A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING Puritans. A vindication of those, who uniustly suffer
by the mistake, abuse, and misapplication of that NAME. A Tract necessary and
useful for these Times.

Printed for Robert Bostock, 1641.

A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING Puritans.
IT is a common Maxim amongst Politicians, that a State is mayntained by
Accusations, but ruined by Calumnies: and therefore (says Marquis Malvezzi)
happy shall the Subjects be of that wise Prince, which countenances
Accusations, and checks Calumnies: for the suffering of Accusations to go
less in repute, and Calumnies to get footing, has been the increase of
manslaughter, and the continuance of enmity in all ages. Many believe that
nothing which is done would be known, if this means of dispersing privy
calumnious speeches were not used, whereas little is known because it is used:
for falsehood constantly affirmed for truth sometimes deceives, and when it does
not, but is known to be falsehood, yet it forces to some suspension of
judgment, and makes us yield some way even to that which we believe not. This
is most apparent at this day in this Kingdom in the Case of Puritans, for did
accusation and legal process take place, few crimes would be proved against
Puritans, and did not malicious calumny prevail, as few men would be proved
Puritans, whereas now nothing is so monstrous, which is not branded upon
Puritans, and no man is so innocent as to escape that brand. So great also is
the audacitie of those which lacerate the fames of Puritans, and with so much
confidence do they vent their obloquies, that they which know the falsity
thereof, and easily perceive that the same aspersions are more truly due to the
Autors and raisers of them, yet they are dazeled, and driven to some doubtful
admittance thereof. Neither could this audacity be so prevalent amongst the
vulgar, but that Scholars, and the greatest of the Clergy are now become the
most injurious detesters and depravers of Puritans, having taken up in Pulpits
and Presses, almost as vile and scurrilous a license of fiction and detraction,
as is usual in Play Houses, Taverns, and Bordelloes. Some men divide generally
all Protestants into Puritans, and Antipuritans, but I shall admit of
subdivisions in both, for all men are not alike, which either affect or
disaffect, either Puritans or Antipuritans. Antipuritans I shall thus divide.
Some Antipuritans are so termed merely because they are no Puritans, but such I
dislike not, for I my self am neither the one nor other, I neither merit the
name of Puritan, neither do I hate them so as to profess my self a
Antipuritan.

Others are accounted Antipuritans, because they are of the Romish Religion,
and so profess themselves, but their enmity is but a due antipathy, and as a
necessary consequence of their Religion, and such I take no notice of, I think
Puritans expect no other from them. Others again there are which are very
averse from some Puritanicall Tenets, and hold Puritans in very many things
erroneous, but yet they mean well themselves, and bear no hatred to the
Persons of Puritans, they allow Puritans sound in the most and waightiest
matters of faith, they hold dissent in disputable things no ground of malice,
and they attribute no infallibility to themselves in those things wherein they
dissent: from these men I am but little removed. The worst sort of
Antipuritans, and they which ought only to be so called, are they which
bitterly hate and persecute many good men under the name of Puritans, and many
good things in those which are Puritans, whose antipathy is to men's persons, as
well as opinions, and in opinions those which are sound, as well as those which
are erroneous. These are the Antipuritans which I shall now strive to detect,
whom I hold to be of great number and power in the State at this day, whom we
may account the chiefest causers, and procurers of all those mischiefs and
plagues which now incumber both Church and Commonwealth, and to be guilty of
all those crimes, which falsely they charge upon Puritans, being therein like
Caesar's enemies, which therefore only hated him, because they had deserved
hatred from him. By such Antipuritans is all love to goodness and zeal to the
Protestant Religion, and all hatred of vice, and dislike of Popish
Superstition, brought into contempt. For as they admit all true of Puritans
which Papists object against Protestants, so they account all Protestants
almost (besides their own faction) Puritans. By such is the Religion of the
Scots made ridiculous; by such is the amity of the two Nations, and therein the
Honor and safety of the King his Crown, and Progeny much endangered. By such
is Calvin, and the Reformers of our Religion for harkening therein to Calvin,
traduced, and another reformation attempted, by such is Antiquity preferred to
obscure Scripture, Uniformity in Ceremonies to the disadvantage of unity in
hearts; by such is the outside and walls of Religion trimmed and decored,
whilst the soul thereof is neglected, or defaced; by such is the Kings heart
stolen from his Subjects, and the Subjects estranged from the King: by such is
the Name of Royalty pretended whilst a Papal Hierarchy only is intended; by
such is dissension nourished in the State, that they may fish in troubled
waters: by such is truth in other men styled faction, and faction in themselves
styled truth; by such are innovations preached and printed for necessary
points, whilst necessary doctrines in other men are prohibited. In the power of
such it now remayns to teach and publish all things consonant to their own
ends, and to quash and silence all gainsayers, and either to promote or detrude
all Suitors for preferment at their discretion being absolutely possessed of
Presses, Pulpits, and the ears of great men; by such are many good men reviled
and oppessed for their constancy to the true Religion, whilst many factious,
semipopish Dunces are unduly preferred every where for neutrality in Religion,
or some worse innovation; by such are Puritans made as Sinkes and Sewers to
unlode and discharge their own filth into, whilst their black railing tongues
expume nothing against Puritans, but what is true of themselves. These things
(if I am not deceived) will appear in this ensuing Discourse.

In all ages true Religion has been odious amongst Heathens, and true devotion
amongst Sensualists, Judaisme appeared to Painims mere Superstition:
Christianity seemed to the Jews gross blasphemy: and now amongst Christians
Protestantisme is nothing else but Heresy: and amongst Protestants Zeal is
misnamed Puritanisme; But in this word Puritanisme is a greater mystery of
defamation then ever was before, it may well be called (...), it is a word, of
depravation, fit only for these times wherein the shine of the Gospel is at
the brightest, and the malice of Satan at the highest. This word sprung up
almost with the Reformation, no sooner had the woman brought forth, but the
Serpent pursued her to devour her issue, and she being fled into the
Wilderness, this stream of infamy was spued forth after her to overtake her.

The Bishop of Down in Ireland, in his Visitation speech 1638, endeavors to
make it credited, that Puritans have increased since the Reformation by
degrees, both in number and malice: but the contrary is most apparently true.

Dissent in Ecclesiastical Policy about Ceremonies and other smaller matters,
being not of the substance of Religion, first gave occasion to raise this
reproachful word Puritan in the Church: but since that time men's minds being
better satisfied, and peace being more firmly settled about those indifferent
things, the more few Puritans remained, and the more moderately those few
became inclined, the more furiously their enemies raged against them. Bastwick,
Prin, and Burton, the only men which Law can take hold of, are Names now as
horrid in the World, as Garnet, Faux, Ravilliack, Precisians have now won the
Scene from Jesuits: Poisoning of Emperors, massacring of Provinces, blowing
up of Parliaments are all now grown into oblivion, and drowned in the stories
of Ceremony-haters. Howsoever as amongst Antipuritans, so amongst Puritans (it
must be confessed) there are some differences to be observed. Some Puritans
think all Puritans alike to be loved, and all Antipuritans alike to be hated,
but sure there is truer affinity in mind between some which are Puritans, and
some which are not, then between some Puritans and others, or some of the
contrary opinion and others. Paul unconverted equally opposes Peter as Simon
Magus does, and in regard of this joint opposition, both are unanimous, but
even in this opposition both have their opposite ends. Magus opposes
maliciously for ambition and lucres sake, but Paul ignorantly seeking thereby
the same Gods Honor whom Peter serves in a truer way. Therefore in regard of
the main end, there is more unity and consent betwixt Paul the persecuter, and
Peter the persecuted, then betwixt Paul and Magus, though both persecuters of
the same cause. The like is now visible in England, for every man which is an
Antipuritan, is not so for the same Reasons, some have more of malice, others
are more ignorant, some are pestilent Engineers, and through the sides of
Puritans knowingly stab at Purity it self, others are but Engines misimployed,
or by their own blind zeal misled, and these perhaps whilst they persecute
Gods children, imagine they do God a grateful service therein.

In Samaria, from an unkindly mixture of Israelites and Syrians, a strange
heterogeneous offspring different in Religion from both did arise; and the like
is now in England, nay, it may be said here (as it was in Constantines days)
There are almost as many Religions as Opinions, and as many Opinions as Men.
Papists have their differences, Protestants theirs, therefore needs there must
be many more differences where Papists and Protestants live so confusedly
blended together. For examples sake, how many differences have we even about
indifferent Ceremonies; and that merely amongst Protestants? Some men loath
Ceremonies out of antipathy to Popery, which too superstitously extols them;
others again admire them for Antiquities sake, which before Popery innocently
(yea, and perhaps profitably for those infant times of the Gospel) used them.
These two sorts of men, though different, are not dangerous. Again, some men
are thought to disrelish Ceremonies out of stomach to that authority which
commands them; but if there be any such, I think they are very few, and scarce
visible to the eye of man. Others on the contrary give reverence to them for
Poperies sake, which depends so much upon them; and I fear there are many such
amongst us. Again, some men stand devoted to Ceremonies, as they are the
lightest things of the Law; like the Tythers of Mint and Annis in the Gospel,
embracing them instead of weightier matters, and none are more unmercifull then
these to scrupulous minded men. Others in the mean while account all things of
the same moment, both great and small, pretending to spy some faults, and some
truths on either side, and therefore they hold it indifferent to assent to
either, or dissent from either in any point whatsoever. But the wisest sort
conceive there may be errors on both sides, but not alike gross and
pernicious, and therefore such eschew the wrong, and apply themselves to the
right in either side, yet neither honor, nor despise either side alike. And
these instances show that all men do not profess, or condemn Puritanisme
alike, or from the same ends, and yet in the Chaos of this Country, as things
now stand, Frigida cum calidis pugnant, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.


I could wish therefore that all well meaning men would take notice of these
things, and affect by reason, not passion; for since some good men are
Puritans, and not all, and since some ill men are Puritans, and not all, this
ought not to be a rule of love and hatred in all cases alike. That which is
most objected to Puritans, is fury, faction, and hypocrisy: if I see these in
a man reputed no Puritan, yet to me He is a Puritan: and if I see not these
in a man reputed a Puritan, as to me He is no Puritan.

If Gracchus be invective against Sedition, I censure him by his actions, uot
by his words, and if Cato be accused of mutiny, I censure him by himself, not
by his accusers, I condemn none merely because condemned by others; for it is
usual for the Wolf to sit on the bench and condemn the Lamb at Bar, for
that which is most proper to the Wolf most unnatural to the Lamb, and yet
this proves the Wolf the more a Wolf, and the Lamb the more a Lamb. I
cannot but profess it, there is nothing more scandalizes me at this time, then
to see Puritans being so few in number, so despicable in condition. so
harmless in example, so blameless in opinion, yet sentenced and condemned in
judgment, as if they were the greatest Incendiaries, and the only Innovators in
the Christian World. Doctor Heylyn a violent pamphleter against Puritans, calls
Burton the great Dictator of Puritans, and the Law has past upon him with
great severity, yet Burtons crime was that He wrote against Altar-worship, and
it was adjudged that his style was seditious. It is not manifest that his
intention was seditious therein, and if it was so, it is manifest that He was
most vain and absurd therein as our State is now established, and as our King
is generally revered. They which pretend great danger to the King likely to
ensue out of such paper machinations as these, may have three mischievous ends
therein. First, that they may be thought the only solicitous men of the Kings
safety. Secondly, that they may disparage the common peoples loyalty. Thirdly,
that they may crush their adverse Puritanicall party; but, it is thought, they
which pretend most danger hereby to the King: do least believe themselves, and
therefore they do spin that disaffection and division out of the sufferings of
Burton, which his attempts could never have effected. Let us then a little
farther search into the mysterious abuse, and misapplication of this word
Puritan. Those whom we ordinarily call Puritans are men of strict life, and
precise opinions, which cannot be hated for any thing but their singularity in
zeal and piety, and certainly the number of such men is too small, and their
condition too low, and dejected: but they which are the Devils chief
Artificers in abusing this word, when they please can so stretch, and extend
the same that scarce any civil honest Protestant which is hearty and true to
his Religion can avoid the aspersion of it, and when they list again, they can
so shrink it into a narrow sense, that it shall seem to be aimed at none but
monstrous abominable Heretics and Miscreants. Thus by its latitude it strikes
generally, by its contraction it pierces deeply, by its confused application it
deceives invisibly. Small scruples first entitle me to the name of Puritan,
and then the Name of Puritan intitles me further to all mischief whatsoever.

The Scots rise up against Episcopacie, it is questioned by some, whether they
so rise up, for the good of Religion, or for the overthrow of wholesome
Discipline.

Answer is soon made, that Episcopacie cannot be unpleasing to any but
Puritans, there is no opinion can smell sharper of Puritanisme, then that of a
Church parity, and of Puritans what good can be expected? but the Scots also
desire redress in other grievances, and here their intention is again
questioned. Answer is as soon made again, That the Scots being declared open
Puritans, they must needs be enemies to Monarchical government, and that no
redress can ever satisfy them, but such as shall debase royal dignity, and
establish a popular rule amongst them. But some of the Scots in some actions
do very much misdemeane themselves, and here it is thought by some, that this
ought not to redound to the prejudice, or blame of the whole Nation: but strait
the Antipuritan steps in again with answer to the former purpose, that the
same faction which makes them all Puritans, makes them all mutiners, and that
there is no trust to be given, nor favor showed to any whose very religion is
disobedience. Other the like examples may be instanced in. Parliaments of late
in England have been jealous of religion, this laudable zeal made them at
first come into contempt as Puritanical, and then the imputation of Puritanisme
made this laudable zeal contemptible; and so by degrees, as any thing else
might be charged upon Puritans, as disobedience, and disaffection to Monarchy,
so nothing could be charged but proceeding from Puritanisme. Some scrupulous
opinions make Say, Brooks, Puritans, Puritanisme inferres them mutineers,
mutiny makes all that they can do or say, all that they forbear to do, or
say, it makes their very thoughts wicked and perverse. Thus we see what a
confused imposture there is in this infamous term of Puritan: but we will yet
further evidence by plain instance how broad the devils net is in the vast
application of this word, and how deep his pit is by its abominable sense, and
the nature of its importance, that we may the better discover that net which
intangles so many, and shun that pit which ingulphs so sure. Puritans (as I
said before) were at first Ecclesiastical only, so called because they did not
like a pompous or ceremoneous kind of discipline in the Church like unto the
Romish: but now it is come about, that by a new enlargement of the name, the
world is full of nothing else but Puritans, for besides the Puritan in Church
policy, there are now added Puritans in religion, Puritans in State, and
Puritans in morality. By this means whole Kingdoms are familiarly upbrayded
with this sin of Puritanisme: As for example, All in Scotland which wish well
to the Covenant, though some Papists, some Courtiers, and almost all the whole
body without exception have now declared themselves for it, yet all these are
manifest Puritans. So also in England, all the Commons in Parliament, and
almost all the ancient impartial temporal Nobility, and all such as favor or
relish the late proceedings of both the houses, which is the main body of the
Realm, Papists, Prelates, and Courtiers excepted, nay, and its likely all
Scotland, and more then half Ireland, all these are Puritans. They which
deprave this great Council of the Kingdom, suggest to the K. that the major
part is gulled and dorde by the Puritan party; but this is only because they
are ashamed to speak it out openly in gross terms, that all the major and
better part in the Court of Parliament is Puritanicall. But this suggestion is
utterly false and impossible, for such as the major part in Parliament is, such
are those that chose them and sent them thither, and such are those that now
approve their actions there, and both in the elections of Parliament men, and
in the consultations of Parliament affairs, the Kings party is as wise,
cautious, and vigilant (if not more) as the other party, and no subtilty could
circumvent or cheat them out of their votes, if the Puritans were so small and
inconsiderable a side, as now they make them. No man of what capacity so ever
can admit this, it is to all undeniable, that the blame of a parliament, is the
blame of the whole Kingdom. But I return to my Ecclesiastical puritan.
Though it be true that Ecclesiastical puritans are fewes now, then heretofore
they have been, yet it is as true that Ecclesiastical puritanisme is made a
larger thing by far then it was, being now spread abroad like a net to
ensnare the more, as our many late additions and innovations testify, which
have crept into the Church (as may be scared) for the vexation and molestation
of such men as were not disquieted with former ceremonies. It is generally
suspected, that our prelates have aimed at two things in the novelties which
they have lately induced into the Church; first, the suppression of those which
are enemies to their pride, avarice, and ambition, by them termed puritans:
secondly, their own further case, promotion, and advantage. Both these ends
seem to be leveld at in sanctifying the Altar, and unsanctifying the Lords
day, in advancing auricular confession, and corporal penances by external
mortifications, and crying down lecturing, and preaching; for if we mark it,
these new Doctrines do not only serve to terrify and scandalize tender
consciences, and thereby to deprive, and silence many painful good Ministers,
and to scare away into foreign Plantations, whole troops of Laymen, and to
enwrap the rest in opposition: but each of these doctrines besides has a
further reach in it of benefit to the Clergy. The Communion Table has lately
gained a new Name, a new Nature, a new Posture, a new Worship that Emperors
and Kings may be brought again to take notice how far the persous and offices
of Priests excel in sanctity the persons and offices of Princes. Theodosius
within one hundred years after Prelacie began to arrogate to it self was
presently taught this lesson, for taking his seat in the Chancell according to
the Eastern and ancient fashion, a Deacon was sent to him in great state, to
let him understand that none but men in holy Orders might presume to set their
feet on that sacred ground. This was then the Bishops Law, not the Emperors,
nor known in any other of his Dominions, but Italy only, but sure it was fit
discretion, that much should be ascribed by Bishops to that place, from which
they were to derive much, and which wonld be sure to repay their homage with so
great an advantage of homage back again. Preaching is now also grown too
burdensome, and the Lords Day to Priests according to that sanctity which
Puritans allow it, it requires too much praying, preaching, singing, which are
not only to them tedious but also apt means to increase, and foment Puritanisme
amongst the people. Auricular Confession also is a godly devise to bring the
Laity into subjection, and to make the people bow before the power of the
Keys, and it may aptly force the consciences of Kings themselves to fear the
scourges of gowned men. Add lastly Mr. Wats his bodily mortification to Mr.
Sparrows confession, and then Laymen will be soon inured again to find out
the fittest penances, especially Praesbyteris, and ars advolvi, and so in time
their purses, their bodies, their consciences shall all be made sensible of
the spiritual Scepter of Priests.

Its no great wonder then if our Court Divines, and their dependents do what
they can to draw us nearer daily toward Popery, under show of Antiquity,
Uniformity, and Charity, for (without all doubt) of all Religions, Popery is
the most beneficial to Priests, most tyrannous to Laymen. Neither is it
strange that they pretend so much zeal to devotion to the Kings Crown and
Prerogative, as things now stand in England, as if none truly affected the same
but themselves, for its clear, that they cannot subject the people but by the
King, nor the King without the people: and so long as they stand possessed of
the Kings good opinion, no man shall have power to confute them.

King Jaws is a great instance for Antipuritans, and a great prop to the
Episcopal Cause, its alleged of him that He hated Puritans for their hatred
to Episcopacie, and loved Episcopacie for its amity to Monarchy: His Aphorism
was, No Bishop, no King: Let us therefore appeal from King James in their
words to King James in his own. In his Preface before his Basilicon Doron his
words are: The style of Puritans properly belongs to that vile Sect of the
Anabaptists only called the Family of love. Such were Brown, Penry. Howbeit
there are others which participate too much with Anabaptists contemning civil
Magistrates, etc. It is only this sott of men which I wish my son to punish
in case they refuse to obey Law, and cease not to stir up Rebellion. But I
protest upon mine Honor, I mean it not generally of all Preachers or others,
which like better of the single form of Policy in our Church of Scotland,
then of the many Ceremonies in the Church of England, which are persuaded that
Bishops smell of a Papal supremacy, that Surplices, Caps, etc. are outward
badges of popish errors. No, I am so far from being contentious in these
indifferent things, that I do equally love and honor the learned and grave of
either opinion. It can no ways become me to pronounce sentence so lightly in
so old a controversy. Since we all agree in grounds, the bitterness of men
in such questions does but trouble the peace of the Church, and give advantage
to Papists by our division. These were the golden words of that peaceful, just
Prince upon his second thoughts: o that they were now duly pondred, and taken
to pieces word for word! o that they were esteemed and understood in their own
weight amongst us, that they might reconcile our present differences, and that
the same peace which followed him to his glorious Urne, might still bless
these our times! O how contrary are these mild words to the unnatural
suggestions of Antipuritans! Such as daily accuse all good men for Precisians,
and all precise men for Puritans, and all Puritans for the only Firebrands of
the World, thus arming the King against his Subjects, and by consequence
raising Subjects against the King: Puritans here are described both what they
are, and what they are not, the King had been misinterpreted before, writing
generally of Puritans, now to avoid all mistake, he expresses himself plainly
and definitely. A Puritan positively in King James his sense, is He which
imitates Anabaptists in rebellion, turbulence, and opposition to Law, and such
are liable to Law; but negatively a Puritan in the acception of King James, is
not He which dislikes Episcopacy, or the Ceremonious Discipline of England.
This King James protests upon his Honor, though to his great dishonor He be
now often cited to the contrary. As for those which relish not Bishops and
Ceremonies or the English Policy, He wishes them to be at peace only with
those of the opposite opinion, He himself vowing equal love and honor to
the grave, and learned of either side, and not taking upon him to be a Judge
in so old, and difficult a controversy; He only like a sweet arbitrator
persuades both parties to peace and amity. I wish our Bishops would now stand
to this arbitration, I wish they would neither condemn the Scotch discipline,
nor urge the English; I wish they would put difference between seditious and
scrupulous Puritans, and not infer the one out of the other; I wish they
would either disclaim King James as a manifest favourer of Puritans, or else
imitate him in the same definition, and opinion of them. K. James further takes
notice, that the reformation in Scotland was far more disorderly, then in
England, Denmark, etc. whilst the main affairs there were unduly carried by
popular tumults, and by some fiery-spirited Ministers, which having gotten the
guiding of the multitude, and finding the relish of government sweet, did
fancy to themselves a democratick form of policy, wherein they were likely to
be Tribuni plebis. That the Crown might be disincombred of these usurping
ringleaders, the King advises the Prince to entertain and advance godly,
learned, and modest Ministers, promoting them to Bishoprics, but restrayning
them heedfully from pride, ambition, and avarice. These things then are hence
observable. 1. Scotland differs from England in turbulent Ministers: Secondly,
this is imputed to the iniquity of the times, not to Puritanisme, as if by
nature the Scots were more enclining to Puritanisme then other Nations.
Thirdly, notwithstanding that iniquity of those times, there was a number
sufficient of worthy Ministers fit for preferment. Fourthly, King James erects
Bishops Sees in Scotland for peculiar reasons, and therefore He speaks not of
Denmark etc. Lastly, notwithstanding that peculiar reason. He advises the
Prince to be indifferently at war with both extremes alike, as well to repress
Papal Bishops, as to curb proud Puritans. For (says the King) the natural
sicknesses which have ever troubled and been the decay of all Churches since
the beginning changing the Candlestick from one to another, have been pride,
ambition, and avarice: and these wrought the overthrow of the Romish Church in
diverse Countries. K. James knew well how apt Churchmen had ever been to abuse
their power and pomp, what enemies they had been to our Savior, and what a
tyranny they had erected over all Christendom ever since Constantine almost,
and therefore though He dislikes a democracie in the Church, (as He had
reason) yet He so limits and circumscribes his Bishops both in power and
honor, that they might be as sensible of their chains and fetters, as of
their Miters and Crosiers. I wish K. James had particularly signified what
bonds and bounds He thought fit to prefix to Episcopacy, to preserve it from
corruption, and what his opinion was of a Prelacy so active in secular affairs
as ours is now in England, and how it would have pleased him to see a
Metropolitan amongst Protestants almost a rival to the French Cardinal. The
world, in my opinion, has little reason to dote upon a gowned Empire, we have
all smarted long enough under it, men of mean birth commonly bear preferment
with little moderation, and their breeding having been soft and esseminate, in
their malice and cruelty, they nearest of all approach to the nature of women:
and by the advantage of learning they extend their power, and win upon others
more then they ought. When the Church was at first under Heathen or Jewish
Governors, which sought as enemies to ruin it, not as Fathers to protect it,
they which were within could not live in peace and unity without some
Political bonds, so at that time there was a necessity of some coercive power,
within besides that which was without. The world is now unsatisfied what kind
of power that was, whether Episcopal or Presbyteriall, or what Episcopacy, or
Presbytery was in those days. Yet me thinks what government so ever then was,
it is not necessarily precedentary to us now. The Episcopal saction at this day
takes advantage by the abuses of the Presbyter al, and the Presbyterial by the
Episcopal, and most men think either the one power or the other necessary, and
some more favor the Episcopal as K. James, some the Presbyterial as M. Calvin;
but sure the Presbyterial is less offensive then the Episcopal, and yet
neither the one nor other of necessity. Kings may grant usuram quandam
jurisdictionis either to Bishops or Elders, but the jurisdiction it self is
their own property, from which they ought not to depart, nor can without wrong
to their charge committed to them. For the power which God gives the Prince, is
not given for his use alone, but for the peoples benefit, so that since He
cannot let it fall to decay without making it insufficient for good and entire
government which is mischievous to the people, he cannot justly lessen it at
all. And it is manifest that except one supreme head be alone in all causes as
well Ecclesiastical as civil, humane nature must needs be destitute of those
remedies which are necessary for its conservation, since power cannot be
divided, but it must be diminished to him which suffers that division, and
being diminished it proves insufficient. All confess some government necessary
for men in holy Orders, to whom the power of the Keys belongs, but some
account Princes but as mere temporal or Lay persons, and therefore conclude
against their authority over sacred Ecclesiastical persons as incompetent,
especially in cases merely ecclesiastical. For this cause spiritual
Governors have ever been in the Church to whom some have attributed a divine
right depending from none but God, and subordinate to none but God, but this
has been controverted by others, and no little debate and strife has
followed hereupon. But it seems to me, that princes do receive from God a
spiritual unction, whereby not only their persons are dignified, and their
hearts prepared and enlarged with divine graces fit for rule; but their
functions also innobled and sanctified above any other whatsoever, and higher
advanced then the sense of Laick or Secular will bear. To Princes an
assistance of counsel is requisite in spiritual as in civil affairs, but
that, that Counsel ought to be composed only of persons Ecclesiastical, or
that those persons ought to be invested with all those Ensigns of Honor and
Authority which our Bishops now claim as of divine right, seems not
necessary. Clergymen are not always the most knowing in all Ecclesiastical
cases, neither are they at all indifferent and impartial, in many which
concern their own honor and profit, (as the world feels to its regret)
therefore for jurisdiction they are not the most competent. But be they of what
use soever, they may still remain subordinate, and at the Princes election,
and admitted of ad consilium solum, not ad consensum: and it had been happy
for all Christians these many hundred years bypast if they had not been
further hearkened to. The Sacerdotall function is not at all disparaged by this
subordination, for whether the order of Princes be more sacred then that of
Bishops, or not, it is all one to Priests, for an obedience they owe, and must
pay, be it to the one Order, or the other. Our Bishops at this day stand much
upon their Divine right of Jurisdiction, and they refer their style to the
providence of God immediately, not to the grace of the King: and though in
words they acknowledge a Supremacy of power to remain to the King; yet indeed I
think they mean rather a priority of order. Whatsoever Supremacy they mean, if
it be not such as makes them merely subordinate, and dependent, so that the
King may limit, alter, or extinguish their jurisdiction, as far as He may to
his civil Judges, they derogate much from his Kingly office.

Bishops for their claim of Jurisdiction ought to prove, that they alone did
exercise it over all in all causes from our Saviors days, till the entrance
of Christian Princes: and that being cleared, they must further prove, that
those times also are leading, and precedentary to ours. In both these their
proofs are lame, especially in the latter; for neither is the power of the
Keys the same thing as Jurisdiction, nor is jurisdiction now as it was in the
Apostles days, nor is the State of the times, now the same as then.

In those days either Christians were to implead one another before Infidel
Magistrates whatsoever the case were, criminal or civil, spiritual or
temporal, or else they were to erect some tribunal in the Church, or else
they were to await no justice at all: and because some judicature within the
Church was most fit, therefore Christ himself according to the exigence of
those times, did indow his Church with a divine Economy, which was partly
miraculous, and of use then, but not now. The Spirit of God did then internally
incite such and such men at such times to reside and preside in such and such
places; and some of the Apostles at some times could judge by inspiration
without proofs and allegations, and could execute sentence of death or other
spiritual punishment upon secret hypocrites, not intrenching upon temporal
authority, but in these times this discipline is useless, and therefore
decayed. Whatsoever the offense then was, what injury or trespass soever
betwixt brother and brother, (the only remedy was Dic Ecclesiae, and yet that
precept serves as strong for temporal as spiritual trespasses, so that it
cannot be enforced now to continue, unless we mean to drown all temporal
authority. As for the extent also of spiritual power in those days I will
only cite a learned Politician of the Popish religion: who admitting (it
seemed) that the keys of heaven were given to Saint Peter alone, and his
Successors, and not to all Bishops and Ministers whatsoever, thus proceeds. By
the keys given to S. Peter many Holy Fathers mean, the one of knowledge, and
the other of power, and that that power ought not to be understood universally,
but only concerning the Kingdom of Heaven which is spiritual: for the Civil,
Royal, and Temporal power is expressly forbidden him by Christ. Even so that
also of knowledge, it is not to be understood of natural, politic, or moral
things, but as Saint Paul says, of Christ's mysteries only.

Wherefore in matters of faith Ecclesiastical authority may approve, and
Secular cannot condemn, but in matters or policy what all the Prelates in the
World approve, temporal authority may condemn. It is a great wrong to
pretend, because Christ has given Saint Peter the cognizance and power of the
Kingdom, and forbidden him the earthly, contrary to this precept to extend
spiritual things to temporal. Saint Augustine often says, That Grace does
not destroy any thing in Nature, but leaves her all her own; adding moreover
divine perfection. The Temporality has of its own nature, power, to forbid all
things repugnant to public quietness and honesty; and Christ came not to take
away this authority from Magigistrates, He only adds power to his Ministers in
matters of faith, not known by nature, but revelation. For ought we know,
this power of opening or shutting Heaven, of binding and loosing sins was
miraculous, and so but temporary: but admit it in this Catholic Writers sense,
yet we plainly see, it is no prejudice at all to limit Secular Princes thereby.
The same learned Papist writes: That the Eastern and Western Churches
continued in unity and charity for the space of nine hundred years after
Christ, and this peace was easily kept, because the Supreme power was then in
the Canons, to which all Churches acknowledged themselves equally subject.
Ecclesiastical Discipline was then severely mayntained in each Country by its
own Prelates, not arbitrarily, but absolutely according to Canonical rigor,
none of them intermedling in another government. No Pope of Rome did pretend
to confer Benefices in other Bishops Diocesses, or to get money out of others
by way of Dispensations and Bulls: but when Rome began to shake off all
subjection to Canons, then notwithstanding any ancient order of the Fathers,
Councels, or Apostles themselves, instead of her ancient Primacy she brought in
an absolute Dominion, free from any Law or Canon and this made the division.
Neither could any reunion be brought to pass within these 700 years,
because this abuse which caused the Division is not remedied. Whilst the union
held, Saint Paul's doctrine was jointly observed, that Every one should be
subject to Princes, no man pretended to be free from punishment. Nay, and after
the division, the same opinion remained, that every Christian in temporal
businesses is subject to the Prince. And nothing is more temporal then
offense, because nothing is more contrary to the Spirit. Amongst the Greeks
also it is still held that Bishops ought to judge what opinion is found, what
Heretical, but to punish those of hurtful opinions belongs to the Secular.

The State of Venice, as well as other Catholic Kingdoms, walks between two
extremes, between Protestants, which have no other aim but to diminish
Ecclesiastical authority, and the Court of Rome which has no other aim, but
to increase it, and to make the Temporal her servant.

Those of the Court of Rome, making use of Religion for worldly ends and
respects under a spiritual pretense, but with an ambitious end and desire of
worldly wealth and honor would free themselves from obedience due to the
Prince, and take away the love and reverence due by the people to draw it to
themselves. To bring those things to pass, they have newly invented a doctrine
that talks of nothing but Ecclesiastical greatness, liberty, immunity, and
jurisdiction.

This doctrine was unheard of, till about the year 1300, then it began to be
written scatteringy in some books, but till 1400, there were not written above
two Books which treated of nothing else; after this such Writers increased a
little, but after 1560, there were scarce any Books printed in Italy, but in
diminution of Secular authority and exaltation of the Ecclesiastical. And now
the people have scarce any other Books to read, nor have the Confessors any
other doctrine, or need any other learning. Hence comes this perverse opinion,
that Magistracy is a humane invention, and to be obeyed for policy only, not
for conscience: but that every intimation of Ecclesiastical persons is
equivalent to a divine precept; there want not in Italy, pious, learned men
which hold the contrary, but they are not suffered to write, or print. Neither
are foreign Books permitted, or ancient Authors left ungelded of all which
serves for Temporal authority: as appears by a book printed 1607, called
Index Expurgatorius: and Clement the Eighth in 1595, published a rule in his
Index, that all Catholic Writers Books since 1515, might be corrected, not
only by expunging but also by interlining, and this has been practiced though
not publicly above seventy years. Thus we find the Court of Romes, but not
the Authors meaning, and finally, we are sure to have no book true. I have
hitherto cited this egregious Politician, for these purposes.

First, That we may see how easy it is for Clergymen to wrest all authority
out of the Temporalties hands, if Princes will be so easy to be hood-winkt,
and deluded by them, and to resign their judgments to them in such cases as
concern their profit, and advancement.

Secondly, That we may take notice how far the learned of Papists themselves
do discover, and detect the errors and tyranny of the Court of Rome, and that
mystical way of deceiving, whereby all hope of remedy is cut off. I observe
this also the rather because our Prelates in England at this day assume to
themselves almost as vast and unquestionable a power of shifting and repressing
all adverse disputes, and of authorizing and publishing all arguments
whatsoever savouring their cause, as the Court of Rome does.

Thirdly, that I might produce the same Author against himself in those points
wherein he taxes Protestants. We will yield that for the space of nine hundred
years the Sea of Rome did not usurp over other Sees, but did acknowledge
equal subjection to the Canons, and that the division and separation of the
Eastern Churches happened, when Rome arrogated above Canons; but withal we
must have it yielded to us, that those Canons had been composed only by
Clergymen, and that in too much favor of Clergymen, and too much abridgment
of Temporal Rights and Privileges, and that they did concern matters more
then merely spiritual, and speculative, and things known by mere revelation.
So that though one Prelate did not usurp over another, yet all Prelates had
usurped over the Laity from the times of Constantine almost.

It is true, the Church had Bishops before in its times of persecution, but of
what power or pomp? It is said of Calvin, that in regard of his sway in
Geneva, he wanted nothing but the Name of Bishop; and it may be as truly said
of the Bishops before Constantine, that they wanted all but the Name.

The power of Bishops before the installment of Christian Princes, was rather
like that of Arbitrators then of Judges, and that held in all cases alike,
Civil and Spiritual, but in case of disobedience they did not entrench so far
upon the Lay power, as to inflict any pecuniary, or corporal punishment, but
they did deny the Sacrament, and eject delinquents out of the Congregation, and
this was then an abscission from Christ, being done Clave non errante: that is,
whilst God did inspire (according to his promise) a miraculous power of binding
and loosing infallibly.

The Priestly function was then an Office, not a Jurisdiction, of sacred
dignity, not Power: but the Function of a Prince was ever sacred both for
honor, and power, for dignity and command. Constantine the Great was the first
Prince which took upon him the care and protection of the Church, after that
it had suffered contempt and poverty for 300 years: and now did even that
authority and protection cease, and devolve into his hands, which the poor
persecuted Bishops had but feebly managed before; but such was the
extraordinary indulgence of this pious Emperor, as well to religious persons,
as to Religion it self, that taking little notice what the Church had gain by
him as its Head and Governor, He heaped up greater Titles and Honors upon
Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and Popes, as if some other supreme Ruler
more sacred and competent then himself were necessary. Nevertheless it is
thought, that this was as poison poured into the Church, and not Balm, for
from that very time Clergy men began to be more glorious, but less gracious,
more rich outwardly, but more poor, and vile inwardly. Within a little space
after Constantine there was just cause of complaint that excessive Honors had
corrupted the Church, and that Religion had prospered better in former times,
when it had wooden Chalices and golden Priests, then now, when it had golden
Chalices, but wooden Priests. It is remarkable also, that soon after
Constantine the temporal power being too much restrained, and abased, and the
spiritual as much enlarged and exalted, the whole face of Christendom began
to be imbroyled with wars, and poisoned with heresies, so that the Historians
of those times have almost nothing else to write of but the forcible investing
and devesting by arms of such Bishops and Patriarchs, and of the oppositions
of such and such Councels and Synods, and of the Appeals, Jars, Schisms,
Excommunications, and Commotions of such, and such Priests, and Monks. Nay,
such were the ill effects of those ages which were certainly more zealous then
politic, that they cannot yet be wholly rectified, and purged in these our
latter times, which are grown too too contrary, being more politic then
zealous: Thus did the Church fare for 900 years till the Roman Bishops began
to Empire above all, and then did the greatest part of the Clergy themselves,
especially East from Italy, make their departure and separation. Neither did
the Romish Vice-god after this great rent and division in the World hang his
head for shame, or seek any reunion by letting fall his pompous, painted
plumes, but audaciates himself rather to mount higher yet, and to detrude the
Western Emperor quite out of the bounds of Italy. And in this, his industry
fails him not, for after much bloodshed in many cruel conflicts He gains in
Italy a Temporal, and in all Europe besides a spiritual Monarchy, making a
triple Mitre shine as gloriously upon the seven-hilled City, as the Diadem had
done before. During his wars with the Emperor of Germany, He had other
contestations also with England, and some other Potentates at sometimes, but
all dismayed him not, only once He was heard to say, It was time for him to
compound with the Dragon, that he might crush the lesser Adders at his
pleasure. Yet after this even this Holy tyranny grows too insolent and
insufferable, and so conspires its own dissolution, so that many Countries in
the Northwest parts lying more remote from Rome, quite revolt from her
Allegiance, and Protest against her. Amongst those other Countries also less
distant, which still in words confess her Supremacy, her Reign is now but
little more then precarious: Venice regards not Bulls and Anathemacs, France
disdains a younger brothers benediction, and Spain being honored with the title
of the Popes eldest Son, confesses him a Father, but employs him as a Chaplain,
gives verbal, but reaps real honors by him.

Augustus having cashiered an unworthy Commander, gave him leave to say, that
he had cashiered Augustus: and so the Popes great sons shake off his yoke by
degrees, but conceal it, and give him leave to do the like.

It is now very good policy in the Pope, not to pretend to Temporal things as
they stand in ordine, or have relation to spiritual things, but rather to
relinquish his right to spiritual things, as they stand in order to Temporal:
it is eminent wisdom in him to forbear threatening, roaring, cursing, and
sending his ridiculous Epigrams, out of his own Territories: as he was wont
to do: Nay, his very last refuge of sending forth his poisoning and stabbing
Ministers cannot remain in season much longer. But to return to our learned
Statesman: as He justly taxes the Court of Rome, so He unjustly taxes
Protestants of the contrary extreme, and this will appear out of his own
words. For He grants, first, that the Secular Magistrates have nothing
diminished of their authority by Christ's coming: and it is clear that Princes
were absolute Governors of the Church before Christ both in Spiritual and
Temporal Cases.

In the next place He yields, that the power and knowledge of Clergyman
called the power of the Keys, is no other but such as Christ infuses in smeere
supernatural things, known only by Faith and Revelation, not by any
Physical, or Ethicall Principles; but it is easily proved by us, that such
power can extend to no proper jurisdiction at all in humane affairs, but is a
mere speculative motion, and such we deny not.

Thirdly, He yields that in Jurisdiction there be three things distinct.

First, matter of Law.

Secondly, matter of fact.

Thirdly, matter of execution: whereby retribution is made to every fact
according to Law. The first of these, and that in Spiritual Cases alone being
tryable by Clergymen only. Admit this and nothing follows, but that things
merely Spiritual, are best known to Spiritual persons, there is no power
here concluded. As for example. In case of Heresy, that I hold such an
opinion, must appear by witnesses and proofs, and herein all kinds of
witnesses besides Clergymen are competent.

Next, that this opinion is heretical, requires the judgment of
Ecclesiastical persons, but it does not follow, if they be the fittest Judges
herein, that they must be the supreme Judges herein, and not as well Dependent
and Subordinate as our Civil Judges are in common actions. But in the last
place, that such an heretical opinion so dangerous and pestilent to the Church
and Commonwealth ought to be corrected or cradicated by such coercive force,
and the raising of that force whereby it is to be punished is in the judgment,
and in the power of the Supreme Magistrate, for two Magistrates cannot have a
Supreme power of the same sword. Either the Secular must command the
Ecclesiastical, or the Ecclesiastical must command the Secular, as to
coercive power, or a worse confusion then either must needs follow.

So then, it is the Execution of Justice alone, which is essential to the
Supreme Governor, Matter of Law requires a Counselor, matter of Fact a
witness, Matter of Execution alone intimates a Prince, and that Principality
cannot be divided betwixt two persons of a several nature.

From hence then it appears plainly that no Catholic differing from the Court
of Rome ascribes more to Clergy men, then this first point of adjudging
according to the Law of God in things Divine; and this implies rather a
dependent, then an independent condition in the Judge: and in this Protestants
join with full consent. But all this while I find my self in a digression:
my scope is not to prove that Protestants do attribute sufficient to Priests,
it lies upon me to prove that they attribute too much to them, and herein I am
to undertake not only the Episcopal, but the Presbyteriall side also, not only
Protestant Prelates, but even Master CALVIN that great Archprelate also.

Divines have much trumped the World hitherto in not setting forth the true
bounds and limits of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but if I mistake not, the
first power (which they claim as most essential) they take to be the power of
the Keys, though they define not certainly, what that is, whether a Power, or
Office; or to whom belonging, or of what extent, and continuance.

The second power which they insist upon, as next issuing out of the power of
the Keys, is in Excommunication, Ordination of Ministers, Exposition of
Scriptures, etc.

The third and more remote kind of causes wherein they challenge an
Ecclesiastical power, is of such as concern Matrimony, Testaments, Heresies,
Fasts, Tithes, and Immunnities of Clergymen, etc. And further doubtless they
would proceed, but that these savor so much of the Temporality, and discover
their trumpery; but I have said, if in all these cases Clergy men are
necessarily more knowing and impartial then all the else, there is necessity
of their Counsel to declare matter of Law, but not of their Consent in
applying coercive, and forcible remedies for the execution of Law. I have said
also that Clergymen being as well Citizens of the Commonwealth as sons of the
Church, and these Cases importing as well perturbance of the State as annoyance
to the Church, that there can be but one Head which ought to have command over
both, and in both. It is manifest also that many Cases are partly temporal,
and partly spiritual, and that scarce any is so temporal, but that it relates
in some order to spiritual things, or any so spiritual, but that it has some
relation to temporal things, so that the true subject of Ecclesiastical and
civil justice cannot rightly be divided. Further, also it is as manifest that
where any doubt, strife, or uncertainty may arise between one Jurisdiction, and
another, neither acknowledging any supreme power of decision, no assured peace
can continue, and by consequence no stability or permanent subsistence to
either, is to be expected. It is natural therefore to be inferred, that either
the Temporal or the Ecclesiastical Magistrate must be in all Cases
absolutely predominant, and that since the Ecclesiastical ought not by Christ's
own command, therefore the temporal ought, as has been further proved by
sundry arguments, and Scripture proofs alleged out of this famous Politician.
So much of the temporal power, and its necessary Supremacy: my endeavor shall
be now to maintain that no Ecclesiastical power is at all necessary in mere
Ecclesiastical persons.

Master Calvin according to the Popish grounds maintains, that spiritual
jurisdiction differs from temporal, and is not incompatible but assistant
thereto, because it proposes not the same ends, but several, which by several
means may be the better compassed. But the spiritual Magistrate (as I
conceive) can propose no other end, then what the Secular ought to aim at, for
either the Prince ought to have no care at all of the Honor of God, and the
good of men, and that which is the prime mean of both, true Religion, or else
his ends must be the same which the Prelate aims at, viz. to vindicate
Religion by removing and correcting scandalous offenders. Secondly, to preserve
the innocent from contagion by the separation of open offenders. Thirdly, to
prevent further obduration, or to procure the amendment of such as have
transgressed by wholesome chastisement.

This is beyond all controversy, as also that the Person and Power of a
Prince, are as sacred to effect these ends, as the Prelates: and certainly, God
did not so sanctify their persons and offices for any less end. And therefore
in ancient times Holy Bishops did Preach and recommend nothing more to Princes
then the care of Religion, though proud Prelates now arrogate this only to
themselves, and though it be still apparent, that no offense is so spiritual
but that it is a civil evil, as well as a blemish to Religion: for so much as
true Religion is the foundation of a State. And this could not be, neither
were Princes answerable to God for the corruption of Religion, if God had not
given them a supreme power, and that effectual to bring all offenders
whatsoever to confession, satisfaction, and contrition or to expel them the
congregation by themselves, or their surrogates.

Master Calvin instances in adultery and drunkenness, etc. and says, that the
temporal power punishes these by external force, and for public examples
sake, as it concerns the State, but the Spiritual Judge punishes them without
force internally for the amendment of the delinquent. He might as well have
named swearing, lying, stealing, murdering, and all sins whatsoever, and so
have made all men twice punishable, and the Ecclesiastical Courts as full of
business as the temporal, to the great vexation of the State, and danger of
division, out of this false ground only that temporal power has not a
competence for the amendment of off^nders, or for the care of Religion, but
only for the satisfaction of wronged parties, and the expedition of ^ivill
justice.

This is a way to erect regnum in regno, and to maintain such concurrent
jurisdictions, as cannot possibly stand together, for all being subject to sin
and offense, as well the Spiritual as temporal, either the one or other must
go unquestioned, and this may produce division: or else both; and that will
cause most certain confusion. Both sides here seem strangely puzzled, the
rigidest of the Episcopal faction allow Princes a coercive power over Priests,
and Prelates, where they perform not what their duty is in their functions or
jurisdictions, and this power requires a higher power of summoning, arraigning,
and legally trying them: and yet the moderatest of the Presbyteriall faction
would have Princes questionable, tryable and punishable by the Spiritualty.
This is a gross confusion, which will appear to be so more plainly in the
sequel; when it is more fully cleared, that to Princes alone God has precisely
committed utramque tubam, and utramque tabulam too, as our reverend Andrew
says.

It Is true, as Calvin alleadges, Princes are sons of the Church, they are in it,
not above it: the word intruding the Church universal, such as is both
militant and triumphant; past, present, and future, for that has no other head
but Christ: to that all Princes and Priests are equally sons: but take Church
for such or such a National, Local Church, and then the Prince is head
thereof, under Christ; and the Clergy are part of his charge, and under his
protection. The same man also may in diverse respects be both father and son to
the same man without confusion of relations. A King, a Bishop may hear the
Word, and receive the Sacrament from an inferior Minister; a Subject may be
natural Father to his Prince, and in this respect a filial subjection is due
from the superior, and so a King may refer his own case to his Chancellor,
yet this destroys not the greater, higher, and more general superiority in
other things, at other times. And to me it seems that even in the exercise of
the Keys, the Priest officiates under the Prince, as the Chancellor does in
matters of Law, even when the Kings own case lies in Judgment before him, and
when perhaps he makes a decree against his own Master, and contrary to his
own Masters private advertisement: and yet the King is not properly either
Lawyer, or Theologue, though both are actuated, and organized as it were, by
the soule-like commanding, over seeing, and overruling of his more sublime and
divine power.

Herein the Priest also may learn a limitation from the Lawyer, for though the
Judge be bound to pronounce right judgment against his own Master, yet this
holds not in all cases alike; because of his limited condition, for in
Criminal cases such as concern the safety of the Kings own person, or the
royal dignity of his calling, therein judgment must be utterly mute. And
therefore it is a weak argument of Master Calvin, though it be his best; when
he inferres a necessity of an Ecclesiastical Judicature from hence, because
else the Prince himself wanting punishment, should escape free: for the reason
is the same in matters of Law; the King is not questionable, or responsible,
for personal crimes, and yet this is held no political mischief. Besides if
the Prince shall not go unquestioned, or undisciplined by the Spiritual, yet
the supreme spiritual Magistrate must, and this is an equal, if not a greater
mischief: for both cannot be equally liable to the judgment of each other.
Neither is it to much purpose that the example of Bishop Ambrose so harshly, so
unreverendly treating pious penitent Theodosius, is so confidently cited
always by either faction Episcopal and Presbyteriall; for though the name of
Ambrose be great, yet I will crave leave to speak as an advocate against him
in the name of the Emperor Theodosius.

Reverend Sir, you take upon you to be a judge over me, and to condemn me of a
bloody Massacre committed unjustly at Thessalonica, and being so condemned, you
proceed against me with your ghostly punishment, subjecting me to your
Ecclesiastical severity: But I pray consider what mischiefs may follow
hereupon; if Emperors may be punishable by Bishops, then common equity
requires that Emperors have the benefit of a fair hearing and arraignment, or
else were their condition more miserable then the condition of the meanest
vassals: for as Princes actions are more inscrutable, and their counsels more
mystical; so also their ends are for the most part more liable to envy, and
misinterpretation: It is not possible for you without due discussion, inquiry,
and examination of impartial witnesses, perfectly to understand all the true
circumstances, reasons, and grounds of this my fact; and without this
understanding it is not possible for you to pronounce a just censure against
me. It Is necessary then that some Tribunal be prepared for you, and some Bar
for me, that upright sentence may pass, and that justice may be done
understandingly, and upon this it must needs follow that I am your mere
Subject, and must lay down my Scepter to bow my self under your Crosier, till
this difficulty be fully ended. Admit this also, and then you may use what
procrastination you please in this intricate decision; or in the like manner
question me of all other enormities, and scandalous deviations, which rumor,
envy, or treason it self forges against me; and thus shall I have no leisure
to judge other men, it will scarce be possible for me to acquit my self in
judgment from other men: that power which God has put into my hands for the
protection of so many Myriads, will be utterly disabled by that higher power
which is put into your hands over me. By the same reason also that I am to
render an account to you in this place, I am to render the like to all your
superiors, equals, or inferiors in other jurisdictions, of all sins
whatsoever, whether real, or imputable, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, so that no
end is like to be of my trials, purgations, or condemnations.

You will say, my crime is sensibly evident; if I would deny this, you could
not prove it so; and if I would not confess this, you could not force me, for
it was a political thing, and far off acted: and my mere confession can
give to you no jurisdiction. But be my crime as manifest in it self as the
disobedience of Saul was to Samuel, or as David's murder was to Nathan, or as
Solomon's incontinence was to all the world, or as Manasses his Idolatry: yet
why should I suffer more then they? What new coercive, vindicative authority
have Priests gained over Princes by Christ's Gospel, which the Jewish Priests
never used, claymed, or heard of? If Excommunication, etc. be now necessary,
sure it was in use before Christ; and then we should have heard of some Kings
Excommunicated, etc. by some Priests; for if the Temporal power had not of its
own nature a competent force and habitude to restrain all things repugnant to
public quietness, and honesty, a Spiritual power was necessary; and yet we
read of none such. But if there was a sufficiency in the Temporal power, as is
most manifestly apparent; then we cannot imagine that Christ came to take away
any of this authority from Magistrates: but that power which he added, was
rather an excellency of grace and virtue in matters of faith, and illumination.

It cannot be alleged by you, that that punishment is merely spiritual,
and so no political evil: for as it puts other men into the condition of
Publicans, Heathens, and worse; so it further yet degrades, disables, and
oppresses Princes. How shall he be honored and obeyed as the Vicegerent of God
in all causes, whom the Laity sees ejected out of the Church, and expelled out
of the Communion of the faithful, as a rotten contagious member? how shall he
be held more sacred then a Priest, whom the sentence, interdiction, and the
confounding blow of a Priests spiritual execration, shall render so
contemptible, miserable, and abominable in the eyes of the world?

Saint Paul being accused in matters of Doctrine, made his appeal to a wicked
Heathen Emperor; and yet now a Christian godly Emperor being accused by any
Churchman, no appeal is allowed, though in mere civil accusations. Saint
Peter's Keys did either endure some new power not before known to the world, or
not; if it did, then our Saviors Gospel came into the world to the detriment
of civil government, which is contrary to Religion, and all reason: and if no
new addition of power were imported, then Tiberius himself, though a Heathen,
and Tyrant, remained as absolute as before; and yet in his time there was more
necessity of an Ecclesiastical judicature, then is now. But you will say, if
Princes be not subject to some chastisement, then some scandals must pass
unremediable. Not so, for here God is the revenger, and strikes often, as he
did Vzziah; but if not, yet either the Temporal or Spiritual Governor must
pass unchastiz'd, which is all one; for two Supreames cannot be, nor no entire
government without some supremacy, nor no supremacy without immunity, and
exemption from judgment.

The perpetual conflicts and contestations between Princes and Prelates,
which are likely to ensue, will soon clear this; that either Princes must at
last submit to the tribunals of Churchmen, and reign at their discretion; or
else Churchmen must submit to them: for both tribunals cannot stand
compatible. For my part, I excuse so grave a Father as you are, of ambition
herein; and therefore I am the less cautious in submitting my self at this
time: but I conceive this Doctrine may be the ground of dangerous consequences
to others, and therefore I desire it may not from me pass into a president for
the time to come.

Let not proud Prelates from this my voluntary humiliation, arrogate to
themselves as if it had been due; or derogate thereby from the more sacred
order of Princes: neither let Princes from this particular learn to yield to
any Spiritual Monarchy whatsoever. My belief is, that the Prince is the Head,
the Fountain, the Soul of all power whatsoever, Spiritual, or Temporal;
wherein he ought not to endure at all any kind of rivality of Ecclesiastical
persons, nor can admit of any diminution in any part of his jurisdiction,
without offense to God, damage to his charge, and danger to himself. So much
for Theodosius, and so much for that jurisdiction which is due to Prelates: I
should now speak of the exercise thereof, as it is granted by the favor of
Princes, but this is a very tender point.

It seems to some, that Princes ought not to incumber men in Sacred Orders, in
any kind of judicature which is not purely Spiritual; nor that Prelates can
accept of any Temporal employment whatsoever, without dishonor to their
Orders, and neglect to their cure of Souls: and yet now none so greedy of such
employment. A sacred place may not be put to secular uses, that is profane: but
a sacred person may, that is honorable.

A Bishopric now adays is but a Writ of ease, to dismiss from Preaching, and
attending Gods service; whereby the man is preferred from the Church to the
Court, from the Altar to some Tribunal, from Gods spiritual to the Kings
temporal affairs. In the High Commission, at the Council Table, in the
Star Chamber, and the Chequer, Churchmen are now more active then in their own
Consistories, and yet their ambition further aims (as it is said) to the
Chancery, Court of Requests, etc. which could not choose but redound to the
scandal of Religion, the obstruction of Justice, and vexation of the Subject:
if there were not learned and skillful men enough in Policy and Law to serve
the King, unless Divinity were deprived of some of her followers, there were
some seeming umbrage why the King might borrow of God; but when Gods more holy
office is neglected, that the Kings meaner may be the worse administered, the
world much gazes and wonders at it.

The functions of Divines are too sacred for any secular person to officiate,
and therefore it should seem, their persons also ought to be too sacred for
secular functions; for it seems prepostrous, that it should be thought an
honor to Priests to relinquish spiritual, and adhere to temporal employments.
Nic: Machiavell did observe that Christian Religion had long since fallen to the
ground had not the regular strictness of poor inferior Priests and Friars
held, and propped up the reputation of it in the World, as much as the pride
and luxury of the great Cardinals, and Prince like Bishops, did strive to sink
and demolish it. The same observation holds true amongst us Protestants at this
day, for the more our Prelates enjoy, the more still they seek; and all our
three Kingdoms are grown so sick of their pride, injustice, and pragmaticall
faction, that scarce any remedy but bloodletting can cure them. We find in
Scripture the most high and holy Offices of Religion performed by Princes, even
amongst, and above the greatest of Priests; but we scarce find any instance at
all where Priests intermedled with any State affairs, either above, or under
Princes: and yet with us now the employing and entrusting of Clergymen in
Temporal businesses, is held as politic as it was in times of Popery: although
no time could ever justly boast of that use. But to pass over Temporal
businesses, how violent have our Bishops been in their own Canons about
Ceremonies, and indifferencies? and what disturbance has that violence
produced? They strive as for the beauty and glory of Religion, to bring in the
same former of Liturgy, the same posture of the Communion Table, the same
gesture at the Communion, etc. in all our three Dominions; as if uniformity
were always beautiful: and yet we see, all men are created with several
faces, voices, and complexions, without any deformity to the universe.

It Is not external variety, but internal dissension, which spoils the
harmony of Religion; and dissension is more nourished by the harshnes of
Pastors over their flocks, especially over the weak ones in scruples, then by
permitting various Rites and Forms in the external worship of God. Certainly,
liberty and variety in indifferences, and Ceremonies is more favored in
Scripture, than any universal similitude, or rigorous force whatsoever, over
the perplexed, anxious consciences of weak men. We see in Scotland, where
there is no Ceremonies, they enjoy that uniformity without contention, which
we aim at only, and seek to purchase with infinite debate, and persecution;
and under their peace and unity, the Protestant Religion thrives, and Romish
Superstition utterly ceases: whereas under our strife and disagreement,
Religion and true Devotion is overrun, and over-growne, like Corn choked
with weeds. Nay, it is thought that if our Bishops had bin more gentle-handed
all this while toward such as disrelisht Ceremonies for Poperies sake, and had
rather pitied the^ as men of tender consciences, than persecuted and defamed
them, as seditions Puritans, these differences had not lasted so long: for when
the reformation was not yet fully perfected, the Puritans of those days were
more fiery than now; but not being so odious in the Church, less combustion
followed thereupon: whereas now they are so unmercifully heated, that no
moderate compliance can serve the turn.

There seems now little remaining of Puritanisme, but the breathless carkas
of it, and yet till that too be interred and consumed, no truce can be
admitted. The very sufferings of Puritans now are sufficiently quit, and
imputed as the effects of their own malice, their punishment is argument
enough for the desert of their punishment; the more they have borne, the more
they must now bear; and the more they now bear, the more they shall
hereafter. Fury is one of the maine thing; objected to Puritans; but in truth,
the World has not any thing more furious then such as most pretend against them.

Hence it is, that the hatred of Puritans flows and descends from the highest
of the Clergy to the lowest: and young Students in the University know it now
their wisest course to study the defamation of Puritans, as the first and most
necessary point of their learning and qualification, and as their surest path
to promotion. And to make their detestation sure, and themselves
irreconciliable, they must engage themselves by some notable service of
novelty, quarrelling with some point of Protestantisme, or refining some point
of Popery; they must tax Protestants as some ways injurious to Princes, or
extol Papists as zealous observers of Antiquity. It must be maintained that
Royalty cannot stand without the prop of Episcopacy, though it never yet found
greater enemy; and that Puritanisme only hinders the stretching of our
Religion, or else Papists and we should soon agree. Those of vulgar wits which
serve not for such strains, that they may be redeemed from suspicion of
Puritanisme, must do something factiously, or be vicious, or else their hopes
of preferment are almost desperate.

Charity to Papists, conformity to Ancient Fathers, and decent uniformity
amongst our selves, are the specious colors wherewith they dress and deck all
their pretenses; for want of Sectaries living in these days, they rake out of
their toombs Hacket, Copinger, Brown, etc. to upbraid us, for want of
opposites enough here in England, they calumniate the Scots to our dishonor; for
want of true imputations, they forge any crimes how monstrous soever, and their
most sure one is, that which is most undiscernible, hypocrisy. Nevertheless
it must be believed that the Antipuritan disparages not our Ancestors in the
reformation, but for love of antiquity; not tears in sunder the bonds of
Religion, Nature, Policy betwixt two the most close-united Nations of the
World, but out of love to unity: nor fills whole Kingdoms with blood, but out
of love to Order. Such was sure Diogenes his humility, trampling upon Platoes
Couches; such was Neroes uniformity, setting on sire the streets of Rome: Such
was Procustes his symmetry, cutting his guests according to his beds. And
therefore its thought Puritans are not so much hated for their opposition to
Ceremonies, as Ceremonies are multiplied, and enforced for suppression of all
zealous Christians, under the umbrage of Puritans: and that for the same
purpose the enemies of Piety have blown those coals which they might have
quenched.

The Bishop of Down makes a very sharp speech to the Puritans in Ireland, as
being very disobedient, and animated therein by the Scottish Covenanters; but
his chiefest eloquence uttered against his own Countrymen the Scots, whom he
paints forth as the chiefest Traitors, perjured Rebels, Heretics and
Hypocrites in the World: nay, he denounces them worse than Anabaptists, and
such as have more than justified the Powder-Traytors, and all the rebellious
practices of the Jesuits: Afterward he adds also, That Puritanisme is not
the National sin of Scotland only, but that they of the same faction in
England had been as deep in the same condemnation, but that they had not so
much power. See here the lively portraiture of an Antipuritane, see a true
Boner revived again, but in Protestant habit; and for ought I see, here are
none exempted from this black venomous censure in all the Kings Dominions, but
those of the Popish and Episcopal Faction. It Is not to be wondered at that the
King thinks ill of his Subjects, or that Burton or Prin suffered worse then
Traitors merits: It Is rather to be wondered at, that our streets do not run
with blood daily, since this is the Gospel our Reverend Fathers of the Church
preach. This speech was thought worthy to be dispersed in Print over all our
Kingdoms in English; but since, because it redounds so much to the honor of
the three Nations, and the repute of Protestant Religion, it is Translated into
Latin, and Coppies are Printed for all Christendom to take notice of. In this
speech its urged, that Puritans who began about 80 years since, have proceeded
from bad to worse by six degrees; first they did dislike, then contemn
Bishops; then they did disobey their jurisdiction; then separate themselves;
then they fell into the Heresy of holding no difference between Bishop and
Presbyter: lastly, they rebelled, and grew more immoderate than Anabaptists.
And here Saint Cyprian is alleged, who says, That the contempt of Bishops is
the beginning and ground of all Heresies and Schisms.

Here we see what Puritanes are, the most cursed Miscreants on earth; next we
see who Puritans are, all such as hold not with Episcopacy: that is in
probability half Ireland, more then half England, all Scotland, and many
other Protestant Countries. King James did put a difference betwixt such as
disrelisht Bishops, and Ceremonies merely, and such as under that pretext
fraudulently sought to perturbe the State, and make a factious separation. But
here the difference of all Puritans is graduall only, not substantial; for
dislike of Bishops is the beginning of all Heresy, and must needs end in
Anabaptisme and rebellion.

How plainly does it here appear, that Episcopacy is the true Helena of all
this war; and yet Saint Cyprian is to be understood of the Pastoral
function, not of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of a Bishop, or else in his
sense the Genevans, and the greatest part of Protestants are Heretics, and
King James made a frivolous distinction. Such stuff as this had not
mis-beseemed a Papist, but its very odd in a Protestant Bishop; except we
consider him, as one who has look back toward the Onions and Fleshpots of
Egypt, and is inamor'd again upon those glorious titles and ensigns of
Honor, and Pomp, which Rome confers upon her Courtiers. But to conclude this
point, I wish Princes would not allow such Bishops to be carvers to themselves,
and make them Judges in cases of their own interesse: they are surely good
spectacles for Princes in Theological deliberations, as Temporal Counselors
are in State affairs; but miserable are those Princes whose eyes cannot see
without such spectacles. If Religion did not prosper worse, if peace were not
more violated, if persecution were not more common in Countries where Bishops
govern, than where they are expelled, we might suspect the Scots, as
Heretical, and Rebellious by nature; for choosing all the plagues of war
rather then Bishops: but when we see the contrary, we may as well listen to the
Scots against Bishops, as to Bishops against the Scots. So much of the
Ecclesiastical Puritan, next after whom sprung up the Puritan in Religion, of
whom I shall speak very briefly.

There are many men amongst us now, which brook Bishops and Ceremonies well
enough; and perhaps favorably interpret our late innovations; and yet these
may be too grave to escape the name of Puritans. To be a Protestant may be
allowed, but to dispute against Papists, smells of preciseness: to hold the Pope
fallible is tolerated, but to hold him Antichrist is abominable Puritanisme: to
go to Church is fashionable, but to complain of the Mass, or to be grieved
at the public countenance of Popery, whereby it intwines our Religion, and now
drinks up that Sap which is scarce afforded to Protestantisme, or at all to
take notice how far some of our Divines are hereat conniving, if not
cooperating, is a sumptome of a deep infected Puritan.

He that is not moderate in Religion is a Puritan, and he that is not a
Cassandrian, or of Father Francis Syncters faith, is not moderate: he savours
too much of Calvin's gross learning, exploded now by our finest wits. But I
pass from this kind of Puritan to another; whom I shall call my Political
Puritan; for the bounds of Puritanisme are yet larger, and enclose men of other
conditions.

Some there are yet which perhaps disfavour not at all either Ecclesiastical
Policy, or moderate Papists; and yet nevertheless this is not sufficient to
acquit them from the name of Puritans, if they ascribe any thing to the Laws
and Liberties of this Realm, or hold the Prerogative royal to be limitable by
any Law whatsoever. If they hold not against Parliaments and with Ship Money,
they are injurious to Kings; and to be injurious to Kings, is proprium quarto
modo to a Puritan.

Our present civil, nay more then civil war with Scotland, and all the
mischiefs thereon attending, the disaffection between the King and his
Subjects, and all the mischiefs thereon attending the discontinuance of
Parliaments, the proper remedies of all State-maladies, and universal
grievances, which is a mischief whereby all mischiefs become incurable, all
are caused by the abusive mistake and injurious misapplication of this word
Puritan.

The Scots are Puritans, and therefore enemies to Monarchy, the English are
Puritans, and therefore haters of Royal prerogative, both the Nations have
been hitherto famous for their devout reverence, and obsequious zeal to their
Princes; but now Puritanisme has infected them, and perverted them to
disloyalty. Thus is the Kings heart alienated from his Subjects, and by
consequence, the Subjects loyalty blunted toward him, to the incomparable,
almost irreparable detriment of both: neither is this disaccord between the
King and his best Subjects, more fatal and pernicious to the Commonwealth,
then his accord with the Recusant faction. Papists have now gotten the repute
of the best Subjects, and fittest for trust in places of eminent service; nay
it is almost necessary that foreign Papists be brought in for the supporting of
the endangered royalty: for though the Popish faction at Court be strong and
active enough for matter of Counsel, yet for matter of force the Puritans in
City and Country be too predominant.

The Bishop of Down in his visitation speech lays all the calamities of
Church and Commonwealth upon Nonconformists, and for proof thereof instances
in the Covenanters, whom he charges of rebellion, charging withal that
rebellion upon Puritanisme. The first thing (says he) that made me out of love
with that Religion, was their injurious dealing with Kings, which I observed
both in their practice and doctrine. He taxes first their doctrine, because
they deny the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, and allow Subjects to
resist, nay and depose their King, if he be a Tyrant. Surely Ahab could say
little for himself, if he could not lay his own crimes upon Elijah; but see
here by what art of confusion all Scots are called Puritans and all Puritans
rebels.

King James spoke not so confusedly as if Puritanisme were a Religion; and all
that disliked Bishops and Ceremonies were of that Religion; and all of that
Religion were enemies to Kings. If a Bishop needed any proof, if his (...)
were not unquestionable, I would desire him to prove all Covenanters Puritans,
and all Puritans, denyers of the Kings supremacy: or to instance in any Kings
which have been deposed or murdered by Presbyteriall authority. How far Bishops
have incroached upon Kings, is known to all the world: our Protestant Bishops
lately have by Oath and Canon combined together to bind the Kings hands though
he be Supreme, that he shall not govern our Church but by Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, etc. and yet these troublers of Israel have the face to
tax Elijah of their own sin.

Presbytery indeed has heretofore passed her bounds, yet not of late, but
Episcopacy has ever from Constantine claimed an independence of Divine right,
till this instant. I conceive there are not in all the Kings Dominions, three
men, except Papists and Anabaptists, which hold it lawful to depose, or by any
force to violate the persons of Kings, how ill soever. The Scotch Divines
indeed maintain that a great body of men may defend themselves against the
unjust Sword of misled Kings, because they cannot fly, or otherwise save
themselves; and this they take now to be their own case; whereas our Court
Divines in England hold, that in such case, we ought all to yield our throats
without defense. This seems unnatural, and truth was never unnatural, but I
forbear to dispute a point so horrid to man's imagination: The Bishop next
instances in the rebellious practices of Puritans, and reckons up some facts in
Scotland appointed by the Presbytery without King James his privity, and some
other seditious Sermons, and actions whereby he was much annoyed. But what? did
not King James know his own enemies, or how to blame them? did he condemn all
Scots alike, or all Bishophaters alike, or join the English in like
condemnation? we know well enough, that King James called rebellious precisians
Puritans, but he never called all Puritans rebellious precisians: He never used
those terms as convertible, but declared his contrary meaning by a manifest
difference taken between them. But the Bishops maine instance is in the
present Scotch insurrection; this he calls a rebellion of Puritans, and far
greater then the Powder Treason: For (says he) that plot was but the act of a
few discontented Gentlemen, but in this rebellion of the Puritans they have
engaged a great part of the Kingdom, so that this may be said to be the
common sin of that sect. What could have been raked out of Hell more
slanderous to our Religion, more Apologeticall for Popery.

The Powder-Traytors are here preferred before the whole sect of Puritans: The
sin of the Power-Traytors was, that they being but an inconsiderable party,
sought the destruction of their King and his issue, and the flower of the
Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty, and the extirpation of the true Religion, by a
most diabolical bloody practice and conspiracy. And it ought not to be charged
upon the mere actors, as a symptom of discontent, only we know how far the
Romish Religion it self favors and gives ground to such damned feats, and how
far it has owned some having proved prosperous, and justified the doing
thereof in nature as impious, though perhaps in degree not so heinous as this.
For take this as it was conspired, and questionless, since the crucifying of
Jesus Christ, the light never discovered any treason more ugly, and horrible.

Now to outmatch this deed of darkness, the Scotch Nation by a strange
general unanimity have armed themselves to oppose the ill government of
Bishops, and other alterations in the service of God, and the administration of
justice, and being invaded therefore by another Nation, have used force to
defend their lives; and seeing that defense not safe in their own Country,
they have since pursued it further by way of prevention in the Country of
their Invaders. That is the greatest act of rebellion whereby the common peace
and safety of a Kingdom is most disturbed and impeached; but by the common act
of a whole Kingdom, that mischief cannot be effected, therefore the Bishop
fails in his politiques when he thinks that the Major part disturbing the
Minor, is more traiterous, than the contrary. The unanimous act of a whole
Kingdom ought to be presumed to be less injurious, and more wise then the act
of any small inconsiderable party, for it has scarce ever been seen that a
whole Kingdom, or the majority thereof has over been treasonable to its self
in procuring its own ruin.

Many States have perished by the machinations of a few ill affected, ill
advised Counselors, (scarce ever any perished otherwise) but the total body
and collection, has never been guilty of its own ruin: and if it were, such
Treason could not be so great as that which is plotted by a few. Whilst the
Scots contained themselves within their own territories, and were considered
as a kingdom within themselves, as they were when the Bishop past his censure,
they were not rightly so censured: neither was he then privy to their
intrusions, that they would infest our kingdom with the same combustion, and
so prove a disturbance to the greater part of our British Monarchy, whereof
they themselves are but a member of less bulk and value. Cursed therefore are
those uncharitable exasperating censures, whereby the King is too far incensed,
and by whose rash instigations the commotions themselves become the harder to
be appeased.

Great insurrections are like great fires, wherein delay is mischievous, and
small remedies rather turn to fuel, then extinguish: and violent counsel
against an enraged multitude is like oil, or pitch cast into the flame. The
wise politician proportions his remedy according to the mischief, if water
will not prevail, he uses milk; if a little quantity will not suffice, he
powers as the combustion it self requires. Unfortunate Rehoboam stands as a
Seamarke to warn all Princes how to shun this rock of violent counsel
against a people violently enraged and aggrieved. Some men have interpreted the
designs of the Scots to have been treasonable from the beginning, and wholly
bent upon the spoil and havocke of the English Nation from their first
stirring: Others have wholly justified their intentions and proceedings
hitherto as defensive only, and enforced by necessity: both these, I conceive,
are too rash and headlong in their guesses. In so great a body of men, there
must needs be variety of opinions, and its likely contrariety of affections;
and therefore it behooves the King to be the more tender, moderate, and
circumspect in his deliberations, as well for the one side as the other,
especially since the Scots have not evidently and universally as yet declared
themselves for the worse. We may at once be charitable in hoping the best, and
wise withal in preventing the worst; nay, a charitable and sweet demeanor, if
it be not too fond, may prove a great part of our prevention: doubtless
Rehoboam himself, had he not been wilfully devoted to young, rash, and
violent Counselors, might have easily retained within his obedience many of
his well-meaning Subjects, and reclaymed others of more moderation; and by that
means have divided and dissipated the most obstinate, headstrong, and furious
of all the rebellious party. Some Princes think themselves bound in Honor to
do unwise things, and this was the error of Rehoboam, his aged Counselors
advised him to that which was most politic, concluding that to be most
honorable; but his Genius rather led him according to the advice of his young
Gallants, to conclude that most politic, which to his haughty stomach seemed
most honorable: but what was the event? to avoid the scorn of young men, he
incurred the scorn of old men; to avoid the unjust censure of fools, he
incurred the just censure of wise men; to gain the honor of appearing stout,
he purchased the dishonor of being rash; to show a contempt of danger, he made
himself a prey to it; rather then to decline a blow by a gentle bowing of his
body, he yielded himself to be inevitably oppressed by it.

At this time of revolt the Israelites were not so wicked, as their revolt
after made them; it may be so with the Scots, they are yet Protestants, and
perhaps may be retained so: and who can think of Protestants, that so great a
body of them, can at one fall so desperately tumble into the depth of
mischief, as to make Fasting, Praying, Oaths and Sacraments, mere instruments
and traynes to commit murder, theft, sacrilege, treason, and the most
unnatural of all crying crimes? But to return to our own Nation, and what we
suffer by our own Divines.

Manwarings Doctrine is common at Court, and it is not long since a Bishops
Chaplain in Terme-time, challenged a Judge of Treason, for delivering Law
according to conscience. And this is now no prodigy, for Pulpits are not
public enough to preach an unlimitable prerogative in; it is fit our learned
Doctors should mount the Benches of Justice also, there to advance Logic
instead of Law; for Law is grown injurious to Princes, and smells rank of
Puritanisme. Divines themselves will lose nothing to Princes, but all other men
shall, that they may gain the more: and neither Lawyers nor Statesmen must
direct them in any thing, but both Lawyers and Statesmen must be directed by
them in all things: but let us a little examine how the conditionate and
absolute forms of government come within the circle of Theology. The
Israelites were governed by Monarchs, but not all alike absolute. The
Patriarchs were not so absolute as the Judges, nor the Judges as the Kings, nor
the Kings as those Heathen Emperors, which at last made them tributary. The
due of Caesar, and the due of Solomon, and the due of Samuel, and the due of
Jacob, was not the same as to all points of State, or all degrees of Royalty,
and yet the nation was the same, and the form of government still remained the
same.

It should seem that God approved that degree of Sovereignty best, which was
by himself settled in the person of Moses; for when that people afterward
desired a King, of a more awful and large prerogative, in imitation of other
Nations, the thing displeased God. Samuel also wrote a book of this subject,
showing the just conditions of Regal power; (the loss whereof is much to be
lamented) for if it had been Gods will that all Kings should be equally
absolute in all respects, and free from all limitations and obligations alike,
Samuel needed to have written little thereof; one word had determined all. But
in Scripture, as it now remains, Samuels book being not extant, our chiefest
light and guide now is by example, not rule; and example we find very various.

The State and Sovereignty of the Jewish Kings in general, we find mild, and
gracious; but much differing in particulars. Solomon was heavy over his
Subjects, and under his Son they would not bear the like; yet Solomon's
pressure was not upon the estates of his Subjects by taxes, and impositions,
for He made silver in Jerusalem as stones for plenty; nor did He vex their
persons by Military hazards and services, for He was at peace with all the
world: Neither did He any way let fall, or lessen their honor amongst other
Nations; He made them rather a spectacle of glory and prosperity to the world.
Solomon's harshnesse was only in employing so great multitudes for his own
pompous attendance, and for the performance of such public works, and
structures, as did tend to the Magnificence and beauty of the State. Besides,
Scripture does not satisfy us, neither by rule, nor example, whether Kings
ought to be successive always, or elective; or whether primogeniture of
Males, or unigeniture of Daughters, ought to take place: many things are left
so uncertain, that it is not always safe for Kings wholly to rely upon
examples; and for the rule of obedience, it is general, and no more
advantageous for free Monarchs, then conditionate Potentates; no more for
supreme, then subordinate commanders.

The Law of Nature best determines, that all Princes being public Ministers
for the common good, that their authority ought to be of sufficient latitude
for that common good; and since Scripture is not express concerning that
latitude, as to all people, the same not being to all alike necessary, the
several Laws of several Countries best teach that certain latitude. I could
wish therefore that Princes herein would not so much consult with Divines, as
Lawyers; or rather with Parliaments, which are the Grand Courts and Counsels of
Kingdoms; for (as Cotton says) Every man in particular may deceive, and be
deceived; but no man can deceive all, nor can all deceive one. Ancient times
are not precedentary to ours by any necessity, for Laws are now more learned,
exact, and particular; and Courts, and Tables of Justice, and Policy, are more
wisely and methodically composed and elected, then they were; and therefore
there needs not that vocal power, or indisputable force to remain in the
breasts of Princes, as was of old.

The Courts of Parliament, and their unquestionable Acts, and Ordinances, and
their infallible avisoes, are now in all well-governed Countries; the very
Oracles of all Policy, and Law, they are the fountains of civil blood,
spirits, and life; and the sovereign antidotes of public mischeifes. That
Prince was never yet deceived which relied upon them, nor can He choose but be
deceived, which thinks he can be assisted with any more wise or faithful
advertisement, then that which is given (...) by his whole Realm united, and
contracted in a less circumference. What end can all the flower of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of a Nation, being wise and religious, have in
seducing their Sovereign, or in limiting that Sovereignty by which alone they
are protected? Or what one party of particular men can better understand the
true limits of sufficient Sovereignty, and the profit thereof; then this
collective universality, whose rays like the Suns, are every where dispersed;
and yet whose body of light is here as in a refulgent Globe concentred?

Individuals may have many particular ends, severd from the Princes or the
States, but Communities can aim at nothing but the common good; as the lesser
fountains scatter their branching streams up and down in various Maeanders,
whilst the Sea contains it self in an entire body, within its constant
bounds. Individuals also have but their own particular set limits of
perfection, and have judgments besides apt to be darkened by their own
several interests and passions; whereas the common body injoyes a confluence
of several perfections, and has the less force from abroad to overcloud
them. Of all men therefore it will most concern Princes to suspect them which
are enemies to public assemblies, and to confide in them most, whose ends are
not divided from the generalities; and as they tender their own happiness, to
expect it chiefly from that generality, by which they are Kings, to which they
are Gods, from which their very Diadems receive honor and sanctity, to which
their very Royal Order imparts life, and breath, and necessary subsistence. I
come now to my Ethicall Puritan.

The name of Puritan must not rest here, for there may be some moderate, well
inclined, facile men, whose education may be such that they are not much versed
or insighted either in matters of Religion, or matters of State; they may be
such as are no ways busy but in their own particular affairs, and yet it
behooves, that these men too be brought in within the opprobrious compass of
Puritanisme. To the Religious, Ecclesiastical, and Political Puritan, there
must be joined also an Ethicall Puritan.

This detested odious name of Puritan first began in the Church presently after
the Reformation, but now it extends it self further, and gaining strength as
it goes, it diffuses its poisonous ignominy further, and being not contented to
Gangrene Religion, Ecclesiastical and Civil policy, it now threatens
destruction to all morality also. The honest strict demeanor, and civil
conversation which is so eminent in some men does, so upbraid and convince the
Antipuritan, that even honesty, strictness, and civility it self must become
disgraceful, or else they which are contrary cannot remain in grace: But
because it is too gross to deride virtue under the name of virtue; therefore
other colors are invented, and so the same thing undergoes derision under an
other name. The zealous man is despised under the name of zealot, the Religious
honest man has the vizard of an hypocrite and dissembler put upon him to make
him odious.

Puritans by some are parallelled to Jesuits, Jesuits are called Popish
Puritans, and Puritans, Protestant Jesuits; yet this is not indeed
disparageable to them: For doubtless fiery zeal and rigor were not blameable
in Jesuits, were not their very Religion false; as celerity and expedition in
a Traveller is not in it self faulty, but commendable, though the Traveller
being in a wrong path, it causes him to stray the further from his journeys end.

My Lord of Down professes that the first thing which made him distest the
Religion of Puritans (besides their gross hypocrisy) was sedition: So gross
hypocrisy, it seems, was the first. What is gross or visible hypocrisy to
the Bishop, I know not, for I can see no windows or casements in men's breasts,
neither do I think him endued with Saint Peter's prophetical spirit whereby to
perceive and search into the reins, and hearts of hypocrites; but let him
proceed. It is a plausible matter (says he) with the people to hear men in
authority depraved, and to understand of any liberty and power appertaining to
themselves. The profession also of extraordinary zeal, and as it were contempt
of the world works with the multitude. When they see men go simply in the
Streets, and bow down their heads like a Bull-rush, their inward parts burning
with deceit, wringing their necks awry, shaking their heads as if they were in
some present grief, lifting up the white of their eyes at the sight of some
vanity, giving great groans, crying out against this sin and that sin in
their superiors, under color of long prayers, devouring widows, and married
wives houses; when the multitude hears and sees such men, they are carried
away with a great conceit of them, but if they should judge of these men by
their fruits, not by outward appearance, they should find them to be very far
from the true Religion. See here the froth of a scurrilous libeller, whereby it
is concluded that he that is of severe life, and averse from the common
vanities of the time, is an hypocrite: If these descriptions of outward
austerity shall not only show what is an hypocrite, but point out also who is
an hypocrite, our Savior himself will hardly escape this description; doubtless
our Savior, and many of his devoutest followers did groan, shake their heads,
and lift up their eyes at the sight of some public sins, and vanities, and did
not spare to tax the vices of Superiors, and to preach too, and admonish the
meaner sort of the people; yet who but an Annas or Caiphas will infer from
hence that therefore their inward parts burn with deceit, and that their end
is merely to carry away the multitude; such as judge only by outward
appearance, and have not their senses exercised to discern betwixt good and
evil? It is likely the High Priests and Pharisees did thus blaspheme in those
days, and that the rather, because from their own feigned sanctity, they were
the more apt to suspect the same in others: But what? must we needs follow
them, or this Bishop in this? But to proceed with this Bishop, Saint James
(says he) gives us a full description of true Religion.

Wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, and hypocrisy. None
of these properties will agree with the Religion of Puritans. It is not pure,
for it allows Usury, Sacrilege, Disobedience, Rebellion, etc. It is not
peaceable, for these men are the incendiaryes of Christendom. It is not
gentle, nor easy to be entreated, for they are more austere then Cato, and not
to be moved by persuasion or command. It is not full of mercy and good fruits,
for they are all for sacrifice, nothing for mercy; for the first Table, not the
second; for faith, not charity; they pull down Churches, but build no
Hospitals. It is not without judging, for they are known to be most rigid
censurers. And he is an hypocrite which spies a moate in his brothers eyes, and
not a beam in his own.

Here is a confused proof, that such Puritans are hypocrites, but no proof at
all, that this man is such a Puritan. If my Lord Say be such a Puritan, this
denotes him an hypocrite, but this does not prove that my Lord Say or Brook,
or Dod, or Clever, etc. or any the most famous Puritan living is guilty of
Usury, Sacrilege, Rebellion, pulling down of Churches, setting the World on
fire, or of renouncing the second Table and all works of justice and charity,
or of censuring and condemning malignantly other men: If these things were true
of particular men, calumny were needless; Accusation would better suppress
them. And sure it is not out of favor that Law proceeds not, for malice has
often enough showed her teeth, and would have bitten if she could, neither
would she now calumniate if she could accuse.

The Bishop expects not to be believed, if he puzzell, and work some into
doubt, it is sufficient: but since bitter censuring, and calumnious condemning
of others is so infallible a sign of hypocrisy, how does the Bishop wipe this
off from himself? Can Puritans speak worse of any, then he does of Puritans?
Sure they may well join with him upon this issue, that the greatest slanderer
is the greatest hypocrite; and yet seek no further for slanders, then this
very speech, wherein he so eagerly inveighs against slander; but if individuals
cannot be thus convinced by the Bishop, how shall these signs and symptoms be
applied to whole Sects, Religions, Kingdoms?

The most ordinary badge of Puritans is their more religious and conscionable
conversation, than that which is seen in other men's: and why this should make
them odious or suspected of hypocrisy amongst honest and charitable men, I
could never yet learn. A seeming religious consists in doing actions outwardly
good, and the goodness of those actions is apparent to man; but the false
hypocritical end of them is only discerned by God: and therefore with what
conscience can I condemn that good which is visible, for that evil which is
not visible? Say, Brook, Dod, Clover, etc. are known to me; yet no otherwise
but as men singularly devote, and as all the Prophets, and Apostles would, if
they were now living: and shall I conclude, because they seem so, therefore
they are not so? I am so far from this, that my own conscience binds me to
honor them, and that in those things, wherein I have not the grace to follow
them. I have been a diligent inquirer into Puritans, and have exactly tried
them three ways. First, in themselves; and so I find them zealous, at least
seeming so outwardly, and distinguished principally from other men by their
remarkable, and singular zeal to God and the Truth: and this to me is no ground
of uncharitable censure. Secondly, in those, which in these times think and
speak charitably of them; and they are so many in number, and of so good
quality, that indeed to the Popish and Episcopal faction, all the Kingdom
almost seems Puritanicall; but for this I cannot think the worse of them. But
thirdly, when I consider Puritans, and compare them with their common notorious
adversaries, then their goodness seems most evident to me, as if it were
legibly ingraved in the open wickedness and scandal of their chief opposers.
Nothing but Truth, Holiness, and Goodness, seems to me to be the cause, that
Papists do so implacably abominate them: that our proud Hierarchists,
Ambidexters, and Neuters in Religion, do so uncessantly pursue their
subversion; that Court-flatterers, and time-serving Projectors, and the
ravenous Caterpillars of the Realm, do so virulently prosecute them with
defamations and contumelies; that Stage-poets, Minstrels, and the jesting
Buffoones of the age, make them the principal subject of derision: lastly,
that all the shameless rout of drunkards, lechers, and swearing ruffians; and
the scum of the vulgar are so tickled with their reproach, and abuse.
Certainly, nothing but an unappeaseable antipathy could be the cause of all
this, and no testimony of goodness can be more sure, un-erring, and
unanswerable then such antipathy.

Amongst wicked men there may be particular hatred, but not a general
antipathy: One wicked man hates not another as wicked, but rather loves him
therefore, or else the World did not observe a decorum in loving her own, and
hating strangers. As there cannot be division in Satan's kingdom; so there
cannot be communion or compatibility betwixt Christ's and Satan's Subjects But
it is a miserable thing to see how far this word Puritan in an Ethical sense
dilates it self. Heretofore it was Puritanicall to abstain from small sins;
but now it is so to abstain from gross open sins. In the mouth of a
drunkard, He is a Puritan which refuses his cups; In the mouth of a swearer,
He which fears an oath; In the mouth of a Libertine, He which makes any
scruple of common sins; In the mouth of a rude Soldier, He which wishes the
Scotch war at an end without blood. It is sufficient that such men think
themselves tacitly checked and affronted by the unblameable conversation of
Puritans. Bishop Lake that good and godly man moved at the declining state of
his time is said to have expressed his regret thus: We fear, says he, a
relapse into Popish error, and superstition; but my heart misgives me worse
than so: Utter irreligion and Atheism, me thinks, begins to prevail
strangely amongst us: we are not so likely to lose the light of truth, as the
heat of zeal; and what benefit is in Religion, where the name of it is
honored, but the power of it is not at all seen? where Gods will is truly
understood, but his commands are wholly slighted? where men know like
Christians, but live like Heathens? The soul of Religion is hearty devotion,
and that grows daily more and more ridiculous amongst us; and yet Religion
without the soul of it, is rather a curse than a blessing to us. No impiety is
so heinous in an ignorant Sodomite, as want of piety is in a right instructed
Israelite. In this wise I have heard that good Prelate did complain; and this
makes me think, that he had in his complaint some respect to this word Puritan,
then which, certainly the Devil has not a more fatal engine whereby to
confound Religion, and to subvert all true zeal, goodness, and devotion. Thus
far it appears what a vast circumference this word Puritans has, and how by
its large acception it is used to cast dirt in the face of all goodness,
Theological, Civil, or Moral: so that scarce any moderate man can avoid its
imputation. And thus it does mischief to men, not commonly noted for Puritans,
but if a man be so noted, though perhaps irregularly, then it is farther
otherwise abused: for all such a man's evil shall be charged upon his
Puritanisme, and all his good defaced for his Puritanisme. Such a man is
condemned for murder, and adultery; and at his death gives strong assurances
of unfaigned repentance, and contrition of heart. He was a Christian, a
Protestant, a Minister, a Puritan; yet this crime is recorded and blown
abroad, not for the shame of Christians, Protestants, Ministers, but of
Puritans. And as for his attestation of deep humiliation, how excellent soever,
the honor of them, if any be acknowledged, shall redound to the Christian, the
Protestant, the Minister, to any thing else except the Puritan.

Howsoever in the first place it ought to be observed, that an unclean stream
does not always receive it is uncleanness from the filth of the Fountain, but
in the second place a pure stream necessarily infers a pure Source. It Is true,
Trees are known by their fruits, and so are Men generally by their works; but
this similitude holds not in all men, at all times: for good men sometimes
commit foul sins, and bad men perform laudable services. David defiles
Vriahs wife, and to conceal it from the world, makes drunk and murders Vriah;
and together with him casts away the lives of many other faithful Soldiers:
yet nothing moved at this his own mis-doing, at the same time He sentences to
death a Subject of his for damnifying a neighbor, to the value of a poor Lamb.
What might Joab, and the other privy Ministers of these his foul deeds, censure
all this while of this his externally professed sanctity, and purity, and
strictnes in point of justice to other men; or of his so great indignation
against petty offenders? What might they judge of the root, from whence these
fruits sprung? did they conclude these fruits good? or did they conceive that
such fruits might grow upon a good stock? It Is strange, that He which would be
so rigid to a petty Fellon, should himself find no remorse at his own
murder and oppression, in spoiling so gallant a Commander, of his wife, of his
sobriety, of his life, and to continue so long a time without regard either
what himself had done, or what Vriah had suffered. But it is well, David lived
in those times when the name of Puritanisme was not invented to blast all
goodness: had he lived amongst us, he had been accounted a Puritan, and
being a Puritan, God might have forgiven him, but the world never would: but
it seems the world was not then poisoned with the same base word, though I
believe under some other nicke-name goodness was always odious: for we read,
that for that very sin of David, Gods name was evil spoken of amongst the
wicked. So Solomon the Son of seduced Bathsheba, if we censure him by many of
his actions, perhaps Jeroboam, and Ahab that made Israel to sin, were not
personally addicted to so much excess of bodily lust, and pollution, nay
perhaps many Heathens and Turks have detested his enormous lubricities.

I speak not this to countenance sin, but to discountenance rash censures of
sinners, wishing all that think themselves frail and mortal, to turn their
eyes inwards, and to lay their hands upon their own mouths, forbearing to
censure all sins, but most especially the most latent and obscure of all
sins, hypocrisy.

Solomon the magnificent is held the honestest of all the Princes which reigned
in his time, not excepting Christian Princes, nay not excepting the great
Father of them all, the Apostolic man of Rome: yet this is no shame to
Christianity, but to Christians rather; nay I wish it might be accounted rather
a rebuke, then a shame; rather a rebuke to humble them, then a shame to confute
them. For Christ tells us that many times the first are last, and last first,
God sees not as man sees, and yet he that will judge uprightly ought to see as
God sees, and not as Man. So much of the extensive infamy of this word Puritan,
now of its intensive malignancy: but little more needs to be spoken hereof, for
he which tells you who is a Puritan, for the most part tells what is a Puritan.

The Papist we see hates one kind of Puritans, the Hierarchist another, the
Court Sycophant another, the sensual Libertine another; yet all hate a
Puritan, and under the same name many times hate the same thing. He which is an
enemy to our Religion which is the truth, hates the Puritan as an enemy to
Truth; He which is an enemy to Piety, Policy, Morality, charges the Puritan of
being the same: Wherefore whatsoever is hated by the perverted and disaffected
in Religion, Piety, Policy, Morality, is a Puritan, and whosoever is a Puritan,
is censured, hated, and slandered as a man perverted and disaffected in
Religion, Piety, Policy, and Morality.

This sufficiently appears by the common slanders of all goodness in these
days, and particularly by the Bishop of Down, for as he justifies Jesuits,
Anabaptists, and the Powder-Traytors before Puritans; so he describes, and
proscribes whole Religions, Sects, and Kingdoms for Puritans.

In the year of grace 1588, when the Spanish Armado had miscarried,
notwithstanding that his holiness of Rome had so peremptorily christened it,
and as it were conjured for it, One of that Religion was strangely distempered
at it, and his speech was as it is reported, God himself was turned Lutheran:
By which, for certain, he meant Heretical. It Is much therefore that my Lord
of Down, now that Episcopacy is so foiled in Scotland, has not raged in the
like manner, and charged God of turning Puritan: but surely, if he has spared
God, he has not spared any thing else that is good; and if he has spared to
call God Puritan, he has not spared to call Puritan Devil: but to conclude, if
the confused misapplication of this foul word Puritan be not reformed in
England, and that with speed, we can expect nothing but a sudden universal
downfall of all goodness whatsoever. Aelius Adrianus the Emperor, about an
hundred years after our Savior, having been certified by Serenius Granianus,
Proconsul of Asia, that the Christians in those parts were illegally oppressed
by the malice of unjust Sycophants, sends this his imperial edict to the next
successor Minutius Fundanus.

If the Provincials can prove ought against the Christians, whereof they charge
them, and can at the bar of justice make good the same, let them proceed in a
judicial course: but let them not appeach the Christians merely for the name,
by clamouring, and railing scandals against them: For it is expedient, if any
be disposed to accuse, that the accusation be thoroughly known, and judicially
tried by you; therefore if any accuse the Christians that they transgress the
Laws, see that you judge and punish according to the quality of the offense,
but if any upon spite or malice by way of calumny complain against them, see
you chastise such for their malice, and repay them with condign punishment. I
began with a Marquess, I end with an Emperor: both read the same lecture,
both teach us a difference betwixt privy malicious calumny and open judicial
accusing, or impleading; God send us to hearken to both, as much as the
necessity of our case requires it.

FINIS.
TO THE READER.
READER,
I Have said enough to make my self condemned for a Puritan, and by
consequence, all which I have said to be condemned for Puritanicall: but
verily, if thou art not an Antipuritan of the worst kind, I am not a Puritan.
In my opinions I am not scrupulous or precise, in my life I am not strict, or
austere, the more is my blame; if thou art a downright Protestant, and no
more, I am the same, and no more. If thou think some men religious which
affect not the name of Puritan, I think so too: if thou think most men
irreligious which hate the name of Puritan, I think so too: if thou art not to
me a violent Antipuritan, I have no quarrel with thee; nor am I a Puritan to
thee: if thou art, hate me as a professed Puritan, and I will thank thee for the
honor of it. Farewell.

Thine to fear thee, more then hate thee, and to fear thy malice rather then
justice, Philus Adelphus.


