The PREAMBLE, to all the Freeborn People of ENGLAND.
BRethren and Fellow-Commons; God and the world knows, that the well-affected
party of this Kingdom (discerned by their voluntary aid to the Parliament)
having tried all possible and fair means, as much as any People for number and
power of any Kingdom or Nation ever did, by Prayers, Assistance, Concurrence,
Attendance, Petitions, Oblations, Informations, and Discoveries, as well of
Treasons, as of utter desolations, and perceiving themselves now at last to be
in a far worse condition, both in number and power (their Lives and Estates,
yea and precious time also being so far spent) then they were at the first; and
besides, like to loose all, and scarcely to have (or leave) so much as their
Lives, Laws, or Liberties for a prey.

And seeing, by manifold examples of grievous experience, that neither
Petitions can be easily accepted, justice truly administered, the Presses
equally opened, the cries of the poor heard, the tears of the oppressed
considered, the sighs of the Prisoners regarded, the miseries of the widow and
Fatherless pittyed, nor scarcely any that are in distress relieved but Laws
any way wrested, most of our freedoms restrained, Ordinances, Protestations,
Oaths, and Covenants slighted, the hearts of all Estates, King, Parliament,
Priest and People obdured, the wicked for the most part absolved, the just
oftentimes condemned, and most of all in Authority perjured, not only by
breaking that solemn Oath, which themselves did make, and compelling others to
take, but nevertheless, by persecuting those who make Conscience to keep it,
even because they will not break it. In deep, sad, serious, and lamentable
consideration of all these grievous proceedings, and as much by feeling the
smart, as hearing, seeing or knowing the verity thereof, chiefly the
Opressions, taxations, Insurrections, Rebellions, Presecutions, Violences,
Robbeies, Sequestrations, and Combustions, I with my poor one Talent, in stead
of him that has Ten, out of a dutiful and conscientious love, tender and
pitiful respect to my Nation, now in this her great defection, and apparent
desolation, chiefly for the remnant thereof (who mourn in secret, both for her
great abominations, sins, desolations, and their own particular transgressions,
and who doubtless are marked to escape the fury of Gods fearful indignation;)

Have used my best endeavors here, both to show the maladies and remedies of
this sick, swouning, bleeding, and dying Nation, that if God has not ordained
it, like Babell, to sudden, inevitable and utter destruction, it may yet be
cured, and a remnant reserved, according to the Lords usual dealing in all his
visitations, remembering his tender compassions and mercy, even in the midst of
his most fearful judgments and severitie, that in despite of Satan and all
his instruments, they may do justice and judgment, and praise him in
sincerity.

Farewell.
ENGLANDS BIRTHRIGHT Justified Against all Arbitrary Usurpation, whether
REGAL or PARLIAMENTARY, or under what Vizor soever. With diverse Queries,
Observations and Grievances of the People, declaring this Parliaments present
Proceedings to be directly contrary to those fundamental Principles, whereby
their Actions at first were justifyable against the King, in their present
Illegal dealings with those that have been their best Friends, Advancers and
Preservers: And in other things of high concernment to the Freedom of all the
Freeborn People of England; By a Well-wisher to the just cause for which
Lieutenant Col. JOHN LILBVRNE is unjustly imprisoned in Newgate.
In the 150. page of the Book called, An exact Collection of the Parliaments
Remonstrances, Declarations, etc. published by special Order of the House of
Commons, March 24. 1642. we find there a Question answered, fit for all men to
take notice of in these sad times; which follows.

NOw in our extreme distractions, when foreign forces threaten, and probably
are invited, and a malignant and Popish party at home offended, The Devil has
cast a bone, and raised a Contestation between the KING and PARLIAMENT touching
the MILITIA. His Majesty claims the disposing of it to be in Him by the right
of Law; The Parliament says, Rebus sic stantibus, and nolenti Rege, the
Ordering of it is in them?

Militia, but it is for the good and preservation of the Republic* against
Foreign Invasions or domestic Rebellions. For it cannot be supposed that the
Parliament would ever by Law entrust the King with the Militia against
themselves, or the Commonwealth, that intrusts them to provide for their weal,
not for their woe. So that when there is certain appearance or grounded
suspicion, that the Letter of the Law shall be improved against the equity of
it (that is, the public good, whether of the body real or representative)
then the Commander going against its equity, gives liberty to the Commanded to
refuse obedience to the Letter: for the Law taken abstract from its original
reason and end, is made a shell without a kernel, a shadow without a
substance, and a body without a soul. It is the execution of Laws according to
their equity and reason, which (as I may say) is the spirit that gives life to
Authority the Letter kills.

Nor need this equity be expressed in the Law, being so naturally employed and
supposed in all Laws that are not merely Imperial, from that Analogy which
all bodies Politic hold with the Natural; whence all Government and
Governors borrow a proportionable respect; And therefore when the Militia of
an Army is committed to the General, it is not with any express condition,
that he shall not turn the mouths of his Cannons against his own Soldiers,
for that is so naturally and necessarily employed, that its needless to be
expressed, insomuch as if he did attempt or command such a thing against the
nature of his trust and place, it did ipso facto estate the Army in a right of
Disobedience, except we think that obedience binds Men to cut their own
throats, or at least their companions.

And indeed, if this distinction be not allowed, then the legal and mixed
Monarchy is the greatest Tyranny; for if Laws invest the King in an absolute
power, and the Letter be not controlled by the equity, then whereas other Kings
that are absolute Monarchs, and rule by Will and not by Law, are Tyrants
perforce. Those that rule by Law, and not by Will, have hereby a Tyranny
conferred upon them legally, and so the very end of Laws, which is to give
bounds and limits to the exorbitant wills of Princes, is by the laws themselves
disappointed, for they hereby give corroboration (and much more justification)
to an arbitrary Tyranny, by making it legal, not assumed; which Laws are
ordained to cross, not countenance: and therefore is the Letter (where it
seems absolute) always to receive qualification from the equity, else the
foresaid absurdity must follow. So far the Parliaments own words.

It is confessed by all rational men, that the Parliament has a power to
annull a Law, and to make a new Law, and to declare a Law, but known Laws in
force and unrepealed by them, are a Rule (so long as they so remain) for all
the Commons of England whereby to walk; and upon rational grounds is conceived
to be binding to the very Parliament themselves as well as others. And though
by their legislative power they have Authority to make new Laws, yet no
freeman of England is to take notice (or can he) of what they intend till they
declare it: neither can they, as is conceived, justly punish any man for
walking closely to the known and declared Law, though it cross some pretended
Privilege of theirs, remaining only in their own breasts.

For where there is no Law declared, there can be no transgression; therefore
it is very requisite, that the Parliament would declare their Privileges to
the whole Commons of England, that so no man may through ignorance (by the
Parliaments default) run causelessly into the hazard of the loss of their
lives, liberties, or estates: for here it is acknowledged by themselves, that
their Power is limited by those that betrust them; and that they are not to do
what they list, but what they ought, namely to provide for the peoples weal,
and not for their woe: so that unknown Privileges are as dangerous, as
unlimited Prerogatives, being both of them secret snares, especially for the
best affected people.

It is the greatest hazard and danger that can be run unto, to disart the only
known and declared Rule; the laying aside whereof brings in nothing but Will
and Power, lust and strength, and so the strongest to carry all away; for it is
the known, established, declared, and unrepealed Law, that tells all the
Freemen of England, that the Knights and Burgesses chosen according to Law,
and sent to make up the Parliament, are those that all the Commons of England
(who send and choose them) are to obey.

But take away this declared Law: and where will you find the rule of
Obedience? and if there be no rule of Obedience, then it must necessarily
follow, that if a greater and stronger number come to a Parliament sitting, and
tell them that they are more and stronger then themselves, and therefore they
shall not make Laws for them, but they will rather make Laws for them, must
they not needs give place? undoubtedly they must.

Yea* take away the declared, unrepealed Law, and then where is Meum and Tuum,
and Liberty, and Property? But you will say, the Law declared, binds the
People, but is no rule for a Parliament sitting, who are not to walk by a
known Law. It is answered: It cannot be imagined that ever the People would be
so sottish, as to give such a Power to those whom they choose for their
Servants; for this were to give them a Power to provide for their woe, but not
for their weal, which is contrary to their own foregoing Maxim; therefore
doubtless that man is upon the most solid and firm ground, that has both the
Letter and equity of a known, declared, and unrepealed Law on his side, though
his practice do cross some pretended Privilege of Parliament.

And whereas by an Act made this present Parliament, Anno 17. Caroli Regis,
entitled,

An Act for Regulating of the Privy Counsel, and for taking away the Court,
commonly called, The Star Chamber.

It is there declared, That the Proceedings, Censures and Decrees of the
Star Chamber, have by experience been found to be an intolerable burden to
the Subject, and the means to introduce an Arbitrary Power and Government, and
that the Councell-Table have adventured to determine of the Estates, and
Liberties of the Subject, contrary to the Law of the Land, and the Rights and
Privileges of the Subject. Which Laws are there recited, as first Magna Carta,
and the 5. Ed. 3. 9. and 25. Ed. 3. 4. and 28. Ed. 3. 3. the last of which
says, That it is accorded, assented, and established, that none shall be taken
by Petition, or suggestion made to the King or His Council, unless it be by
Indictment, or presentment of good and lawful people of the same
neighborhood, where such deeds be done; in due manner, or by Process made by
Writ original at the Common Law, and that none be put out of his franchise or
Freehold, unless he be duly brought in, to answer, and fore-judged of the same
by the course of the Law; and by another Statute made in the 42 Ed. 3. 3. it is
there inacted, That no man be put to answer without presentment before
Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process and Writ original, according
to the old Law of the Land.

Therefore for the Subjects good and welfare in future time, it is Inacted,
That from henceforth no Court, Council, or place of Judicature shall be
erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed within this Realm of England, or
dominion of Wales, which shall have, use, or exercise the same, or the like
jurisdiction, as is, or has been used, practiced, or exercised in the said
Court of Star Chamber; that then whosoever shall offend, or do any thing
contrary to the purport, true intent and meaning of this Law, then he or they
shall for such offense, forfeit the Sum of five hundred pounds of Lawful money
of England, unto any party grieved, his Executors or Administrators, who shall
really prosecute the same, and first obtain judgment thereupon, to be
recorded in any Court of Record at Westminster, by Action of debt, Bill, Plaint
or Information, wherein no Essoine, Protection, wager of Law, aid, Prayer,
Priveledge, Injunction, or Order of Restraint shall be in any ways prayed,
granted, or allowed, nor any more then one imparlance, etc. And the Petition of
Right, which may be said to be more then a bare Law (for it is a Declaration of
the equity, true intent and meaning of Magna Carta,) and other the good Laws of
the Land, which provides for the peoples freedom (and binds all, as well the
trusted, as those that trust) as appears in the Parliaments Prayer to the
King, which is, That no Freeman hereafter be used contrary to what is before
expressed, etc. which they say is the Rights and liberties of the Freemen of
England, unto which the King answers, Let Right be done according to the Laws
and Customs of the Realm; But this Answer admitting still a Dispute what was
the true intent and meaning of the Laws and Customs of the Realm.

They Petition the King again to give a more full and satisfactory answer,
which he does, and says, Let Right be done, as in the Petition is desired; and
amongst other things there expressed, it is declared to be contrary to law, to
imprison a man without cause showed or expressed, and also that it is contrary
to Law, to force a man to answer to Questions concerning himself, or for
refusal, to commit him to prison. So far their own words: And therefore it
were well that both Parliament-Committees, and all County-Committees, and other
Magistrates in this Kingdom would compound with all those honest and Freemen
that they have at their own Wills unjustly committed to Prison contrary to the
true meaning of this Law, before by the sentence of the Law they be forced to
pay 500 l. to every man they have so unjustly Imprisoned.

From the equity and letter of which Laws, It is desired that our learned
Lawyers would Answer these ensuing QUERIES.

1. Whether the Letter and equity of this Law do not bind the very Parliament
themselves, during the time of their sitting, in the like cases here expressed,
to the same Rules here laid down? Which if it should be denied, Then

2. Whether the Parliament it self, when it is sitting, be not bound to the
observation of the Letter and equity of this Law, when they have to do with
Freemen, that in all their actions and expressions have declared faithfulness
to the Commonwealth? And if this be denied; Then

3. Whether ever God made any man law-lesse? Or whether ever the Commonwealth,
when they choose the Parliament, gave them a lawless unlimmitted Power, and at
their pleasure to walk contrary to their own Laws and Ordinances before they
have repealed them?

4. Whether it be according to Law, Justice, or Equity, for the Parliament to
Imprison or punish a man for d^ing what they command him, and by Oath injoyne
him?

5. Whether it be legal, just or equal, that when Freemen do endeavor
according to their duty Oath, and Protestation, to give in Information to the
Parliament of Treason acted and done by Sir John Lenthall, against the State
and Kingdom, and long since communicated to several Members of the House of
Common^, but by them concealed and smothered; and now by Gods Providence
brought upon the stage again, and during the time that Inquisition is made of
it before the Committee of Examination, before any legal charge be fixed upon
Sir John Lenthall, or be required to make any Answer or Defense, that he shall
be present to outface, discourage, and abuse the Informers and Witnesses in
the face of the Committee, without any check or control from them?

And sometimes, while they are sitting about the Examination of his Treason,
that he shall sit down beside them with his hat on, as if he were one of them,
and that he shall enjoy from the Committee ten times more favor and respect,
then the just, honest, and legal Informers against him; who by some of the
Committees themselves, while they are sitting, are threatened, jeared,
nicknamed, and otherwise most shamefully abused.

Yea, and the friends of the Informers for the State are kept without doors,
and the friends of the accused admitted to come in always without control,
and during the Examination of the Information, that the Committee shall refuse
to remove the Informers out of Sir John Lenthalls custody of King's Bench, to
another Prison, although they have been truly informed, that he has set
Instruments on work to murder them, and also importuned to remove them.

6. Whether it be nor most agreeable to Law, Justice and Equity, that seeing
Sir John Lenthall, having so many friends in the House concerned in the
businese, that he should not rather be tried by the same Council of War in
London, where Sir John Hotham and his Son were, then at the Parliament, his
principal crime being against the Law Marshall, as theirs was?

7. Whether to answer to an Indictment, when a man is demanded Guilty or not
Guilty, be not a criminal Interrogatory, concerning a man's self, and so a man
not by law bound to Answer to it, especially seeing to a Conscientious man, who
dare not lie, it is a great snare, who if he be indicted of a thing he has
done or spoken, dare not plead, Not Guilty, for fear of lying, and if he plead
guilty, he shall become a self-destroyer (contrary to the law of Nature, which
teaches a man to preserve, but not destroy himself) in declaring that which
peradventure all his Adversaries would never be able to prove against him. And

Whether it be not more suitable and agreeable to the true intent of Magna
Carta ( expressed in the 28. Chap. thereof) where it is said, No Bailiffe from
henceforth shall put any man to his open Law, nor to an Oath upon his own bare
saying, without faithful Witnesses brought in for the same, and to the true
intent and meaning of the Petition of Right, and the Act made this present
Parliament for the abolishing the Star Chamber, etc.

For a freeman to have a charge laid against him, and his Adversaries brought
face to face to prove it, and then the Accused to have liberty to make the best
defense for himself he can, which was the practice amongst the very Heathen
Romans, who had no light but the light of Nature to guide them, Act. 25.16.

Yea, Christ himself, when his enemies endeavored to catch him by
Interrogatories, he puts them off, without an Answer. Luke 22.67, 68.70. Chap.
23.3.

Yea, when the High Priest asked him about his Disciples, and his Doctrine, He
answers, He ever taught openly, and therefore says he, Why ask ye me? ask
them that heard me, for they know what I said, John 18.20, 21.

Hence justly it is conceived, that the Parliament may not condemn that man
for contemning their Authority, who refuses to answer to Interrogatories
before them (the supreme Court,) who answers to Interrogatories in the like
case before an inferior Court, but you will say, it is the usual practice of
the COMMON LAW, the Question is, whether that practice be just or no? or
whether any Law in practice in the KINGDOM of England does bind the Freemen
thereof, but what is made and declared by Common Consent in Parliament? and
whether or no is there, or ought there not to be a plain platform agreed on,
and laid down by the Parliament concerning things of so high consequence to all
the Commons of England? and seeing the Parliament has taken care that the
Bible shall be in English, that so Laymen (as they call them) may read it as
well as the Clergy, ought they not also to be as careful, that all the binding
Laws in England be in English likewise, that so every Freeman may read it as
well as Lawyers (seeing they have Lives, Liberties and Estates as well as the
other) and peaceably enjoy them no longer then they continue in the observation
of the Laws of this Kingdom; whereof they are Members: and seeing the Lawyers
are so full of broils and contentions, and grow so rich and great thereby;
have not the people cause to believe they drive on an Interest of their own,
distructrive to the Peoples welfare; yea juggle, and put false glosses upon
the Law (merely) for their own ends: Seeing so great a part of it is in an
unknown tongue, (which the Commons call Pedlers-french, or Heathen-Greeke,)
even as our State Clergy did in the days of old, before the Scripture was
tolerated to be in English, in which days they could easily make the poor
people believe the Poopes unwritten verities were as binding as Scripture
Rules, which the Lawyers have given the Commons just cause to fear, is their
present practice with law Cases; many of which are besides the Rule of the
Statute Law, and also against Justice, Equity and Conscience, tending to no
other end, but to inslave the People?

8. Whether it be not just and equal, that seeing Monopolisers were thrown out
of the House about Four years ago, as infringers upon the Common-right of
all the freemen of England, in setting up Pattents of Soape, Salt, Lether,
etc. why should not those be partakers of the same justice now, that have been
chief sticklers in setting up greater Patentees then ever the former were?

As first the Patent of engrossing the Preaching of the Word only to such men
as wear Black and rough garments to deceive, Zech. 13.4. and have had a
Cannonicall Ordination from the Bishops, and so from the Pope, and consequently
from the Devil, although the Spirit of God does command every man that has
received a gift, to minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the
manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

And although ignorance and blindness be so universal all over the Kingdom,
experience teaching, that where that most abounds they draw their swords
soonest against the Parliament and Commonwealth (and so consequently against
themselves, and continue the longest in their Rebellion, as now we have
woeful experience, yet these grand Monopolizers will neither go amongst them
themselves, nor suffer others without severe punishment to instruct and teach
them the Principles of Christianity, or Morallity, by means of which they
become destroyers and murderers of souls and bodies, and enemies to the very
Civil societies of Mankind.

The second Monopoly is the Patent of Merchant Adventurers, who have engrossed
into their hands the sole trade of all woollen Commodities that are to be sent
into the Netherlands, the mischievousnesse you may at large read in a late
discourse consisting of motives for the enlargement and freedom of trade,
especially that of Cloth, and other woollen manufactures engrossed at present
contrary to the law of Nature, the law of Nations, and the laws of this
Kingdom, by a company of private men, who style themselves Merchant
Adventurers, the first part of which Discourse (the second being not yet come
out) are to be sold by Stephen Bowsell in Popes-head-alley. Wool being the
stapell Commodity of the Kingdom, and freee by the laws and Constitutions of
the land, for all the Freemen of England to trade in. 12. H. 6. 6. and 21. 13.
the enjoyment of which is so essential a Privilege to all the Commons of
England, that whosoever gives it from them, and by any pretended Patent or
Authority whatsoever, assumes it to themselves, are culpable of the greatest of
punishments whatsoever, as those that are guilty of Robbing the Free men of
England, of their birthright and Inheritance, and yet the present Farmers of
the Custom House, and their Associates are guilty of this capital crime, for
if Naboath would not part with his Vineyard (which was his Inheritance) to the
King, although he would have given him as much money as it was worth, or a
better for it, 1 King. 21.2. there is no reason why the free men of England
should have so great a part of their Birthright, as this is, taken from them
by force and violence, whether they will or no, as their multitude of Petitions
to the Parliament yet unanswered, do declare.

The third Monopoly, is that insufferable, unjust and tyrannical Monopoly of
Printing, whereby a great company of the very same Malignant fellows that
Canterbury and his Malignant party engaged in their Arbitrary Designs, against
both the Peoples and Parliaments just Privileges (who turning with every
wind, do endeavor by all possible means, as well now as then, to sell and
betray the Kingdom for their own gain,) are invested with an Arbitrary
unlimmitted Power, even by a general Ordinance of Parliament, to print,
divulge and disperse whatsoever Books, Pamphlets and Libells they please,
though they be full of Lies, and tend to the poisoning of the Kingdom with
unjust and Tyrannical Principles.

And not only so, but most violently (even now in Parliament time, which should
be like a cried Fair, and each one free to make the best use of their Ware,
both for the bublick, and their own private good) to suppress every thing
which has any true Declaration of the just Rights and Liberties of the
freeborn people of this Nation* and to brand and traduce all such Writers and
Writings with the odious terms of Sedition, Conspiracy and Treason, but to
countenance and authorize such as shall calumniate them, and so both accept and
reward such men far better then their most faithful servants and best
advancers, just as the Bishops formerly did against both the Scots, and the
Parliament themselves.

They do not rest here neither, but are yet further authorized with a general
Ordinance of this very Parliament, contrary to all law, justice, equity and
reason, under pretense of searching for scandalous Books, to call numbers of
deboyst men with Smiths and Constables, yea and the trained Bands also (when
they please) to assist them, and in most bold and tumultuous manner to break
open and rifle, even the Parliaments own (in all their greatest dangers,
troubles and distresses) most faithful friends Houses, Chests, Truncks and
Drawers; and from thence to rob, steal, and felloniously to carry away such of
the Possessors proper goods, choice Linnens, and best things, as they please,
as well as Books new and old, after they have put the owners themselves out of
doors, and commanded Constables to carry them before a Committee, and from
thence to Prison.

Where they may without any consideration rott, if they will not either betray
both a good Cause, and some other of the Parliaments best friends, when they
had few others, or else submit to their unjust laws; besides, it is a common
thing for such lawless men to break in, and search honest men's shops, when
neither the owners nor any of theirs are present to see what business they
have there.

And yet as unjustly as all the rest, they do not only allow the weekly
printing, divulging and dispersing of Oxford Aulicus, and other Malignant Books
and Pamphlets, tending to the ruin both of the Kingdom and Parliaments
Privileges, but likewise the sending of Printing matterialls to the King,
whereby to Print down both Power of Parliament, and freedom of People.

All which unjust dealings do come to pass also with the privity of the
Masters and Wardens of the Stationers Company, as was openly proved to their
faces at their public Hall; who therefore like wise men perceiving the Plague
afar off, would not go on still and be punished, but most cunningly, both to
hide themselves, and their treachery against the well-affected party, and
divide their spoil, so unjustly obtained by lying in wait for blood, they
have now procured by this their good service to the Parliament (as they did to
the Bishops) the form or power of a Stationer-Committee in London among
themselves, that they may henceforth without either Censure or Resistance of
Higher Powers, both absolve the wicked, and condemn the just, and so do
whatsoever they list.

The next Monopoly, it is to be feared will be upon Bread and Beer, for as
justly may there be a Monopoly upon them, as upon the former.

Oh Englishmen! Where is your freedoms? and what is become of your Liberties
and Privileges that you have been fighting for all this while, to the large
expense of your Bloods and Estates, which was hoped would have procured your
liberties and freedoms? but rather, as some great ones Order it, ties you
faster in bondage and slavery, then before; therefore look about you betimes,
before it be too late, and give not occasion to your Children yet unborne to
curse you, for making them slaves by your covetousness, cowardly baseness,
and faint-heartednesse; therefore up as one man, and in a just and legal way
call those to account, that endeavor to destroy you, and betray your Liberties
and Freedoms.

9 Whether it be not more agreeable to Equity, Law, Justice, and Conscience,
that the badge of a Malignant, or a man incapable of hearing Office in the
Commonwealth, or being chosen to sit in Parliament, as one to make Laws,
should not rather be, for being disaffected to common Freedom, and having
either in purse or person declared his disaffection thereunto, in any ways
assisting the Common enemy, who has drawn his sword, to destroy the freedom
of the Commonwealth, which by the Law of this Land is granted unto the Free
People thereof, (by means of which all such have disfranchised themselves) then
for refusing out of Conscience to take the National Covenant?

Which was first ordained to beget Unity between the Nations, but as sad
experience teaches, in its effects produces nothing less amongst us, setting
us at as bitter a War and contestation amongst our selves, (almost as we
have with our professed enemies) who before this unhappy make-baite came
amongst us, were knit together in love and affection as one man against the
common enemies of our Liberties, Peace and safety, and had no upbraiding one
another with being a Covenanter, or an Anti-Covenanter, which breeds constant
heart-burnings amongst us, and which if it be not by some wise, moderate and
discreet means) prevented, is likely to burst out into a dangerous flame in the
midst of us, so that our being knit faster to God, and each to other by a band
of Unity, is hereby frustrated.

Secondly, the Preamble of the Covenant it self says, that the taking of it
is not the chief part of it, but the keeping of it, the benefits of it being
sure and steadfast to us, when we are sure and steadfast in the Observation of
the things Covenanted: so that if there be not the Observation of them, the
ends and intention of it is void and frustrate; but it is observed that many
of those that authorized it, and first took it, within a little after, run
both out of the House of Peers and Commons to the King to Oxford, and drew
their swords against it, to destroy it, and so became wilfully perjured, and
the most part of the rest that still remain, have been very active in setting
up things quite contrary to the true and declared intent and meaning of the
Covenant.

As first, it ties all those that take it without respect of persons, to
endeavor the extirpation of Popery, but contrary hereunto there is an
Ordinance lately made for the strict payment of Tithes, to the Clergy, for
their maintenance, although it be one of the greatest branches of Popery that
ever was established in Rome, the taking away of which in any place where
Popery is professed, is a more direct way to root up Popery, then the taking
away all things else professed by the Papists, for the Clergy are such greedy
dogs, as the Prophet calls them, that they can never have enough, being
sheepheards that cannot understand, seeing they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain, Esai. 56.10, 11. that they will be of any Religion
where riches or profit is to be had, and will be sure to avoid and hate that
Religion that brings in no profit to fill and cram their fat guts, who bite
with their teeth, and prepare war for those that puts not into their
mouths. Micah. 3.5. Besides, Tithes is a Jewish Ceremony abolished, as all the
rest by the death of Christ upon the Cross, Heb. 7.5.12.28. and 8.5. and
9.9.15.26.28. the establishing of which again, is the denying of CHRIST'S
death, and a setting up of Moses and the Ceremonial law: for as the Apostle
says, Gal. 5.3. For I testify again to every man that is Circumcised, that
he is a debtor to do the whole law, yea says he, Christ is become of no
effect to such a man, so say I, He that compells you to pay Tithes, compels
you to keep the whole Law, which whosoever goes about, is fallen from Grace.
Gal. 5.4. Again, the p^^^ent of Tithes is an unjust and unequal thing in a
Civil sense, for that the Priests who are not one for a thousand of the rest
of the Inhabitants in the Kingdom should have the tenth part, yea, or rather
the seventh part of all things a man has (saving his Children) considering
that they never labor for it with their hands, nor earne it with the sweat of
their brows, nor bestow any kind of Charges, is the most unjust thing in the
world, and so intolerable oppressing a burden, that the Free-people of
England are not able to bear it, as the Petitions presented by diverse persons
already to the House, and those many Petititions that are in agitation both in
the City of London, and many Shires in the Country do and will fully declare.

A second thing sworn to in the Covenant, as other branches of Popery is, to
root out and exterpate Prelacy (as there it is expressed, Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deanes, sub-Deanes
and Chapiters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on
that Hierarchy,) and yet the same men have established the Bishop's Priests,
and servants, who have no other calling in the world whereby to stand, but what
they had from them, as both the Ordinance and the Priests themselves confess,
and yet by virtue of this Papal, Prelaticall Call, they Institute and ordain
a Generation of Antichristian Officers, to fill the Kingdom (contrary to the
Covenant) as full of Popery and Popish Officers, as ever it was in the Bishops
days: the drivers on of which design (if they have taken the Covenant,) are
every man of them perjured.

But you will say though the Parliament and Priests acknowledge the Bishops to
be Antichristian, yet the present Priests say, they were not ordained by them
as Bishops, but as Presbiters, who had their Calling from the Pope, not as a
Pope, but as a Presbyter.

To which I Answer, the Devil was an Angel of Light, but is now a Devil; the
question is, Whether now he does those actions that he does as an Angel of
Light, or as a Devil? Even so, (admit for Disputations sake only it should be
granted,) the Pope was once a Presbyter, but is now a Pope, Antichrist, the man
of sin, and son of Perdition, as is confessed by the Priests themselves,
The Question therefore to them is ^^ether the Pope does the actions that he
does as a Presbyter, or as (...) and Antichrist the Pope; again, the Bishops,
as they themselves confess, are Antichristian, and as Antichristian has
petitioned against them to this very Parliament, that so they might be
extirpated root and branch.

The Question now to the Priests is, Whether the Bishops did those actions that
they did after they were made Bishops, as Antichristian Bishop, or as JESUS
CHRIST'S Presbyters? and if they were Antichristian, then surely those that are
made by them are the same, and not in the least degree any better, for the
Apostle says, Heb. 7.7. without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the
greater, therefore for these men to say, they are better then those that made
them, is a mere rediculous foppery; Christ himself telling all such men, they
are very fools, Matthew. 23.16, 17, 18, etc. where in the like case he says
unto the Scribes and Pharisees; Woe unto you blind guides, which say,
Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing, but whosoever shall swear
by the gold of the Temple, he is a debtor. Ye fools and blind: For whether is
greater, the gold, or the Temple that sanctifies the gold? and whosoever shall
swear by the Altar, it is nothing, but whosoever swears by the gift that is
upon it, he is guilty. Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift,
or the Altar that sanctifies the Gift. Whosoever therefore shall swear by the
Altar, swears by it, and by all things thereon: and who shall swear by the
Temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells therein: read likewise the 1
Cor. 10.17. Hosea. 9.4.

From all which places, to my understanding, it clearly appears, that no man
whatsoever can be instated into any Office whatsoever by an Antichristian
Power, but his Function is as Antichristian as his that made him, for as James
says, chap. 3.11. Does a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water,
and bitter? therefore in the words of the Prophet Esai. chap. 5.20. I say, woe
unto them that call evil good, that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

But if this be not enough to prove them Antichristian, but that yet they think
the stream of Presbyterian imposition of hands is run so clear from the
Apostles to the Pope, and from the Pope to the Bishops, and from the Bishops to
them, I would feign know of them how they will be able to prove, that it purely
came through the hands of Pope JOANE, or where they will ever find in the New
Testament, that ever a woman in their sense was a Presbyter, or ever laid her
hands upon other Presbyters, to ordain them.

Thirdly, How they will be able to prove their succession to come truly to
them, seeing there has been sometimes two Popes at once, and sometimes three,
and each excommunicating the other as false, how they will be able infalibly to
make it appear, that their Ordination came from the true Pope, and not from
the false? Or how out of the New Testament they will ever be able to prove,
that a Bishop, Pastor or Teacher, did ever lay his hands to ordain another
Bishop, Pastor, or Teacher? and till they be able satisfactorily to answer to
all these Queries, I shall account them as Antichristian as the Bishops, and as
papisticall as the Pope himself, and every man a perjured man that has taken
the Covenant, that does not earnestly endeavor to extirpate and root them out,
their power and Interest being so destructive to the Peace, Safety and Freedom
of a Nation, as all ages, times and places do fully declare where they have
had footing; and this the Parliaments own Declaration, made the Fifteenth day
of December, 1642, does clearly hold out, which is worth every true-hearted
English-mans serious perusal and Observation.

In the third place, they swear to preserve the Liberties of the Kingdom, and
yet commit men to prison for standing for them, witness Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburnes lying in Newgate, committed originally, no man knows wherefore; and
those that were the Authors of his imprisonment, are ashamed to this day to
tell him for what cause they have committed him: And because they would feign
pick a hole in his coat, they not only keep his estate from him, but as if
they intended to destroy him without remedy, do commit him to prison, which
action indeed tends to his utter ruin, and then lay all the Provocations and
aspersions upon him, which they can devise against him in his Imprisonment,
because they had none before.

And then at their last pinch, examine him upon Interrogatories at the
Committee of Examinations, concerning himself, (just High Commission and
Star-Chamber-like,) and because he stands upon his right, and the law of the
Land, and will not answer, they turn him over to Newgate amongst Roagues and
Cut-purses, there to brand him with infamy as much as in them lies, that so
it shall never be taken off from him as long as he lives, and then to make
Orders to arraigne him at Newgate Sessions, if they can devise a crime, and
get Lawyers to plead against him, before they have done him one bit of justice
in helping him to the moneys they owe him.

O Englishmen, what do you think of the makers, and first takers of this
Covenant, are they perjured yea or no? are you able to discern the benefit of
forced Covenants, are they not like forced Religion?

In the fourth place, they swear faithfully, To discover all such as have
been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments against the
public good, and what mischief they are not able in their own persons to
suppress or overcome, that they shall reveal or make known, that it may be
timely prevented or remedied; all which they swear to do, as in the sight of
GOD.

And yet notwithstanding, although Lieutenant General Cromwell, according to
his duty long since, revealed the Earl of Manchesters treachery and baseness
at Dennington Castle, and other places, and proved it punctually by
unquestionable witnesses before a Committee of the House of Commons, and before
he could perfect his charge, he was sent upon an unhopefull design with Sir
William Waller to relieve Taunton with Horse, although it be an exceeding close
enclosed Country, where a hundred foot may deal with a thousand horse.

And when he came back to Windsor, he was posted away Vriah-like, by special
command, with his own Regiment of Horse, to lie betwixt Oxford and Worcester,
(in the very road way of destruction, had not the Noble General (by GODS
Providence) exceedingly strengthened his party) and after that, he is posted
from place to place, and never suffered to come to the Parliament since,
whereby Manchesters treason lies, as it were hid, although it be more fully
proved (as some of that House have since confessed) then ever Strdffords was;
and yet he is suffered to act in all the great designs of the Kingdom, unto
this present.

2. Master Mussenden and Mr. Wolley, and diverse others (Gentlemen of quallity)
of the Committee of Lincoln, in August, 1644. exibited Articles of
High Treason, and other heinous misdemeanors against Colonel Edward King, to
the House of Commons: which Articles they have since Printed and published to
the view of the World; yet can they not to this day get any hearing of them,
that so they may prove against him what they accuse him of, howbeit, although
in their Fourth and Twelfth Article, they accuse him of plain High Treason,
their own words are as follows: As

Article 4. When he (the said Colonel King) was before Newarke, he sent for a
Captain, who kept Crowland, who obeyed his command, yet sent word to him of
the danger that Town was in, and therefore desired his second pleasure, which
was, That he should march; who accordingly did; the Gentlemen of the Country
fearing the enemy, procured Major Ireton to send a 100. Musketeers to keep
Crowland, which he hearing of, took ill, that without Order from him, any
should come into his liberties, and commanded them to be gone, who accordingly
departed; the enemy presently surprised the Town, and those few that he had
left in it, by which means he betrayed the Town unto the enemy, which was not
regained without much charge, hazard, and loss of many men's lives.

Article the 12. That when the Enemy took Grantham, they being beaten from one
part of the Town, wheeled about, to fall upon the other side, at a place called
Spittle-gate, which Major Savill (being then Major of the Town) perceiving,
commanded Colonel King (being then Captain of a Company there) to march with
his Company to defend that place, Colonel King answered, That he scorned to be
commanded by him, and rather then he would be commanded by him, he would take
his company, and let the enemy into the Town, and he delayed so long before
he would go, that the enemy was entered at the said Part before he came
thither, by which means be betrayed that Town. Also,

3. John Musgrave Gentleman, has complained to the Commons in this present
Parliament against Richard Barwis Esquire Burgess for Carlisle, and a Member now
sitting in the House of Commons, and lately one of the Commissioners of
Parliament for both Kingdoms, that at his being at Edenborough, he held
correspondency with the Commissioners of Array, both for Westmerland and
Cumberland, and in his Twentieth Article against him, he says, That when the
said Richard Barwis was at Sunderland, he had Intercourse by Letters with the
chief Delinquents in Cumberland, which were, especially Baronet Graham, Baronet
Musgrave, Baronet Curwen, and Sir Willfrede Lawson; and that the said Mr.
Barwis Estate was protected by means of some of the foresaid Knights, during
the time the King had the Command of the North, and that Mr. Barwis was an
Instrument in getting men nominated to be Committee Men for the Parliament,
while they were in actual Rebellion against the Parliament and Kingdom, and
has been an instrument in getting the Command of both the foresaid Counties
into the hands of those that actually have been in Arms, and committed treason
against the Commonwealth, who abuse the honest well-affcted to the Parliament
there, as much as ever they were while the King had the Command of them: and
though complaint has been made of all this to many of the House of Commons,
and much more by Mr. Musgrave, and his partner, who are sent up to the
Parliament from the Country (as Commissioners for that purpose) yet they cannot
be heard or find any Justice against Mr. Barwis, and the other Delinquents, by
means whereof, both the Counties are in danger shortly to be lost and destroyed.

4. Some Gentlemen of the Bishopric of Durham, long since complained to
diverse Parliament men of old Sir Henry Vanes wilful loosing and betraying
their Country, being there Lord Lieutenant, but by reason of his greatness
could never be heard, but in regard the substance of his charge is come into my
hands, from the hands of a Gentlemen of that Country now in London: I have
inserted here, that you may read it as follows, only with this caution, that
seeing in the Copy I took it out of, there were some interlynings at the latter
end thereof, that if a word should be displaced, you would not therefore throw
aside all the rest of it, for I dare pawn my life, the substance of it will be
proved.

The Militia of the County of Durham was entrusted with Sir Henry Vane the
elder, to whom some Gentlemen of the Country repaired, and desired his care
therein, which he omitting, the Earl of Newcastle in August, 1642. taking
advantage thereof, came into the County of Durham, and to the Town of
Newcastle upon Tyne, with diverse Captains, Commanders, not exceeding the
number of 100. men, to raise forces against the Parliament, and by Michaelmas
after, he increased to 500. or 600. men at the most, and Sir Henry Vane having
Arms of his own in his House at Rahy Castle, sufficient to arm 100. men,
those Arms were carried by his two principal servants, William Conyers, a
Popish Recusant, and Henry Dingly his soliciter in his Law affairs, to the
Town of Newcastle, where they were delivered to one appointed by the Earl of
Newcastle, to receive them, and Conyers and Dingley received a note for the
receipt of those arms.

All which being publicly known in the Country, the people were much
disheartened, and for that the party entrusted with the Militia, had furnished
the enemy as aforesaid, many were forced to take up Arms under the command of
the Earl of Newcastle, diverse for fear fled out of the Country, and others of
them, who staid longer, were taken and imprisoned: and shortly after, the
Earls Army increased to the number of 5000. and upwards, as it was commonly
reputed; there being 39. Colors of foot, and 25 Troops of Horse, or near
thereabouts; and the affected plundered in their Estates to their utter
impoverishment. Our humble desire is, That no man that has taken up Arms, and
served, or been active in this unnatural War, against the Parliament, or are
Delinquents, or willingly contributed thereunto, be put into Commission, or
employment, or Administration of Justice, until the well-affected of the
Country be heard concerning their offenses, and misdemeanors, and the same be
determined of in the Parliament, etc.

This Information was presented to the Right Honorable the Earl of Essex, in
February, 1643. by Richard Lilburne, and his brother George Lilburne, in the
presence of Edward Wright, Nicholas Heath, John Ewbanke, and Michael Dawson,
all of the County of Durham.

The Copies of Colonel THO. MIDFORDS Certificate, with others, given under
their hands.
THat about July, 1642. Thomas Midford and George Lilburne went on purpose to
the House of Sir Henry Vane the elder, near Charing-Crosse, and there
acquainted him of the freequent meetings of the Papists and their adherents, in
the County of Durham, and that they did not only gather together most of the
prime Horses of the said County, but did exercise them in Arms, and trained
the said Horse, to the discouragement of all the true-hearted Protestants of
the said County: And that the Seaports of the said County were fit to betaken
care of, which the said Sir Henry Vane promised to take timely care of, making
show that he intended shortly to go down into the said County: In the mean
time, desired the said George Lilburne, and the said Thomas Midford to go to
the Deputy Lieutenants, and acquaint them with the aforesaid Information, and
to tell them from him, that he could not then write to them concerning the
same, but bid them take care thereof, till he gave further Order.

The said Thomas Midford, about the end of the said month, coming into the
said County, went to Durham, and did acquaint Sir William Darcie, being then
high Sheriff of the said County, Sir John Conyers and others at John Halls
House in Durham, of the same, who returned the said Midford no other answer,
but well, well, and seemed to make no great matter thereof.

18 June, 1645. Tho. Midford.

In the year 1643, Nicolas Heath of Little-Eden in the County of Durham Esquire
came to Sir Hen. Vane senior in Westminster Hall, and told him that the County
was in a very sad Condition, and the Inhabitants utterly undone, unless there
were some present course taken for preventing of raising the forces which were
then a gathering; but Sir Henry Vanes Answer was, That he never thought
otherwise.

NIC. HEATH.
18 June, 1645.
Mr. Henry Dingly died in Jan. 1644. at Charing-Crosse, and lodged near Sir
Henry Vanes House, testis John Mar, Esquire Clarke of the Kitching to the Prince.

Mr. William Conyers, Steward of his Land, has continued in his service
likewise, and lived in Raby Castle, ever since the carrying of the Arms from
the said Castle to Newcastle upon Tyne, till within these Four months last
past, Testis, Mr. George Lilburne, and Col. Rob. Lilburne, his Nephew. June 2.
1645.

5. When Alderman Gurney was Lord Major of London, the Citizens complained to
the Parliament of him and others of his Brethren, and also of the Recorder
Gardner, those that prosecuted the Cities business, was principally Alderman
Folks, and Alderman Gibbs, that Monopoliser, and Mr. Gline now Recorder, sat
in the Chair of that Committee, but as soon as they had justled out those,
they complained of, and set themselves down in their places or Saddles, rode
and spurred the poor Commons of London as hard as ever the former did, and
troad in Strafford's paths of Arbitrary Government, as much as the former, and
the People sigh, groan, and cry out of their unjust bondage by the Lord Major
present, Recorder and Court of Aldermen, and the Parliament look upon them with
a slighting eye, and afford them no help, though the Commons of London have
been chief Instruments under GOD of saving their Lives, Liberties, and Estates,
howbeit now they go about to make them slaves for their pains; it were well
therefore the Commons of London would ask their Four Burgesses, if they did
not send them to sit in Parliament, to preserve and defend their Liberties, and
if they find they have not performed their trust, then to desire to choose
Four more Faithful, Careful and stouter in their places, and that the
Commons of London are sensible of their being robbed of their Freedoms by the
aforesaid parties, the Petition of diverse of them presented to the whole Common
Council, sitting in Guild Hall in April last, and since printed, does fully
declare; whereof a true Copy here follows.

To the Right Honorable, The LORD MAJOR, and the Right Worshipful, the
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of LONDON; In Common Council
Assembled. The humble Petition of diverse Citizens of this Honorable City.
SHOWING,
THat the afflictions and sorrows of our hearts are unexpressable in regard of
the manifold miseries that are upon us, and thousands of our deer Brethren, and
fellow Citizens, complaints being general, and very grievous. As amongst many
other;

I. That the Poor is in great necessity, wanting wherewith to set themselves
on work, their Children uneducated, and thereby prepared, to wickedness and
beggary.

II. That Trading is exceedingly decayed, whereby thousands that have lived in
a free and plentiful way, are many fallen, and are more falling into great
extremity.

III. That Assesments are made very unequal, whereby the Taxes laid upon the
City, are made burdensome, and paid with much repining.

IV. That the Forces of the City are very much abated, and that the City is
not in a Posture of War answerable to its greatness, or its danger.

And though there has not been wanting continual endeavors of juditious
charitable persons to prescribe remedies for those grievances, yet our miseries
are such, that we are in effect debarred from opening our griefs, or proposing
our remedies to any that has power to help us.

For if we motion our going to the Parliament immediately (as was usual and
successful in former times) our mouths are presently stopped with this
prejuditiall rumor. That the Parliament will not receive any Petition from the
Citizens, but by the Common Council; whereupon few or none will move in that
way, though there be never so urgent necessities.

If we propose to go through the Common Council, sad experience has proved
it so difficult to obtain a Common Council, that men are weary in pursuance
thereof. The Lord Major and Aldermen challenging to themselves Prerogative of
calling Common Counsels only when (they see cause,) also that nothing shall
be debated, but what has been first presented to the Court of Aldermen, and
that after debate, the Lord Major has a negative voice or power to Null or
frustrate all that has been debated by refusing to put to Vote, or by
dissolving the Court at his pleasure. By which Prerogative Rules, if the Lord
Major will not, or cannot preserve the Citizens from miseries and destruction,
Will not hear our Complaints, nor be sensible of our necessities, The whole
power of the chosen Common Council men, may not interpose, or use any means
for our preservation and relief. We willingly give all due honor to the Lord
Major and Aldermen in referrence to their particular Offices. But that the
safety and well-being of so great a People should depend upon the understanding
and affections of so few, and that the whole City must be without a just means
to preserve themselves, or to remedy things that are any ways amiss, except
the Lord Major and Aldermen will assent, And that those whom the People yearly
choose, and principally entrust, should be made useless at their pleasure. And
themselves estated with such a power, that no Authority in the City can call
them to an account in cases of mis-government, is so pernitiously obstructive
and intolerable, as is not to be pleaded, but to the enslaving of the People.

Whereas of Right, the People of the City are a free People, and are not to be
bound or concluded, but by their own consents, or by the major part of those
they yearly choose to give their consents in common and free Council, who are
Commonners chosen from amongst themselves, with reference to their Consciences,
and good affections. In whom the concluding law-making power of the City justly
is. It being destructive and improper that it should be estated in two distinct
jurisdictions. And therefore, since we have none to open our griefs unto, but
unto you, And that it is thought convenient, that we should apply our selves
to this Court in whatsoever we desire to present unto the Parliament.

We most earnestly entreat you to shake off all pretenses of Prerogatives, by
which (and the like) the City and Commonwealth have been most grossly
inslaved, and that you will reduce your selves into so proper and just a method
of proceeding, as may stand with the condition of a free people, and conduce to
the remedying of all grievances, and removal of all our afflictions.

Unto which end we humbly propose to your grave consideration, as follows.

I. That you will be pleased to Order a Court of Common Council once every
week to meet without warning upon a certain day, and express hour, and to
publish the same, that all the Inhabitants of the City may be informed thereof.

II. That you will also publish your readiness to receive all Informations and
Petitions from any of the Inhabitants, there having been many most necessary
and useful things stiffled for want of encouragement in this kind.

III. That you will resolve within your selves, to maintain the Essence and
freedom of your Court, As namely,

To take into your Considerations, and freely to debate whatsoever the present
or greater part shall think meet and necessary. To Vote and conclude
whatsoever to the major part shall seem good: To continue the present Session
or Court, as the present occasions shall require, To adjourne to what day and
time shall by the greater part be thought convenient, over and besides the set
weekly Court, without which, and the due Observations of all reasonable Orders,
as by your wisdom shall be provided, you will appear to every juditious
understanding, but as a mere shadow of Power, and no ways helpful. And
therefore,

IV. That you will be pleased to make a perpetual standing Order, or Law, that
whatsoever Person or Persons shall from henceforth by secret or open means
endeavor to deprive the Court of Common Council of the foresaid Rights,
Freedoms or Privileges (in the vindicating whereof some members of this Court
then Commoners expressed much zeal against that obstinate Lord Major Gurney, and
his perverse Associates) shall be instantly disfranchised, and otherwise
punished, as shall seem good to the Justice of this Court.

These we most earnestly entreat may be speedily established, as being the
only means to encourage your Petitioners, and all other well-affected People,
to study and present you with such materials as may happily tend to give a
speedy end to all our miseries.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
This Petition was delivered the 15. of April, 1645. to the Common Council of
London, sitting at Guild Hall.

6. Sir John Lenthall having acted and done many things of extraordinary
prejudice against the State, one Captain Cob, a sea-Captaine, and then
Prisoner in the hands of Sir John Lenthall, out of duty and affection to the
welfare of the Public, informed by a Letter the Speaker of the House of
Commons of it, and sent his Letter by the hands of one Mrs Jencts, who
faithfully delivered it to him, and by her importunity to some that belonged to
the said Speaker for an Answer to it, the said Captain Cob was brought out of
Prison to the House of Commons door, as he thought to justify the said Letter,
who had brought along with him three or four Witnesses, to prove all the
particulars mentioned* in the said Letter.

But the Speaker, contrary to his duty, never caused him to be called in, but
only sent him out word, that he should go home again, and he would shortly
come over to his brother Sir John's House, and speak with him there, who
accordingly did, but would admit none to be present to hear what passed
amongst them there; yet Cob, as soon as he came into the Prison amongst his
fellows, gave unto them a true Relation, upon his Reputation, of what passed
amongst them, which as they aver, was to this effect; as soon as he came up,
says the Speaker, Sir do you know me, yes sir, says Cob, I know you to be
Speaker of the House of Commons, which was the reason I writ to you, judging
you the fittest man to bring to light so great a business of importance, as I
have to make known to you, for the good of the State and Kingdom, then the
Speaker showed him his Letter, and asked him if he would justify it, and he
told him, yes, and a great deal more, if he would do his duty, in making it
truly known to the Honorable House of Comm^ns.

The Speaker turning himself to his Brother, said, Sir John, if this be true,
hear is enough to hang you, well Sir, says Sir John; whereas he charge me
of letting Violet go twice to Oxford, during the time that he and Sir Bassell
Brook were contriving their Plot against the City; you know I never let him
go but once, and then I had your warrant for it; well, well, said the Speaker,
Captain Cob, I see you are an honest man, and much wronged by your
adversaries, but shake hands and be friends with Sir John, and I will get you
your Liberty, so they parted.

But Captain Cob perceiving the Speaker did nothing in it, but endeavored to
smother it, sent a true Copy of his Letters, that he had sent to the Speaker,
to Mr. William Fendry of London, with Ellen Thomas, her information about the
threescore thousand pounds of Sir Bassel Brooks, that then was in Sir John's
hands, which Letter and Information the said Pendry communicated to two Knights
that are members of the Committee of both Kingdoms, who took no more care then
the Speaker to have it brought to light, nor the 60000 l. attached, and now it
is upon the stage, before the Committee of Examination, the Chaireman of which,
Justice Whittiker, with Mr. Knightly and Sir Robert Pie, who is desired to
remember a Letter that was going to Don Cottington, etc. have not dealt fairly
in the business, as both the Informers, and some of the 6. Citizens that were
permitted into the Commit, to see to the managing of the business do
declare.

And therefore assuredly, if so foul and heinous a business as this is, be
smothered up again, I am very confidently persuaded, some one or other will
publish all the particulars of it (ere long) in print, to the view of all the
Commons of England, that so they may see and judge how they are jugled with, by
some of those they have reposed their greatest trust in, although Sir Jo.
Lenthall, and the Speaker have (as it may justly be supposed) set Dr. Bastwick
at work to publish to the view of the world the innocence of the parties
accused, saying in the 8. page of his late book against Mr. Lilburne, that
there is nothing made good against them, so much as with a seeming
probability, much less proved, and so busy and earnest is the said Bastwick
to defend their rotten Reputations, and their wicked and unjust dealings
toward the State and Kingdom, that he thinks with his lies and base and
sordid language, to salve up their credits, and to baffle and justle the just
and honest prosecuters out of their just ways and paths they tread in, to do
the Kingdom faithful service in bringing treason to light.

Yea, so bold and impudent is he, being backed by their Authority and
Interest, that rather then truth shall come to light, and their wickedness be
discovered, he will lay such a blot upon the Parliament, that will render them
ridiculous to all that seriously read his Book, and consider that the
Parliaments own Authority has licenced him to call them Ninneys and Grols.

For says he in the last page of his Book, For as there is no family, though
never so honest, that has not a Whore or a Knave of their kindred, so it is
impossible in such a great Counsel as the Parliament is, but they should have
some Ninnyes and Groles, and men that have no more wit, then will reach from
their nose to their mouth: It were well Dr. Bastwick would do the Common
wealth that service, as to name those men, that so some men may beg them for
fools, to take upon them so high a calling, as to be Lawmakers to so great
and knowing a People, as England is, and to have so little wit in them.

Surely this Parliament will be contempteous, not only to their foes, but also
to their friends, and will never shake off this blot while they sit, unless
they call him to an account, and make him name whom he means, and punish that
Licencer that durst be so bold, to let such a book be published cum
privilegio, to the dishonor of the very Parliament it self, surely Sir John
and his Brother the Speaker have feed Bastwick well, and are not very sound,
that they put him (their pack-horse) upon such desperate courses to salve up
their credit, and he has as little wit or honesty in him to be so earnest for
Sir John Lenthall in particular, who is notoriously known and reputed so grand
a Knave and Tyrant, by thousands that know him, as England has not his fellow,
being at this present Outlawed, and has so continued 3. years, and of whom for
murder, Cruelty, Bribe^y and Arbitrary Government, and what not, there has so
many complaints been made to this present Parliament, (though little effect
they have taken, by reason of the Speakers Power and Interest) whose common
practice it is, to walk in a constant contempt and violation of the known
Laws of the Kingdom, and to the making of them null, and of none effect, as
much as in him lies, to the ruin and destruction of thousands of the free
Denizons of England.

For though the Law provide, that if a man in Execution escape or walk abroad
out of Prison, the Jailer is liable to pay his debt, yet for his own gain he
does constantly do both, and the undone and wronged Creditor can have no
satisfaction of him, neither Law nor Justice against him, by reason of the
Speaker his great faction in the House, supporting of him.

Sir John Lenthal, besides his Outlawries, has dozens of executions upon him,
and yet walks abroad, and continues keeper of King's Bench Prison, and Justice
of Peace, and as it is reported, is Chairman of a Committee, by means of which,
he is invested into a Power to crush and destroy every honest man that but
opens his mouth to speak of his baseness and injustice, the height of his
injustice and of his Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, scarcely in
Strafford to be parralell'd, which is so insupportable to the poor oppressed
Prisoners in Kings Bench, that they have got a proverb amongst them in these
words;

The Lawyers rule Committees, the Speaker rules the Lawyers, Sir John Lenthall
rules the Speaker; Thomas Dutson rules Sir John Lenthall, and the Devil rules
Dutson.

But for all Bastwicks brags of Sir John Lenthalls innocence, if he please to
do the State so much service, as to prevail with his good friend the Speaker,
to procure the same Court Marshall in London that sat upon the Hothams, as
soon as the Ordinance is past, he shall have the names of some of reputation
in the Kingdom, that will before that Counsel accuse Sir John Lenthall of
High Treason, and hazard the loss of their lives upon the proof of it.

In the last place, the Parliament men swear to be at enmity with
indifferency or newtrallity, which newtrallitie in the Covenant, is branded as
detestable by them, and yet notwithstanding, diverse of them cannot endure them
that would have an end of these wars speedily; but hate and abhor all those
who with all their might endeavor the end of them: and though such men walk
by better principles then taking the Covenant, even by Principles engraven upon
their souls by God himself: yet unless they will take this (impossible to be
kept) Covenant, (the framers and makers of which have run into wilful
perjury themselves) they must be turned out of Committees and their Regiments
disbanded (as in Hartfordshire, etc. and Newters put in their places, that are
neither hot nor cold, nor have any other principle whereby to walk, but base
pecuniary principles and self-Interrests, and by this means the Kingdom is in
danger to be utterly destroyed, even by such covetous newtrall indifferent
Committie-men, and men of excellent public principles, disfranchised, and
undenized, contrary to the fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, which
do allow none to be so dealt with, but only for an act done or committed
against the welfare of the Public.

And though many conscientious men have laid out their wits, their time, their
pains, their purses, their blood; yea, and all that in this world is most
precious to them for the preservation of the Public, yet they must not sit in
Parliament, though never so fit and able, unless they will take this makebate
(persecuting, soul-destroying, Englands-dividing, and undoing) Covenant; I
shall therefore desire all the Commons of England, and the Parliament
themselves, seriously to read over some part of their own words, in their
Exhortation to the taking of the Covenant, the words thus follow:

And as for those Clergy men who pretend that they (above all others) cannot
Covenant to extirpate that Government, because they have (as they say) taken a
solemn Oath to obey the Bishops, in licitis and honestis, they can tell if
they please, that they that have sworn obedience to the Laws of the Land, are
not thereby prohibited from endeavoring by all lawful means the abolition of
those laws, when they prove inconvenient or mischievous.

And if there should any Oath be found, unto which any Ministers or others have
entered, not warranted by the Laws of God and the Land, in this case they must
teach themselves and others, that such Oaths call for Repentance, and not
obstinacy in them.

O that the Parliament would mind these their own words, and give free leave
to some of their honest fellow Commoners to remonstrate the inconveniency and
mischievousnesse of this Covenant, and I am confident, it would easily and
clearly be made appear to themselves so vild, that they would never enforce it
any more, but rather recall it again, Judge. 11.30. Est. 3.10. Dan. 3.3. etc.
Mark. 6.23.

12. Whether it be not most agreeable to Law, Justice, equity and conscience,
and the nature of a Parliament man's place, that during the time of his being a
member, he should lay aside all places of profit in the Commonwealth, and
tend only upon that function, for which he was chosen; or if he be poor, or
have lost his Estate, whether he ought not at present, to be content with his
masters wages, that is to say, with so much a day, as the Commonwealth by the
Law of the Land is to pay him for his days labor, which is expressed in 33.
H. 8. 11. to be 4 s. per diem to every Knight, and to every Citizen and
Burgess 2 s. a day, or more, as heretofore has been accustomed, etc. or with
some reasonable Competency, being the Commonwealth is grown so poor, that it is
not able to pay her common Soldiers their 8 d. a day, though they constantly
adventer their lives to preserve her, which the Parliament men seldom do, and
not to thirst after great and rich Places, far less to possess or enjoy
them.

Seeing by woeful experience it is found, that the possessing of them breeds
nothing but factions and base cowadlinesse, yea and sowing up of men's lips,
that they dare not speak freely for the Commonwealth, nor displease such and
such a faction, for fear of being Voted, and thrust out of their unfit to be
enjoyed Offices, the Common wealth has just cause to fear they will set up an
interest of their own, destructive to that common Interest and Freedom,
whereof the poorest free man in England ought to be possessor, and so make this
present Parliament an everlasting Parliement, and the War a never ending
War, seeing it tends so much to the enriching of Parliament men and their
Officers, who have already wisely, as they think, fenced themselves with an
Ordinance made the 26. of June, 1645. That they shall not be called to account
for their Masters the Commonwealths money, nor Plate that once comes into
their fingers.

Object. But would you have those Parliament men, that had their Places before
the Parliament sat, turned out of theirs?

Yes, I would have Sir Henry Mildmer, Sir Henry Vane the younger, Soliciter
Saint-John, Mr. Holland, etc. turned out of their Places at present, though I
conceive it just they should be secured of the enjoyment of them again so soon
as the Parliament is ended, for their present enjoying thereof, sowes but up
their lips, and makes them they dare neither speak nor do that they should,
and without them is hoped they would (and for avoiding the jealousy of
partiallity) I think there is as much Justice, to turn them out during the
Parliaments continuing, as to turn out Mr. Green, Sir Robert Harlow, Sir
Walter Earl, Mr. Reynolds, the Speaker, Mr. Prideaux, etc. and all the
Chancery Judges, for to me it is one of the most unjust things in the world,
that the Lawmakers should be the Law executors, seeing by that means, if they
do never so much injustice and oppression, a man may spend both long time, and
all he has besides, before ever he can get any Justice against them, yea, and
it may be, hazard the loss of his life too.

And therefore it were a great deal better for the Commonwealth, that all the
executors of the Law should be such persons as do not in the least belong to
the Parliament, that so they may not be able to make any fictions to save their
Lives and Estates, when they do injustice: and I am confident, there is never
an honest-hearted Parliament man that means well to the Commonwealth, but he
will upon the debating of this needful point, be of my mind, though it be
never so contrary to his own particular Interest and profit.

But you will say, This will fetch that gallant man Cromwell from the Army,
which will be a mighty loss to the Kingdom, seeing he is so able and active a
Soldier, and so extraordinarily beloved of the Officers and Soldiers in the
Army, yea, and such a stay to that unparralleld General, Sir THOMAS FAIREFAX.

I answer, it is very true, that the Kingdom will have a mighty loss of him
indeed, if he should be taken out of the Army, and be made unserviceable to
them any where else; but if he come into the House of Commons (that proper seat
whereunto he was chosen,) and do them ten times more service there, then he
does, or can do in the Army, what loss has the Commonwealth then? Consider
seriously the grand service he did the last Winter, when he was in the House,
and see whether any action that ever he did in his life can be parralleld to
it, and I believe it will be found good to have him at home: for he is sound at
the heart, and not rotten cored, hates particular and selfe-Interests, and
dares freely speak his mind.

Therefore home with him, as well as the rest of Parliament Men, according to
their own Ordinance, and let him perfect what he began, and either lay
Manchester flat upon his back, or himself, for the best service can be done the
Kingdom, is to pull out homebred Traitors, and to help to keep and preserve
the Great Counsel aright: for if there be Twenty Armies abroad, and your
Counsels be not absolutely safe, sound, and Unanimous at home, you are not
safe, but still in danger; besides, I have heard it reported, that he was
about a design of getting a Committee set apart, and an Order made and
published to the whole Kingdom, that if any man were unjustly oppressed by any
Member of Parliament, Committe-man, or any other Officers or Ministers, let him
bring his complaint, and he shall have a just and a fair hearing, and Justice
done not in words, but in actions upon the Transgressour.

O for selfe-denying Cromwell home again, to set this on foot, which would be
a salve for all our sores, and would gain the Parliament more ground in one
month, then their forcing the Covenant will do in a hundred; And if you will
seriously meditate upon these things, you will find there was a hidden mystery
in sending him from the Parliament, when he had impeached Manchester, the fresh
pricking of which vein again, would cause good blood to grow in the body of
our Commonwealth; and besides Cromwell may reasonable well be spared now from
the Army, seeing there are so many gallant, brave, and true-hearted Englishmen
there besides himself, who are well known for their Honesty, Parts, Valor and
Soldiery to the Noble General: and besides, Cromwell, if he were at the
House, might (if it were thought fit) now and then visit the Army, to solder
them together, if there should be any disjoynted, (as I hope there will not) in
which Art he has good skill, and unfainedly hates all factious pertaking, and
base selfe-gaining.

Again, Whether is it not agreeable to Law, Justice, Equity and Conscience,
seeing that by the 4. of Ed. 3. 14. that there should be a Parliament once
every year, and more often, if need require, and in the 36. of E. 3. 10. it is
inacted, That for maintenance of the Laws, and the redress of diverse mischiefs
and grievances, which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every year,
as at another time was ordained by a Statute, that seeing this present
Parliament, (by reason of the extraordinary necessities of the Kingdom) have
sat four years, and many of the members betrayed their trust, and those that
remain, ingrosse Law-making, and also Law-executing into their own hands
contrary both to reason, and to the true intent and meaning of the Law, which
says, delays in judgment in other Courts shall be redressed in Parliament,
as also false judgments and difficult Cases that shall happen, shall be there
decided: Read the 14. E. 3. 5.

By which manifest abusing, negligent and not true using the Laws,
oppressions, mischiefs and grievances are no less (if not far more)
increased, then they were before the Parliament began; and many times by the
powerful Interest of a Faction in the Parliament, to save some one, two or
three of their Members, undeserving credits; they so violate the known,
unrepealed, and declared law of the land, yea and their own Votes, Ordinances,
Declarations, and Protestations, as if they had never made them; I say, all
these things considered, ought not the Freemen of England, who have labored
in these destroying times, both to preserve the Parliament, and their own
native Freedoms and Birthrights, not only to choose new Members, where they are
wanting once every year, but also to renew and inquire once a year, after the
behavior and carriage of those they have chosen.

And if they find that since they came into the House, they never made any
motions for the public good, nor so much as for theirs that sent them, but do
sit like so many Ninneys and Groles, that have no more wit in them, then will
reach from their noses to their mouths, as Doctor Bastwick says, or have any
way been unfaithful and unserviceable to the public, or groundedly suspected
so to be, that then those that choose and sent them, may have liberty to choose
more faithful, able and better men in their places, for standing water will
speedily corrupt, if it have not fresh running springs to feed it, though it
were never so pure at the first.

Therefore I earnestly desire all true-hearted: Freemen of England, to have a
care in their present new choices, and seriously consider, that Gallant man,
Major George Withers advice to them in his late Book, especially his 20. page,
who there says, Some men give their voices to their friends, some to their
Landlords, some to the richest (and he forsooth must needs be the wisest) men's
merits are measured by the aker, weighed by the pound, so let a Beast be Lord
of beasts, and possess many acres of dirt, he shall be preferred to be a
Parliament Man, in admiration of his wealth, and not wit: although (as Varro
says of a swine) he has no more soul then will serve in stead of salt to
keep his body from putrefying.

But who thinks upon the poor wise man, who as Solomon says, saved the City?
who thinks of the just man, whose integrity keeps Gods blessing amongst us, and
us together amongst our selves? No not one; who wonders then to see a crooked
representation of a crooked Commonwealth it is no true glass that ca^ts not a
shadow as crooked and deformed as the substance: but above all others, have
care of choosing Lawyers, as the same Author in his late Poems called Vox
Pacifica, page 183. says of them; for if the Commonwealth had Peace with
their professed enemies; yet they will reincrease.

-- Your Quarrels, else, ass^one as you agree:
By their formalities, and flow proceeding,
Your remedy f^r injuries is made
A mischief, the disease often times exceeding;
And if some eye unto them be not had,
So many places in your Parliament,
They will supply, and fill so many Chaires
In your Committees; that, much detriment
Unto the Subject; and some close impaires
Of Public Freedoms (e're you be aware)
Which slip upon you, if you have not care.
So strong a party they have always had,
That your great-Charter, which does interdict
Delay of Justice, was in that point made
(Ere since the Grant) a Law without effect.
But when their Courts, and practices have reached
Oppressions height; they, as the Clergy were;
Shall down into another Orb be fetched,
And taught to keep a constant motion there:
This work, upon some Court has been begun,
Another time, it shall be fully done.
And as the worthy Author of that late sheet of paper, called Some
Advertisements, for the new Election of Burgesses for the House of Commons,
says in his 6. page.

Take heed how you fill up Elections with these kind of men (meaning Lawyers)
the Recorder of every Borough will of course look to be chosen; as being the
mouth of his Corporation: but it is a Custom not fit for the necessity of
these times, our affairs require rather Statesmen then Lawyers; my Reasons
against such Elections follow:

1. The Knowledge of the Common Law, does no way conduce to the making of a
Statesman: it is a confined and topicall kind of Learning, Calculated only for
the Meridian of Westminster Hall; and reaches no further then Dover.
Transplant a Common Lawyer to Calice, and his head is no more useful there,
th^n a Sun-dyals in a grave: who ever heard of the Polyticks written in
Law-French?

2. If the making and penning of good Laws were the work of these times (as
they are not) it were not wisdom to choose Mercinary Lawyers to make Laws:
because they are the first men to invent subtilties to evade them, and make
them useless; and will pen them obscurely on purpose to procure themselves
work in the interpretation.

3. Lawyers, being a bold and talketive kind of men; will intrude themselves
into the Chaires of all Committees, where (being accustomed to take fees) they
will underhand protect delinquents, and their concealed Estates with tricks
and devices.

4. The Reformation of Courts of Justice, is a work of absolute necessity,
without which (though the sword of the Lord returns again into its scabbard,
so that you have no war yet) you shall have no Peace: but if you have many
Lawyers, they will never suffer any effectual Law to pass for this purpose:
Because they yet move by the corruption and delays of the Law, then by the Law
it self:

5. It is necessary to make a Law for limitation of exorbetant fees, extortion,
and prevarication (or collusion) amongst Lawyers, as it is used in other
Countries.

6. It is necessary to limit the certain number of practisers in each Court,
that they swarm not (like Locusts) over the land, devouring and impoverishing
it.

These blessings you will never attain unto, unless God give you the wisdom
to avoid such Elections: lay to your hearts sin as well as the shame and
smart, of oppressions and transgressions of lawyers, and you will find that
the cries of the oppressed have been a principal motive to draw down Gods
vengeance upon this mournful Land.

Was ever so desperate a wound given to the Laws, Liberties and properties, as
the predetermined judgment of Ship-mony. Who gave that blow? Judges. What were
they? Thieves cum privilegio Rege majestatis, who bought Justice by wholesale,
and sold it by Retaile? Who assisted them? Lawyers; who undertaking to plead
for their Clyants against it, (pretending one thing, and doing another thing)
for the most part: and betrayed the Cause, all to get favor and preferrment;
and yet such proceedings* were both against the Judges, and the Coronation
Oath; upon an extrajuditiall opinion collusively given: (for says the Record)
Sacramentum Domini Regis erga populum suum habent ad custodiendum: But our
Judges, (though more wicked) have the happiness to live in a more wicked age,
and outlive their crimes, paying only a small part by way of fine: and
enjoying there to their stolen treasures: and after they had made Peace as
devouring as war, and the Law as cruel as the Sword; who is that is not a
better Christian then these Brothers of the Coyfe, brothers in evil: will not
cry out with Epicures, that God takes no more care what men do on this earthly
balke, then man does what Ants do on an Em^n^t-hill; when Verres: (being
Consul of Cicily,) had pilled that Province, and (other Pro-Consulls, and
Pro-Praetors were puni^hed for lesser Extortions) he laughing at their foolish
moderation, vaunted to his Brother Ty^^^^kedes: that he had got enough to buy
the freindship of the Senate, and commendation, of a rich and Honorable man:
So our Judges enjoy their crimes, and the prize and reward of them: Nay, they
grow fatt and prosper upon the anger of God and man, whilst this Land groans
under the sad weight of the Sword, Pestilence, and famine, the effects of their
inju^tice: but through whose favor is it they have not expiated their Crimes
with their blood: and washed away the Guilt of the Land* but the Lawyers? who
wisely consider it may be their own Case another day.

I have showed you how unsafe it is to trust Mercinary-men with making or
keeping of your Laws; I will epitomize what I have said in Pleniea's words (in
Panegyr. ad Trajanum,) Heretofore we were laden with our Crimes, now we are
oppressed with our Laws: and it is to be feared, least the Commonwealth
(though founded by the Laws) be confounded by the Laws (or rather by the
Lawyers.)

Likewise to this purpose read what the Author (reputed to be a member of the
Assembly, as well as he that writes the Brotherly and friendly Censure of Mr.
Prinnes 4. late Queries:) in his Antidote against the same 4. dangerous
Queries, page 3. says, That if the thing be granted, that he disputes, for
Judges will be taught, That they judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
with them in judgment, people will grow more peaceable and free from
continual contentions: Lawyers shall not get the wealth of the Land into their
hands by fishing in troubled waters: encouraging men in unlawful and
quarrelous suites, pleading wicked Causes for large Fees, prolonging suites;
and making men spend in long suite unto twice the value of their just Right,
and debt for which they sue, and by taking treeble fees, and keeping them,
though they fail their Clyant, and have been employed at other Bars, when
his Cause was to be pleaded.

Godliness and true Religion being increased by faithful Preaching and godly
Discipline, in the hearts of men, will make the Commonwealth free from the
necessity of many Lawyers, which the learned Philosopher held to be a Plague in
a State and Kingdom: and therefore it is no marvel that the corrupt ones of
that Profession, are deadly enemies to the Maintenance, Honor, and other
encouragements of the true Ministry of the Gospel.

Also: Read what that honest Author (and true principl'd Commonwealths man:)
of the little book entitled, A Help to the Right understanding of Mr. Will.
Prynne, says of Lawyers; and lay all the aforecited Authors together, and you
will easily find, they make it evidently appear, that there is as little use
of Lawyers to be in the House of Commons, as there is of a Plague or
Pestil^nce, or of the Bishops and Popish Lords in the Honorable House of
Peers; their Interest being both as Delatory, and as destructive to the true
Peace, Prosperity and welfare of the Commonwealth of distressed England: for
the procuring of which, as principal helps and means under the powerful and
wise disposing Providence of the Lord JEHOVAH, who in his own due time, (as
Mordecai said to Esther, Est. 4.14. and Isa. 63.3. when all means fails, is
alone able without and beyond all means, to bring Salvation by his own
outstretched Arm, Yet let not us be idle or secure, but observe and endeavor
these ensuing means for our part.

I. By Petitioning, and by all other lawful ways and addresses, strive to
procure from the Parliament, and all other just Authority, that they (according
to their duty, Oath, and Profession; yea, and our trust reposed in them) will
Administer JUSTICE impartially, (according to that loud and earnest desire of
distressed and Imprisoned Lieutenant Colonel LILBVRNE, in that late Letter,
(which frequently is called his,) and according to those sad and lamenting
Expressions in that just complaining Epistle (of an Utter Barrester to his
special friend,) called Englands Misery and Remedy,) and that without turning
either to the right hand, or to the left, or knowing of any Relation either to
Father, Mother, Sister, Brother, Kinsman or other; or without regarding of any
Faction, either Popish, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Separate or
Anabaptist, but Cordially to do every one Justice, because it is just: and
severely to punish all perverters of Justice, whosoever they be: one Months
doing of which, would procure the Parliament more Cordial friends then the
fighting of all their Armies, or the forcing of all their Covenants, or the
Pressing of all their Soldiers, or persecuting all their Sectaries will do in
ten months space.

II. To endeavor to set the City of London right in the enjoyment of her
Privileges: (being the Metropolis of England, that she may indeed be a true
President to all the Cities and Corporations in the Kingdom, and a balance to
all the Tyrants, or Arbytrary-principl'd men in the same:) the means to set her
right, is first, for the Commons to get a Copy of their Charters, and translate
them into English, and print, them, that so every freeman may see and know his
own rights, and endeavor the more earnestly the exemplary punishment of the
infringers and incroachers thereupon.

III. To rise as one man under faithful, honest, experienced, constant,
well-affected Commanders, such as those that rise, shall choose to adventure
their lives with; and beleager all the Kings Garrisons before the storm grow
so great in the North, that no man dare travel under pain of his life,
according those honest and good Directions lately printed* which are entitled,
Englands Cordial Physic.

IV. To call to a just and strict account all Fingerers, and Receivers of
money, whatsoever, even Parliament men as well as others; for they are all but
the Commonwealths servants) and severely (according to the greatest pennalty
of any declared and unrepealed Law) to punish all those that have any ways
cheated and cozened the Commonwealth, and unjustly made themselves rich by her
treasure now in the time of their great richer, and her extreme poverty; and
for future time, to make a Law to punish with death all such gross
transgressors, who deserve to have their skins flead off, and stopped full of
straw, and hung up publicly in the places where they so unjustly executed
their undeserved Offices, and deceived their own Nation to enrich themselves,
to the terrifying of all such as shall succeed them in their places, from the
acting of such unchristian* yea, and worse then Heathen-like Roaguery.

For I am confident, that the portion of all such covetous State-robbers,
National Fellons, mighty thieves, and secret Traitors will be such as are
described (or painted lively in their colors) throughout the Twentieth Chapter
o^ Job, from the fourth Verse, which I express here at large, and more
Scriptures after them, for the use of those that have no B^bles, to read (they
are become so dear, and Monopolized like other things, as shall yet hereafter
appear,) the words a^e these.

Know not thus this of old, since man was placed upon the earth, that the
triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a
moment. Though his Exce^lency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto
the Clouds, yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung: they which have
seen him, shall say, Where is he?

He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found, yea, he shall be chased
away as a Vision of the night, the eye also which saw him, shall see him no
more, neither shall his Place any more behold him. His Children shall seek to
please the Poor, and his hands shall restore their goods: His bones are full
of the f^rme of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust. Though
wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue: though
he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still within his mouth.

Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of aspes within him: He
has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again, God shall cast
them out of his belly: He shall suck the poison of Aspes, the Vipers tongue
shall slay him: He shall not see the Rivers, the shods, the brooks of honey
and butter; That which he labored for, he shall restore, and shall not
swallow it down; according to his substance shall the restitution be, and he
shall not rejoice therein.

Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor, because he has
violently taken away an house which he builded not: surely he shall not find
quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.

There shall none of his meat be left, he shall be in straites; every hand of
the wicked shall come upon him: When he is about to fill his belly, God shall
cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him, while he is
eating.

He shall fly from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him
through: it is drawn, and comes of the body: yea, the glistering sword
comes out of his gall; terrors are upon him: all darkness shall be hid in
his secret places; a fire not blown shall consume him: it shall go ill with
him that is left in his Tabernable. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and
the earth shall rise up against him: the increase of his House shall depart,
and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath: This is the portion of a
wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God.

Cnsider and apply these Judgments to your selves ye wicked Lawyers, (if you
apprehend your selves to be guilty of the blood, and of grinding the faces of
the poor, by your professions, and especially you grand Lawyers, (who are out
of your element) in the House of Commons, by your practices.)

And as the Psalmist says well of wicked men, Psalm. 73.5. etc. They are not in
trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men: their eyes stand
out with fatnes, they have more then their heart can wish, they are corrupt and
speak wickedly concerning oppression, they speak foolishly, they set their
mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth;
therefore the people return hither, and waters of a full cup are wrung out to
them. And they say, bow does God know? and is there knowledge in the Most High:
Behold these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, they increase in riches.

But in the 18. verse it is said; Surely thou (O Lord) did set them in
slippery places, thou castest them down into destruction.

And in the 49. Psalm. 16* he says, Be not thou afraid, when one is made
rich, when the glory of his house is increased, for when he dies, he shall
carry nothing away, his glory shall descend after him, etc. And in the 50.
Psalm. 16, etc. But unto the wicked, God says, What have thou to do with my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth: seeing thou
hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. When thou saw a thief,
then then consentedst with him, and have been partaker with Adulterers. Thou
give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and
speak against thy brother, thou slanderest thine own mothers son. These
things have thou done, and I have kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in
Order before thine eyes. Now consider this, ye that forget GOD, lest I tear
you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth
me, and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation
of God.

But as the Prophet Jeremiah says, chap. 23. etc. But this people has a
revolting and rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone: neither say they in
their heart, let us now fear the Lord, our GOD, that gives rain, both the
former and the latter in his season, he reserveth unto us the very appointed
weeks of the harvest: your iniquities has turned away these things, and your
sins have withdrawn good things from you. For among my people are found
wicked men; they lay wait, as he that lays snares, they set a trap to catch
men. As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, therefore
they are became great, and waxed rich. They are grown fat, they shine, yea,
they overpasse the deeds of the wickod, they judge not the cause, the cause of
the fatherless; yet they prosper, and the right of the needy do they not
judge.

Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, shall not my soul be
revenged on such a Nation as this? A wonderful and horrible thing is committed
in the Land, the Prophets Prophecy, falsely, and the Priests hear rule by that
means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end
thereof?

But to return to our former matter, especially the grievances of the Nation;
(through the mistake of the Printer, in omitting of some Manuscripts) and the
absence of the Author, when the Monopolies in the former part of this Book were
expressed; as chiefly that soul-starving, or murdering Monopoly, in hindering
the free passage of the Gospel, by extorting the prices of Bibles, which the
false self-loving Stationers, as deadly enemies to all goodness, have been
enterprizing a long time to obtain, and against all common freedom, to
engrosse into their own hands the sole and only selling of them, by which
means, they intend to sell at what rates soever they please, though already
they sell at double the rate that honest well-affected Commonwealths men may
print and sell them, and also be conscionable gainers by them:

So of all Monopolies or Patents, next the monopolizing of engrossing the
Preaching of Gods Word into the Tything and gripeing claws of the Clergy; this
is the most wicked and intolerable, because it deprives many, both poor
servants, and others of mean condition to buy any Bibles at all, by reason of
the extraordinary dearth or dearnesse of them, that thereby they might be
instructed in the way to heaven and happiness; and taught their duty also
toward their Masters, and the Magistrates; whereby it is evident, that those
Stationers, thus enterprising, are self-seekers, and as great enemies to the
Commonwealth, as they are to all goodness.

And besides, they employ the Bishops old Thieves and Roagues about their
robbing affairs, as Hunscott their Beadle for one, and a tall pale-faced
fellow for another, who lately with their base crew of robbing Partners, under
pretense of Parliamentary Authority, to search for dangerous Books, have
robbed diverse honest men's houses in London, who have been the Parliaments best
friends and servants, and particularly, Lieutenant Colonel Lilburnes house,
who being Prisoner in Newgate, and his wife with him, and the great with
Child, and near her time, those robbers took advantage of their absence.

And none being in the House, but an old Gentlewoman at that time, whom they
much frighted; as they did a young Gentlewoman in another place, to the great
danger of her life (insomuch that she cries out in her extreame-Fever,
Hunscott, Hunscott,) they ran up into the Chambers, and stole out of his
wives Drawers, diverse pieces of her Childbed linen* and such other things as
they pleased, and refused to show the Old-woman what they had stolen, though
she earnestly entreated them.

And in other the Parliaments friends houses, under the color of Parliamentary
Authority, they at least do rob all choice old books, as well as new, upon all
occasions of such grievous oppressions, and unexpected persecutions.

And not only has this base fellow Hunscott this so needful and profitable
Office of Robbing, but it is reported, that he has also another as needful
and profitable, for he gathers the Excise for Cattle, and Hats, etc. which
with the former, is esteemed to be worth 500 l. per annum to him.

Oh! what a clear demonstration of future and intended slavery may be well and
clearly perceived by any (who have but half an eye) to begin again among us
(though after more hidden and obscured ways then formerly) when such sturdy
Roagues, bold Robbers, shameless covetous, and impudent Tyrants as this, or
his fellows, are authorized and sent from high Judicatories, upon such ungodly
and barbarous designs, and inhumane enterprises, and yet found good enough
also to be employed in the great Affairs of the Kingdom!

Is there never a conscientious nor honest man left unkilled, exiled or
imprisoned, that has the fear of God, and done good and faithful service to
the State, there would be some color of excuse, that such abjects and
off-scourings of mankind should be accepted, and well-deserving worthy men
quite rejected? Well, these are brave times for the wicked, who are advanced by
the ruin of the godly, the allowed thief permitted to rob and destroy the
honest man, the rich to rob, plunder and sequestrate the poor, until they can
get no more, but when they have gotten all, and done with all what they please,
it rests only that the poor also, in their turn, render them the like
measure, and find out their Riches for the States service, which all this
heavy time they have saved, whiles poor men's estates have been exceedingly
destroyed.

But as the Watermen at Queen-hive do usually cry, Westward hough, hough, so
according to the present current of the times, most honest men have more then
cause to cry in the Water-mens language, Egypt hough, hough, the house of
Bondage, slavery, oppression, taxation, heavy and cruel, heavy and cruel, we
can no longer bear it, we can no longer bear it, we can no longer bear it;
we are as much provoked and forced to cast off all our yoakes and crosses from
our shoulders (except only that of Persecution) as ever any people or Nations,
though no People or Nation under heaven have been more free, beneficial and
helpful to those whom we entrusted to help and deliver as from Oppression,
which says the Wiseman, is enough to make wisemen mad.

According to the Parliaments Declaration, in their own words, expressed on the
second page of this book, is it not justly said, that in the General of an
Army should turn the mouths of his Cannons against his own Soldiers, would
not that his attempt contrary to the nature of his trust and place committed
unto him, ipso facto, estate the Army in a right of disobedience, (even by
standing on their own defense, as the Parliament themselves do (and we also in
helping them, or else where had they been, against the fury of the King, which
Solomon calls, like the roaring of a Lion; except we think that obedience
binds men to cut their own throats, or at least their companions, so (as they
truly teach us) it is the equity, and not the Letter of the Law, unto which
we must have recourse in our greatest necessity, as the Parliament themselves
were forced to do, and still does in this their own extremity.

But some will say, that our bondage is not yet so bad as that of Egypt was,
for all the Jews were in great bondage under the Egyptions, and yet many of
ours are exempted: unto that I yield, and do confess, that few of our great
and mighty men do either work the clay, or make the bricks; but they lay
either all, or most part of the burden on the poor by heavy labor, and sweat
of their brows in the heat of the day, not only in working the clay, and
making of the bricks, but if they do complain to Higher Powers, upon their
cruel and Tyrannous Taskmasters, they are so far from getting any kind of
Justice, that because they moaned and complained, and groaned under such heavy
and grievous burdens, that they were not able any longer to bear or endure,
they are further ordained (even for their complaining) to gather stubble too,
because they are so idle.

Innumerable instances there are throughout these three mourning and bleeding
Kingdoms, to prove all these businesses, but I will only choose a City
instance, and let every man who is in his profession after that manner grieved
and wronged, turn the simile home to himself, according to his smart; Though
the poor Hat-makers, who earne their living with heavy and, hot labors, both
early and late, do pay Excise both for all the materials, and fire which they
use, for the bread they eat, for the liquor they drink, and clothes they
wear, yet when they have made their Hatts, and done all they can with great
trouble and toil, day and night, they are forced to pay Excise over again out
of their very labor, notwithstanding it was both so dear and heavy in buying
all the necessaries before.

O cruel, pitiful, lamentable and intolerable Bondage, no longer to be
endured, suffered, nor undergone, the burdens being far heavier then the poor
laborers can bear! and yet the Spiritual Taskmasters do gape, and roar
like Lions for their prey of Tithes, also over, above, and besides all, without
any kind of pity, compassion or commiseration, in these grievous days of
affliction.

When this Kingdom was in any way or possibility of subsistence, the ancient
custom was, that Taxations should be raised by way of Subsidy, which is the
most just, equitable, and reasonable way of all, for it sets every tub on its
own bottom, it lays the burden upon the strong shoulders of the rich, who
only are able to bear it, but spares and freeth the weak shoulders of the
poor, because they are scarcely able to subsist, pay rent, and maintain their
families.

But our new invented pay, lays the burden heavily upon the poor, and men of
middle quality or condition, without all discretion, and scarcely makes the
rich touch it with one of their fingers: yea, many of them are more and more
advanced in their prosperous estate, through the great ruins, distractions,
and miseries of the Kingdom, by their great salleries they have for executing
their places, as 500 l. 1000 l. 1200 l. and more, per annum, besides all the
bribes they get, and the false Accounts they make; So that in this life, the
rich have their pleasures, but poor Lazarus pains.

Seeing the Parliament ordained, that none should be accepted to be a
Parliament Man, that had been a Monopolizer to the Kings Counsel, and false
Judges against the Liberties of the freemen of England, is it not as unjust to
employ any man in a place of Trust, Credit, or profit now in Parliament time,
that have been known to be a Monopolizer in any place or Office to or for the
Parliament, to the prejudice of the Freemen of England?

Further it was omitted in the former part of this book, where complaint is
made both of injustice to well-doers, and no justice to evil doers, that
(according to the Parliaments book of Declarations, page 259. and 260.)
Whosoever shall serve or assist the King in these Wars, are Traitors by the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by two Acts of
Parliament. 11. Richard 2. 1. Hen. 4.

And page 576. of the said book, It is declared by the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, that whereas the King, seduced by wicked Counsel,
does make war against his Parliament and People, and for the promoting of
that war, diverse forces both of horse and foot have been, and are leavied and
raised by several persons, and his Majesty's good Subjects are most cruelly
robbed, spoiled and slain.

To the end that no man may be misled through ignorance, the Lords and Commons
in Parliament declare, that all such persons as shall upon any pretense
whatsoever, assist his Majesty in this war with Horse, Arms, Plate or
money, are Traitors to his Majesty, the Parliament, and the Kingdom, and
shall be brought to condign punishment for so high an offense.

Yea, and according to the book of Articles for War, page It is enacted to be
death unto any whosoever, who holds Intelligence and correspondency with the
enemy.

All which Sir John Lenthall, and the Speaker his Brother have done, and yet it
must neither be proved against them, nor they tried nor arraigned, but
altogether excused, cleared, and freed, even by Vote of Parliament, and the
accusers both prisoned and arraigned for them; yea, and a Commit chosen to
devise and inflict punishments against the Accusers, so that still the just are
condemned, and the wicked absolved.

Psalm. 9.18, 19. For the needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of
the poor shall not perish for ever: Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail, let
the Heathen be judged in thy sight. And 12.5. For the oppressions of the poor,
for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, says the LORD, I will set him
in safety, from him that puffs at him. And 35.10. All my bones shall say,
LORD, who is like unto thee! which delivers the poor from him that is too
strong for him yea, the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him? And
37.14. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast
down the poor and needy, and to stay such as be of upright conversation.

And 62.9, 10. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are
a lie, to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.
Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery; if riches increase, set
not your hearts upon them. And 74.19. O deliver not the soul of thy Turtle
Dove, unto the multitude of the wicked, forget not the Congregation of thy
poor for ever. And 82.3, 4, 5. Defend the poor and fatherless, do justice
to the afflicted and needy. Deliver the poor and needy, rid them out of the
band of the wicked, they know not, neither will they understand: they walk on
in darkness, all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

And 92.6, 7. A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this;
When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do
flourish, it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever. And 118.8.9. It is
better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in man. It is better to
trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in Princes. And 146.3. Put not your
trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.

Isaiah. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees,
and write grievous things, which they have prescribed. To turn aside the need,
from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that
Widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. And what
will ye do in the day of Visitation: and in the desolation which shall come
from far? to whom will ye seek for help? and where will ye leave your glory?
Without me they shall bow down under the Prisoners, and they shall fall under
the slain, for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
s^retched out still. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their
hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical Nation; and
against the people of my wrath, I will give him a charge to take the spoil,
and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the streets.

FINIS.
The chief faults escaped in the printing, either through the Authors
absence, or the Correctours negligence.

In page 4. l. 22. read the last but one of. p. 5. l. 2. read and that. and l.
7. read for the same. p. 7. l. 37. r. and justly for hence justly. and read may
condemn for may not condemn. p. 9. l. 20. r. of which you may. and l. 32. r.
are culpable. p. 10. l. 19. r. public for bublick* p. 15. l. 18. r. that call
evil good, and good evil. and add to the next line, Job 14.4. Who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. read 25.4. and Psalm. 51.5. p. 16.
l. 16. r. to prison without cause showed. and l. 18. r. to force him to commit
a crime. and l. 26. r. and then make for and then to make p. 17. l. 14. r.
strengthened for straightened, l. p. 37. l. 18. r. suites for suite, p. 39. l. 1.
r. according to those, for, according those. p. 40. l. 23. r. consider, for
cnsider. p. 43. l. 16. r. If there were, for, Is there.

THE POSTSCRIPT, Containing diverse sentences belonging to several passages of
this Book, which were in their due places omitted, and here at last remembered.
Add to page 16. l. 29. So that first, he was committed by Order and Vote of
Parliament, without cause showed, and then secondly, for refusing to answer
upon Interrogatories to their Committee of Examinations; which is contrary, 1.
To the Great Charter of England. 2. To the very words of the Petition of Right.
3. To the act made this present Parliament, for abolishing the Star Chamber, 4.
To the solemn Oath and Protestation of this Kingdom. 5. To the great Covenant
and Solemn Vow, made upon pain of eternal damnation, for uniting the two
Kingdoms together. 6. And most principally of all, contrary to the infallible
Rules of Gods own most sacred Word, which forbids that any man should answer
upon questions to accuse, condemn, and consequently to kill and destroy
himself, or that any man should be condemned before he be heard. And 7.
Contrary to all justice, equity, conscience, sense, reason, the very practice
of the Romish Heathens, love, duty, brotherly affection, Christianity,
Reformation, Comiseration, or Compassion. 8. Contrary to the Kingdoms great
trust, committed by their grand Commission to the Parliament, for defending and
improving, and no wise for destroying nor disannulling their Liberties, and so
always for the Weal, but never for the woe of the Freemen of England,
otherwise they are not only to be bidden* take heed to their injustice* but to
be called to an account, and censured accordingly.

That in regard the Kingdom is in so pitiful and great distress, and that
the most and best things that ever this Parliament did, were first motioned by
private men, and then authorized and established by them; it would be excellent
and needful, if they would ordain, that every freeman of England, who is
able, would bestow his servico one year at least, freely for the good of the
Civil State, in any Place or Office of Trust, whereof his skill and breeding
do fit him, to be most capable, according as they shall be chosen, and those
who are not able to serve freely for a year, and to have competent maintenance
allowed unto them, to the value of 50. or 60 l. a year, according to their
charge; if such be chosen for their skill and diligence, though they want
outward means: for which allowance, those that are conscienscious, will do as
good service, at least, as some others, who have 1000. or 2000. a year.

The like rule is no less, but rather far more excellent and needful, to be
observed and established in matters concerning the Church State wherein her
servants are to perform their duties freely, they being able to maintain
themselves, and those with them, whether by means obtained formerly, or
industry used daily; otherwise, to have the like allowance of 50. or 60 l. a
year, according to their charge.

And that the remainder of all Church-living, obtained by the subtilty of
Antichrist, be n^w wholly employed to the supply of the Kingdoms manifold
present necessities, and after the Wars are ended, to the payment of the
Kingdoms great debts, contracted upon the public faith.

But if in case, that the Clergy or any of them shall not be content with the
aforesaid allowance, which is sufficient for as honest men, that then it might
be free for those whom God shall be pleased to fit with sufficient abilities to
supply their places freely: to the intent, it may not be said of them, as of
the Scribes and Pharisees, that they shut up the Kingdom of heaven, and will
neither enter in themselves, nor yet suffer those that would. Matthew. 23.13.
Luke 14.52.

In the Appendix of one of Mr. Prinnes books, authorized by the Parliament,
called The Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, beginning at page 1. It
is manifested by sundry Histories and Authors, that in the ancient Roman
Kingdom and Empire* in the Greek and German Empires, derived out of it, in the
old Grecian, Indian, Egyptian Realms, in the Kingdom of France, Spain,
Italy, Hungaria, Bohemia, Denmark, Poland, Swethland, Scotland, yea of Judah,
Israel, and others mentioned in the Scripture, the supreme Soveraignity and
Power, resided not in the Emperors and Kings themselves, but in their
Kingdoms, Senates, Parliaments, People, who had not only power to restrain,
but censure and remove their Emperors and Princes, for their tyranny and
mis-government: Where also there is an answer to the principal Arguments to
prove Kings above whole Kingdoms and Parliaments, and not questionable nor
accountable to them, nor censurable by them for any exorbitant actions.

The 4. page, 6. 7. 10. 11. 13. 17. 101. 112. 123. 125. 150. 151. 153. 154.
159. are most excellent for deciding those differences, which I refer to the
juditious and courteous Reader to peruse at his leisure.

FINIS.
Printed October. 1645.


