A COPY OF A LETTER, Written by John Lilburne Leut. Collonell. To Mr. William
Prinne Esquire (UPON THE COMING OUT OF HIS LAST BOOK, Entitled Truth triumphing
over Falslhood, Antiquity over Novelty) In which he lays down five
Propositions, which he desires to discuss with the said Mr. Prinne.
Sir,
YOU and I have both been Sufferers, by the hands of the Prelates, the comnon
and open Enemies of Christ^ Kingdom; and the eyes of the people of God are
therefore the more upon us, and are subject with less jealousy to receive
those things that come from us for truth, not immitating the noble Bereans, who
daily searched the Scripture, to see whether those things they heard, were
according thereunto or no, Acts 17.11. the Law and the Testimony of Christ
being the str^ight Rule, by which we are to walk espeacially in matters of
worship, and whosoever he be that practices and speaks not according to this
Rule, it is because there is no light of truth in him, Esa. 8.20. I have seen
some of your late writings, which a little diving into, I have found them full
of bitter and unsavory Language against the poor Saints of God, and the
unspotted wais of Jesus Christ, and finding your Confidence very great but your
Arguments very weak and uns^und having received a Talent from the Lord, I
conceived my self bound in Conscience to employ it, and lay it out for my
Ma^ers best advantage) and I was determined some weeks since, to have writ you
a few lines in a public way, and to have told you, you err not knowing the
Scriptures. Math. 22.29. (but being that you, and the Blacke-Coate? in the
Synod) have not dealt fairly with your Antagonists in stopping the Press
against us, while things are in debate, yea robbing us of our Liberty (as we
are Subjects) in time of freedom, when the Parliament is sitting, who are
sufficiently able to punish that man (whatsoever he be) that shall abuse his
pen. So that whill we are with the hazard of our dearest lives, fighting for
the Subjects Liberty, we are brought into Egiptian bonds in this and other
particulars, by the Blacke-Coates, who I am afraid, will prove more cruel
Taskmasters then their dear fathers the Bishops: who Cowardly sit at home, in
my apprehension, for no other end but to breed faction and division amongst the
well affected to the Parliament, promoting thereby their own interest, which
is Lazines, Pride, Covetousnes and Domination, endeavoring to lay lower then
the dust a generation of men whom they falsely call Sectaryes, that have in the
uprightness of their hearts without Syodianlike ends, ventred all they have in
the world for the good of the Parliament, and the Commonwealth of England, and
who may bid defiance to all their Adversaries that brand them with
unfaithfulnes. so that by mean^ of which, I have not been able that way yet, to
accomplish my earnest desire: and truly it argues no manhood nor valor in you
nor the Blacke-Coates, by force to throw us down and ty our hands, and then to
fall upon us to beat and buffet us, for if you had not been men that had been
afraid of your cause, you would have been willing to have fought and contended
with us upon even ground and equal terms, namely that the Press might be as
open for us as for you, and as it was at the beginning of this Parliament,
which I conceive the Parliament did of purpose, that so the freeborne English
Subjects might enjoy their Liberty and Privilege, which the Bishops had
learned of the Spanish Inquisition to rob them of, by looking it up under the
Key of an Imrpimatur, in whose tyrannical steps the Synod treades, so that you
and they think you may rail at us own privilegio, and rank us amongst the
worst and basest of men, as rooters up of Parliaments and disturbers of States
and Common welthes, and so think to carry it away without control, but it
may be you will be mistaken, for though we cannot print so fast as you, we can
speak and lay down as strong Arguments for our selves, as you can for your
selves, and therefore being desirous to try a fall with you, though one of your
friends not long since told me, there was as great disproportion betwixt you
and me, to write upon controverting the things of God, as there is betwixt a
tall Ceder and a little shrub: unto which I replied, go you, and tell the tall
Ceder, the little Shrub will have about with him: And therefore, that I may be
as good as my word, I send you these ensuing Propositions, upon which I will
dispute with you, hand to hand before any Auditory in and about the City of
London when and where you will choose, giving me four or five days warning
before hand.

First, That the Ordinances, Laws, Rights and Ceremonies of the Church of the
Jews were types and figures, which were only to last and endure till the
coming of Christ, which he by his death did abolish, Genesis 49.10. John 19.30.
Acts 15.24.29. and 21.21:28. Heb. 7.11:12. and 10.1. and he himself with his
Institutions in the New Testament are the Antitypes of them, Acts 3.22. Heb.
1.8. and 6.20. and 7.17.18.19. and 8.1 2.6. and 9.11.12.

Secondly, That Jesus Christ being appointed by God his Father to be Mediator,
has a Kingdom given unto him, Dan. 2.13.14. Mat. 2.2 and 28.18. Luke 1.32.33.
Heb. 1.8. which he has erected, and set up in the world, amongst his Saints,
where visibly and spiritually he governs, rules and dwells, Psalm.
2.6.22.27.28: and 46.4: and 48.1. etc. and 132.13:14. Esa. 6.9 7. and 33.23.
and according to that trust the Father has reposed in him Acts 3.22.23. he
has been faithful to every thing requred of him, Heb. 3.25. compared with
Exodus 39.43. and unto this his visible Kingdom by his last Will and Testament
he has bequeathed perfect and complete Laws, which are unalterable and
unchangable, in all times, ages and places by any of the sons of men, Acts
1.3. 2 These. 2.15. 1 Timothy 6.13.14.20. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17. Heb. 10.28.29. and
12*25.

Thirdly, that the matter, form, Laws, Worship, Ordinances and
Administrations of this Kingdom are not carnal, nor of this world, but all
and every one of them spiritual, John. 4.22.23. and 18.36. Act. 1.15. and
^.41.47. and 11.23.24. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. and chapter 5: 2 Cor. 2.6.7.8.

Fourthly, that no Parliament, Council, Synod, Emperor, King, nor Majestrate
has any spiritual Authority, or jurisdiction over this Kingdom, or the
Subjects thereof, Mat. 20.25.27. 1 Cor. 4.5. Ephesians. 1.21.22 23. and 5.24.25.
Col. 4.17. 1 Pet. 6.5.3. Rev. 17.17.

Fifthly, that to persecute for conscience is not of nor from God, but of and
from the Devil, and Antichrist, Esa. 2.3.4. and 11.6:7:9. Micah 4.2.3. Luke
9.54.55, 2 Cor. 10.4. 1 Timothy 1.20. Rev. 13.2.4.15 16.17.

Sir, In your last Book that you put out, you spend a great deal of pains in
citing old rusty Authors, to prove that Kings, Councels, Synods and States
have for so many hundred years meddled with matters of Religion, I grant you
they have; but I demand of you, by what Right, or by what Authority out of the
Word of God they have so done? Has God the Father, or Jesus Christ his Son
given them any allowance in thi^? Or have they not hereby rather fulfilled the
Prophesies of the Scripture, which says, ( Rev. 17.17.) that the Kings of the
Earth shall give their power unto the Beast, till the Word of God be fulfilled,
which they have done in assisting the Pope, to join the Ecclesiastical and
Civil State together, making the golden Laws of Christ, to depend upon the
leaden Laws of man; yea, upon such Laws, as was just suitable to their
tyrannical lusts, and which might the most advance their wicked ends and
designs, and in the doing of this, they have set up a perfect Antichrist
against Gods Christ; yea, England is not free from this; for though King Henry
the right did shake of the Popes Supremacy, yet by the advice of the Clergy,
the sworn enemies of Jesus Christ, he assumed the same, calling himself Head
in all causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, and so though he jusled out the Pope,
he set himself in the Throne of Christ, and his Successors have done the
same, for opposing of which, the Saints that were burnt in Queen Mary's days
have not only smarted, but also those that were hanged and murdered in Prisons
in Queen Elizabeth's days, and those that were banished and destroyed in King
James his days, and my self and many others, that have suffvred worse then
death in King Charles his days, and this is the great Contrversi^, that God
contends with the whole Earth for, and for which God will make the greatest of
Princes and States to taste a Cup of trembling, yea, and to drink the dregs of
his fury and wrath; for he will give people and Nations for his Saints, Esa.
43.3.4.14. And if England drink yet deeper of this Cup, amongst other causes,
they may thank Mr. Prinne for it who has incited them to wage war with the
King of Saints, (and his redeemed ones) who will dash all the Nations of the
Earth in pieces in being revenged of them, for that which they hove done unto
them already in this particular, Rev. 18. chapter and 19.1.2. For Sir, let me tell
you, it is the incommunicable Prerogative of Jesus Christ alone to be King of
his Saints, and Lawgiver to his Church and people, and to reign in the souls
and consciences of his chosen ones, it being too high a throne for all the
creatures in the world to reign in; and therefore, were your eyes but open, it
would make you quake and tremble, to consider what you have done, in
endeavoring to set the Potentates of the Earth together by the ears with
Christ (who is to rule all Nations, Rev. 12.5.) to pluck his Crown from his
head, his Scepter out of his hand, and his Person out of his Throne of State,
that his Father has given him to reign gloriously in.

Oh Sir! consider the time is not long, before Jesus Christ will come again in
glory tryumphantly, and say it out of his own mouth before the eyes of the
sons of men, bring those mine enemies before me, that will not have me to
rule over them, that J may slay them, Luke 19.17.

Sir, If your Positions be true, that there is no rule left in the world, how
we may worship God, but that Kings and States may set up what Religion^ they
please, or may mould it to the manners of their people; (...) Queen Mary did
justifiably in burning the Saints in her days that would not stoop and submit
to that Religion she and her Parliament had set up: Truly, had I not seen your
name to your Books, I should rather have judged them a Papists or a Jesuits
then Mr. Prinnes, and without doubt the Pope when he sees them will Cannonize
you for a Saint, for throwing down his enemy Christ, who you say has been
less faithful then Moses, and so had need of the Pope, or some others to
supply what he has been deficient in; Surely you have given away your ears,
and suffered as a busy body in opposing the King and the Prelates; without all
doubt, all is not gold that glisters; for were you not a man, that had more
then truth to look after, namely your own ends and particular interest, which
I am af^raid you strive more to set up then a public good, you should rather
importuned the Parliament, to have continued their favors and respects to that
people, that cannot prostrate their consciences to man's devises though never so
great and famous; (and who yet with their bodies and estates to the utmost of
their power, yea and diverse of them beyond their abilities) have done the
Parliament as sinceare, upright, faithful and good service as either your
self or any generation of men in England whatsoever they be) then to enforce
them to destroy them: But truly the Son of God, and his saints (those beloved
^ewels of his) are but a little beholden to you, that will not suffer his
ransomsed ones to enjoy the Liberty of their Conscience to serve their Lord and
King, that has bought them with his own blood, [are you not in this as cruel
a Taskmaster as Pharaoh] nor to have footing in the Land of their Nativity,
though Christ himself has given them a true right to all things present in
this world, and all things in that is to come, 1 Cor. 2.21.22.23. and they
themselves (many thousand of them) have endeavored more then your self to
redeem their native Country from bondage and slavery with their dearest blood:
And therefore I say, the Lord judge betwixt you and us in this particular.

Sir, It may be instead of satisfying my desire, you will run and complain to
the Parliament; and press them upon their Covenant to take vengance upon me,
if you do I weigh it not; for I bless God I am fitted to do, or suffer
whatsoever the Parliament shall impose upon me, but if you do, take these two
along with you.

First, That I am not against the Parliaments setting up a S^te-Government for
such a Church as they shall think fit, to make the generality of the Land
members of, for I for my part leave them to themselves, to do what they shall
think good, so that they leave my Conscien^e free to to the Law and Will of my
Lord and King.

Socondly, If you put them in mind of their Covenant, tell them, I think they
have sworn to root out all Popery, and therefore have lately abolished the
Common Prayer (that great Idol) but yet have established Tithes, etc. the very
root and support of popery, which I humbly conceive, is a contradiction to
their Covenant, and which will be a greater snaire then the Common Prayer to many
of the precious consciences of Gods people, whose duty is in my judgment, to
dye in a prison before they act or stoop unto so dishonorable a thing as this
is to their Lord and Master, as to maintain the Blacke-coates with Tithes,
whom they look upon as the professed enemies of their Anointed Christ, he
that pays Tithes, is bound to the whole Law of Tithes, in which there was a
Lamb to be brought for a Sin-offering, which is abolished; also he that was to
take Tithes, was one that was to offer sacrifice daily for sin, which if any do
so now it is to deny Christ come in the flesh, and to be the alone sacrifice
for sin by his death, and so overthrow all our comfort, joy and hope. So
desiring to receive your Answer to the things I propound to you, I rest

LONDON, this 7. Jan. 1645. Yours more then you are the Truths JOHN LILBURNE.

FINIS.

