The Life and Death of Mris RUMP.
And the Fatal end of her Base-born brat of destruction, with her own first
hatching And bringing forth from the Devils Arse a Peake, it being the only
place, from whence this illigitimate Bastard or Monster had its Nativity.
The Names of the chief Actors, in this Tragical Scene.
Devils Arse. Mris. Rump. Mulciber Blacksmith of Hell Vortiger. Etheldrid,
Edricus. Cain. Oliv. Cromwell Reynolds, Pride.
Enter the Devils Arse and Mris Rump. Devils Arse. HA, ha, ha, Hoop, what comes
here, a Brat of my own bringing forth?


Mris Rump. Zounds thou lie, I am no Monster like thee, I scorn to loose the
least title of my usurped Honor. Am not I the powerful mighty and invincible
stamp of Tyranny, to whose shadow all must and shall bow, or else expect the
terror of my Thundering Ordinances, Votes, and Declarations, how dare thou to
question my impregnable Force to whose Command Armies were subject.


Devils Arse. What force have thou? Will thou deny me, thy own Mother from
whence thou had thy first Birth, breath, life and being was not I the first
Arse, or stump from whence all misery befell man, did not I seduce the Woman to
the destruction of all men? and am thy own creator?


Rump. No my name is beyond thy stinking Pedigree, is not Rump an Honorable
name.


Devil Arse. And is not my name the very same, but one of better narure.

He spits at her.
Mrs. Rump. What! do thou spit at me?


Devils Arise. Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.


Mrs. Rump. Oh cursed Varlet, the very scent of thy stinking Salliport would
infect a Toad.


Devils Arse. Out of my sight, thy very breath infects my eyes.


Mrs. Rump. Some dismal Fiend confound the substance of thy Hellish shape.


Devels Arse. Art thou like bloody Nero to murder me thy own mother? who did
thou learn this cruelty of.


Mrs. Rump. None but thy self?


Devils Arse. It is true I caused Cain to murder a fourth part of the whole
would, I his own Brother.


Mrs. Rump. And with these bloody Paws I murdered my own King; And world do
my Genesis Monck too, were I in place again.


Devils Arse. Out Devil murder thy King?


Mrs. Rum. I and would murder thee too, were thou a King.


Devils Arse. I had rather be a Pedlar, far be the thought of it from me; but
where is thy Conscience?


Mrs. Rump. In the Exchequer, had it not been so, I had never embrewed my hands
in blood for cursed gold. But is there no more Murderers but I?


Devils Arse. Here comes many more of your Comrades:

Enter Vortiger, Etheldrid, Edricus, O. Cromwell, Reynolds and Pride.
Vortiger. I murdered my Sovereign Lord and King Constance, and many more
besides.

Etheldred, I murdered mine own Brother Edward to possess his Crown, and
subtily caused all the Danes in one general banquet to be slain,


Edricus. And I murdered my King Edmond Iron-sides.


O. Crom. Did not I go before you all? I can scarce number the Catalogue of my
murders plots and treacheries; I murdered Hewet, Love, Slingsby, and many
more, besides I causd Sindercomb to be poysond, and to clear my pretended
innocence laid it on himself. And I gave Tithes to the Priests to make all
amends. I always stool a Goose and stuck down a Feather. Nay rather then leave
my old Trade of Murder, I hanged many of my ow Soldiers, as I did a Drummer in
Ireland, for taking a Mutton from the enemy, and two at Edinburgh in Scotland.


Reynolds. And I (through thy persuasion after I had swore fealty) murdered
Thompson and many of the Burfordians.


Pride. And I because the blood of men could not satisfy me murdered the
harmless Bears on the Bankside.


Mris Rump. And I think thou art well requited?


Pride. Indeed I find so for I did not only murder the Bears, but pinch the
poor of measure while on earth, but have it large enough in Hell.


Mris. Rump. I and good reason too, you have your firing free Noble Colonel.


Pride. I but though firing be cheap, water is dear, there is never a
Tankard-bearer in Hell; therefore I have little hope of help.


Cain. What pratling's here? Did not I teach you all to murder?

Enter Mulciber. I brought all these to my Forge, and I think they have acted
their parts. Exit omnes.
Mrs. Rump. And what have you all done that I have not been forward in, I have
destroyed all Laws, Break Oaths, Covenants, committed, Sacrilege, murders,
Plunderings, and would have done more, had not I been prevented, by a company
of Secluded Malignants of my own creating. And shall not I be received to sit
in Council among you.


Devils Arse. I But first setting by all Ceremonies, Mrs. Rump, is not my name
more Ancient, and I more Honorable, art not thou a brat of my own Hatching?


Mrs. Rump. No, I come of noble blood; which I have gained by noble murder,
the Scarlet die of which lies still in my stained Conscience; But yet not thy
Brat.


Devils Arse. Grim fiend thou lyests for the very substance of thy deformed
shape, was framed in Hell, by Mulciber Blacksmith, who Anvell'd thee out of my
horrid, Black, and putrifi'd, Excrements.


Mr. Rum. I charge thee be gone, If not I shall force thee to an Oath of
Abjuration, and if that be performed thou may by thy perjury become one of my
Counsel.


Devils Arsr. What do thou intend to swallow up my blood as thou did the
blood of thy Sovereign Lord and King?


Mrs. Rump. I do so, my delights in nothing more then Martyrings Kings, and to
have my hands smoking in the blood of Princes; Oh the Son of him, who was the
sacrifice of my youth! his escape is the chiefest of my torment, who now is
like to be advanced to my destruction.


Devils Arse. Thou Damned Hedgehock, what repent now its too late for that. Thou
may now travel with thy late born Babe of Reformation at thy back in a
blancket like an old Irish Bennoot: but whose there Mulciber.


Enter Mulciber. I come, I come, I come, What Is here to be done, a piece of my
own work, I Will finish it? come away thou lousy Rump, now will I have thee to my
Anvel; and beat thee into a better form that thou may seem some what.


Mrs. Rump. Oh good Sir, where shall I go?


Mulcib. To Hell the fittest place for thee, Earth is not to be pestered up
with such, combersome bundles of baseness, I shall Anvill the into some better
form quickly.


Mrs. Rump: Will no dungeon serve turn, but that ugly loathsome and miserable
place of torment?


Devils Arse. No place but one?


Mrs. Rump. What place do thou mean.


Dev. Arse. I mean that stinking poisonous place called the I Will of Jaqueses,
where the black horrid excrements of all sinners may Float upon thy loathsome
Soul, and smother thy loathsome Brat of cursed, Usurping and Tyrrannical
Reformation to Eternity, as a Revenge on thee for thy cruelty committed on thy
Right and Lawful Sovereign Lord the King.


Whilst thus he made an end of speaking Mrs. Rump (much tortured in conscience)
with her ugly Deformed, Monstrous, and horrid Brat without a head, who had feet
like a Bear, and bag at the Belly full of false Oaths, Papers, and
Engagements, being more Ar -- then Body, with a gashly countenance gave a
terrible screek, and departed the world in a flash of Lightning, and being
converted to a stinking vapor vanished away, and was no more heard of since,
whereby her Funeral could not be solemnized. EPILOGUE.
YOu that have seen this stinking Lump of Earth,
Conceal her Name, since her prodigious Birth
Is not worth minding, for her fatal fall
Was great, I, and her Virtues none at all;
She Is not worth eating boyld or roast at Supper,
Who had her Birth and Name from Plutos Crupper.
Of's very Excrements, you all may tell
By Mulciber her Corpse was forgd in Hell.
Let all Spectators now together jump
Upon this noisome, beastly, stinking Rump,
And say, here lies interred a clod of Clay,
Who killd her King, her God and Soul away,
She sold, and that for Nasty Pelf,
But now Old Bawd she is defunct her self.
Since she is dead and gone good People all
Lament in Sack at this her Funeral.
Cursd be the Divils Ar -- from whence did Spring
This hellish Rump, to Murder Charles Our King:
Yet by his Son we shall true Peace enjoy
Singing with Eccoes loud Vive Le Roy.
LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Microcosmus. 1660.


