AN ANSWER TO NINE ARGUMENTS: Written by T. B.

WHEREIN IS PLAINLY FROM THE SCRIPTURES showed, the weakness of his
Arguments, whereby he undertakes to prove both the Church and Ministry of
England true; as likewise describing the nature and properties of a true Church
and Ministry.

Written long since by that faithful Servant of God and his Country, John
Lilburne Leiftenant Collonell: And now published for further good, by a well
willer to Him and the Truth.

Gal. 4.17. They zealously affect you, but not well: they would exclude you,
that you might affect them. 1 John 4.1. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but
try the Spirits, whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone
out into the world. LONDON.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1645.

JOHN LILBURNE. AETAT: SVAE 23. Ano 1641.
G: Glo: fecit.
portrait of John Lilburne Gaze not upon this shadow that is vain,
But rather raise thy thoughts a higher strain,
To GOD (I mean) who set this young man free,
And in like straits can eke deliver thee.


To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe providence of God bringing to my hands this ensuing Matter, the Author of
which thou well know, if thou be not a stranger in Israel, is famous in
Sufferings both for the cause of Christ in holding him forth to be the only
King, and Lawgiver of his Church, against that Prelaticall faction which stood
in opposition to the same, as likewise in standing to defend the privileges of
the Kingdom, whereof he is a member, with his liberty, estate, and life, as
counting nothing dear to himself, that he might render himself faithful to
Christ, in giving to him that which was his due, and unblameable to Caesar to
give unto him that which is his, resolving by the strength of Christ, that
although others that have seemed to suffer for Christ, should deny him, and
plead for Baal, yet to stand in his integrity, my self knowing him to be the
same that he was standing a member of such a Church which he maintains to be
the only spouse of Jesus Christ, I thought good to publish to thy vow, that
which long since was written by him to that end, when he was in the depth of
his sorrows, or rather sufferings, close prisoner in Irons in the Fleet, is
being an Answer to some, Arguments, which by an Opposite to the truth were then
written, wherein is unmasked those unsound grounds, by which a false church and
ministry is pleaded for, as likewise describing from the Authority of the
Scriptures the nature and properties both of true church and ministry.

And if it should be Objected by any, that what is here published, is not
useful to us, the Prelates being now thrown down, and a Reformation like to be
established agreeable to the Word of God.

To which Answer may be made, that if it were so, surely it would put an end to
all contest of this nature. For what is that Reformation the Word holds out,
but only the men should not Lord it over each others consciences, but to serve
each other in love, and labor in the use of those means God has appointed to
inform one an other, as knowing it is the work of the Lord Jesus alone, as to
bring Souls to himself, so also to enlighten Souls in the knowledge of the
truth, as it pleases him, and not men by banishments, Chains, or
imprisonments to do it, as the Prelates have done, and the Presbyters in
Scotland at this day do: But such a Reformation except God by a mighty hand
interpose is like to be no other then a scourge to the States, and as contrary
to truth in the pure nature of it as the other, (although it have wore
appearance of truth) which will he plainly manifested to those whose eyes the
Lord shall open, to help to see and ezamine what in this ensuing Discourse is
said, there be two great evils, which frequently are apt to beare-sway in the
hearts of those that profess Religion which is spiritual sluggishnes, which
is manifested in living upon other men's light, taking all for Gospel which
Learned men say, without trial, ( witness Mr. Enoch Gray, who has forsaken
the truth to embace this present world) and that great God of the World self
love, that cup of gold in the hand of the whore, is so suitable to self, that
rather then that shall be for gone, all the glory of Jesus Christ shall be
trampled under feet by them: And in my observa^ion I have perceived three sorts
of men glued to those evils.

The first is carnal Professors, that can content themselves with a form of
godliness, and therefore takes all for gould that glisters,

The other two are Clergy men and Lawyers, who are filled with self love,
that like Herod and Pilate they both join together against Christ and his pure
ways, and what should be the reason, that those two should cleave so fast
together to go hand in hand to fight against Christ, truly I know not, unless
they fear that if the truth of Christ take place alone, that it will bring
such a luster, with it, as to appear so perspicuous and clear upon the faces
of all men, as thereby to root the one out of their Calling, and the other out
of their Tithes, and thereby spoil all their glory and greatness at one blow;
and I hope the wisdom of this present Parliament will see, that such as that,
which now goes by oppression into their purses, may be turned to make up the
Kingdoms losses, which may with much ease be done, if they consult with God
and their neighbor Country, (the Sates of Holland:) but I shall leave that to
their wisdoms, and thee in thee perusal of this to the blessing of the most
High, and if there be any thing in it that savours of harshnes to thee, let it
be looked at by thee as expressions of Resolution rather, knowing that such a
spirit has been still manifest by him both in the cause of God and his
Country: And therefore I shall say no more, but rest

Thine in all services of love to his power, M. N.

AN ANSWER TO NINE ARGUMENTS of T. B.
LOVING FRIEND
TO satisfy your earnest desire to me, I have put pen to paper, to answer
the ungrounded Arguments of your Friend, which you communicated unto me; but to
tell you my Judgment of them, in few words: They are of such Insufficiency, and
so ungroundedly compiled, without all Authority of holy Scripture; that I do
assure you, if it had not been my promise to you to reply unto them, I should
not once more have spent my precious Time and Pains in a second view of them:
For in the laying down of nine Arguments, he has not one Portion of Gods word
to prove them all, but only one; and that is nothing pertinent to his purpose:
but runs on most deceitfully to prove Logic by Logic. Truly, I am afraid
he is too near of kin to the Prelate of Canterbury and Pope of Lambeth, and
the rest of his brother Bishops, that passed Censure upon that Worthy man Dr.
Bastwicke at his Censure in the High Commission Court, who there Blasphemously
affirmed, that the Scripture is the Refuge of all Heretics and Sismatiques,
as you may read at large in the Tenth and Eleventh Page of his Answer to Sr.
John Banks his Information: and I believe your Friend that gave you these
Arguments thinks so too, or else he would have proved that which he had
undertaken; by the Authority of the Sacred Word of God. But Antichrists Owls
love and desire Darkness, and cannot endure to bring their sayings and actions
to the unerring Touchstone of the Holy Scripture, and there to try them,
whether they be dross or Gold, for he that does, or says evil hates (...)
Devils Institution, and Invention, with which the Limbs of the Beasts Kingdom
have for many hundred years together, and still do fight against the truth
of God, and the Kingdom and Scepter of the Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I
exhort you, and all those that desire to fear God and walk in his wais, and
love the Salvation of their own Souls, to take heed of such an Erroneous
Sophister, as your supposed Friend is, that gave you these Arguments. But
because I hear he does brag and boast, that none of the Separation dare come
to particulars, but only run upon generals; therefore to prove him a falsifier
of the known truth, and also a liar; I leave my general speech to you, and
come to the unfolding and ripping up every particular in all his Arguments.

Therefore to my Opposite, I direct my speech. And in the first place you say,
You have sent her (your Friend) those Arguments which do prove your Mother the
Church of England to be a true Mother.

To which I answer, she is a true Whorish Mother, and you are one of her
Base-begotten and Bastardly Children, for you know a Whore is a woman as truly
as a true wife, and she may have Children as proportionable as the Children of
a true wife; yet this does not prove her Children which are Base-begotten are
true-begotten Children because they have all the parts and Limbs of Children
that are begotten in a true married Estate and condition: even so say I, the
Church of England, neither is, nor never was truly married; joined, or united
to Jesus Christ, in that Espousall bond which his true Churches are and ought
to be: but is one of Antichrists National, Whorish Churches, or Cities spoken
of Rev. 16.19. united, joined, knit to the Pope of Lambeth, as Head and Husband
thereof; being substitute to the Pope of Rome, from whom he has received his
Arch-Episcopall Power, and Authority, as you may read in the beginning of
Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, and in the last Page of Francis Masons Epistle
Dedicatory to George Abbot: William Lauds Predicessour, in his book of
Bishops, Priests, Deacons.

Again, you confess the Church of England is a Scratched and Deformed Mother,
in some respects which you could wish were reformed, and removed from her. To
which I reply, she is a Whorish Mother, and that is Deformity enough; for
though a Whore be never so personable, and Complete a Woman in all outward
respects, yet if she be a Whore, there is Deformity enough in that alone, to
spoil all her personal Comeliness and parts. But it is much you will confess
your Mother is Scratched and deformed in some respects, seeing in your ensuing
Arguments you say, you have the true matter of a Church, and true Form, true
Salvation, true Religion, and true Worship: but if you have all these, it is a
wonder to me, wherein her Deformity can be; therefore I pray you the next time
nominate, and particular your Mothers Deformities, that I may know them by your
own confession. But put the case I should deny (as justly I may) that you have
neither true matter, true Form of a visible Church, nor true Religion, nor
true Worship: I doubt I should so perplex you to prove it, that all your
Sophistical, decievable, Logisticall, Philosophical Arguments would be to
scant to make it good: but I let it alone in this place, and refer it to the
ensuing discourse, where it will come in more pertinent.

But if you could wish your Mothers Deformities were removed, then, why do you
not tell her of them? and labor to discover them unto her, that so her
Deformed Face may be made strait and Comely? truly in my judgment you are but a
very unnatural and unloving son, that sees your Mothers Deformities, and
wishes they were removed from her, and yet will not strive to your utmost (as
is your duty) to purge her from them that she may be, instead of a deformed
Mother, a wholl and beutiful Mother.

Again, in the Third place you say, That your Labor may be effectual to your
Friend, you would have her to observe these five things.

1 Rightly to apprehend the truth of your Arguments. 2 To hold her thoughts
largely upon them. 3 To strive to believe them. 4 That she should strive to
remember the danger that will follow the neglect of them. 5 That she should go
to God by Prayer to make them effectual to her, for her good.
For the answearing of which, in the first place, You would have her rightly to
apprehend the truth of your Arguments. But how can she apprehend truth in
those Arguments that have nothing but falsity in them, as by Gods assistance I
shall make it appear in my ensuing discource, and if she should apprehend the
truth of them indeed, she may justly say thus much of them, that they are all
Sophistry and ungrounded Arguments, being destitute of any Authority from the
holy Scriptures.

2. In the Second place, You would have her hold her thoughts largly upon them.
Truly if she should do so, she should exceedingly wrong her own Soull, for
will you have her put Confidence in the broken Reeds of Egypt? which will
pierce and run into her hand when she most trusts to them? but such are all
your Arguments, being no better then Bulrushes which the Two-edged Sword of
Gods Word, at one blow will cut them all in pieces: and if she have no better
Weapons to defend her felfe with, then these, she may come to beundon by them,
by being more strenghtened and confirmed in Error and so lie open and liable
unto Gods heavy Judgments, Plagues and Vengence, which he has threatened to
pour down in abundance upon all those that worship the Beast. Rev. 14.9.10.
and this is the Beast that she shall get by keeping her thoughts largely upon
them: and therefore her safest course is to compare them with the infallible
Word of God, by which she shall see it is her duty to keep her thoughts upon
them as little as she can, least she pay too dear for her so doing Rev. 19.20.

3. In the third place, You would have her to believe them. I pray tell me
whether you have the Spirit of God infallibly? that you cannot err in that
which you say: that you would have her so confidently to believe your
Arguments, without any proof unto them from the Authority of the Word of God,
which is the only binder of the Conscience. Indeed she has but a blind Guide
of you, and an ignorant Leader, and if she follow your guiding and leading, you
will lead her into more Rebellion against Jesus Christ his Scepter and
Kingdom; and so bring misery enough upon her, for Christ has threatened to
slay all those his enemies, which will not have him to rule over them, Luke
12.21. and if he dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses, that rejected
Moses Law, of how much sorer punishment think you shall they be worthy of,
that reject the commandments of Jesus Christ? as both she and you do for the
present: therefore, let her look to it, and take heed of giving to much credit
to your Heretical and Erroneous sayings, for are the things that you say of
more authority then the sayings of Christ himself, or his Apostles, or the
Angels of heaven, that she must believe them before by the divine Scripture
you have proved them? truly you take more Authority upon you then Christ would
do, for he would not have the Jews to believe him upon his bare sayings, but
the Scripture that did bear witness of him Joh. 8.17.18. It is written in your
Law (says he) that the Testimony of two men is true, non (says Christ) I am
one that bear witness of my self, and my Father that sent me bears witness
of me. So that you see Christ would not have the Jews to believe him upon his
bare sayings only, but he brings his Father and the holy Scripture to bear
witness what he is, and then commands them to believe him. Also Paull would
not have the Galathians to believe either him or an Angel from Heaven, but to
hold them accursed if they bring any thing contrary to the Scripture Chap 1.19.
but you would have your Friend to believe your Arguments, and yet does not
bring two Portions of Scripture to prove them all: therefore I again advise
her neither to believe you nor your sayings, because there is no light of
truth in you, seeing that you go not to the Law and the Testimony to prove
that you say, as you ought and should do, Esaias. 8.20. therefore she is bound to
reject your Arguments, as Ungrounded, Antichristian, and Erroneous, and to
Search the Scripture her self, for that is it that truly testifies of Christ,
and of his ways. Joh. 5.39.

4 You would have her to remember the danger that will follow upon the neglect
of them. Your saying were very good if it were grounded upon the word of God
but seeing (as I have already, and will more fully make it appear) they are
not, I would have her remember the danger that will follow the observation of
them, which will be very great, and terrible, for the things that you would
have her to give Ear unto, will teach her to rebel against the voice of God
himself, who has commanded all his faithful people and servants, to give
Ear to Christ only, and alone, in all things that pertain to life and
Salvation, and his Worship and Service. Act. 3.22.23. For Moses truly said unto
the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
Brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you: and it shall come to pass, that every Soull that will not hear
that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People. So you see what Doom
the Scripture says will befall all those that will not give Ear, nor stoop
unto all the Laws of Christ, as well for the governing of his Church, as the
Salvation of their Souls: for Jesus Christ has been as faithful yea more
faithful in his House, then Moses was in his, under the Law. Hebr. 3. who was
strictly tied to make all things according to the pattern showed him in the
Mount: yea, even to the very Pinnes of the Tabernacle. Exodus 25.9.40. and
26.30. and 27.9. Which Moses caused accordingly exactly to be made, and
accomplished. Ex. 30.43. and this Moses did but as a servant but Jesus Christ
was faithful in all things that pertains to the welfare of his Churrch under
the Gospel, as a son: and none may add or defract from that which he has
done, and left in his last Will and Testament: but now if she should give Fare
to your Grounds, she should declare and say in her actions, that Jesus Christ
has not been so faithful in his house, or Church, as Moses was in his; which
were to tell the Spirit of God he lies, therefore let her look to the danger
that will follow her keeping those things which you would have her to observe.

5 In the fifth and last place, You would have her to go to God by Prayer to
make them Effectual to her, for her good: but if she should do so, she should
put up an unacceptable and sinful prayer, for the prayer that any puts up to
him for the keeping and confirming them in their Errors, is detestable and
Odious to him; but those things that you would have her to go to God for, that
they might be Effectual for her good; are gross Errors, and therefore I
affirm it is her sin, if either she pray to be kept in them, or do not
forthwith reject them.

Well, but now to come to grapple with your strong Arguments, and the first of
them is thus framed.

That People or Nation that is daily within the voice and call of God, calling
them to Repentance, that so they may be saved, that same is a true visible
Church.

But the People (generally) of England are within the voice of God, calling
upon them to repent, and believe; that so they may be saved.

Therefore the Church of England is a true visible Church.

Acts. 2.41.47. and not of people uncalled to God, and the knowledge of his
truth Act. 2.30.5.13. And this I will (by the strenght of God) fully prove by
and by, and therefore if the rest of your Arguments be no stronger then this,
they will prove no stronger to bind your opposers, then the Philistims flaxen
Cords were to bind Sampson, who when he had a mind to be loosed from them, they
became as flax burnt with fire: and just such are your Arguments, no more able
to hold off and keep back the truth from being set at Liberty, then
Dellilahs green Withes with which she tied Sampson were able to keep him
bound that his Enemies might cease upon him; for he broke them as a Thread of
Tow is broken when it touches the fire, Judge. 16. 9. But now to the matter. I
absolutely deny your Argument.

And first for your Major. I cannot but express my Sorrow for you, to see you,
who are so mighty a Champian as you boast your self to be, to reason so
shallowly and ungroundedly, for if your Argument be true, then all the Nations
under Heaven are true visible Churches of Christ, for it is not possible that
the Heathenest Nation in the World should run out of Gods Voice and Call.
Psalm. 139.7.8.9. For (says David) If I ascend up into Heaven thou art there if
I make my Bed in Hell behold thou art there, if I take the Wings of the
Morning, and dwell in the uttermost part of the Sea, even there shall thy hand
lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me, if I say surely the darkness shall
cover me, even the night shall be light about me, yea, the darkness hides not
from thee, but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both
alike to thee. And also see Amos. 9.1.2.3. Where you may also read that no
place can hide a people from Gods presence or call; so that I say no place can
exempt a people from Gods voice, but wheresoever they are he can find them out,
and by his Judgments laid upon a Nation or Peeple, whether they be Pagans,
Heathens and Infidels that professedly serve and worship Idols, and nothing
else: or whether they be a Nation of seeming Christians (as England is no more)
like the Samaritanes that profess the Worship of the true God, and yet serve
their Idols. 2. King. 17.32.33. yet take them in which sense you will, I say
they are within the Voice and call of God, and by his Judgments and Plagues
laid upon them for their sins, he calls them to Repentance that so they might
not perish, but be saved: as the Apostle Paull in the first of the Romans does
largly prove. Verse. 18.19, and so forward. So that by your Argment, all the
Nations under Heaven are visible Churches of Christ, for I thus frame my
Argument according to your own grounds.

All the Nations of the Earth that are within the Voice and call of God,
calling them to Faith and Repentance that so they may be saved are true
Churches.

But all the Pagan and Heathen Notions in the World are within the Voice and
call of God, as I have already proved.

Ergo. They are true visible Churches.

Deny any part of the Argument if you can, and prove against it.

But for the proof of your Argument you cite. Math. 20.16. where it is said,
Many are called, but few chosen. the first part of the words, Many are called,
(you say but do not prove) that we are to understand them of the visible
Church, which are called to the outward preaching of the word: to which I
answer, and say, you are not an Oracle of God that we must believe your
sayings without ground, for you bring no proof for what you say, but your own
bare Affirmations, but if you will be an Oraclo, it is but a lying Oracle, and
not of Gods: you say they are called to the outward preaching of the Word, it
seems to me that you will have all the people in a Nation, that are within
Gods call to be Preachers (and then what shall become of all your Priests? for
if this be not your meaning, I know not what you drive at, but for that place
of Scripture many are called, but few are chosen, I understand it thus, many
there was that heard the Word of God, and seemingly, professed it, as they that
came to John's Baptism, and Herod that reformed many things, and those many
great multitudes that Christ preached unto, many of which made an outward
profession of him for a time, but it was but for the loaves, as he himself
does witness, John 6.26.27. so here are many called to the outward profession
of, the Gospel, but says the Text few are chosen, that is to say, ehough
there be many that make a formal profession of Christ, and have the ouiside of
Christianity, yet few are they that are chosen, either to Christ's glorious
kingdom with his father, or are chosen and admitted as visible members and
Subjects in his visible Church, or Kingdom, which in Scripture has many and
diverse names, as, Syon, Jerusalem, his holy Mountain, the Lords holy place,
the kingdom of Heaven, Psalm. 54.7.147.12. Fsa 62.6.65.9.11. Psalm.
68.17.33.46.4. Mat. 20.1. Rev. 21.1.10. this exposition of the place I plainly
prove from Christ's preaching to so many as he did, the most of which for a time
did outwardly prosesse him, yet all those great multitudes that he preached
unto, and wrought Miracles amongst at his death there was but an hundred and
twenty that entered into communion to worship him in a visible Church, Acts
1.15. and in the second of the Acts Peter preached to a great multitude of
people yet that multitude were not members of a true visible Church, neither
before he preached to them, nor after, but only so many of them as declared and
manifested faith which were to the Number of three Thousand, and they were
added or joined to the Church, and the Apostle commands them to save or
separate themselves from the rest of the multitude which he preached unto,
seeing they did not peleeve, nor were never the better for his preaching:
saying, Save your selves from these untoward Generatron. Verse. 40.41. For the
Lord would not have them to join Riffe Raffe and all sorts of people to the
Church, to whom the Word was preached, but only those that declared the work
of Grace to be wrought in their hearts, therefore the Spirit of God says The
Lord added to the Church daily, such as should be saved.

Now though I grant the Kingdom of England is within the Voice and call of
God, calling the people thereof to Repentance, that so they may be saved, yet I
grant no more then what all the Nations under Heaven are, therefore you cannot
conclude from this Ground that the Church of England is a true Church of Christ
seeing the Whole Nation, good or bad, wicked or righteous, godly or ungodly, have
all one and the same Privilege, by virtue of their being professed Membees of
your Chapter and therefore from that which has been said, I frame this Argument.

That the true visible Church of Christ under the Gospel, does not consist of
all sorts and kinds of people to whom the word of God is preached, but only to
such persons, who by their outward Conversation may be judged to be true
Believers. Esaias. 4.3.35.8.9.10.51.11. Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.7. Rev. 22.14.

But the Church of England is not made up, nor does not consist of true
Believers, that is to say Saints by calling and practice, but of all sorts and
kinds of wicked persons, as Witches, Sorcerers, Whoremungers, Drunkards
Idolaters, Swearers, Blasphemers and all sorts of Profane, Lewd and Wicked
livers.

Ergo, It is no true Church of Christ, but a false and Antichristian Church of
Antichrists, 2. Cor. 6.9.10. Rev. 9.20.21. and 13.8.16.17. and 21.27. and 22.15.

Both the Proposition and Assumption, I have already strongly proved by the
Authority of the Scripture. and deny either of them, and prove against them, if
you be able.

Again, your second Argument to prove the Church of England a true Church is
this. That Ministry which does accomplish the same and which the Ministry of
the Apostles did, must needs be a true Ministry. But the Ministry of the Church
of England does accomplish the same ends that the Apostles Ministry did,
namely conversion and confirmation. Therefore the Ministry of the Church of
England must needs be true.

But to prove your Argument, you bring not one Place of Scripture but take that
for granted which I confidently think neither you nor none in the Chapter of Engl.
are ever able to prove, therefore I absolutely and in every respect deny your
Arg. and two manner of ways prove against it. 1. I will prove that if the
Ministry in the Chapter of Engl. did accomplish the same ends that the Ministry of
the Apostles did, yet for all that, that is not sufficient to prove it a true
Ministry; for to judge the cause by the effect is a Leaden and false Rule. 2. I
will prove that the Ministry in Engl. does not accomplish the same ends that
the Ministry of the Apostls did, and therefore by your own Arg. is no true
Ministry.

Now for the first of these which answers the Major of your Arg. I say it has
been and still may be possible, for a man to accomplish the same ends that you
here speak of, namely to be an Instrument to bring Gods people to the
manifestation of Faith, and also to build them up, and yet be no true Officer
or Minister in the Chapter of God, and I prove it out of the Acts of the Apostles
in which we read that when the Chapter began to increase, Saul raised a great
persecution against it upon which, all the brethren viz. the members of the Chapter
were scattered abroad, and they went up and down preaching the word Act 8.3.
but the Apostles themselves they stayed still at Jerusalem. Verse. 1. Now all
those that were scatterd abroad were not true Official Ministers, for they
were but Laymen according to your distinction in the Church of England, yet
diverse of them who were no true Officers, but Brethren, Disciples, or private
men as you call them, yet they preached the Word to the Gentiles there and
begot by their preaching maany of them to the Faith, for the Text says. The
hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number of them believed, and then
came Barnabas from Jeausalem, who was yet no true Officer in the Church of God,
being as yet uncalled to his Apostleship, and he confirmed and strengthened,
and more fully built them up in the Faith of Christ and in the Knowledge of the
ways of God. Also Aquilah, and his wife Priscilla did further instruct and
build up that Eloquent man Apollos. Act. 18.26. Also there were certain women
that labored with Paull in the Gospel. Phil. 4.3.

So that here you see, and I have proved it, that people may be called to the
manifesttaion of Eaith, and further built up by those that are no true Officers
or Ministers in the Church of Chirst: but if your Argument were true then it
would follow that all those men, yea and the women too were true Officers and
Ministers in the Church of Christ, because they were Instruments of bringing
Gods people to the manifestation of Faith, and further built them up, but your
Argument is rotten and unsound, and falls here flat to the ground, and
therefore if I should grant it (which I do not) that your Ministers by their
Ministry did accomplish the same ends, that the Apostles by their Ministry did,
yet this would not be sufficient to prove them true Officers or Ministers, for
the excecution of an Office does not prove an Officer but only a true and
lawful call into the Office, which all your Priests and Minnisters in England
want, and therefore are no true Officers, nor no true Ministers of Jesus
Christ. For you know that a King has many in his Kingdom besides himself,
that do those actions and administer those administrations that is peculiar to
him alone to do and administer, unless they were Authorized by virtue of a
power given and derived from him to do such actions without a lawful Authority
given and received from him, they might loose their lives for the doing of
them: but now if your Argument were true, that all those men that are means,
or Instrumensts to bring Gods People to the manifestation of Faith, and
obedience to the Law and will of Christ, were true Officers and Ministers of
Christ, it would follow by the same Argument, that all those men that do the
actions of a King, or accomplish the same ends, that Kings by their actions do
accomplish, are true Kings but so to conclude in England is little better then
High Treason: Therefore your Argument is erroneous, and false, and has not
validity in it: for if so be you will have their Administrations to prove the
lawfulness of their Office, then I pray you, wherein does the execution of
their Office consist? for an Office and the execution of it are two distinct
things: for a man by virtue of being instated into the Office of a Judge though
he never live to execute any of those acttions, or Administrations that belong
to his place, or Office: but he must first receive power to sit in Court of
Judicature, before he dare take upon to fit there as Judge; and when he has
receiced power from the King by virtue of which he is instated into his Office,
and does become an Officer, then does he lawfully sit in Court of Judicature,
and condemns fellons and guilty persons, and acquit the innocent, and does
there pass sentence according to the Laws, for the King under whom he is a
Judge: But now if this Judge should usurp his place, and come into it by
virtue of a false Authority, and then condemn the Kings Subjects to death,
though they be theives and malefactors, yet he would be in danger of loosing
his life for all that, though he do the act and actions that belong to a true
Judge to do, because he had no lawful Authority from the King so to do: for
it is the Kings Authority placed upon a man, that does make that person, to be
an other kind of person then before he was; for before he had received this
power he was but a private man, but now he is an other kind of man; namely, a a
public person, in Office, and Authority, and may lawfully do those actions
now, which if he should have done before would have cost him his life: Even so
is it with the Ministers and Officers which Jesus Christ has instituted in his
New Testament, and left personally to officiate in his Church; they must be
members of an incorporated or constituted City, body, or visible Church, and
then if the Church find any amongst themselves fitted, or qualified according
to those gifts, and qualifications which the Apostle lays down in the first
of Timothy the 3. and 5. chapters, and the first or Titus: then the Church has
authority to choose them for her Officers, Number. 8.9.10. Ezeck. 33.2. Acts
1.23.6.3.5. and 14.24. but though they be never so fitted, guifted, and
qualified, yet they are not to take upon them to officiate in the Church of
God, by virtue of an Office, before they have a true and lawful Call from the
Church, who only and alone has power from Christ, her only King and Head to
instate them into that Office, and whereas before they were but members or
private men, (as you in the Church of England call them) and could not lawfully
do those actions that belong to a true Minister, or Officer in the Church of
God to do, yet now they may do them upon grounded grounds, for it is only
their lawful Call, into their Office that puts a distinction betwixt them, and
the other members, or Brethren of the Church, as is plain out of the first of
the Acts, where Joseph and Matthias were by the Apostles and Brethren set a
part for the Apostleship, and Joseph for any thing I know was as well fitted
for the Office as Matthias was, for the Church was not able to put a difference
betwixt them, which was the more fit, but yet for all this they were not both
Apostles, but only Matthias who was lawfully chosen, and immediately called by
God into the Office, and then those actions that he did and Adminstrations that
he administered, was the execution of his Office, so that it any should have
questioned him whether he was an Apostle or no, he would not run to the
Administration or Execution of his Office to prove himself a true Apostle, but
he would go to his Call into his Office which was from God, and which gave him
a being in his Office, and power to Officiate and do those actions that he
did: and though he had nev^^ lived to have executed any of those actions that
belonged to his Office, yet he had been a true Apostle for all thae; by virtue
of his Call into his Apostleship. So that I say to you of your Ministers, it is
not sufficient for them when they tree questioned about their Calling, and put
upon it to prove it, whether it be from God or the Devil (the one of which it
must needs be) to run to the Execution and Administration of their Office, to
prove the lawfullnesse of their standings in their Office; but they should go
to the power and Authority that instituted them into their Office of
Priesthood, and prove it whether it be true or no, which if they cannot do: I
say they are all false and Antichristain Officers and Ministers, which all Gods
people are bound in Conscience to detest as the Devil, and oppose to the
utmost of their power, and strength, and therefore I put you upon it to prove
(if you can) the lawfulnes of their standing, for do you think that they
which are Antichrists Ministers have a greater priveledge of exempion from
proving the lawfulnes of their Calling and Office, when they are questioned,
then either that great Prophet Jihn the Baptist, or Josus Christ the son of
God, and his Apostles had? truly I see no Ground nor Reason for it, unless you
will say their bare word is of greater Authority then the words of the Eternal
Son of God, and his Apostles.

For first of all, John the Baptist when he was questioned by the Scribes and
Pharisees what he was, he does not say It is sufficient that I do the work
of a Prophet, and therefore you need not nor have noe ground to question me any
further about my Authority: no he knew such an Answer would not serve their
turn, and therefore when they ask him what he was, he confessed that he was
not the Christ, what then art thou? say they to him: art thou Elias? and he
says I am not, who then art thou? he said I am the voice of one caying in the
Wilderness make straight the way of the Lord as says the Prophet Esaias as Joh.
1.19.20. and so forward.

So you see John brings Authority from the Scripture to prove his Office, and
does not run as your Priests do to the Administration or Execution of his
Office, to prove his Office, or the lawfulness of his standing in it. Also
Christ himself when he was questioned by the Jews about his miracles, and
those great works which he wrought, by virtue of what authority he did them,
he answers, and says, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not
true, and therefore he brings his Father, and John the Baptist, and the holy
Scripture to bear witness of him, that he did not take up his authority that he
exercised of himself, neither did he come unto them of his own head and in
his own name, but brings the voice of his Father, and the authority of the
Word, to bear witness that he was sent of God, and prophesied of old to be the
Messiah, John 5.31.32.37.46. and 8.17.18. Also the Apostle Paul when he was
questioned by his enemies about his authority, or the lawfulnes of his office,
he goes unto his Call into his office, and that authority that placed him in
it, and by that proves, that he took not that authority that he exercised upon
him without good grounds, but had it placed upon him by Jesus Christ himself,
Acts 22.10.11. and so forward. Also when he was questioned by the false
Apostles at Corinth and Galatia about his authority, he answers for himself,
that he was an Apostle, and was free, for I have (says he seen Jesus Christ)
who placed me in my office, and by his authority gave me my Apostleship, and
called me by his voice thereunto, so that my authority, and calling is not from
men (as you false Apostles are, nor by men, (as the Ordinary Officers of the
Church are, who are called by the Church, who has authority from God so to
do) but immediately from Jesus Christ our Lord, as all his true Apostels are,
1 Cor. 9.1. Gal. 1.1. So that you see Paul proved he was an Apostle, and a true
officer of Jesus Christ, before ever he preached his Gospel, and before ever
he was an instrument to bring any to the knowledge and obedience of the truth,
and before ever the Corinthes became (being begot by his Ministry) the Seal
of his Apostleship. And does John Baptist, Christ, and his Apostles whenever
they are questioned about their authority by their opposers, prove their
calling into their office, by virtue of which they do officiate, and
administer those administrations they administer? and think your Ministers
those Priests and Deacons of Antichrist to have more exemption then Christ or
his Apostles had? and therefore if they be ministers of Christ (as they say
they are) I put you and them upon it to prove their calling and office from
him, that they were instated into their Ministry by virtue of his power and
Laws: which he has left recorded in his last Will and Testament for the
bodies of his particular visible Churches to elect, choose, and ordain their
own Officers: either let them do this, or else I say, and will against them
all maintain it, that they are Antichrists Ministers, set in by the power of
Satan in the Kingdom of the seven headed, and ten horned Beast in direct
opposition, and professed hatred against the Kingdom and Septer of Jesus
Christ the eternal S^n of God, for they are but false Prophets, false She
Pheards, and false Teachers, like those in Jeremiahs time, that run before
ever God sent them, and say they are of his sending, when as indeed thiy lie,
Jer. 14.14. and 23.21.32 Ezeck. 18.6.7. for he never sent any of them, Rev.
9.3. Therefore do you, and all those that are under their Jurisdiction look
to it, as they and you love your own souls: for the Lord has not only
threatened to plague false Prophets, false Ministers, and false sheepheards, but
also all those that give care and submit unto them, and are seduced by them,
Esa 9.16. Jer. 14.15.16. and 23.15.16.34.39. and 27.15. and 29.8.9.18. Ezeck.
13.8.9.10. So that it is not enough for a man that takes upon him to be a
Prophet, and a Shepherd to come in the name of the Lord, and do part of
those things which a true Prophet, and Shepherd of the Lord does; but first
of all he must prove his Authority, and that he is of the Lords sending, else
none of Christ's Sheep are to give ear unto him, John 10. the beginning; for
Christ has bid them beware of such, seeing many of them were, and still a^e to
come abroad into the World, coming in such a foul deceiving flattering way,
that they should deceive if it were possible the very Elect, Mat. 7.15. and
24.11.24. Mar. 13.22.23. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 J^hn. 4.1. and the reason wherefore they
should beware of them, and try, and examine their Authority from whence it is,
as the Church of ^^^^esus did, for which she is highly commended, Rev. 22. is
because that false Apostles, and false ministers, all of them are deceitful
workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ and ministers of
righteousness. Therefore all Gods people had need exceedingly to labor for
true knowledge and understanding is it is their duty, that so they may be able
to try, and know false Ministers, and Sheepeards from true ones, least their
souls run upon the Rocks, and so be in great danger of suffering shipwrake in
submitting and giving ^eare unto those Ministers, and Preachers that never were
of the Lords sending, nor never received their errand from him in the number of
which are all the Ministers in England, as well the best as the worst, done of
them being Christ's true Ministers, but Antichrists Locusts, which came out of
the smoke of the bottomless pit, and are fully described in the ninth of the
Revelation.

But I know what evation you will have to prove your Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, true, which is to fetch, and derive their lineall succession (which
Rabby Pocklington in his Sunday no Sabbath boasts of) from his impiety of Rome,
that Antichrist and man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, 2 These. 2.3. and so
think to avoyde all that I have said against them, and also you will rune to
your greasy moldy Consecration, and laying on hands, by which you give them
your own Holy Ghost, namely the spirit of error, of blindness and ignorance,
and therefore if you go to the Pope and derive their authority from him: as of
absolute necessity you must, this being your best, and only Argument you have
to prove them true, which Mason to the utmost makes use of against the Papists,
who deny your Bishops, Priests and Deacons to be true ones, because you
schismed away from them, and so they want Cannonicall Ordination (as they call
it) and therefore Mason in his book of Ordination of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, proves it at large to be a false accusation, and that they are true
having, had an inviolable canonical Ordination and Consecration from the
Bishops of Rome, as there you may largly read, page 10. 41. 58. 62. 64. 88. and
so forward to the end: Now if you go this way to work too, as of necessity
you must, having no other way, at all to go to prove them true, then what do
you else but even you your self, prove your Ministers to be Antichristian,
whom Mason in his foresaid Book, page 77 does prove by the authority of the
Scripture, that if they be so, it is the duty of all Gods people to separate
from them: And as for laying on of hands, I say it was but a Ceremony, which
ceased when the visible working of miracles ceased, which if you say to the
contrary, I put you upon it, to prove it, a durable and permanent action in the
Church of God, absolutely essential to the making of a true Pastor, Teacher,
Elder or Bishop: Also you will say, one minister must make an other, but your
ministers and officers are made by other ministers and officers, therefore they
are true: But I deny that either he that is made, or he that made your
ministers is true: But for the Argument, I absolutely deny the proposition, and
I affirm that it is not essential to the making of a true Bishop or elder,
(which is all one, Titus 1. to be made by other Bishops or Elders, for those
Bishops, Elders and Deacons, that were made in the Apostles times, were elected
and made by the Church, who only has power for that end, and the Apostles and
Evangelists did nothing else by that action of laying on of hand, but show
their likeing and approbation of that action that the Church had performed, and
of those persons that the Church had made Officers, to officiate in her, and at
the laying on of the Apostles hands, God was pleased to work miracles, even to
give the Holy Ghost unto those upon whom they was laid, which were no officers
in the Church, Acts 8.17.18. and 19.6. and also at the curing the Father of
Publius of his Fever, Paul laid his hands upon him and healed him, Acts 28.8.
yea Ananias who was no officer in the Church but a Disciple or a private man
(as you call them) yet he laid his hands upon Saul, at the doing of which he
received his sight, and also the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.20.17. So that you see
l^ying on of hands in the primative time, was not only peculiar to the Apostles
and Evangelists themselves, bat also to others which were no officers, but
Brethren, out of office, and was not only used at the showing their approbation
and likeing of those men that the Church had chosen into office, but also at
the workeing of miracles, as the giving of the Holy Ghost, and healing of the
Sick, so that I affirm, that Action ceased when the visible working of
Miracles ceased, and is not in the least essential to the making of Officers.
Again, in the New Testament you do not find, neither are you able to prove or
show one example that an Apostle was made by anorher Apostle, or that on?
Evangelist was made by another Evangelist, or that one Bishop or Elder was made
by another Bishop or Elder, or ever that one Officer made another Officer in
the same Office that he himself was in: so that your making of Bishops by
other Bishops is an Invention of the Man of Sin, and his Fellows, therefore
to make Officers by Officers will never be proved by you nor any others, to be
Essential to the making of an Officer, and therefore I say of your Officers,
that both the makars and those that are made by them, are all of them false,
not only in regard this action is a siction of your own Invention, but also
because your Church is false and Antichristian. Therefore if every Parish in
England had power in themselves (which in the least they have not) to choose and
make their own Officers, yet for all this they would be false, for a false and
Antichristian Church as yours is, can never make true Officers and Ministers of
Jesus Christ: and though that the Churches of the Separation want the Apostles
in personal presence to lay hands upon their Officers which lawfully they
choose out from among themseves, yet have they their Laws, Rules and Directions
in writing, which is their Office, and is of as great Authority as their
personal presence. Mat. 7.12. Luke 16.29.31 Joh. 5.45. Act. 13.27. and 15.21.
and 21.21. 2. Cor. 3.15. All these writings does show that the Scriptures and
Laws of Moses and the Prophets was their Office, for they themselves were dead
long before Christ's time, but their writings did still remain, wherefore the
spirit of God is pleased to call them by their names, shewong that they are of
as great Authority as their personal presence were, and those that now read
them if they do not obey them, is as inexcusable as those that lived in their
days and heard them from their mouths and yet rejected them. Even so now
though we have not Peter and Paul and the rest of the Apostles in personal
presence, yet we have now their Laws, Rules, Epistles and directions which
they sent and gave to the Churches of God that was planted in their times, and
these are there Office, and are of as great Authority and Sufficiency as their
personal presence, yea and of greater, as the very false Apostles themselves
those enemies of Paul do confess for his letters say they are weighty and
powerful, but his bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible. 2.
Cor. 10.10. For Paul in the writing of the Scripture was so powerfully guided
by the Spirit of God that it was not possible for him to err in the doing of
it, whereas in his other personal actions he was subject to sin and failings
as well as Peter was Gal. 2.11. and the rest of the Apostles: some of which we
read of Act. 22. which was his going into the Temple with others, after the
Ceremonial Law of Moses to purify himself, when he knew his Lord and Master
Christ at his death had abolished and put an end both to the Temple and all the
Mosaica^^ Rites Ceremonies and Worship, and he himself with the rest of the
Apostles Act. 15. but the Spirit of God had decreed the same, which they
commanded the Churches inviolably to observe, and also he himself before did
preach the same, so that I say the Apostes Laws is their office, and is of as
great, yea greater authority then if now we had them in personal being:
therefore in my judgment those that do maintain Apostles now in personal
being, do maintain an error, seeing that the Apostle Paul calls himself and
Barnabas the last, as it were men appointed to death. 1 Cor. 4.9. and if they
were the last then none were to follow or succeed them in their Office,
therefore your Bishops are all Liars, in calling themselves the Apostles
successors, for they are Antichrists Locusts and Frogs which are said to
come out of the smoke of the bottommlesse pot, or out of the mouth of the
Dragon, Beast and false Prophet Rev. 9.3. and 16.13. So that I affirm the
Officers in the true Churches of the Sepearion, that are called by virtue of
the Apostles Laws, though they want them to lay hands upon them, to show their
aprobation of their fitness for their Office, yet they are as true Officers as
those that they themselves caused to be made, and laid their hands upon.

And thus have I sufficiently by the authority of the sacred word of God proved
all your Officers and Ministers, false and Antichristian and none of Christ's,
which if you can groundedly contradict, show your best skill challeng I you,
and put you to^ prop to hold up your tottering and sandy Chapter and Min. or else
your great brags will prove no better then wind and fables, and you, your self
found to be a liar.

2. Again in ^he second place if your Priests by their ministry do not
accomplish the same ends, that the Apostles by their ministry did, then by
your own grounds they are no true Ministers of Christ: and that they do not by
their ministry accomplish the same ends, that the Ministry of the Apostles
did, I prove it out of the 1 Cor. 11.2. where the Apostle does praise the
Corinthians, that they did remember him in all things, and keep all the
ordinances as he had delivered them unto them; here was one maine end that the
Ministry of the Apost. did accomplish; namely to bring the Saints in the chapter
of God to the obedience not only of some but of all the Laws of Christ, but
your Ministry never did, never will, nor never can, so long as they stand in
their present calling, and office accomplish this end, in the heart: and lives
of those that hear and give ear unto them, but rather by their Ministry they
teach them flat Rebellion to the Laws and Ordinances of Christ.

1. As first Christ is not only the alone Priest of his Church and people to
reconcile them by his blood to God his Father, but also he is the alone and
only Prophet of his Church, to whom alone they are to go for counsel and
knowledge, and to whose voice only they are to give ear, and to no other
Prophet, and this did his Apostles teach his people to observe, Acts 3.22.23.
for Moses truly said unto your Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord God raise up
unto you of your Brethren like unto me him shall you hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you, and it shall come to pass, that every soul
that will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from among the people, and
Gal. 5, 1, there Paul bids them stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Jesus
Christ has made us free and b^ not again entangled in the yoke of bondage.
And in his giving Laws to the Corinthians, he would have them follow him no
further then he followed Christ 1. Cor. 11.1. But your Ministers in their
actions and practice do declare and say unto the people that they will not own
Jesus Christ for the only Prophet or his Church. and therefore they teach the
people to worship the Lord with Ceremonies, and Will Worship, as Capping,
Cringing and Duking, clean contrary to the seccond Commandment: and also with
Holy G^^ments as they call them, and with book prayer translated out of the
Popes cursed Masse-booke, as worthy Dr. Eustaricke does in the third part of
h^s Letany, declare and prove: by which they teach the people to leave the
naked simplicity of that worship, which Jesus Christ has instituted in his New
Testament, John 4.23.25. saying to the woman of Samaria, the hour comes and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him, for God is a spirit, and
they that worship rim, must worship him in spirit and in truth; and tie, and
bring the people to worship God, with a worship which is merely and altogether
sinful, men's inventions and foolish devises, which worship is odious,
detestable, hateful, abominable to God, Esa 1.11.12.13. and 66.3.4. Jer.
6.19.20. and 25.6.44.21.22.23. Amos 5.21.22. Mat. 15.8.9. Mark 7.7.8. Col. 2.
So that I may truly say, of the Church of England, and the worshippers therein,
as the spirit of God said of Judah in the second of Esa 8.9. their Land also is
full of Idols, they worship the works of their own hands, that which their
own fingers have made, and the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbles himself; therefore forgive them not.

3. Again in the third place, as Jesus Christ is the only Priest, and Porphet
of his Church, so he is the only King and Lawgiver of it, and to it, and none
else, Psalm. 2. and 149.19. Esa 9.6.7. and 83.20. for the Lord is our Judge, the
Lord is our Lawgiver, (says the Church of God) the Lord is our King, he will
save us? now the Apostles by their ministry taught this to the Saints, and
Churches of God, That Jesus Christ is the only King, and Lawgiver of, and to
his Church, unto whose Laws and Septer alone, and to none other they must
stoop, submit, and yield unto, Ephesians. 1.21.22. and 2.22.23. Col. 2.2.3.6.7.
Heb. 3. begin. and 20.28.29. and 12.25.

But your Ministers by their Ministrery teach the people to rebel and bid
defiance against the Septer, Laws, and Commands of Christ, as though he had
not had wisdom and power enough, to have erected and governed his own
spiritual Kingdom, and to have instituted sufficient Offices as void places
for his people, by virtue of his Laws to elect and choose Officers to
administer, therein for the building of them up, till they come to perfect then
in the knowledge of God, and unto the measure of the fulness of Christ; contrary
to what the Apostle affirms by the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. and
therefore they teach the people to run to Antichrist, and seek for more
Officers: Away with such horrible wickedness as this which your Bishops,
Priests, and Deacens, those little toes of Antichrist daily, and howerly
perpetrate and commit, as if so be Jesus Christ had not been so faithful in
his House, as Moses was in his, and as though he had not had so sufficient a
care of his Church under the Gospel, as Moses had under the Law, and therefore
they go unto Antichrist, Christ's professed enemy, and there would teach the
people to seek for Laws for the governing of the Church of God under the
Gospel, rakeing them out of his cursed counsels, Books of Articles, and
diabolical Traditions, and in their doing of this, which is their constant
practices, they teach flat Rebellion, and High Treason againg the Septer and
Kingdom of the everlasting Son of God, who will have his church governed by
his own Laws, which he instituted, and left recorded in his last Will and
Testament, which he has bequeathed to his church, commanding them, as they
will answer it before his dreadful appearing, to observe and keep them
strictly without violation in the least; and also by his own Officers therein
expressed, who are only five, who are to be permanent, officiating in personal
presence and Being for the freedom of his church; namely, Pastor, Teocher,
Elder, Deacon, and Widow, Romans 12.7.8. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3. and 5. chap. But
they teach the people to go to the Laws, and Officers of Antichrist, which
are a great multitude in number, as, Patriarchs, Primates, Metrapolitanes,
Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Deanes, Chancellours, Vicar general, Prebends,
Doctors of the Civil Law, Doctors of Divinity, Proctours, Registers,
Archdeacons, Subdeacons, Priests, Jesuits, Parish-preists, Parsons, Vicars,
Curates, Cannons, Petty Cannons, Chanters, Vestrey men, Church wardens Sworn
men, Side men, Parish clerks, damnable and divelish Pursevants, Summers,
Apparritours, with a great many more.

And therefore in this respect do not by their Ministry accomplish the same
ends that the Ministry of the Apostles did, and so by your own grounds are no
true Ministers.

And a^ for those two things, of conversion, and confirmation, or building up
in the ways of God, which you speak of, if you mean by conversion, an
opening of the eyes, to turn them from drunkenes to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God: Or if you mean, by conversion, a deliverance from the power
of darkness, and a translation into the Kingdom of the Son of God, both of
which the Apostles Ministry did accomplish in the hearts and lives of Gods
people, Asts 26.18. Col. 1.13. I absolutely deny it, that your Ministry in
England does this: And therefore I desire you to declare, what you mean by
conversion, and prove your definition by the holy Scripture and also prove that
you in England are so converted, which when you have done, I shall further
answer you, by Gods assistance. And as for their building them up in the ways
of God as all true Sheepheards ought to build, up their sheep, as Acts 20. 1
Pet. 5. yet I deny it, that your ministers do it, for how can they build them
up in that which they themselves are ignorant of, and enemies unto; for as
Jannes and Jambres which withstood Moses, so do these men also resist the
truth, being men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.8. and
do feed you with husks and chafe, being neither willing to embrace it
themselves, nor to let those that would, as their constant preaching and
speaking against the truth, of God, and the Kingdom of his Son does witness.

And in the conclusion of this your Argument, you say, when the Separation can
prove conversion in an Antichristian Church, you will say more to them; this
belongs to you to prove, for we do not plead for Antichrist, but against him,
and all his: And therefore have I taken the pains by the Word of God, and
demonstrable Argument grounded thereupon, to prove the Church of England
Antichristian: And when you or any other do by the Authority of the unerring
and pure Word of God, sufficiently confute what I have writ against it, I do
promise you, I will be a member of the Church of England again; but if that be
not done, I will by the strength of the Lord of Hosts for ever separate from
Church, Ministry, and worship in England, as all and every one of them
Antichristean and false: yet thus much I say, and do acknowledge, and the
Scripture proves it, that God has a people or an elect number in spiritual
Babylon, yea in the Kingdom of Antichrist, part of which the chapter of England
is, and none of them shall perish, but ^e eternally saved: yet I say, it is the
duty of all Gods Elect and chosen ones, that as yet in the whorish ^os^ of the
chapter of Engl. or in any part of Antichrists regiment i^ separate away from it,
and come out of it, least God plague them for their staying there, (...) and
(...) forward, and 51.6.9.11. 2 Cor. 6.16.17. Rev. 14.9.10. and 18.4. Now from
all that which has been said, I frame these Arguments First that every lawful
Pastor, Bishop, Minister, or Officer in the visible Church of Christ ought to
have a lawful call, and be lawfully chosen into his Office, before he can be a
true Officer in the Church of Christ, Acts 1.24.25. and 26. and 24.23. Gal. c
11. Heb. 5.4.

But the Ministers and Officers in the Church of England have not a lawful
call, neither are lawfully chosen to be Officers in the Church of Christ see
the Book of Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons compared with the
Scripture.

Therefore, all your Ministers are false and Antichristian Officers, Rev. 9.3.
2. Secondly, The doing of those actions that belong to the execution of an
office, does not prove a man to be a lawful officer, but a lawful power
instating him into his office, Acts 8.4. and 11.28.24. and 18.24.26.

But all the Ministers in the church of England have nothing to prove the
lawfulnes of their standing in their Ministry, but the actions of a Minister,
and are not able to prove that they are instated into their Ministry, by
virtue of a lawful power and authority.

Therefore, they are not true Ministers of Christ, but false and Antichristian
Ministers of Antichrist.

3. Again in the third place upon your own grounds I frame this Argument.
Those that by their Ministry do not accomplish the same ends, that the
Ministry of the Apostles did, are no true ministers.

But the ministers of the church of England do not accomplish the same ends by
their ministry, that the ministry of the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 12.2.

Therefore, your ministers are no true ministers.

So you see I have overthrown your second Argument, and that in your own way,
and deny that which I have said, and prove against it if you be able.

3. Again your 3. Arg. to prove your scratched and deformed mother a true
visible church is this.

Whatsoever people do enjoy and outwardly submit themselves to the true
worship of God, they are a true visible chapter of Christ. But the people of Eng.
d^e outwardly enjoy and submit themselves to the true worship of God. Ergo the
people of England are a true visible Church.

Answ. 3. And for the proof of your Arg. you say that the Separation grant and
teach the proposition, but the assupmtion they stiffly deny (as well they may
do) but you will stiffly maintain, and prove it to their shame But first of all
I will prove your Arg. false to your shame, and then I will examine your proof
of it: Therefore I deny your proposition, assumption, and conclusion. And first
you say the Separation teach where there is true worship, there is a true
Church, what they teach I do not very well know, for I never heard any of
their Sermons, but only one, neither have I read but very few either of their
Books or writings; but yet I say your Major is not found, for true worship does
not prove a company of people, to be a true visible church of Christ, for they
must be a true visible church before they tender and offer up any public
worship to him: therefore true worship does not prov^ a true church, but rather
a true church proves true worship, for the cause must ever go before the
effect which it produces; but a true Church produces true worship, and not
true worship a true Church: Now to the making of a true Church, there must not
only be true matter, but also a true form, 1 Cor. 15.13. Col. 2.5. or an
entrance into that heavenly state, or spiritual city, called the New
Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven, and which is (in the last end)
described in the Word of God, and so becoming a politic Kingdom or Body that
makes them a true church; or an uniting, joining, or combining of a company of
Beleivers together amongst themselves, and so unto Christ their only and alone
head and King, promising perfect obedience to all his Laws, and to walk in
all his ways, that gives them the denomination of a true visible church of
Christ, by virtue of which they come to have Christ's power to execute all the
Laws that Jesus Christ has left and bequeathed in his last will to his
welbeloved Spouse, and to administer all his administrations, which out of this
state cannot lawfully be administered: as I have already proved at large in my
Answer to W. G. an eminent Profess^ in your Church, but yet an earnest pleader
for Antichrists Kingdom and dominion, as well as your self, and therefore for
this particular I refer you to that.

And as for your Minor and Assumption, which is that you in the Church of
England do enjoy, and outwardly submit your selves to the true worship of God:
It is most false and a notorious, lie and untruth, and as well might wicked
Faux, and the rest of the Gun-pouder plotters say, that they submitted unto
noble King James Laws and Septer, when they went about to blow up the
Parliament House, that so they might destroy him and all his; for you do not
only oppose, and justle out the true worship of God, and throw down and
trample upon the Septer of Jesus Christ his Son, but also you set up a false
and Antichristian worship, the inventer of which is the Devil, and the man of
Sin, his eldest and most obedient Son: Therefore I am ashamed to hear you who
boast your self to be such a mighty champion, as you ^ay you are (having as I
hear you have said, that you have confuted many of the Separation) to reason
so shallowly and ungroundedly, and against the known and confessed truth and
therefore you are but like Goliath the Philistines great champion, who
exceedingly reviled as you do, the Host of the Lord, and kept a mighty
challinging of them, as though none of Gods people had been able to encounter
and graple with him; when as poor David that yongue stripling with his
sheepheards staff and a company of smooth stones flung out of a slinge
overcame and destroyed that mighty Giant, who thought none so strong as
himself, 1 Samuel 15. and justifies an one are you, and will prove to be, for
you fight for the spiritual Philistims, the enemies of the Lord, namely for
Antichrist, and his Kingdom, and you send forth great bragges and boastes
against the truth of God amongst your ignorant acquaintance, but indeed they
are nothing but wind and chafe not able to stand before the breath of Gods
sacred truth, which his weak servants for their conquering weapons make use
of, as I have already, and shall more fully by the strength of God make it
appear in my following lines, and therefore to confute your Argument, and lay
it even with the ground, I will bring your own Writers weapons, who were
members in the Church of England, who do not plead for Separation, but for
Reformation therein read but the Lincolne-shire Ministers Abridgment, and Mr.
Cartwrights Defense against Bishop Whiteguift, sometime Pope of Lambeth, and
Dr. Ames his Fresh Suite against Human Ceremonies, and you shall see your
worship proved to be Antichristian, and none of Christ's, but of the Devils
invention. Also read the Scots Dispute printed in Holland the last Summer, and
you shall see the greatest part of your worship, and all your human
Ceremonies, with which you serve God, proved to be Idols, as your holy
garments, and your invented gestures of bowing, and cringing, and your kneling
at the act of receiving the Sacrament, etc. Also read a little Book of Mr.
Damfords (sometime Minister of Colmanstreet in London) against the Service. And
noble Dr. Bastwickes book called The Vanity and Impiety of the old Letany. and
you shall see the Wickedness, Sinfulnes and Ungodliness of it set forth to the
utmost, for there it is proved to be an Idol, which as he there faith, sends
more souls to Hell in a year then all the profaneness, deboystnesse,
wickedness and ungodlynes in the Kingdom does besides, and that nothing could
have been invented either by the Devil, or the Pope, for a greater means to
pull down the Kingdom of Christ, and for the maintaining and building up the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and therefore I put you upon it to Answer their
writings, and confute the Arguments of your own Authors, which have fully
proved that your worship is no divine but humane worship, and therefore not a
true but a false worship.

Now if you should deny that your human invented diabollicall Book of Common
prayer, and your sacred Ceremonies (as your Lords and masters the Bishops calls
them) are not the worship, with which you in the Church of England worship and
serve God, the Book of Common prayer it self will confute you, for there in
the Preface before that Book of devised Service, and wicked man's invention
they ascribe to the dumb Ceremonies, a Sacramental naature, and the very
Office, and work of the spirit of God, the doing of which makes them all to
become Idols, and all those Idolaters that use them, or partake with them that
do it, for there they say, they are apt to stir up the dull mind of man to
the remembrance of his duty to God by some notable and speaciall signification
whereby he might be edefied: Also in the act of uniformity they themselves do
confess that they are but of man's Invention, and device, and to worship God
with man's devices and Inventions, is odious and detestable unto him, as before
I have fully proved: and therefore you in England have not the true Worship of
God, and so by your own confession are not a true Church of Christ.

But now to answer your Argument which you bring to prove your Assumption,
which is this: You have had those that have lived and dyed in the same Worship
which you still have, and have been saved in it, therefore it must needs be a
true Worship.

This you say, but do not prove it in the least, but still take that for
granted which I deny; which is, that it does not therefore follow because some
in the Church of England have been saved that have used your Worship, that
therefore it is true Worship, for then it would follow that the Worship in the
Papistry, which in some respects is more grosser then yours, is a true Worship,
for you dare not deny it, which if you do, you are not able to prove it, that
in the Papistry there has not been many people that have lived and died
therein that have been saved, for the Scripture does declare that God has a
people there, which he calls upon to come out thence. Rev. 18.4. for he ownes
his Elect even in Spiritual Babylon: yet for all this it does not follow that
their Worship is or ever was a true Worship, though the Riches of the Grace,
and unfathomable Goodness of the Kindness and Love of God does reach and extend
so far as to save some that live and die in that Worship as well as in the
Worship of England; yet I say it is as extraordinary a work as the
manifestation of Gods love to the Thief upon the Cross was, but for all that,
I will maintain it, that none of those that yield and submit themselves unto
your or their Worship, cannot by the Scripture prove himself to be a visible
Christian or a true believer, if they should be put (by Gods people) to prove
it. Joh. 14.21.23.24. and 15.8.14. Col. 15.19 to the end. Ephesians, 5.8. Col. 1.21.
Tit. 1.16. and 2.14. 1 Pet. 2, 9. Heb 9.14. Jam. 2.17, 18. 1 John 3.8. and 2 John 9. Rev. 13.8. and 14.1.4.9.10. and 19.20.

Now from that which I have said I frame these Arguments.

1 That Worship which is of the Devils and Antichrists Invention, Institution
and setting up, is no true divine Worship.

But the Worship of the Church of England is of the Devils and Antichrists
Invention, Institution and setting up, as the forenamed Authors, and the 13.
Chap of the Rev. does fully prove.

Ergo. The Worship in the Church of England is no true Morship.

2. That Worship which is a main means and cause of pulling down the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and establishing, maintaining and upholding of the Kingdom of
the Devell and Antichrist, and sends more Souls to Hell then all the
wickedness Impiety, ungodliness in the Kingdom does besides, is no true
Worship of God^ but ought to be detested and abhorred of all his people.

But such is the Worship of the Church of England as worthy Dr. Bastwicke in
the third part of his Letany does prove.

Ergo. It is no true Worship, but ought to be detested and separated from by
all Gods faithful ones.

And thus much for the answering of your third and fourth Arguments, which you
say are so strong and true, that you say you need spend no more time in the
proof of them, but indeed you are exceedingly mistaken, for you have not in
the least proved either of them, as I have made it manifest. Well now to come
to your fifth Argument, which is thus framed.

If the Church of Engl. have the true matter and form of a true Church then it
must needs be a true Chapter But the Chapter of Engl. has the matter and form of a
true Church. Ergo. It is a true visible Church.

Ans. 5. I Answer, if it had the true matter and form of a true visible
Church, then ti were true indeed, for these are both and only essential to the
being of a true Chapter but I say, you want them both: But you for to prove it say,
that the matter of a true Chapter is a company of men and that you have: and you
say the Form is a profession of true Religion: truly you bewray the blindness
and ignorance of a man whse brains and understanding is infatuated and made
drunk with the spiritual cup of fornication of the scarlat whore, not in the
least understanding what you say and affirm: yet to answer your Arg. though I
grant, that where true matter and true form is there is a true Church, yet I
absolutely deny that you have either true matter or true form, which you say
you think none will deny; so that the begging of things, and taking that for
granted which I deny, and which you are never able to prove, is the best ground
you have to prove your false Arg. true. But now for the matter of a true Chapter
you will have it to be a company of men, making no distinction, but let them be
what kind soever they will serve it seems to be true matter in your chapter
whether they be a company of men possessed with Devils and unclean spirits
from whose mouth Christ will own no confession, nor service, but absolutely
commands them to hold their peace and not to take his name in their mouths to
speak of him, Mar. 1 s 25.34. oa whether they be Inchanters, Sorcerers, or
diviners, or wether they be whoremongers, fornicatorss, Idolaters, adulterers,
drunkards, swearers, blaspheamers, profane persons, liars, or those that
commit the sin against the holy ghost, so they be but men, let them he what
kind of men they will, you say they are fit matter for a true church; indeed I
confess they are the fittest matter for your church that you can have, and
your church is made up, and does consist of all such sorts and kinds of wicked
persons, which does evidently and and undenyably prove it to be an Antich. Chapter
and one of the national Cities that is under the government of the Beast, for
he is said to compel all as you do both rich and poor, high and low, bond and
free, to become his servants and subjects and to worship him according to his
laws, and whosoever will not, shall not live neither in peace nor quietness.
Rev. 13.15.16. and this is the practice of your Church daily and hourly: for
the most unfittest matter for your Churches are the Conscientious Saints that
desire to glorify God as well in their Bodies as in their S^ules, and to walk
unblameably in all his ways, and if there be any such among you, they are cast
out of your Synagogues by you and prohibited either to buy or sell with you
though such as these alone be the only true and fit matter for the visible
Church or Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Esaias. 35.10. and 51.11. Jer. 4.5. Act.
1.14.15. and 2.41.47. and 11.21.23. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev.
22.14. For all unclean, wicked and ungodly persons of what sort soever, are no
fit matter to become members of Christ's holy City, new Jerusalem which is said
to come down from Heaven, or visible Church, for all such should and ought to
be kept out from thence. Act. 2.40. 1 Cor. 5.13. and 6.9.10. Rev. 21.27. and
22.15.

In the second place you say the proffession of true Religion is the form of a
true Church, and this you in England do and have, and therefore are a true
Church. For answer to which I say, that I have already in the foregoing
discourse fully proved, that your Religion is not a true Religion but a false,
seeing you worship and serve God, not accoding to his Laws and commands, but
with, and according to your own devises and Inventions, but yet I do confess
that ye do profess (like the Samaritane) the worship of the true God, but
for all that (with them) you serve your Idols, therefore by your own grounds
you have not the form of a true Church, wherefore by the same Ground it
follows that you are not a true Church. But now punctually to answer your
Argument, I affirm that the form of a true Church is for a company of
believers who are washed in the bl^od of Christ by a free and voluntary Consent
or willingness to enter into that heavenly and holy State, City or Kingdom,
which in the word of God is plentiuflly described, and by the power of Christ
to become a constituted or Polytique Body or Corporation, or an enclosed or
fenced Garden or Vinyard, and then by virtue of their combination uniting and
joining themselves together each to other and so unto the Lord, promising to
walk in all his ways and to yield obedience to all his Laws and commands, as
he requires they should. Genesis 17. 2 Cor. 6 17.18. they become a true visible
Church of Jesus Christ. Deuteronomy. 29.9.10.11. 2 King. 11.17. 2 Cron. 15.12. Nehe.
10.29. Psalm. 110. 3. Jer. 50.4.5. Act. 23.24 and so has power from Christ her
head, to cast out offenders. 1 Cor. 5. to choose elect and ordain her own
Officers Act. 6.3.5. and 14.23. and they ordained them Elders in every Church
by Election. as the Original and Beza's Translation with others, read it
(though the word, Election, by the Bishops fraud and Policy, be left out in
our last English Translation) and to receive in believers. 2 Cor. 2.7.8. and to
keep out wicked persons Rev. 21.27. and 22.15. and to reprove and admonish her
own Officers Bishops or Overseers Col. 4.17. or do her self any sprituall
good, or exclude from herself any evil she fears, or is like to come upon
her without the help or assistance of any either church or officers besides
her self, Rev. 1.2.3. chapter but the Chapter of Eng. neither has, or ever had this
form in the least, as I have fully manifested elsewhere: as also you may read
in a little Book lately printed called the Three Estates, that is to say, the
Civil State, the rrue Ecclesiastical Sat, and the False Ecclsiasticall
State, and also you want the profession of the true Religion, and therefore
your Chapter is no true Chapter of Christ, for it is united by profession and
subjection to the Pope of Lambeth, who is substitute to the Pope of Rome, whom
Mason in his Epistle Dedicatory before his Book of Ordination of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, calls the Head and chief over the Chapter of Engl. for they in
their public Court of High Commission at the censure of that noble and worthy
Dr. Bastwicke have renounced the King as Head thereof, and have placed it upon
the Bishops of Canterbury, as you may read at large in the 10. and 11. p. of
his Answer to sir John Banks, if Canterbury be her Head, as Mason and others
affirm, then sure I am, that Christ is none of her head, for his body is no
monster, to have two heads Therefore the Church of England is a whorish and
Antichristian Church, and none of Christ's, having nothing to do with Jesus
Christ. nor any of his Laws, Worship, Offices, Ordinances or Administrations;
but in the next place you bring an Argument to prove the Religion in the Church
of England to be true, and you thus lay it down.

That Religion which will lead men on into the true way of salvation, that must
needs be the true Religion.

But the Religion which we profess leads into the true way of salvation, for
men to look for salvation in Gods free mercy in Jesus Christ.

Therefore (say you) your Argument must needs be true.

I answer that if it were granted (which in the least I do not) that your
Religion is true, yet this alone were not sufficient to prove your Church true.
But I absolutely deny your Argument, and affirm that your Religion neither is
the true Religion, nor that it leads men the true way to salvation, for I have
already proved it to be a false Religion, and that it leads men the true way to
Rebellion against God, and his Son Jesus Christ. But you will say how comes it
to pass that some are saved, which profess our Religion, which you affirm to
be false? I answer in Moses words, hidden things belongs to God, but revealed
things to us and our Children, Devt. 29.29. but yet when I seriously consider
of it, and with a deliberate eye look into the holy Scripture the revealed
will of God, it makes me think, say, and cry out with Paul, Romans 11.33. O the
depthes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unspeakeable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out, who can save
his People, those elect ones, even in the bosom of Antichrist his cursed
Kingdom of darkness, contrary to all grounded reason that the wit of man is
able to give or render from his revealed will, but only must say, it is alone
his mere mercy, and gracious, and omnipotent pleasure so to do, who is tied to
no means, place or person, but can work, and bring to pass his own ends,
and purposes without means, yea and beyond all outward means, 1 Kin.
19.10.17. Ezec. 57. for the holy one of Israel is not limited. But to prove
this Argument you lay down an other after this manner. If men professing the
same way to salvation that we do, have lived and dyed in the profession of it,
and been saved, then is the Religion and way to salvation that we profess a
true Religion and way to salvation. But men that profess our Religion have
been saved. Ergo it is true. what childish reasoning is here to beg things
after this manner, and to judge the cause by the effect contrary to the whole
current of the Scripture, for it does largly show, that a bad and wicked cause
or action may produce and bring forth a good and glorious effect and this is
just as they said in Paul's time, let us do evil that good may come of it, but
says he, such men's damnation is just, Romans 3.8. and if you have read the
Scripture, (which it appears you have not very often) you may know, that the
Midwives, and Harlot Rahabs lying saved the Israelites children, and the Spies
lives, Exodus 1. Josh. 2. for which act of mercy they are commended in the Word
of God, and also it produced good effects to them, for the Lord caused the
Midwives to prosper, and saved Rahab alive, yet for all this they sinned in
lying, and do you not know, that the Word of God says we must not do the
least evil that the greatest good may come of it: but yet by your reasoning a
man may, which to affirm is the height of wickedness, and impiety, and also by
your reasoning a man may defend and justify all the sins and sayings of Gods
people, and others recorded in the Book of God, out of which that God that is
able to bring light out of darkness, and good out of evil, has brought much
glory to himself, as out of Pharaohs hard heartedness and blood thirsty
cruelty that he exercised upon Gods people, it produced good to them, by
working their deliverance, and glory to God, by manifesting his power and
goodness, yet for all this Pharaohs sin was never the less. And also according
to your reasoning Judas his treason might be excused, for that sin of his
brought a world of glory unto God, and salvation and eternal glory to his
elect and chosen ones; yet though his betraying of Christ did produce such a
good and glorious effect it did nothing at all excuse his sin.

Again your Arg. is nothing to the purpose to prove that which you have
undertaken, for we are not reasoning of the way and means of salvation, which
is only and alone by faith in the Lord Christ, which is possible may be had in
a false Chapter yea also in no Chapter but the thing we are about is to prove and see
whether the Chapter of Eng. be a true Chapter of Christ, or a false Chapter of Antichr.

But yet more fully to Answer your Argument what though it be confessed that
many of God Elect have been saved, that have professed your false and Antichr.
Rel. it will not therefore follow, that your Religion is a true Religion, nor
your church a true church, because some have been saved, that have professed
it: I hope you will not so conclude, which if you do, then I say by your own
grounds, that the chruch of Rome is a true church, the Religion there a true
Religion, for many therein have lost their lives for the maintaining of some
truths, which have yet adheared to the Church of Rome, and of many of their
eternal happiness, as good grounds may be given as the most of the martyrs of
the chapter of Eng. yea, and I verily believe, that God has had, and still has a
people there which belongs to his Election of grace, which both has and will
save, and so by your own grounds their church and Religion are both true,
because it is possible that some that profess have been and still may be saved
But if you will maintain this, then you contradict your own writers, which
have plentifully proved the Religion in Rome and the church thereof, to be
false, and yet have granted that some have been saved there, and therefore for
you to go about to prove the church of Engl. true, and the worship therein
true, because some of the members thereof that have professed the Religion
therein have been saved, is an erroneous and unsound ground, for by this ground
it will follow, that the Cross upon which the Theife was hanged was a true
church, for there he had salvation and the apprehension of Gods love, and his
assurance of his entrance into the Kingdom of glory, as fully as ever any in
the chapter of En. had; and also it will follow, that the Chariot in which the
Eunuch rode, Acts 8. was a true chapter for there he came to the knowledge of his
salvation and the apprehension of the true love of God in Christ; also you know
God by his almighty power saved Daniel and the three children alive even in the
Lions den, and in the hot burning furnace, and because God by his power did
this, shall I therefore go cast my false into the fire, and among the Lions,
and say, they have no power to burn me, or kill me, but I am safe enough
because God preserved Daniel, and the three children alive in the like
condition: every wise man would conclude surely I were out of my wits: So you
see how erroneous, rotten, insufficient and unsound all your grounds and
arguments are in the lying down of which you run with your deceitful Logike,
like a blind horse in a mill, about, and about, and still come to the same
place, where you begun, never in the least prove any thing you say by the
authority of the word of God, nor yet by any grounded reason, but ruly your
false affirmations, for the wind that comes out of you. mouth, is so weak and
feeble, that it will scarce blow away a straw if it lie in your way

And then in the last place, you bring an Arg. in the neck of this, being of
the same nature with the former, and it is this. That because Latimer, Hooper
and Bradford, with many others were martyrs in your chapter and were saved ss^ by
the judgment of charity (not infalibly) we may judge were saved, and knew the
corruptions of your church, and yet did not separate away from it, therefore it
is a true Church, and need not be separated from, seeing men may be saved in
it. Truly I must confess unto you, I am almost weary with answering your
paultery, old, rotten, moldy stuff, and you are such a novice in the
mysteries of God and godliness, and the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, not
understanding what you say, or affirm, nor bow to prove an Argument, that I am
almost loath any more to contend with you in regard the victory in overcomeing
you will be so poor and mean, and your wares are such paltery, and peplary
commodities, that I am even tired with lookeing upon them and turning them
over: but yet for all this I will a little reply to this your last Argument, but
I hope you do not hold that maxim in the Church of Rome, extra ecclesia nulla
salus, that is, out of the Church no salvation, if you do, it is most
erroneous, for I have proved it, and the whole New Testament does declare it,
that it is possible for a man to be saved, though he be a member of no visible
Church; yea and that some that are joined to a false Church may be saved, but
yet if they may be so, it is no ground for their staying, or abiding there, for
God calls, and commands all his people to be separated from the World, and all
false churches, 2 Cor. 6.16.17.18. Rev. 18.4. but it seems by your reasoning,
you hold that if a man get salvation, and get to heaven, and so get his own
ends served, let Gods glory go a begging, and lie at the stake a bleeding for
all you, but truly such a servant deserves no wages, but rather punishent; for
alas man this is but self seeking at the best, in which a man can have no
spiritual comfort, and joy: But God would have his people to joy and rejoyc in
walking in his ways, and sing and be merry, and be of a cheerful
countenance, as it does become the heirs of the Crown of glory, and he would
have them not only as it were creep into Heaven, but to strive and labor to
have an abundant enterane thereinto, 1 Pet. 19.10.11. but by your reasoning you
would have them never be merry, joyful, nor cheerful (for in false ways
there is no peace nor comfort, Esa. 59 8 9.11. Mal. 2.2.) but live like
forlorn men destitute of all comfort, hanging down their heads like
bulrushes, and so dishonor their God and their Christ in the eyes of the men
of the world, who will glory and triumph over them, as though there were not
that sweetness, beautifulnes, amiablenes, fulness, satisfaction and contednes in
the enjoying of God in his Son Christ, that might make them walk with merry
counterances, cheerful hearts and rejoicing souls, as it becomes the Sons and
heirs of the King of glory, disdaining, contemning, and lightly esteeming the
base and empty moth eaten contents of this present world, and to have their
affections crucified to it, and it to them, and though they be in the world,
yet to walk as those whose conversation is already in Heaven, longing and
desiring to be dissolved to be with Christ which is best of all: Away man,
Christ has no need of such unserviceable self seeking servants as you on are,
to wear his glorious and rich Livery, and let me tell you, God never sent his
son Christ to save us for that end to live at ease, and delight, as we lift,
or in the fashion of the World: but that we should glorify him in being unlike
to the World in our lives and conversation by an unblameable walking in all his
ways, laboring and endeavoring to yield obedience to all his Laws and
commands, not suffering our hearts to be possessed with base fears of the
world, nor be in love with the things thereof, but that we should hold forth
the profession of the purity of his truth and Gospel without fear before the
eyes of the world, and though we suffer persecution, affliction and
tribulation for it, that we should joy and rejoce in it and esteem it our
Crown and happiness that the Lord counts us worthy to suffer for, his sake: And
truly let me tell you, he that seeks but his own ends, and so that he could be
but saved cares for no more, not regarding or taking thought what becomes of
Gods glory, honor and praise, it is an evident and demonstrable sign, that
that man does not belong to God, nor never shall be heir of glory, John
14.23.24. and 25.8.14. 1 John 3.8.10. and 2.9. Rev. 12.11. and 14.4.

And what if Latimer, and the rest of the martyrs had communion with the Church
of England, is that a sufficient ground, that therefore we must not separate
away from it,? I hope not, for what if God winked at their blindness, darkness,
and ignorance, yet now let me say with Paul, that in truth he will have all his
people to come to the knowledge of his truth and ways, Acts 17.20. because he
has appointed a day, wherein he will shortly judge that great scarlet whore of
Rome, and all her national churches, cities, or daughters that depend upon
her, one of which England is; and woe to that man at that day, that is found
within her territories, or the Paile of her great catholic church, or the
walls of her great wide and far spread spiritual city.

Alas man there is a great deal of difference betwixt King Edwards and Queen
Maryes times, and ours now; the martyrs and people of God were then but newly
enlightened, to see the blake and spiritual dark Kingdom of Satan, and
Antichrist, in which they were brought up, the darkness whereof was so great,
the Sun and the Air was both clouded, Rev. 9 2. and the bright, shining light
of the old and new Testament shut up in much obscurity to what it is now, and
they did but see the abominable wickedness of his kingdom a far of, like the
man in the Gospel, whose eyes Christ opened, who at his first looking up, did
see men walking a far off like trees, even so they saw but the truths a
far off, which made them rejoice at a little Reformation, and highly to
esteem of those things in the worship and service of God, that now are made
manifest by the light of truth before the open Sun, to be no fitter for Gods
worship and Service then kennell dirte, being mere Idols, and those Idolaters
that communicate with them, and though they rejoiced at a little Reformation of
Antichrists errors; but now it is made manifest that no Reformation of his
Kingdom will serve the turn, but it must be now annihilated and nullified
before the visible Kingdom of Christ can flourish, and become the praise of
the whole Earth, and you know and confess they would have no Communion with
the Church of Rome from which they thought they had separated, neither with
that abominable Idol the Mass which you confess they counted detestable,
though they had communion with the Church of England and the Service-Booke, but
now the Church of England is proved again and again by hundreds of the
Separation, and others in their disputes, Sermons and writings, to be as
Antichristian as the Church of Rome and the Service Book to be as detestable
as the Idol of the Mass, being even one and the same with it, saving that it
is in Latin and this in English (as Noble Dr. Bastwicke has proved) And what
though the abomination and fornication of that great Red WHORE of Rome, in
King Edwards time was not so fully laid open, but that the Martyrs and chosen
people of God did then commit some spiritual Fornication with her, must we
therefore do the like? no, God forbid! for the Lamb that stands upon mount
Syon with an Hundred forty and four Thousand of his Elect and chosen ones
having his Fathers name written in their Foreheads has proclaimed and made it
manifest, that Babylon or spiritaall Rome is now fallen and is become the
habitation of Devils, and tho hold of every soul spirit and the Cage of every
unclean and hateful, Bird: with whom Gods people now at no hand are not to be
mixed in spiritual Society or Communion.

And what though the everlasting Gospel then was not so fully preached and
revealed as now it is, so that Gods people then were exceeding ignorant of it,
and by their blindness thought they thought they had separated away from the
Beasts Kingdom, yet were they in it, and did worship him, must it then follow
that we must do so too? no: for now the great City Rome is, much more fallen
and descovered then it was: and now a third Angel has proclaimed it with a
loud voice having his Commission from God so to do that seeing now the Book is
opened, and the truth of the everlasting Gospel is preached and Light is now
brought into the world: so that now if after all this a man worship the Beast
and his Image, or receive in his right hand or in his forhead his mark, the
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered out without
mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire
and Brimstone in the presence of the Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,
and the smoke of their Torment ascended up for ever and ever, and they have no
rest day nor night that worship the Beast or his Image, or receive the mark of
his Name. Rev. 14.8.9.10.11. Wherefore says the Spirit of God, Came out of her
any people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues, chap. 18.5. here is the express command of God himself to all
his chosen and elect ones to separate away from all Antichristian Assemblies,
and not in the least to partake with them in any of their worship, ordinances,
or administrations, which precept if any of them refuse to obey, let them know,
that God will plague them, and though for his Covenant sake, he save their
souls, yet it will be through much difficulty, accompaned with many an heavy
and sad heart, and many a bitter uncomfortable Cross. Therefore let all Gods
people that yet are in her, or in the bosom of the Church of England, her
daughter, as they love their own inward peace, and spiritual joy, and look
that their souls should prosper and flourish with grace and Godliness look to
it, and withdraw their spiritual obedidience and subjection from all
Antichrists Laws and worship, and now join themselves as fellow Cttizens of
the City of God, to worship and serve him in mount Syon the beauty of
holiness, and there only to yield all spiritual obedience to Christ's
spiritual Laws and Scepter.

Now my Opposite, I have fully by the authority of the sacred and pure word of
God, particularly answered your trifling, childish and frothy arguments, and
proved against you and them, that the church, ministry and worship in England
is all of them Antichristian, from which all Gods people are bound in
consolence, ind in pain of undergoing the Lords high displeasure hnd
indignation, and heing portakers of his fearful and dreadful plagues, to
separate away from it, and to have no communion with it.

Therefore to you my Opposer I say with the Prophet to backstyding Israel, I^
God be God follow him, or if Baall or Antichrist or Rome he God then follow him.

And so much for the Answering of your erroneous Arguments.

BUt now you will, it may be say, if salvation as you have confessed and proved
may be had in a false Chapter yea in no Gh. then wherefore do you enter into, and
become a member of a true Church? My Answ. to this is, in the first place
negatively: I do not enter thereinto for to be saved thereby, or for to seek
for Jesus Christ, as though I wanted either, for I have both Christ and
salvation, as all those ought to have, that become fellow citzens of the City
of God, as I have before largely proved, neither do I enter into into it to
live securely and carelessly in sin and pleasure, loosenes of life and
conversation; no, none such are fit to be there, and if any such creep in
thither, us it is possible they may, they ought to be cast out from them, 1
Cor. 5.13. But affirmatively in the second place I answer, That I enter into
it, First in obedience to Gods command, Es^. 26.20. who has commanded and
enjoined me, and all his faithful people to become Citizens of his City, and
members of his visible church, there to worship him Syon, the beauty of
holiness, according to his own Laws and appointment. Again I enter into a
true Church estate, to honor and glorify my God, who has passed by so many
thousands as he has done, and left them in their sins, and yet has chosen me
freely before the foundation of the world was laid; out of the riches and
abundance of his grace, and through and for his Son Christ my Saviors sake, by
whose blood my soul is washed and cleansed from all my sins and pollutions,
and presented spoils and blameles before his and my heavenly father, by which
I am made fit, being an beir of glory, to partake with him in eternal glory in
the never ending Kingdom of glory, with unspeakable grace, mercy, and favor,
ties and binds me to walk uprightly and is blameable without fear or self
respects in all his ways and commands, and with all my strength and might to
set forth his prasie, and to honor and glorify his great and holy name, which
is done by my public and open professing of the purity of his truth, and
walking inoffensibly and unreproveable in all his paths, endeavoring to the
utmost of my power, being assisted with his renewing spirit, (who is the worker
of all my works in me and for me) to yield willing and cheerful obedience to
all his Laws and commands, by the doing of which, light does shine so before
men, that they may see my good works, and so glorify my father which is in
heaven. Also by this I become a witness bearer against the world, leaving them
without the least excuse before God in the day of their great accon^nt, in that
I esteem the enjoying of God in his Christ above all earthly favors and
riches, the sweetness of which makes me with wilingnes and cheerfulnes freely
and willingly to part with all worldly treasures, delights, and pleasures aed
with rejoyceing and glorying to suffer persecution, tribulation, and all sort
of affliction for the enjoying of him, and yet though I profess the truth of
God amongst the men of the world, and do so highly prize it, and esteem it
worthy the loosing of my life for it, yet they neither do nor will embrace it,
has despise and reject it, which makes their sin inexousable. Also I enter into
a true church estate, as into a speaciall place of shelter, and resume, Esa.
4.5.6. where God in an espeaciall manner has promised to be a shielder and
defender of me from harms and dangers which when I see are, I may press him
with the making good of his promise, who in especial manner has promised to
be an hiding place to his people walking here in his ways; whereas though I be
his, yet if I walk in false ways, and have communion with false Assemblyes,
which it is possible for Gods own people to do, then am I without all promise
of protection, peace and comfort; for God is terrible and dreadful out of his
holy place, or in false ways or in ways of our own invention we shall
neither find nor know prace, Esa. 29.13. and 50.10. and 59.8.10.11. and he has
threatened to curse those blessings that are got therein, Mal. 2.2. for the vine
thereof is as the vine af Sodom, and of the feilds of Gomorah, their grapes are
grapos of gall, and their clusters are bitter, their wine is the poison of
Draggans, and the cruel venom of Aspes, Deuteronomy 32.32.33. but his visible Chapter
(or Kingdom) is his City walled, Rev. 21 which he will save and protect his
vineyard fenced, Esa. 5. which he will keep Esa. 27.3. his Garden enclosed,
which he will preserve; his Spring shut up, which he will de end; his fountain
sealed, which he will not suffer to be be broaken open, Can. 4.2. his body
pelitique, over which he ^s Head, Ephesians. 1.22. and therefore bearing a a tender
love to the members thereof, Ephesians. 5.23.25.30. he will not suffer them to be
wronged, but will defend them from their enemies, and keep them in the midst of
all afflictions, Esa. 43.1.2. and 41.10.11.14. and 54.17. Heb. 13.5.6. Also I
enter into a true Chapter estate, there to find Gods espeaciall presence, which he
has promised therein Psalm. 0.11. and 4.6.4.5.68.16. Jer. 8.3. Rev. 21.3.22.23.
and that I might grow and increase in grace which he has promised there, Ps:
132.13.14.15.16. and 133.3. Jer. 8. for he has said he will water it every
moment Esa. 27.3. that so his people may become fruitful and grow ^d like tall
Cedars in Lebanon. Lastly, I enter into it, that I might draw more to my God,
and gain more and more spiritual fellowship, and communion with him, and that
I might make my election and salvation sure, that so an entrance abundantly
may be administered unto me, to enter into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 9 Pet. 1.10.11. and that so I may walk comfortably,
irejoyceingly and cheerfully, as it does become one united to the Lord of
glory, in the professing of whom alone so much riches, treasure, comfort,
rejoyceing and unspeakeable joy is to be found and had, that a beleiver may
spend largely and plentifully all his days upon and live like a King, and be
never able to exhaust it. And those are my reasons amongst many others.
Wherefore though God has manfested his love and kindness unto me in his son, yet
I desire according to my duty to enter into a visible Church, as a visible
christian, there publicly in the eyes of his people to worship and serve hem
only according to his own Laws, without any man's inventions whatsoever.

But now to say a little to that, which follows your Arguments, and so I will
conclude. You desire to let your Friend know, there have been known wicked men
in a true Chapter and therefore though in the Chapter of Eng. there be all sorts of
wicked men, yet Gods people may have communion with them, because there were
wicked men in the Chapter of the Jews, and the Corinthes: And this is that you
labor to prove, let me tell you, you might have saved your self a great deal
of pains, for the Separation de confessi and acknowledge, that there has been
wicked men, and also corruptions in a true Chapter and that still may so fall out,
that yet in may be so, and yet not the essence of it destroyed: but what get
you by this? for this will not serve turn, to warrant communion with the Chapter
of Eng. in regard I groundedly and absolutely deny, that either the Chapter of Eng.
is or ever was a true Chapter and till you have proved it true, all the pains that
you have taken in proving that it is possible for corruptions and wicked livers
to be in a true Chapter is spent in vain and to no purpose, and I am confident,
that you nor none else will ever be able to prove the Chapter of Eng. true, nor any
other National Chapter for Jesus Christ by his death did abolish the National
Church of the Jews, with all there Laws, rites and Ceremonies thereof, and in
the new Testament did never institute no national Chapter nor left no Law, nor
Officers for the governing thereof,, but the Church that he instituted, are
free and indedendant bodies, or Congregations depending upon none but only upon
Christ their Head: Therefore, national Churches under the Gospel are of
Antichrists, that man of sins institution and ordaining, who only has ordained
Laws and officers of his own for the governing of them, as I have
sufficiently proved at large in my foresaid Answer to W. G. and but put the
ease, the Chapter of Eng. had been a true Chapter as it never was, yet those abominable
corruptions, and most detestable, gross, open, notoriovs wickedness and
prophanes, would have utterly destroyed long ere this her Essence and Being,
and have made her utterly to have forfeited her Charter, and have ceased to a
true Chapter for if God threatened to unchurch the Chapter of Ephesus, Rev. 2. and to
take his heavenly state, Charter, and Candlestick frow her, for but forsakeing
her first Love; and the Gh. of Pergamus for having some in her that taught the
Doctrine of Balam; and the Chapter of Thiatira for suffering Jesabels doctrine to
preached amonst them: do you think that he would have spared the Chapter of Eng.
to this day, who for many hundred years, even ever since her first
constitution, take her at her best, has been ten times worse then all these,
in which all manner of false doctrines have been manifestly maintained and
preached, and all kind of prophanes and wickedness by her nembers practiced and
perpetrated. Therefore for you, or any other to say, and affirm, that this
monsterous, ugly, botched and skabbed body, is Christ's true Spouse, is
dishonorable to his blessed Being and Mediatorship, who gave himself for his
Ch., that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word, and that he might, preserve it to himself a glorious Chapter not having spot,
or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish,
Ephesians. 5.26.27. for the name of this City, is the Lord is there, Ezr. 48.15.
all the true Inhabitants of which, are to be righteous as the servants and
elect ones of the Lord, Esa. 60.21. and 65.2. but in the Chapter of Engl. he that
is most acute in teaching false doctrine, and setting up Antichrists wicked
Kingdom, climbes to the highest preferment and Church dignity, as they call it,
witness, the profane ignorant, sottish, athiesticall Bishops, who are so void
of understanding in the mysteries of God and godliness, that they dare not
publicly dispute with the yonguest boy, that does oppose them, though they
have been challenged to it. Also he that commits the most widkednes and
ungodlynes, is the best loved and respected, and those that labor to oppose
false doctrine and walk more holyer then others, are the most hated, despised
and reejcted, and this even in the bosom of your Church, even by the Pillars
and corner stones thereof, witness those late, bloody, barbarous, and
tyrannical cutting of men's ears at the Pillory, and whipping others at the
Cart, that even for conscience sake: therefore do you think, or have you any
ground to imagine that if ever your Chapter had been true, but that these
transcendant, exceeding gross and vile corruptions, would not have nullified
destroyed and annihilated her, and ^^^e made Christ long ere now, to have given
her a Byll of Divorce, as he did to ^keslyding Israel, and to have taken her
Charter from her, as he has done from all those famous, flourishing and
renouned Churches recorded in the New Testament. It is true, The Chapter of the
Jews had gross and mighty corruptions in her, which was the height of her
sin, for which God severly plagud and punished her many times: And what if she
had such things in her, that will not in the least defend the mighty
corruptions in your Chapter seeing as I have proved, it never was a true Chapter no nor
never so long as she stands in that falfe Antichristian, National state as she
does; but as for the Chapter of the Jews, it was a true Chapter unto whom God truly
gave his Laws and Ordinances, in the observation and keeping of which, she
might have continued lovely, amiable, and beautiful in his eyes, but yours
has not her Power, Laws and Ordinances from God, but from the Devil and
Antich. Rev. 13.2.4. It is true, it was the sin of the Jews to commit such
gross evils, as they did, and to suffer the offenders amongst them to go
unpunished, contrary to their wholesome Laws and Gods own command, who had
ordained and commanded them, that the soul that committed such and such evils,
should be out off, and destroyed from amongst the people (as you may largely
read in the 4. last Books of Moses) because the Land as well as the people was
an holy Land by virtue of Gods institution of it, and setting it a part for
himself, as well as the people; and therefore he would have had heinous
transgressors to be destroyed, or killed, least the Land should be polluted
and desiled with their wickedness, as he himself speaks, now because they
would not observe the Laws and Ordinances that he had given them, though he
suffered their manners long, and bare much with their sin, in that he fatherly
chastised and corrected them again and again, before he utterly destroyed
them, and anhialated their national Chapter that so they might be left without
excuse, but seeing no Reformatton after so many corrections could not be had,
but their prophanations and gross abominations were so great and continued in,
it caused him at the last utterly to renounce them, and for ever put an end
unto their national C. and Ceremonial Law, which was done at the death of
Christ, when he spoke, and said, it is finished and now he will never any more
return again unto them, to become an husband, as he was to the Nation of the
Jews, though yet he has, as the Scriptures declare an elect remnant and
company amongst them, and at the end of their National Church, Jesus Christ
the eternal Son of God by virtue of that power, which he had received of and
from his Father, changed their Laws and Ordinances, as the History of the Acts
of the Apostles with the rest of the new Testament does fully declare, and he
institued no national, but particular Churches or Congregations, many of which
may be in one Country or nation, and all of them independent bodies, depending
upon none, but only upon Christ their head, and withal instituted for it
spiritual matter, the particulars of which are to be Believers, as I have
already largely proved, and from them only and alone he will accept Service and
homage Esaias. 43.21. and 51.7. for they alone and no others have true right to
take his name in their mouth, and to declare his Statutes and to meddle with
his Law, and Testimony Psalm. 50.16. Prove. 15:8.9. and 21.27. Esaias 8.16. Mar.
4.34. and also instituted for his Church a spiritual Worship, spiritual
Laws, spiritual Government spiritual Ordinances, spiritual Administrations,
which none upon pain of Rebellion against Jesus Christ the son of God and
Wisdom of his father, are to add to, or detract from.

Again, in the second place, it is true, that many of those Churches which
Christ in his new Testament instituted, as the Church of Corinth for one, in
process of time became corrupt, and had gross Offenders in her, yet though at
the first Constitution of the Church of Corinth, Rome and others did consist of
Saints by calling, and sanctified in Christ Jesus Romans 1.7. Cor. 1.1.2. Gal.
1.22. that is to say, such as by their outward conversation did declare, that
they were united by faith to Jesus Christ; and what though afterward they had
corruptions in them, yet that makes nothing at all for you, for first, I put
you to prove, that ever your Chapter was true, which if you cannot do, to plead
that corruptions may be in a true Church, will do you no good, nor serve
nothing to your purpose, nor be no way advantageous to your Chapter which always
even from the first day has been false and antichristian, and what though
Corinth had offenders in her, did God wink at them, or did Paul the Apostle of
the Gentiles connive at their wickedness? no, for he commanded them to cast out
the incestious person, or give him over to Satan, Epist. 1. chp. 5. as he
himself did, Hymeneus and Alexander, that so they may learn not to
blaspheame, 1 Timothy 1.20. which casting out into the world under the Gospel, is
as great a spiritual punishment, as killing of the body was to the Jews
corporal. Also he commands them, that if any of their members were a
fornicatur, or coveteous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, that they should avoyde him, and not keep company with him, no
not so much as to eat with him* ver. 11. But now if this rule should be
narrowly observed in your church, as it ought to be in all true visible
churches of Jesus Christ, I wonder with whom a man should have any spiritual
society or communion, sure I am, not with one amongst ten thousand in your Chapter
no nor with one at all, it being in every respect so grossly papisticall,
antichristian and idolatrous.

Again, as for that place which in the 2 Cor. 12. last end you cite, where he
says, that he was afraid, that he should be troubled among them, not finding
them such as he would, and that he should be humbled among them, in bewayling
mamy which have sinned already, and have not repented of their uncleanenes,
fornication, and lasciviousnes, which they had committed, but if you read the
next chap. you shall see how he threatens them, and tells them, that at his
comeing again (...) th^n, though before he had used gentilenes and mildnes,
yet now he will not spare them, but exercize warrantable sharpne^s and rigor
toward them, accoding to that power which the Lord had given unto him to
edificati^n, and not to destruction, seeing (as he says) he can do nothing
against the truth but for the truth, so that you se, though there were
corruptions amongst them and gross sinners yet there is no conniving at it,
nor no tollerating of it, but sharp and bitter reproving of it. And as for the
rest of those other Scriptures which you cite I answer to them as before, and
grant that there was gross corruptions in many of the Churches recorded in the
New Testament, yet I say and affirm, it was their sin to suffer, for which God
admonished and threatened them, as you may read in the 2. and 3 Chap. of the
Rev. which became they continued constant in their sin, and would not reform
and amend themselves as they ought and had power to have done, God has taken
away his Candlestick o^ heavenly state from them: Whose examples serve for all
other Churches warning, for God has cast them all off and unchurched them,
taking the fo feture of their heavenly Charter, as is to be seen at this day.
Yea also the Chur. in and at Rome it self, though once the Faith thereof was
spoken of to the praise of the Saints therein throughout the whole World Romans
4.8. Yet they also are cast off, and are now no Church of Christ, but is become
long and many years since the seat of Antichrist the man of sin, that son
of perdition who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.4. that is to say, above all Civil Magistrates, yea Emperors kings
and Princes, which the Spirit of God in the Book of the Psalms calls Gods.
And is become the Habitation of Devils and the hold of every fowll spirit, and
a Cage for every unclean and hateful Bird to rest in, with whom all Nations
have been made drunk, and still are, with the wine of the wrath of her
spiritual Fornication, with whom the Merchants of the Earth are grown rich
through the ahoundance of her delicacy^s Rev. 18.2.3. that is to say, her
Officers, which the Spirit of God calls here, Merchants, by virtue of their
Offices, have got fat and rich benefices, which they call Spiritual
Promotions, by which they are mightily swelled up with Pride, Venerie and
Luxury, but their day is shortly a coming, wherein they shall cry with weeping
and wailing for the final destruction of the great spiritual City of Babylon,
saying Alas, Alas, for in one hour she is made desolate and naked. Ver.
15.16.17.18. For she does been drunk with the Blood of the Saints and of the
Martyrs of Jesus Christ which she has spilt in great abundance, like water
upon the ground, but the day is almost come, wherein the Justice of God will
render her a full recompense with Vengence and Fury: Wherefore to you all Gods
people that yet is in her, Come out of her and depart from her, for if you stay
in her you will partake of her sins, in dsobeying Gods commands and so will
be liable and open to his Plagues, wrath and Fury: for her sins have reached
unto the Heavens, and God has remembered her Iniquities. Therefore let us call
together the Archers and valiant Spear-men of the Lord, and according to our
duty Let us set our selves in Array against her, and camp rownd about her, and
shoot at her, without mercy: and let none that belong unto her escape your
spiritual Darts, but let us reward her even as she has rewarded us, and
double unto her double according to her works, in the Cup which she has
filled to us, let us fill to her d^uble: for she has been exceeding proud
against the Lord of Hoasts, even against the Holy One of Israel. Jer.
50.8.14.29. and 51.6.9.10. Rev. 18.4.5.6.

And also, I will maintain that the Church of Rome as it is called,, and as at
this day it stands, and has done for above a Thousand years, neither is nor
never was, a true visible Church of Christ. It is true, there was a true Church
in Rome and at Rome, but never of Rome: the members of which were Saints and
Believers, but the Church of Rome now consists of all sorts and kinds of wicked
and ungodly persons, which they force by spiritual Tyranny if they refuse to
submit unto them. Rev. 13.15.16. Yea the common Strumpets and Whores, that pay
so many thowsands in the year to the Popes Graceless Impiety for keeping
public and open Stew-houses even in Rome it self, for all eommers and goers:
are as good members of the Church thereof and as well accepted of as the best
they have. And thus I have punctually answered the second thing that you desire
your friend to take notice of, which is, that Corruptions may be in a true
Church, which I have granted, but yet have proved that it is their sin: and
the continuance in their corruptions, will overthrow their Essence and being,
and make Christ to begone from them and so unchurch them.

Also I have showed that it serves nothing to the benefit of your Church, seeing
you are not able to prove that ever it was true.

Now to that which I have said, and by the Authority of the sacred word of God
proved, I challenge your particular and punctual Answer in writing wishing you
to go to W. B. and G. W. who hoth have been main sticklers and enemies of late
to the truth of God, professed by the total Separation; and desire their best
and ablest asistance, for I believe that some of your nine flexible Erroneous
and Antichristian Argumenss were dug out of their Leaden Mines, wherefore
with importunity, without any denial, desire them to help you to reply in
writing, to this my public answer, otherwise I will say and proclaim it,
that you all three are fearful cowards, and but the ignorant, dark, night,
bragging and screeching Owls of Antichrist. Now out of that you have largely
proved you say (but I affirm) you have proved nothing at all to the purpose,
you infer those four Conclusions.

1. That all the Descriptions and Definitions of a visible Church, given by the
Separation are all false, because they will have none but Saints in their
Church, to be the matter of it. 2. That all their buildings are false. 3. That
the ground of their Separation is not sound, seeing that in a true visible
Church there have been known wicked men. 4. From hence you infer, that it is
lawful and warrantable to have spiritual Communion mith known wicked men in a
religious worship seeing they are the greatest part of a visible Chapter and then to
conclude all, you say many more things you might have set down if time had
permitted, but these you say are sufficient.

To which I answer, that these four Conclusions are all of them wicked,
Antichristian and damnable: without all warrant in the least from the
Scripture, as as I have already largly proved; therefore they are not in the
least sufficient to satisfy the Conseicnce of any man or woman: I trvly desire
to walk-in Gods ways, therefore if you would still keep your Friend a
subjected servant to Antichrist, as you your self are, then publicly in
writing answer that which here I have writ, otherwise I believe and hope that
you will loose her with many more besides ere long, so leving you unto Baall for
whom you plead and stand up salyng with the spirit of God in Rev. 22.11. he
that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be filthy
still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still, he that is holy let
him be holy still; yet for all that if you belong to Gods Election of Grace, I
desire for you, as it is my duty, that God would reveal his truth, counsels
and secrets unto you, which he does less or more to all those that truly feore
him, Ps. 25.12.14. Pro. 3.32. Mar. 4.34. and that you may give true declaration
of your unfeigned repentance for your great sin, for standing for Antichrists
Kingdom, with all your might, and for so bitter and malicious opposing and
reviling the truth of God, and the true professors thereof, which if God give
you not grace to do, assuredly know, that seeing you have fallen upon the
chief corner stone Jesus Christ, he will destroy and break you, but if he
fall upon, as you may justly fear, he will grind you all to dust and powder,
Mat. 21.44. Therefore as you love your soul, look to it, seeing you are now
admonished by me your Opposite. And so

I rest your opposing Oppugner in the truths behalf against all Antichrist
are ^ours and maintainers thereof, though in most cruel and close imprisonment
in Irons with my bloody Prelaticall enemies desire and hope will shortly put a
period to my days.

John Lilburne.
Anno. 1638. which to me is the second year of Remembrance, and the 21 year
of my age.
From the Fleet the Prelates fiery Furnace, yet to me God that made it a
delightsome and rejoicing Palace and Castle, in which I stand Sentinel night
and day, to defend Sion the City of the living God from her enemies, and to
oppose all her opposers, desiring all my fellow brethren, that profess the
same truth with me, as valiant and worthy Soldiers of Jesus Christ to lend me
their best and corragious assistance, with the choysest of their spiritual
weapons, that sow may have in hand with violence ^ble down in the ground the
tottering confused Tower of Babel These Verses were my meditations one night in
my close Imprisnment after the reading of a pamphlet sung in the streets of
London, in which I was joined as a Traitor with the Scots at their first
comeing into England.

The Lord our God is both firm and stable,
And all his Councels and Decrees unalterable:
Which when they surly shall accomplished be,
The downfall of his enemies we shall see:
Which I by faith do apprehend to be at hand,
Which fills my soul with zeal full fast to stand,
To that renowned cause, for which in bonds I lie.
Seeing his praise and truth does spread thereby.
O happy be the day, that he me brought
Unto my sorrows, for they unto my thought
do serve to be the choysest safety can be found
Upon this vain and empty earthly ground:
For in them my soul such large experience has got
Of that celestial tresure, that never shall rot,
But will for ay and ay endure,
As long as God's both stable, firm and sure:
The like whereof I apprehend can not be had
As liberty, though my estate esteemed be had.
Therefore for ever praised be my God,
That no my house of clay has laid his rod
In loving kindness, mercy, and in favor,
That so my soul from him might never waver.
Wherefore before I will his Truth deny,
Resolv,d I am at Stake to dye.
John Lilburne.

Errata.
p. 2. l.r. Deuteronomy. 16.16. p.l. 12. r to you my l. 18. that her. l. 16. r. so
knit. l. 29. r. ordination of. p 6. l 11. r. best. p. 9. l. 41. r. one of. p.
10. l. 16. dele 54. 7. l. 91. r. yet for all. p. 12. r. of faith l. 29. and
unless. l 31. dele without a lawful authority given and received from him. p
14. l. 13 they are. p. 19. l 3. r. to observe. l. 19. r. I challenge. l. 20. r.
your people. p. 20. l. 28. r. bind. p. 21. l. 21. r. feeding p. 25. l.r.
therefore. p. 26. l. 28. r. Gal. 5. p. 30. l. 25. r. failings p. 31. r. only.
p. 36. r. under l. r. of l. in Syon. p. 39. l.r. never can be. p. 40. l. 13.
dele though.

FINIS.

