THE CHARACTER OF A True Christian: Described in a SERMON AT THE Parish Church
of St. BOTOLPH BISHOPSGATE.

At the FUNERAL of Mr. WILLIAM CADE, DEPUTY of that WARD.

BY JOHN LAKE, D.D. Late RECTOR of that Parish; and now LORD BISHOP of
CHICHISTER.

LONDON, Printed for Obadiah Blagrave at the Black Bear in St. Paul's
Churchyard, over against the little North-Door.

To his much Honored Friend Sir JOSEPH SHELDON, ALDERMAN of the WARD of St.
BOTOLPH BISHOPSGATE.
Sir,
THough I have been thinking a good while with my self, what returns to make
for that great civility and respect I have received from you, yet I could never
meet with such a fit opportunity to express my acknowledgments thereof, as this
present Discourse has furnished me withal. Which I assure you no sooner
offered it self, than I most readily embraced, being exceeding glad that I was
now in a capacity to testify in a public manner that high resentment which I
have of all your kindness, and to remove all occasions of suspecting, that I
was as insensible of your favors, as I confess my felf undeserving of them.
As Soon as I perused the Sermon, I concluded immediately it would prove a
Present very suitable, and by consequence acceptable to your self, because it
bears your own Image, and describes your Character, and not only so, but sets
likewise a Crown upon that head which is encircled with those golden Letters,
and beautified with those goodly Lineaments. Here, Sir, you will read your self
by reading the description of a good man and a good Christian; And for your
greater encouragement to continue and persevere in a due exercise of all those
moral Virtues and Perfections, by which you so much illustrate your place, and
adorn your station, you will here likewise meet with your great recompense of
reward: A Scepter ready to fall into your hands; a Crown ready to environ your
brows; an everlasting Mansion opening wide to receive you; a City above the
reach of flames, a building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. This is the true Christians most sure and certain Reward; and
faithfulness unto death, that is, a constant and sincere obedience to the Laws
of Christ, is his most sure and certain Character.

This Sir, is the Present which with all humility I lay before you, desiring
your acceptance of it, as a testimony of that great respect and service which I
deservedly owe unto you. I confess it had been more satisfaction to me, to have
offered something that was purely my own, though but a bunch of Myrrh, and a
little Frankincense, than to bring with me leaves of Gold, which I have not so
truly borrowed as indeed extorted from a more able hand, the Reverend and
Learned Author of this Discourse. Which (to tell you the truth) had seen the
light many months before, had not the Parents excessive modesty, and the
multitude of Affairs, which he has hitherto been encumbered withal (as well
before the conception, as since the bringing forth) caused him to detain it in
obscurity, and contrary to the piety of the Levites Daughter ( Exodus 2.3.) to
cover it with flags and Northern dust, not to preserve his own production,
though fair and goodly, but to stifle and destroy it.

But I shall spend no time in making an Apology for it; and that for this
reason only, because I know it needs none. If it does not sufficiently
represent the natural Parent, you may please to remember, that it comes to you
by a second hand; which wanting skill to dress and trim it, has rather sullied
the brightness of its complexion, and stained the beauty of it. Much I could
speak in commendation of it, as it appears before you, but more I dare not,
lest I displease my Friend, who though I have spoke but little, will judge it
too much, whereas all that had the happiness to know and understand him, must
needs know and understand this likewise, that his real worth deserves a great
deal more.

I have still one Argument in reserve, which makes me more than confident of
your favorable acceptance of this present address, and that is drawn from the
subject of the discourse it self, or that which gave occasion to it, your
worthy Friend and my honored Kinsman, who is gone before us to enjoy that
Crown, which from all eternity has been designed to incircle the Heads, and
adorn the Temples of all true and faithful Christians. The memory of your
ancient Deputy must needs be precious to you, though after his death, to whom
his person was so acceptable (because so serviceable) during his life. And
indeed there was nothing in him that could render him otherwise than singularly
acceptable to all sober and considerative men: For he was of a truly brave and
manly spirit, such as had nothing of the (...) in it: He feared nothing so
much, as to commit any unhandsome or dishonest action, to offend God or injure
his Neighbor. For my own part I must confess, that J have took more pleasure
and delight in conversing with him, and in the enjoyment of his excellent
society, than ever I did in that fair Revenue which he has left behind him.
For though he was naturally a man of a solid and serious temper of mind, yet it
was so handsomely checkered with such a becoming modesty and gravity, with so
much courtesy and affability, such an obliging carriage and deportment, and
many times with such pleasantness of discourse, that I have rarely met with
such a happy conjunction of moral Virtues, as were visible in him. He was noble
and generous with frugality; civil and sociable with sobriety; just and honest
with mercy and clemency. He fed the hungry, and clothed the naked: He was eyes
to the blind and feet to the lame, and he made the widows heart to sing for
joy. And though sometimes the impertinencies of some that were rash and
inconsiderate, and the unreasonable desires of others that were religiously
perverse and obstinate, might make him break out into a little heat and
passion, yet it never was of any long continuance; like a flash of Lightning,
it vanished with its appearance; and though it rose many hours after the Sun,
yet it was quick in motion, and (according to the Apostles directions) was
always set before it.

But as it is not proper for me, so neither is it my design to bestrew his
earth with violets and roses, or to illustrate his Marble with gilded banners.
As to this, I am very happily prevented by a more skilful hand in the
conclusion of this Discourse. Though (to say the truth) he himself has done it
much better than either of us both. His excellent life and conversation has
perfumed his memory, and made his name to send forth more fragrant odours, than
all the precious Ointment we can cast upon it. By his prudence and charity (of
which he had very large proportions) he raised a Monument to himself more
durable than the framed Stones of Paros, and by continuing faithful unto death,
has shrin'd his Ashes in an immortal Urn.

But I am afraid I have tired you too much already with this tedious Epistle,
and therefore do humbly crave your pardon; which I have but little reason to
doubt of, considering your excellent temper and disposition, which I understand
so well, that I verily believe I can do nothing to displease you. And though
the strength of my affections has carrried me out into a short Panegyric of
our deceased Friend, yet for this I hope I shall not meet with any rigid
censure, seeing it is but a just return of civility to him, who both living and
dying did always abound in all imaginable expressions of love and kindness unto
me. And now, Sir, J dare assure you, I have but very few things to add, before
J kiss your hands and bid you Farewell.

One thing J desire to acquaint you withal, before you come so far as to take
notice of it, that in all this Discourse there is no mention made of our
Friends Pedigree and Extraction. Neither was the Reverend Author, when he
Preached the Sermon, desired by me to enlarge upon that subject. For though he
was descended of worthy Ancestors, who for several years lived in good credit
and repute at a Countrey-Village called Boughton in Nottingham-shire, yet
methinks all that honor and glory which we derive from our Progenitors, is not
so much to be prized and valued, as personal worth and acquired eminency. The
Spaniards have a Saying amongst them, which comes now into my mind; Al hombre
bueno no busques abolengo, i. e. Never trouble thy self to enquire after the
Pedigree of a virtuous man. His own excellency is enough to make him esteemed
in the world; and a good name purchased by virtuous actions, shall far out
shine all those great and glorious Titles, which an ancient House, and a
renowned Family can convey unto us.

And thus it was with this worthy Person; His own wisdom and prudence made his
countenance to shine, and whilst he lived advanced his fame and reputation in
the world, and having served his generation for several years, conducted at
last his gray bairs with honor to the grave. He did not so much receive a
luster from his House and Kindred, as added of himself a remarkable light and
brightness to it: Not unlike the Sun, which makes both the Heavens and Earth to
glister and shine, not with any borrowed Rays and reflected Beams, but with his
own naked Splendour.

I shall not trouble you here with a Catalogue of his charitable works at his
decease, because they have long since been publicly divulged, and the persons
concerned, already in actual possession of them. Not that I would conceal any
thing out of any by respect or reservation to my self, but because I look upon
it as an unnecessary performance. For as for my self, I have been so far from
falling short of a most punctual execution of his will and pleasure, that in
sundry particulars (especially where love and kindness and charity were
concerned) I I have far outdone it. And so conscious to my self I am of my own
faithfulness and integrity, that I dare publicly bid the world defiance to tax
me with any one particular action, that may in the least bespeak me either
Uncharitable or Unjust. That which I can tax my self withal, and which does
still afflict my spirit, is principally this, that the great care, diligence,
and circumspection, which I used in the management of these secular affairs,
did eat up so much of my precious time, and unavoidably drew me from the
exercise of my Function, in which I always took so much contentment and
satisfaction. But now having discharged that trust which Gods providence has
laid upon me, I am ready to return to my Masters service, to which I doubt not
in the least but that his goodness will speedily restore me, as his wisdom
thought fit for a season to draw me from it.

But, Sir, I forget my self, and much more you.

That I may not beyond all measure abuse your patience, I will choose rather to
break off abruptly, with this short, though duplicate Petition.

First, That the world may daily abound with such worthy persons as your self
and our deceased Friend, men (...) clothed about with abundance of wisdom,
understanding, justice, and integrity, that by this means virtue and true
goodness may be encouraged, and vice and wickedness may be discountenanced,
though it bear it self out with a brazen brow, and a conscience many times of
as course a metal.

Secondly, and to conclude, That for all your respect and kindness to me God
may reward you abundantly, and return it a hundred and a hundred fold into your
bosom: That peace, and plenty, and length of days, may be your portion here in
this world; and glory, and honor, and immortality, in the world to come: Which
is the earnest prayer, and hearty desire of

Sir, Your very humble, and Very much obliged Servant, James Cade.
Morefields, August 2. 1671.
THE TRUE CHRISTIANS CHARACTER and CROWN.
REVEL. 2.10. -- Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.


I Have no sooner read my Text, but I know you have accommodated it to the
occasion of this time, the Funerals of our deceased Brother; whom I may fitly
call the Transcript of it. Whilst he lived he was the Transcript of the former
part, even faithful unto death; and he is now become the Transcript of the
latter part, God (no doubt) having given him, as the reward of his
faithfulness, a crown of life. There you might behold him in his spiritual
(...), pressing toward the mark; now enjoying the price of his high calling.
There running with patience the race that was set before him; now entered into
his rest. There, in short conquering, now triumphing; there winning, now
wearing the crown. In the former, he went before us, as our example; in the
latter, he is gone before us, as our encouragement: And it will be our honor
and happiness to follow him in both.

The words are part of an Epistle to the Angel ( i.e. the Bishop) of the Church
of Smyrna; Polycarpus was the Angel or Bishop of this Church, as Ecclesiastical
History has informed us. See Eusebius. li. 4. cap. 14, 15. There is extant an
Epistle of Ignatius to this Polycarpus, and another of his to the Church of
Smyrna, of which Polycarp was Bishop. By which it appears of how great
antiquity Episcopacy is, being as ancient as the Apostles themselves, whose
immediate successors the Bishops most certainly were. Polycarpus non solum ab
Apostolis eruditus, (...). Eusebius. loco citat. f. 127.
but it comes open to us, and it will not be rudeness, but our wisdom and duty
to look into it, and take out the Lesson. I mean not here to reveal the
Revelation, or to unclasp the sealed book; to cast the water of the seven
Vials, or to make the Trumpets give a certain sound. The mystical part of this
Book I leave to those who love to see where they have no light, and to look
most upon God where he hides himself from them. My Text is a piece of plain
Morality; a business not of the head, but of the heart. Here are no Riddles,
unless of love and wonder, that God should twist our duty with our interest,
and encourage the short exercise of virtue with everlasting rewards;
faithfulness in a little, so it be unto death with a crown of life, which
knows neither measure nor end.

Accordingly the words present you with 1. A Precept, 2. A Promise, 3. The
necessary connection of both.


The first, contains man's duty; Be thou faithful. The second, Gods Grace; I
will give thee, etc. The third, the mutual relation, and dependence of the one
upon the other; Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.

I begin with the Precept (as you also must do, if ever you would attain the
promised crown) and there are these two things in it: (1.) The duty it self, Be
thou faithful. (2.) The extent of that duty, unto death.


The first thing that offers to our consideration is the duty it self, which
contains (...) the whole of man, and consists in the careful and
conscionable discharge of all the rest. This is Universal Officium, an Office
of universal necessity and importance. What is spoken to this Angel, speaks
to me, to you, and to every one that has an ear to hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches.

Most men are apt enough (if not too much) to read this Lesson to the Angels of
the Churches: To say unto Archippus Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it; Col. 4.17.
and it is well if they say it in such modest terms as these. They are better
acquainted with his duty than their own, and are rigid exacters of it. That
burden which even real, much more these metaphorical Angels, are insufficient
for, they aggravate upon them, and weigh them out their work by the Shekel of
the Sanctuary. They must be Angels, not in name and style only, but in all the
measures of Angelical Perfection; and wherein they fall, or seem to fall short,
each man darteth his (...) Be thou faithful, at them; and does not so much
admonish, as censure and upbraid them.

But however men may turn the edge of this exhortation another way, yet it is
levelled at all; speaks to as many as desire and expect the crown, and none
may exempt himself, or plead a privilege. Christ (as occasion is) says aliis
alia, several things to several men; one thing to one, and another to another,
according to their various necessities and capacities: but this omnibus and
singulis, to all and every one, and whatever his place and state is, he must
adorn it with fidelity.

This is not a mere Evangelical Counsel for those that would be great in the
Kingdom of Heaven, that would have crowns more rich and radiant than their
fellows, or not content with crowns, would have coronets added to them for
their supererogatory virtue and merit. It is not appropriate to Christians of
the highest form in Christ's School, or whose place and state gives them the
advantage of singular perfection. It is not confined to the Monks Cloister and
Cowl; to those that live out of the world whilst they are in it. The Laity may
not shuffle it off to the Clergy, nor men of the active to men of the
contemplative life: But it is the duty of all Christ's Disciples in common,
absolutely necessary to constitute them Christians, and to make them capable of
being Saints.

It says unto the Magistrate, Be thou faithful: Behave thy self as one that is
Gods Vicegerent upon earth, that holds his place, represents his person, and
has the impress of his power: See that thou bear neither the Scepter, nor the
Sword in vain; but stand up like Phinehas, and execute judgment, lest thou fall
under the stroke of it thy self. See that God and his Honor (to whom thou
owe all thine) suffer no detriment. Reflect those beams of his with which
thou shinest, and be in effect (...), the breathing Image of God.

It says unto the Minister, Be thou faithful: Take heed to thy self, and to
thy Doctrine. Be a pattern to the Believers, in word, in conversation, in
charity, 1 Timothy 4.16. Ibid. v. 12.
in spirit, in faith, in purity. Shine like a Star, burn like a Seraphim; and
think Christ has fixed thee in so eminent a Sphere, that should shed thy
rays upon all about thee. Watch for those Souls which God has given thee in
charge, as at the peril of thine own; and when thy Lord comes, let him find
thee so doing.

It says unto the rich and honorable, Prove. 3.9.
Be thou faithful: Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of thy increase. Thy lot is fallen to thee in a good ground, only be
thou careful to cultivate and improve it. Know, God has given to thee that he
might give to others by thee, and if thou embezzle or bury thy Talents, they
will only aggravate thy account. Thy opportunities and advantages set thee
nearer heaven, and give thee the capacities of a more orient crown, if thou will work salvation out of them: but otherwise they will add precipitation to
thy ruin. Thy authority and example are very influential, and thou can
neither perish nor be saved but in state; and therefore in respect to other
men's souls, be faithful to thine own.

It says yet again to the poor and abject, Be thou faithful: Faithful, though
in a little: And by how much less it is, thy care is more concerned to use it
well, and to make up what is wanting in stock, by a wise and faithful
improvement of it; like Zachaeus, supplying what he lacked in stature by
climbing up into a Sycamore Tree. Thou may be zealous for God, though thou
can not make so great a blaze; and moving in a lower and lesser Sphere, thou
may the better fill it. Another stands upon higher, but thou upon safer
ground; and with smaller helps and means thou have fewer temptations also.

Briefly, it says to every man, of what kind, degree, or quality soever he is,
(...), Be thou faithful: Faithful in thy general, and faithful in thy special
calling; faithful to God, to man, to thine own soul; faithful in all relations
and conditions, and in all the actions and offices both of common and christian
life. Give suum cuique to every one his due; to God his due, and to thy
neighbor his. Attend the place and station wherein God has set and settled
thee; finish the work which he has given thee to do, and refer the wages to
him, who never fails to pay his servants that which he has promised them.

Thus the duty of the Text looks on every man alike, and is his faithful
Monitor. He may hear this as a voice behind him, Is. 30.21.
saying, This is the way, walk in it, when he turns to the right hand, and
when he turns to the left.

One man cannot be as enlarged in his piety, as diffusive in his charity, as
useful in his place, as another of greater abilities and opportunities, but he
may and must be as faithful in his measure. Some other duties have their
peculiar objects and appropriations to times, persons, places, with the like;
but faithfulness is an ingredient to all, and gives them acceptance. Our
Savior puts wise and faithful servant together, Matthew. 24.45. good and
faithful servant together, Mat. 25.21. and as he is not a wise, who is not a
good; so he is neither wise, nor good, who is not a faithful servant also. St.
Paul recounts this as a special mercy from God to be found faithful, 1 Cor.
7.25. and it is the Crown of Antipas his Cross, that he was Christ's faithful
Martyr, Revel. 2.13. He that without this gives his body to the fire, only
takes Hell by violence, and the first death consigneth him only to the sencond.

We call Christ Lord and Master, and we say well, for so he is; but it is not
enough to treat him with this easy formality, and to pass such cheap
complements upon him, unless we pay him that fidelity which is due from
servants to their Master, and that humble and loyal alliegeance which is due
from subjects to their sovereign Lord. God is faithful for his part, 1 These.
5.24.
(...), Faithful is he that has called you, who also will do it. The Gospel is
faithful for its part (...), 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
This is a faithful saying, that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. Christ is faithful for his part, (...), The faithful and true
witness; Rev. 3.14.
or (as he is also styled) (...), he that says Amen to both. And accordingly
those that are, Rev. 17.14.
or expect to be with Christ, must be (...), called, and chosen, and faithful;
not called and chosen only (for this every one will arrogate and assume, and in
the want of other evidence vote himself so) but faithful also; and herein they
approve themselves called and chosen, because they have obtained mercy to be
Faithful.

Yet men are not with more ease called and chosen, than (admitting their own
conceits) they are faithful too: And, in their sense of it, they are faithful
more than enough. So faithful, that they can at once provoke Gods justice, and
trust in his mercy, and rely upon Christ's merits without doing any thing that
he commands. So faithful, that they can at once sin and saint themselves, and
securely expect to be saved by him whom they daily crucify. So faithful, that
their faith removes mountains, Mount Sinai and Mount Zion at once, the Law
both of Moses and Christ. So faithful in short, that they can reconcile the
most unchristian practices with the faith and affiance of a Christian; the
confutation and contradiction of the whole Gospel with hopes and comforts of
it; ( i. e. faithfulness with the greatest unfaithfulness in the world;) and
whilst they take Hell by violence of endeavor, take Heaven by violence of
usurpation.

Such faithful ones as these the world is full of; who have such a plerophory
or fullness of faith, that none of the other virtues or duties of Christianity
can find room with them; so faithful, that they do only believe. But this is
Insidelis fiducia, an Infidel faith, faith without fidelity. Which kind of
unfaithful, unfruitful faith, has damned more, than a true faith in Christ his
name has saved; and the more any man believes with it, the more he may
tremble. This faith when Christ comes he shall find upon the earth, and scarce
then be able to beat men out of it. Many shall say to him, even in that day,
Domine, Domine, Lord, Lord, we are they that have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets; and if such as we find not
admittance and acceptance with thee, who shall? But in all this true faith will
be hard to be found; and it is neither slander, nor solaecism to say, that the
greater part of the Christian world (in this sense) is Infidel.

True faith is that which makes a man faithful to Christ, Lib. 3. de Gubern.
Dei. p. 70. and l. 4. p. 100.
and to keep all his commands faithfully (as Salvian defined it long since)
which makes us Christi fideles, Christ his liege-men, in the same sense that
they are called Regis fideles, the Kings liege-subjects and servants, who yield
that homage and fealty to him which they owe.

This was Abraham's faith, Heb. 11.17, 24, 26.
by which he offered up his only son Isaac, and himself a whole burnt-offering
with him. This was Moses his faith, which made him esteem the very reproach of
Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt. This was the faith of
the glorious company of the Apostles, of the goodly fellowship of the Prophets,
of the noble army of Martyrs and Confessors, which exerted it self in the
sanctimony of their lives; their strict observation of the divine laws; their
persevering in holy actions with patience and hope; their despising earthly,
their prizing and pressing after heavenly things; their contempt of death;
their courage for Christ; and all the other instanees of an excellent piety and
virtue.

From this active faith (faith commensurate to fidelity) they, and all good
Christians, are not only called, but constituted faithful: not from that
unactive easy faith, which makes men rest wholly upon what Christ has done
for them, without doing any thing either for him, or for themselves; which
leans hard upon his Cross, but does not take it up; and believes in, not
obeys him. This makes faith a very accountable thing, and well worthy of
that wisdom and holiness which has attributed so much to it in the Gospel; as
that by faith we are justified, by faith we live, by faith we are saved, i. e.
by a faith which so believes in Christ, as by believing to love him, by loving
to adhere to him, and by adhering to him to live and dye in his embraces; which
sacrifices a man's whole honor and interest to the service of Christ and his
own salvation; and thinks nothing too much that he can do or suffer for
Christ, who has wrought such wonders of mercy for him.

To be faithful then (in the notion of my Text) consists not in giving a naked
assent to the Doctrins of Christianity; not in arrogating and appropriating to
our selves the promises of the Gospel, or rather promising to our selves that
which the Gospel promises us not; nor yet in the most steadfast recumbency upon
Christ, or the strongest application of his merits to our souls: But it
consists,

(1.) In praestandis promissis, in performing of our own, as well as exacting
Gods promises at his hands. And as he is faithful that has promised, so
likewise must we; we stand engaged by our Baptismal Vow and Covenant to forsake
the Devil and all his works; and we add treachery and perjury to sin if we do
not. We have devoted our selves Christ's faithful soldiers and servants; and we
break both our faith and our oath, and are Renegado's from our Profession if we
fight not against sin, the world, and the Devil (much more if we fight for
them) under his banner. Gregor. Hom. 29. in Evang.
Tunc veraciter fideles sumus, si quod verbis promittimus, operibus complemus.
Then, and only then, we are truly faithful, when we copy out in deeds, what we
covenanted in words, and our life is the counterpart to our profession. This is
(...), that answer of a good conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. when a man
can put that Baptismal Question to himself again, Abrenuncias? Do thou
renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh? and his conscience can echo to
it, Abrenuncio, I renounce them all; and he has renounced his Baptism that
cannot, and forfeited Gods part of the Covenant, by violating his own.

(2.) To be faithful consists, In peragendis officiis, in executing the duties
of our place and calling, and fulfilling (...), all Gods wills; Act. 13.22.
both what he will have us to do, and what he will have us to suffer; that
which is contrariant to our humors and interest, as well as that which is
consistent and complyant with them. When we come unto Christ, not only with
Domine salva, Lord save us, we perish; but with Domine quid me vis facere? Lord
what will thou have me to do? When we go on (...), Romans 1.17.
from faith to faith; from faith believing, to faith obeying the Gospel; and
whoever believes but obeys not the Gospel, contradicts both himself and it
in that very act; for the Gospel teaches him to acknowledge and believe, that
Christ is become the Author of eternal salvation (...), Heb. 5.9.
to them only that obey him. Christ must and will have a throne in every soul,
where he erects his mercy-seat; and they must submit to his scepter to whom he
holds it forth; and swear fealty, if they would have their pardon. As they
must not make him all Prince, so not all Savior neither; but have faith in him
as a Savior, fidelity to him as a Prince. Otherwise they may vaunt themselves
in the specious name and title of Believers, but faithful they are not.

He only is a faithful, who is a dutiful servant; who is active in his own
Sphere, though not pragmatick out of it. Who when Christ bids go, he goes;
come, he comes; do this, he does it: and having chosen Christ, leaves him to
choose all the rest. In short, let Christ give the word, and (as Cushi to Joab)
he boweth the head and runs. Whatever the instance is, he is Christ's humble
servant; and (having learned not to dispute, but to obey) says (as Christ has
taught him both by his doctrine and example) Thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness. Mat. 3 15.
But again,

(3.) To be faithful consists, In elocandis talentis, in putting to use those
talents (whether of nature, or of fortune, or of grace) which God puts into
our hands, not to treasure up, but traffic with, and to occupy, not possess
only. Even he that has but one talent owes God an account of it; and (in an
apt proportion) as our receipts are, Mat. 24.24.
shall our reckoning be. He was an evil servant, that called God an hard
Master, gathering where he had not strewed, and reaping where he had not sown.
Our good God (of whom nothing is to be said or conceived but what is good)
requires no more of any man than he gives; or no more but the employment and
improvement of it. But withal he is an evil and unfaithful, Mat. 24.26.
who is a slothful servant; and the talents which he now burieth, shall rise up
to his condemnation. God, though he is a bounteous, yet he is not an
improvident Master: but he keeps an exact Audit both of our receipts, and of
our returns, and if they correspond not, will severely avenge the careless or
faithless neglect. Even Paradise it self wanted dressing; and the very best
gifts and graces of God in us will contract and gather rust, if they be not
kept in exercise; and be ready to decay and dye for want of stirring up. God in
the mean time gives us his talents but in trust, to negotiate with for his use
and our own benefit; and has herein made us not proprietaries, but stewards;
and it is required in stewards, 1 (...) 4.2.
that a man be found faithful. We may take our Bill and set down fifty, where
an hundred is due: but when it comes to be conferred with Gods debt-book, we
shall be eternally ashamed and confounded. Once more,

(4.) To be faithful consists, In servandis depositis, in keeping those things
that are committed to our charge, and which God will one day redemand at our
hands.

Such for instance is, The calling wherein God has called us. For Christianity
calls not men from their calling, but to it, and would conjure them (as it
were) within that circle. 1 Cor. 7.20.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called; abide in it as
in his proper place and sphere, out of which he cannot be safe. He that has a
Ministry, must wait on his Ministering; and he that has none must not invade
it. Our condition of life in this world, and our calling to another, may stand
well together; or rather cannot stand, unless together. Let Romes cloistered
Monks, under color of singular religion and devotion, embrace an idle and
unprofitable life; and those Monks at large amongst us, in pretense to follow
the call of Christ, forsake their own, and take Satan's calling out of his hand,
which is to go to and fro in the earth, and to walk up and down in it; yet St.
Paul censureth all such, as walking (...), irregularly and disorderly, out of
their rank, and beside the Christian Rule, 2 These. 3.11. Even those that suffer
the outward exercises of Religion (especially Hearing of Sermons, then
commending, or confuting them, and doing all the contrary) to eat out the
necessary duties of their calling (which is not zeal, but a religious kind of
sloth) they also offer but the sacrifice of fools; and they might serve Christ
more acceptably in the seasonable discharge of the duties of their special
calling, than in this importunate attendance upon those that immediately
concern his worship. To live honestly in our calling, is a piece of that
faithfulness which we owe to our great Master; not to live idly out of one.

Another of those Deposita which are faithfully to be kept is, Romans 6.17.
That form of Doctrine which has been delivered to us, or to which we have
been delivered. This St. 2 Timothy 2.2.
Paul commits and commends to Timothy, that he may commit the same to
faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. And thus by a constant
succession it is come handed down to us, and we should keep it as the most
precious (...), the richest treasure on this side Heaven; lay it up (as the
Virgin Mother of our Lord laid up his sayings) in our heart, and wear it in
effect engraven there. This faith which was once delivered to the saints
(delivered of old, Jude v. 7.
not lately devised, and once delivered, i. e. once for all) we should
earnestly contend for; remember how we have received and heard, and hold fast,
and even dye in the defense, if we cannot live in the peaceable enjoyment of
it. And this brings on

A third and last Depositum, no less faithfully to be kept, viz. faith and a
good conscience, which whoever puts away sinketh and makes Shipwreck. 1 Pet.
1.5.
We are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; and therefore
should keep this at the utmost peril of our soul. As the doctrine of faith must
be kept sacred and inviolable, so likewise the grace of it. Heb. 10.23.
We must hold fast the profession hereof (...), without wavering or warping,
either to the right hand, or to the left: and stand unshaken against all the
winds and waves of persecution, Tertul. in Apol.
as being founded upon rock. Even when crimen nominis fit nomen criminis, when
the mere crime of the christian name is accounted the name of a prodigious
crime, yet we must hold fast our profession still; Ps. 31.19.
trust in Christ (...), before the sons of men: And although they may take away
our life, Rev. 3.11.
yet let them not take away our crown. Hence we are said by Baptism to put on
Christ, Gal. 3.27.
so as to wear the profession of him uppermost; and when at any time we deny or
dissemble our profession, we in effect put him off again. Such night-walkers as
Nicodemus, who come not to Christ but under the veil of darkness, are only the
ghosts of Christianity. For those that in storm cast faith and good conscience
overboard to save their temporal concerns, and will deny Christ rather than
themselves, they choose a mischief before an inconvenience, commute an
inselicity for a crime, and to avoid a faggot incur hell fire.

But enough of the duty it self, (...), Be thou faithful. And before I am well
aware I am fallen upon the next particular, viz.

(2.) The extent of that duty, (...), unto death; In Adman. ad Graecos.
or as Clemens Alexandrinus phraseth it (...), to the very last gasp, even
breathing out our soul in it. As we must run the race that is set before us, so
we must run it (...), Heb. 12, 1.
with patience and perseverance, nor is the crown consigned to those that
contend, but those that overcome. St. Paul himself triumphs not when he
puts on his harness, but when about to put it off. He knows there is laid
up for him a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
but de reliquo, henceforth only; when he was now a veterane in the Christian
Warfare, had already spent a long life, and had nothing left but to dye in it.

I know most men's assurance is upon easier terms, and of an earlier date.

One fancieth to himself a kind of fatal decree, which necessarily attaineth
its end though he never set foot in the way thither; and Henceforth there is
laid up for him a crown of life. In Gods dark book (by what perspective I know
not) he reads his name written, and that with such indelible characters, as all
the Devils in hell, all the fins upon earth, cannot blot it out. And now
instead of giving diligence to make his election sure, he is pleased at cheaper
rates to think it so: So sure, that nothing can resist his happiness, much less
reverse his destined bliss. The force of his nativity will carry him to the
crown; or God in his own defense must do it, as he would have his eternal
counsel made good.

Another having dreamed himself into a state of grace, is securely confident he
can never fall from it, and Henceforth there is laid up for him a crown of
life. His calling he thinks sure, and then his crown must be so too. He is kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation, and now needs keep himself no
longer. He may as well fear that the Heavens themselves should fall, or God
himself fall out of them, as he fail of the crown. Unless Gods eternal purpose,
unchancheable promise, and almighty power, fail first, he cannot; for they are
all engaged in his defense.

A third has been faithful, and run well for a time, and Henceforth there is
laid up for him a crown of life. He looks so much at the things which are
past, that he forgets the things which are before; and whilst he thinks
that the strength of his first impulse will carry him like an Arrow to the
Mark, he falls down in the midst of his course, like a Bird that is weary of
her flight; and so is cast by Vincenti dabitur, It shall be given to him that
overcomes. His zeal perhaps (like a Torch in an high wind) makes a great
blaze, but soon swealeth it self a way; and when the Bridegroom comes, his
lamp is gone out, and all his vain hopes and expectations with it.

Thus do vain men sport themselves in their own deceivings: But God is not
mocked. He looks not at beginnings in Christians, but at their ends: and not he
that starteth first, but he that continues to the last shall be crowned. Ye
did run well, says St. Gal. 5.7.
Paul to his backsliding Galatians, who did hinder you? God for certain did
not. He carries us on to the end, and crowns us in it, if we draw not back,
and drive him from us. But whoever did, they lost all that they had done, yea
and all that they had suffered too, and stood only as monuments of their own
ruin. Let a man have renounced the most darling delights, undergone the
harshest duties and severest disciplines of Christianity, have sustained
infamies, injuries, and all manner of indignities for righteousness sake; yet
revolting at last, defeateth and destroys all, and himself with it. If he
will have his old sins again, he shall have the guilt together with them, and
that aggravated with folly and ingratitude. Lot's Wife, by looking back
perishes in the very Confines of Zoar; and God therefore erected her into a
Pillar to tell the World, that relenting Virtue ki^leth with the recoil. The
latter part of our life, supplanteth the former; and God takes us as he
finds us at his appearing and his coming.

If after all, men can attain this Crown better cheap, I envy not their ease:
only, in a case of such high concernment, I would have them careful, that they
lose not their soul for a pleasing conceit, and perish fatally, whilst they
think to be saved so. Let the Candidates of so rich and radiant a Crown, be but
as perseverant in good, as the Candidates of wrath and death are in evil; let
them take Heaven but with such violence as these take Hell, and they cannot
miscarry: And do they expect God to deal with them upon greater disproportions?
I am sure they serve a better Master, have nobler employments, greater
encouragements; a crown that shall last as long as God is God, and run parallel
with the ages of eternity; and may therefore more than recompense the services
and sufferings of a short life.

Faithful unto death then he must be, that would be crowned after it; and not
unto death only, but even in and into it also. As he must offer up his body a
living sacrifice to God, so (if occasion be) a dying one too; Act. 21.13.
being ready (with St. Paul) not only to be bound (as the sacrifices were
wont) but to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus: And he is most unworthy of
that high and honorable name, who will not take up the most painful and
ignominious Cross that wears the inscription of Jesus of Nazareth upon it.
Matthew. 5.10, 11.
This name will plait his thorns into a crown, turn persecution into a
beatitude, and the flames of Martyrdom into Bonfires of joy. This will make him
sing at the stake like a dying Swan; suffer death with more serenity and
satisfaction, than the witty cruelty of his enemies inflicts it; lie down in a
bed of flames, as if it were a bed of roses; and having prayed for his
murderers, to fall a sleep.

And if the Heathens have thought it discreetly eligible to give their life a
ransom for fame or virtue, well may the Christian (who is an Heir of better
hopes) do this to eternal and never failing purposes: to secure Christ's
honor, his own innocence, and to have Gems added to his Crown. Death herein
shoots its sting but to lose it, and though it kill him, it cannot hurt him:
all it can do is but to kill the body, i. e. to prevent a more lingering death
by the feeble hand of sickness, or old age, and to cure it of those diseases
which kill with equal certainty, and greater torment. And for the Soul (which
is the better part, if not the whole of man) it knocks but off its chains and
fetters, and restores it to it self, and to God that gave it. Thus whilst we
seem to love God better than our selves, we never love our selves so well as in
this very act; for if in love and loyal duty to God we lay down our life for
him, he will give it us again, and a crown of bliss and immortality together
with it.

And here, passing over from the precept to the promised reward, I might (if I
had affections and expressions answerable to the matter in hand) rap both my
self and you into St. Paul's Ecstasy, 'till we were even lost in it. But these
are (...), unspeakable words, 2 Cor. 12.4.
(as St. Paul, by a pretty seeming contradiction, calls them.) All the tongues
of men and Angels are here too short; or, if they could speak, who could hear?

It shall suffice to give you a transient glimpse of this Crown, so far as may
encourage your fidelity and constancy in God's service; and not the least
glimpse of it, but will make all the labors and sufferings of this life vanish
in the comparison.

A Crown then it is; and what can be said or conceived more and greater? Exerce
ambitionem tuam, set thy utmost ambition on work, thou man of desires; here is
that which will fill all the appetites of it. The most towering thought rises
no higher than a Crown, or only to set one Crown upon another: and were other
Crowns accumulated 'till they reached to this, they would cast down themselves
before this crown of life, this crown of glory, which fades not away. Within
the compass of this crown meets all that Religion or Reason calls the
chiefest good: as so many orient jewels in this crown, there is perfect
knowledge, perfect holiness, 1 Cor. 15.27.
perfect peace, perfect love, perfect joy; and, which is the Crown of this
Crown, here is God All in all. The Woman in Revel. 12.1. has a crown of twelve
Stars upon her head: but were all the Stars united into one Constellation, and
should dishevel all the pride and glory of their beams, it would not equal the
glory of this Crown, but be as a dark and opacous shadow to it.

Through the light and luster which this crown will shed upon us, all faithful
Christians (according to the promise of our Savior, Mat. 13.43. Dan. 12.3.
and the corresponding predictions of the Prophets) shall shine like the Sun in
the Kingdom of their Father, even as the brightness of the Firmament, and as
the Stars forever, and ever.

Should our now deceased Brother from under this crown, see what scuffling
there is for Crowns and Scepters (those fine gay gilded Nothings) here below,
he would look upon it with such becoming scorn, as a Philosopher upon Boys
scrambling for shells of Nuts, and fiercely contending for tinsel gayeties of
no greater value.

The richest of these crowns (...), Plut. de Tranquil. animi.
cannot keep off, or cure a fit of the headache; but within the circle of this
Crown comes neither sorrow nor pain.

The glory of these crowns, dum nitet cadit, whilst it glittereth, falls and
breaks; makes a blaze like a Meteor, then shoots, and dies out; but this
crown only burnisheth with the wearing, the massy glory whereof, no time, no
eternity impaireth.

These crowns at best are more honorable than happy; sit heavy upon the head
which they seem to adorn; and whilst they sparkle with Diamonds, are stuffed
with thorns. But the joys of this Crown equal the glories of it; with their
crowns the Saints have harps, and free from all inward and outward
distractions, do nothing but in consort with the Angels, sing soft requiem's to
themselves, and triumphant songs of joy and praise to God and to the Lamb, who
is blessed for evermore.

Thus is Christianity certamen, sed bonum, a fight, but a good one: whilst
Kings have usually their Crowns crossed, the faithful Christian has his Cross
crowned; and that weight of glory which this Crown has in it, may make all the
labor of duty, and pressure of the Cross, mere ease and delight. Let Atheists
and Epicures look upon the Divine life but as a zealous frenzy, such as has no
real object, nor solid fruits, and scorn or pity the strict Professors of it,
as men soberly and gravely beside themselves; and erect in their own fancies, a
kind of Spiritual Bedlam for them. Yet these fools for Christ, will be found
the only wise and happy men, when Hell shall be no longer a painted Fire, nor
Heaven a fools Paradise; but weeping, and wailing shall put scoffing out of
countenance, and the scorner's chair become more uneasy than Phalaris his
Bull; they that sat in it, shall gnash their teeth, and become their own
Tormentors, to see those religious sneaks crowned with majesty and glory, whom
they had so much derided and despised.

Why then, Opus deterret? mercedem vide. Does the work affright you? consider
the reward. If the way seems irksome and unpleasant, the end is blissful and
happy. Look not upon what you are called to do and suffer, but beyond both to
the glorious reward, and faint if you can.

(...). Pro. 10.7. Sept.
ANd now what have I been doing all this time, but presenting our deceased
Brother before you? In showing what you should be, I have only showed what he
was; and in showing what you shall be, I have showed what he is: And by a meet
application of generals to particulars you may read it over in him.

We live in an age wherein we may too truly complain with the Psalmist, Ps.
12.1.
The faithful are perished from the children of men: and out of that small
remnant which was left, we have now lost one, that might have stood for a great
many. A faithful man, and a faithful Christian. One that (according to the
impress of that Company, to which he was a good benefactor) weaved truth with
trust, and in so close a web, that nothing could divide betwixt them.

He was faithful to God, and to the interests of Religion. A man of a sober
piety, and well tempered zeal. One that affected Religion for it self, leaving
the empty pomp to those that blaze more, but burn less; and was content to be,
what they desire to seem. That talkative Religion, which spends it self in
hearing much, speaking more, and doing nothing, he was not emulous of; but of
the active and operative; and instead of speaking great things, did live them.
Whilst others were carried about with every wind of Doctrine, he held fast the
Profession of his Faith, and died in the Communion of that Church in which he
was born, and did the public Worship reputation by his constant and regular
attendance upon it.

He was faithful to the King, as every man that is faithful to God must and
will be; for Christianity has adopted Alliegeance into the Family of Religion,
twisted piety with loyalty, and owneth no man as a good Christian who is not a
good Subject also: and such therefore was he. One that submitted himself to
every ordinance of man (...), for the Lords sake; and served the King with as
much earnestness and diligence, as others oppose him.

He was also faithful to his neighbor. One that did affirm truth perform
promises, keep contracts, that was humble, peaceable, just, merciful; that
obliged all, injured or offended none; and if all were like to him, the word of
a Christian might be, as of old it was, the greatest solemnity of stipulation
in the world. He was none of those half-faced Christians that clash the two
Tables one against another, and break the second with the first; who set up the
duties of piety for a blind, that they may violate those of justice and charity
more secretly and securely. He was none of those that make long prayers the
preface to devouring of Widows houses, and fasting twice a week the cover for
their dishes full of extortion and excess. None of those in short that sue out
a divorce betwixt piety and probity; and when they are less than Heathens, will
be more than Christians. Though he could not make our Savior's challenge,
Which of you convinces me of sin? yet good old Samuel's he boldly might, Whose
ox have I taken? whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defranded, or
oppressed? and all that knew him would be his compurgatours. Trace him through
all relations and conditions (and there are few which he passed not through
amongst you) and you will scarce find a stain, much less a blemish upon his
memory.

And as God (who to encourage virtue, oft-times gives it the earnest of its
reward in this life) had raised him to a considerable height: so he did not
look from that height with scorn on those below him, but only shed the
influences of it with more advantage upon his friends and relations, to whom he
was a common storehouse. And if it be a piece of gross infidelity not to
provide for a man's own; it must be a piece of exemplary Christianity to provide
so well for other men's: for which cause I doubt not but God has given him a
place and a name better than that of sons and daughters. Is. 56.5.
And for those that have sustained so great a loss in him, God for his sake
will be ready to supply it out of his own Fullness; and they have one friend
more in heaven, though they have one fewer upon earth.

But though his goodness was thus diffusive to his friends and relations, yet
it was not confined to them. As the bowels of many poor blessed him whilst he
lived, so he has besprinkled all places, to which he related, with some dews
of charity at his death.

And as he did wisely and faithfully employ that Talent of wealth which God had
entrusted him withal, so likewise did he employ all his other Talents of
parts, and power, and practical prudence (whereof he was a great Master) to
their proper ends and intents; whereby he became singularly useful in his
place, yea (...), a common good. And as the whole City did partake the
influences of his industry, authority, and fidelity, so this parish above all,
whereof he might justly be called the Public Parent.

And now nothing was left, but that he should be faithful to himself and his
own soul: and (knowing this to be his interest, as well as his duty) herein he
exercised himself, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward man. He regulated his affections, moderated his passions, restrained
his members from being weapons of unrighteousness, and kept himself unspotted
from the world. In fine, so had he governed the whole course of his
conversation, that as nothing infamous or scandalous appeared to others, so his
own conscience did not accuse or upbraid him; but humbly acknowledging his
other defaults and defects, he blessed that Grace which had preserved him from
the gross pollutions of sin; and though he had (as all have) more than enough
to speak him frail man, yet nothing in the least to debauch him either into
Beast, or Devil.

But because it is the last Act which crowns all the rest; As living, so
dying he retained his integrity; and his Graces shined most when he was about
to set; and his light increased, not his shadow. Then you might behold
conspicuous in him a patient submission under Gods mighty hand, an humble
resignation to the Divine Will; and a truly Christian deportment in all. You
might behold much pious devotion, ardent zeal, heavenly delight, st^^dfast hope
in Gods mercy discover themselves, and make him shine through the Cloud. In
token that heaven was his center, the nearer he came, he moved the faster
toward it. And therefore he was frequent in communicating the Holy Eucharist,
as the antepast of it, and the Viaticum of eternal life. When scarce able to
speak, he would yet spend his dying breath in exhortations and admonitions to
those about him; and was willing therein to give up the Ghost, that he might be
indeed faithful unto death.

Thus lived, thus dyed our faithful friend and brother. And now no man will
make question but God has given him the crown of life, who is not either an
Infidel himself, or believes God to be worse than one. If God be faithful, i.
e. if God be God, so good and faithful a servant as he was, must be entered
into his Masters joy. I leave him therefore to the enjoyment of it, and leave
you to the imitation of so excellent virtue, till God (in his own due time)
shall crown you with him, and both you and he shall be forever with the Lord.

FINIS.

