THE LIFE AND DEATH OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND, Who Was deposed of His Crown,
by reason of His not regarding the Council of the Sage and Wise of His
Kingdom, but followed the advice of of wicked and lewd Council, and sought as
far as in him lay, to deprive many good English Subjects of their lives and
estates, who stood wholly for the good of the Commonalty; but at a Parliament
holden, His Counselors were all called, whereof some fled, others received
condign punishment according to the Law.

Published by a Well-wisher to the Commonwealth, being worthy the observation
of all men in these times of Distractions.

LONDON, Printed for G. Tomlinson, and T. Watson, 1642.

The Life and Death of King Richard the second.
RIchard the second born at Bordeaux, the son of Prince Edward, being but
eleven years old, began His Reign the 21. day of June in the year of our Lord
God 1377. In beauty, bounty and liberality, He far passed all His
Progenitors, but was over much given to rest and quietness, loving, little
deeds of Arms, and for that He was young, was most ruled by young Council, and
regarded nothing the Counsels of the Sage and Wise men of the Realm, which
thing turned this Land to great trouble, and himself to extreme misery, as is
by these Verses declared. When this King first began to Reign, the Laws
neglected were, Vox clamantis, Joh. Gawer.

Wherefore good Fortune him forsook, and the earth did quake for fear,
The people also whom He polled, against Him did rebel,
The time does yet bewail the woes, that Chronicles do tell.
The foolish Council of the Lewd, and young He did receive,
And grave advice of aged heads, He did reject and leave,
And then for greedy thirst of Coin, some Subjects He accused,
To gain their Goods into His Hands, thus He the Realm abused.


THe Duke of Gloucester with other, entered the Tower of London, Ireland, that
he should assemble an Army to their destruction, etc. In the end, the King
promised on the next morning to come to Westminster, and there to entreat at
large for reformation of all matters.

In the morning, the King came to Westminster, where after a little talk, the
Nobles said, That for His Honor and Commodity of His Kingdom, it was
behovefull, That the traitorous whisperers, flatterers, and unprofitable people
were removed out of place, and others to be placed in their rooms.

The King, though sore against his mind, when he saw how the Lords were bent,
and that he wanted power to withstand them, condescended to do what they would
have him; and to conclude, the King, at the request of the Lords, commanded the
suspected persons of his Court and Family to be awarded to prison, to answer at
the next Parliament; which persons were, Sir Simon Burghley, Sir William
Elmham, Sir Nicholas Dagworth, Sir John Golfar, which was not yet returned out
of France: All these, with ma y more, were apprehended as evil affected
persons, and enemies to the State.

The third day of February the Parliament began at Westminster, which
Parliament continued till the 13 of June next following, except from the Vigill
of Palm Sunday, until the Octaves of Easter: This Parliament was named, The
Parliament that wrought wonders. The Lords came to this Parliament with a
sufficient Army for their own Sureties: The first day of this Parliament were
atrested as they sat in their Places, all the Justices, except Sir William
Skipwith, and Sir Roger Fultharp, Sir Robert Belknape, Sir John Carey, Sir John
Holt, Sir William Borrow, and John Alecton, the Kings Sergeant at Law; all
these were sent to the Tower, and there kept in several places.

The cause was, for that where in the last Parliament diverse Lords were made
Governors of the Realm, both by the assent of the Parliament, and also by the
advice and counsel of all the Justices and yet notwithstanding the said
Justices ill Council holden at Nottingham did the contrary: whereupon it was
now determined, that they should now make answer to their doings. Moreover, in
the beginning of this Parliament were openly called Robert Vere, Duke of
Ireland, Alexander Nevill, Michael de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, Sir Robert
Trisilian, Lord chief Justice of ENGLAND, and Nicholas Brembar, whom the King
often times made Lord Mayor of London, against the mind of the Citizens, to
answer before Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundell,
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Henry Earl of Darby, and Thomas Earl of
Notingham, upon certain Articles of high Treason, which these Lords did charge
them with: And forasmuch as none of them appeared, it was ordained by the whole
assent of Parliament, That they should be banished for ever, and their Lands
and Goods to be forfeited into the Kings hands, their Lands entailed excepted,
which should descend to their heirs.

The Process against those five Lords, comprised 38 Articles.

King Richard (after the Parliament) discharged the old Officers of His Court,
and also his Conncellors, appointing others at his pleasure: He took the Seal
from Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of York, and delivered it to William Micham,
Bishop of Winchester, and made him Chancellor: The Bishop of Exceter his
Treasurer, having taken that Office from the Bishop of Hereford, and Edmund
Staford, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and made many new Officers, putting down the
old, he removed far off from the Council the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of
Warwick, and other worthy men, and put in their places (in despite of his
Commons) such as pleased him.

The King being at Dublin in Ireland, with an Army of men against the Irish,
wondering in all that time he heard no news out of England, the passage was so
dangerous, the wind being contrary, and Tempests so great; at the length came
a Ship with heavy News, how the Duke of Hereford, and now by the decease of his
father, Duke of Lancaster, was arrived in England at Ravenspurg, besides
VVadlington in Yorkshire.

Upon this News the King, being persuaded to make haste over, summoned together
all the Welsh and English, to participate of his Fortunes, to meet the Duke of
Hereford to Battle.

The Duke of Aumraile, Constable and chief Governor of the King. Army against
the Duke, hearing the King was fled, and he left to the mercy of his enemies,
said unto the Soldiers, Let us shift for our selves, my Masters, for the King
is fled: whereupon the men ran away; Sir Thomas Percy. Steward of the Household,
talking with the Constable, departed and took their way through Wales, but the
VVelch-men seeing such disorder, refused their assistance.

The King being at Conway, now in great discomfort, sent the Duke of Exceter
and Surrey, to Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster, to know what his meaning
was, himself remaining at Conway in great perplexity, with him the Earl of
Salisbury, the Bishop of Carlisle, Sir William Fercle Knight, in all but
sixteen persons, then was news brought to the King, how his Constable had
demeaned him, and likewise his Steward, which had caused his riches to be
brought to Land, and going through Wales with it, the VVelchmen had taken it.

Upon this the King going toward the Duke, some that he sent as embassies to
treat with the Duke, but he stayed some of the Kings followers, and imprisoned
them: So the King, though contrary to his mind, wanting force against the Duke
to assist him in his wars, took the advice of some of his Bishops, who
advertised him of the strength of Wales, and advised him to treat a Peace with
the Duke, only on policy to regain new strength in Wales.

After an agreement and peace made of these wars between the Duke and the King,
they were both pacified, and promised each other to meet at London, where, when
the King was come to the Castle Walls, where he beheld the Duke, with all his
Host, of a hundred thousand men: there came before (that were departed from
the Army) the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Percy, and the Earl of
Rutland, from whom the Duke had taken the Office of Constable, more for a
color, then for displeasure, for they bare the Dukes Order, and not the Heart,
which was the Kings: The Archbishop entered first, and after others with a great
train, they went up to the Dungeon, and then the King came down from the Walls,
unto whom they did reverence lowly on their knees; the King took them up, and
took the Archbishop apart, and they two talked long together; but the Earl of
Rutland kept him aloof: They took horse again, and rode toward the Duke, that
now was approaching near.

The King went up again to the Walls lamenting; for when he saw the Dukes Host
within two Bows shoot of the Castle, who compassed it round about, down to the
Sea, the Earl of Northumberland went forth to the Duke, who after long talk,
concluded that the Duke should not enter the Castle before the King had dined,
for he was fasting: so the Host returned, and the King was set to dinner, with
whom sat his assured friends, the Earl of Salisbury, and the Bishop of
Carlisle, Sir Stephen Scrope, and Cecile: they sat long and ate little, for
they had no haste to rise.

After dinner the Duke entered the Castle, all armed, his Basenet excepted;
King Richard came down to meet the Duke, who as soon as he saw the King, fell
down on his knees; and coming near unto him, he kneeled the second time, with
his hat in his hand, and the King put off his Hood, and then spoke first fair,
Cosen Lancaster ye are right vvelcome: The Duke bowing lovv down to the
ground, answered, My Lord, I am come before you sent for me, the reason why I
will show you; The common fame among your people is such, That ye have for
the space of 20 or 22 years, ruled them very rigorously; but if it please our
Lord, I will help you to govern better: The King ansvvered, Fair Cosen of
Lancaster, since it pleases you, it pleases me very well.

The Duke spoke as ye have heard to the King, he spoke also to the Bishop of
Carlisle, to Sir Stephen Scrope, and to Cecile, but to the Earl of Salisbury he
spoke not, whereby the Earl perceived that the Duke hated him deadly.

The Duke with a high sharp voice, bade bring forth the Kings horses, and then
two little Nags, not vvorth forty Franks, were brought forth; the King was
set on the one, and the Earl of Salisbury on the other, and then the Duke
brought the King from Flint to Chester, where he was delivered to the Duke of
Glocesters son, and to the Earl of Arundel his son, that loved him but a
little, for he had put their fathers to death, who led him straight to the
Castle.

The Duke now coming toward London, the Mayor and the Companies in their
Liveries, with great noise of Trumpets, met the Duke, doing more reverence to
him then to the King, rejoicing that God had sent them such a Prince that had
conquered the Realm within one ^onths space.

When the Duke came within two miles of the City, he caused the Host to
stay, and then said to the Commons of the City, My Masters, behold here your
King, consider what you will do with him: they answered, They would he
should be led to Westminster: Whereupon he was delivered to them, and they led
him to Westminster, and from thence by water to the Tower of London.

The Duke entered into London by the chief Gate, and rode through Cheap to Saint
Paul's, where he was after lodged in the Bishops Palace five or six days, and
after at St John's without Smithfield, where he remained fifteen days: from
thence he came to Hertford, where he abode three weeks; and then came back to
London to hold the Parliament that began the first Wednesday of October in
Westminster Hall, which they had hung and trimmed sumptuously, and had caused
to be set up a Royal Chayr, in purpose to choose a new King; near to which the
Prelates were set, and on the other side sat the Lords, and after the Commons
in order.

The Archbishop of Canterbury made a Sermon, and took for his Theme, habuit
Jacob benedictionem a patre suo; which Sermon being ended in Latin, a Doctor
of the Law stood up and read an Instrument, in the which was contained, That
King Richard had by his own confession, disabled himself to be worthy to Reign,
and that he would resign the Crown to such a one as was sufficient to rule:
This Instrument being read, the Archbishop persuaded them to persuade to the
election of a new King; and perceiving they were all contented, for there were
not past four persons of King Richards side (and they durst say nothing) he
asked each of them which they would have for their King.

Whether the Duke of York or not, and they answered no: He asked if they would
have his eldest son the Duke of Aumrale, and they said, No: He asked if they
would have his youngest son, and they said, No; and so of diverse others: Then
staying a while, he asked if they would have the Duke of Lancaster; and then
they answered, They would none other: This demand being made, there they drew
certain Instruments and Charters, and read them in presence of all that were
there. Then the Archbishops coming to the Duke, fell on their knees, declaring
to him how he was chosen King, and willed him to take regard if he would
consent thereunto: Then the Duke, being on his knees, rose and declared that he
accepted the Realm, since it was ordained by God: Then the Archbishop read what
the new King was bound unto, and with certain-Ceremonies, signed him with the
Cross: then he kissed the Archbishop: Then they took the Ring, to which the
Kings be wedded to the Realm, and bare it to the Lord Percy that was Constable,
who receiving it, showed it to all the Assembly, and then put it on the Kings
finger, the King then kissing the Constable: And then the Archbishop led him to
the Siege Royal, and the King made his prayers on his knees before it, and
after spoke unto them all, first to the Prelates, and then to the Lords, and
all the other, and so set him down in the Seat; and thus he was invested, and
King Richard put down: He sat a good while and kept silence, and so did all
the rest, for they were in prayer for his prosperity in his Government, And
when they had ended, where the Offices were void, the King created new. After
this the Archbishop spoke certain things in Latin, praying for the Kings
prosperity, and the Realms, and after spoke in English upon this following, Vir
dominabuntur in populo, Reg. 9. etc. And then exhorting all there present to
pray the like, every man sat down: Then the King arose, and made his eldest
son Prince of Wales: Then the Lords were svvorn to be true to the Prince, as
before they had done to his father: his second son was there made Duke of
Lancaster.

Thus was King Richard deposed when he had reigned 22 years, 3 months, and
odd days, in such manner as ye have heard, whose Royalty had been such, That
wheresoever he lay, his Person was guarded by 200 Cheshire-men: he had about
him 13 Bishops, besides Barons, Knights, Esquires, and others, more then
needed, insomuch that every day came to the Household to meat 10000 people, as
appeared by the Messes told out of the Kitchen to 300 Servitors, etc.

He was buried first in the Church of the Friars Preachers at Langley, besides
St Albanes, and after by commandment of King Henry 5 removed to Westminster,
who after him Reigned: Henry Plantagenet, born at Bullingbrook, son to John of
Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster, was ordained King of England, and began his
Reign in the year of our Lord God, 1399 and reigned many years with much peace
and tranquillity, and banished all King Richards favorites, so that he brought
this Nation to so happy a Union, that the whole Realm enjoyed many graces of
his favor in his Reign, of which many good Acts are still in force.

Verses made then against the Bishops and Clergy.
PLangunt Anglorum gentes crimen Sodomorum.
Paulus fert, horum sunt Idola cause malorum.
Surgunt ingrati, corrupto Semine nati
Mentum Praelati, hoc defensere parati,
Qui Reges estis populis quicunque p^ae estis,
Qualiter his gestis gladiis probibere potestis.
FINIS.

