LIGHT FOR SMOKE: OR, A CLEAR AND DISTINCT REPLY by JOHN LEY, One of the
Assembly of Divines at WESTMINSTER, TO A DARK AND CONFVSED Answer in a Book
made, and entitled The Smoke in the Temple, by John Saltmarsh, late Preacher
at Brasteed in Kent, now revolted both from his Pastoral calling and charge.

Psalm. 37. verse. 6. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noone day.

Whereto is added, Novello-mastix, or a Scourge for a scurrilous News-monger.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Sr. WILLIAM STRICKLAND KNIGHT, and HERBOTTLE
GRIMSTON Esquire, two worthy Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Right worthy Sirs,
I Presented you with a former Book against Mr. Saltm. his Remora to the
Reformation in hand, as I did other mine honored and worthy friends; this I
offer to your view as to Judges of the difference betwixt him and me, as it
has been a graduate by the press from an Answer to Reply, from that to a
Rejoinder, where for the present the period is fixed, and for my part it shall
be to me as an Herculean pillar, (beyond which I will not sail) and this
resolution with my Reasons I have imparted to Mr. Saltm. in a particular
Epistle to himself. But though I proceed no further with him in the
reciprocation of Replies, you may be pleased, having acquaintance with him, as
he makes his addresses to you, or as any opportunity presents him before
you, to contribute some of your discreet counsels for better employment of his
parts and pen, then in crying down that Discipline and Government, as terrible
and tyrannical, which the prudent Senators of both the Honorable Houses of
Parliament in part have set up, and further endeavor to advance; and in
damning the maintenance of Ministers as Antichristian and Jewish, which the
same authority by many ancient Acts, and your selves with your Honorable
Associats by a late Ordinance have established.

For the former, I profess unto you, it is matter of wonder unto me, how any
man can have the face to make such outcries against the Government, as he and
some others do, as if it were more formidable then Prelaticall domination in
the highest degree; when every Bishop by his own power set out Articles in his
Visitation, concerning all aberrations from Ecclesiastical Canons, whether
sins or no sins, and by a mere Arbitrary power made many times crimes of
duties, as preaching in the afternoon of the Sabbath day; and duties of
crimes, as Reading the Book for Recreations and sports on that Day; and
convented, and censured all sorts of persons, (by his sole Jurisdiction)
sentencing whom he would to suspension, and excommunication, imposed Orders of
Penance with ordinary Fees, and extraordinary Commutations, sometimes at no
less then 100 or 200 pound price; besides the additionall power of
Justice-ship of Peace, and the High Commission, whereby the two Archbishops,
and as many as in either Province they made choice of, to be Assessors to them
on that dreadful Tribunal punished, as they thought meet, with fine and
imprisonment, with great fines, and long imprisonment, many times for small
faults, and sometimes for none at all; whereby some of them carried their
concurrent authority with such cunning, that most were overawed by it, knowing
it was great and various, and not knowing, for the most part, when they did act
by one power, when by another.

And can our Anti-presbyterian opposites say that any single Presbyter, any
Presbytery Parochial, Classical, or Provincial, assume any such
jurisdiction, or power, either over men's persons or estates? Is not suspension
from the Sacrament, and Excommunication from the Church the utmost authority
they claim? and is this any more then they that both condemn, and contemn
the Presbytery, of their own free will, or self-will do unto themselves?

It is said by some, that to set up Presbytery in stead of Prelacy is to
multiply Clergy masters over the people, and for one Bishop in a Diocese to
set up many, in some no fewer then a thousand for one; But they should consider
that all the Ecclesiastical authority of a Diocese united in one Bishop, as
in an Episcopal Sea, was as the river Cyrus Gynden late fusum amnem vado
transire tentavit: ibt unus ex equis qui trahere regium currum albi solcbant,
abreptus, vehementer commovit regem. Juravit itaque amnem illum regiis equis
meatum aufereutem, co se redacturum, ut transiri, calcarique etiam a foeminis
posset. Huc deinde omnem transtulit belli apparatum, and tamdiu assedit operi,
donec centum and octoginta cuniculis divisum alveum in trecentos and sexaginta
rivos dispergeret and fiecum relinqueret, in diversum fluentibus aquis. Senec.
de ita, lib. 3. cap. 21. page 448.
Gyndes very deep, and of a boisterous stream, as when it drowned the white
Horse that drew the Charet of Cyrus, but being divided among so many Ministers,
or Presbyters, it is as the same River, when Cyrus enraged at the loss, and
meaning to be revenged of it, caused it to be divided into three hundred and
sixty channels.

And yet is not every Presbyter (though a Bishop) as a Prelate in his own
Parish, that is, endowed with sole power of censures, for others are to be
joined in administration of Government with him, in many places many for one,
and in no place under a double number.

As for the right of Presbytery, whether it be Divine, or humane, I conceive,
if the Question were rightly stated, and the officers their power, duty,
qualifications? and administrations clearly distinguished, those that are in
extremes for their Tenets, whether holding all of it, or none of it to be of
Divine right, would be eafily convinced of an error, and a Tenure would be
found out, and made good, wherein Christ might have his due to the full,
without any diminution of the Magistrates just Authority, or of any liberty
which truly might be called Christian.

For the latter concerning the unlawfulness of Tithes, if his Tenet now be
right, his taking of them before was wrong; and the same constitution of
conscience, which makes him now to renounce them, may make him at least to
doubt whether he be not bound to return what he has received of the
Parishioners of Brasteed in that kind into their hands again, by virtue of
that received Rule of Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. August.
Epist. 54. ad Macedon. page 280.
Augustine in his Epistle to Macedonius, The sin is not remitted, unless the
goods that are wrong fully taken be restored.

And if he appear before you again, you may do well to put such a case of
conscience to his consideration. For my part I am sorry to see him so unsettled
in his judgment, so sedulous in his endeavors (under pretense of Evangelicall
calmness, and meekness, and moderation of spirit) to prepare a Patronage for
all wild and wicked fancies, that every man may believe what he list, and live
as he believes, and so may do what is right in his own eyes, that is,
whatsoever is wrong in the eyes of God and of all good men, as if there were no
King in Israel, Judges 17.6. that is, no Government (for then the Kingly power
over that people was not set up.)

But the cure of this belongs to the care of your selves, and your Honorable
Colleagues, for whom it is our parts, whom God has placed under your power and
protection, uncessantly to supplicate to the throne of Grace, that as you have
pulled down the remainders, and removed the rubbish of ruined Babel from among
us, so you may in Gods good time (and the sooner the better) set up in stead
thereof such a fair, and goodly frame of Church Government, from the
foundation to the top-stone, as may be entertained with shouting, not of a
party only, as at the laying of the foundation of the Temple, Ezra 3.11, 12,
13. but of all sorts both old and young; and to this public devotion (wherein
you have your sociable share, as you have a part of the common care and
providence for the welfare of three Kingdoms) I shall add my private
supplications for your prosperity in particular, and to them my sincere
endeavors,

To be faithfully and affectionately yours in any acceptable service, JOHN LEY.

The Contents.
Section 1. OF the Title Independent, in what sense it is disclaimed, in what
acknowledged: and of subordination denied by Mr. S. and purity in the Church
held necessary by him. p. 1. Sect. 2. The Objection of unseasonablenesse of
Master Saltm. his Quere justified, and his gross mistake, or wilful
falsification of my words detected p. 4. Sect. 3. Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not
of faith is sin, no bar to the establishment of the Presbyteriall government;
Master Saltm. his distinction of a State and public conscience and a
personal conscience. p. 5. Sect. 4. Master Saltm. his unequal dealing in
distributing his own and his adversaries work: The Presbytery not like
Prelacie in unwarrantablenesse by the word of God. Of Prudence how far of
lawful use in religious matters. p. 8. Sect. 5. Whether Classical,
Provincial, and National Presbyteries be like the Independents gathering of
Churches. p. 11. Sect. 6. It is unreasonable to require an undertaking that the
best government in constitution should be faultlesse in execution; Tyranny more
to be feared in Independencie then in Presbytery. p. 13. Sect. 7. Of the power
of the Presbytery for reformation of manners, compared with Prelacy; the evil
effects of Independency; the difference betwixt a Discipline, and the
Discipline; Mr. Saltm. his precipitancy in writing, and in divulging what he
has written of Popery in the Covenant, or under the Covenant. p. 15. Sect. 8.
Tithes not Jewish and Popish, as Mr. Saltm. pretends. page 19. Sect. 9. Of
Mr. Colemans observation of the Church of Scotland. page 21. Sect. 10. A
comparison of young men and old for prudence and counsel. Of visions and
dreams; where Joel 2.28. and Act. 2.17. are vindicated from Mr. Saltm. his
mistaking, and misapplication of them. p. 23. Sect. 11. Master Saltm. his
insufficient answer, and figurative trifling unworthy of an answer. p. 28.
Sect. 12. A comparison of Presbyterians and Independents in point of
strictness, and looseness in admission of members; Of the mixture in the
Church of Corinth. p. 29. Sect. 13. To whom Christ is an head, and how; of his
rod of iron and his golden scepter; and of his being a Lord, and a servant;
gentle, yet terrible. p. 21. Sect. 14. The Presbyteriall government not
unsuitable to the condition of Christ; the prevailing of Independents, and of
the sects that meet in Independencie much more terrible then the Presbyteriall
Government can be. p. 33. Sect. 15. A pleasant reproof of a misaepplication of
Scripture is no offense against the Majesty of the Word; how, and in what cases
a taunting speech may be allowed. p. 39. Sect. 16. Of the Presbyteriall and
Independent Government how affected; The slow proceeding of the Church
Government made no argument for it, nor mentioned to the disparagement of the
Parliament; Mr. Saltm. brings the Parliaments Authority under popular
liberty; Of wheat in the Independent Congregations. p. 42. Sect. 17. The
settling of Government falsely suggested to be heretic all with an implicit
reproach upon the Parliament. Of the truth of Sleydans story of the Anabaptists
in Germany. A rash censure of Luther, and the Lutherans in Germany for opposing
them. A caveat to England to take warning by Germany. The Ministers practice
slandered, and the Magistrate dishonored by Mr. Saltm. p. 47. Sect. 18. The
Toleration desired by Mr. Saltm. neither safe nor sound, opposite to the mind
of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.10. Call 5.10.12. Of the comparison of the two ambitious
Brethren to ten more humble and moderate; The Presbytery not proved by
Magistrates, though approved by them; Of the pretended truth of Sectaries, and
of the prescription of Bishops and Independents. p. 51. Sect. 19. Of the
pretended modesty and humility of the Independents, by way of comparison with
the Presbyterians. p. 54. Sect 20. Whether Christ, if he would have a national
comprehensive Church, was bound to have begun the practice of it over whole
Kingdoms, as Mr. Saltm. says; and whether imports more pride, to desire a
subordination of Assemblies, Parochial, Classical, etc. or to be adverse to
it. p. 57. Sect. 21. Master Saltm. his mistake touching the building of the
Temple. Of the difference of the pattern of the Temple, and the pattern of
the Government of the Gospel. Master. Saltm. confusedly jumbleth them together.
p. 60. Sect. 22 Of staying for the Spirit to give light of instruction to the
reformation of the Church. p. 63. Sect. 23. Of expedition or delay in setting
up of Government; Whether Moses and Christ, the Jewish and Christian State be
so contrary, that there is no conformity between them. p. 65. Sect. 24 Truth
not to be parted with for peace, the Magistrate dishonored, and the
Presbyterians slandered by Mr. Saltm. p 68. Sect. 25 The Magistrates assistance
to the Ecclesiastical Government no argument to prove it no Gospel Government;
the sword of God and of Gideon, of Church Discipline and Civil severity, how
lawful and useful; zeal against Toleration of evil commended connivence at
it blameable. p. 71. Sect. 26. Mr. Saltm. his dangerous supposition of equality
of number and power, with diversity of Religion; of incorporating of two
powers; and what may be expected, should the Sectaries prevail. p. 74. Sect.
27. The Authority of the Parliament not pleaded by the Presbyterians as a
supplement of Scriptures. as Mr. Saltm. suggesteth, nor slighted by them as by
Mr. Saltm. it is; of the pretended danger of the Magistrates engagement with
the Ministers; of the pretended tenderness of consciences in Sectaries. p. 77.
Sect. 28. What a Trumpeter Mr. Saltm. is; his reproach of the Parliament plain
enough, though rather implied then expressed; a challenge of him to prove his
insinuated suggestions of Treason, Blasphemy, etc. in my Examination of his New
Quere. p. 82. Sect. 29. The charge of mis application of Revel. 18.1. justisied
against Mr. Saltm his denial. The expectation of new lights which some
Sectaries teach, Papisticall, fallacious, and dangerous. p. 85.
The Postscript in answer to Mr. Saltm. his Postscript, consisting of two
testimonies of Claudius Salmasius, the one against the form of Baptism In the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the other for Independencie of
Churches, p. 91.

Errata.
Page 41. lin. 4. from the end, after the word observed, read by many. p. 51.
l. 8. for experience r. experiments, p. 84. l. 8. put out the Comma betwixt
Philastrius and Brixiensis, p. 87. marg. l. 19. for Thelmes r. The lives and
Text l. 8. from the end for prophecy r. prophesied.

The Contents of the Novello-mastix.
Section 1. THe Passager his ridiculous descant upon Mr. Leys Name, as if it
had some alliance with French or Spanish lees, to which is opposed a Greek
Anagram, and Epigram on his Name, made by a learned Divine about an year and
half since. p. 3. Sect. 2. His confused jumbling of heterogeneall and
incongruous metaphors, against reason and common sense, with the number of his
Queries. p. 5. Sect. 3. An Answer to his first, second, and third Queries,
concerning Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Independency. p. 7. Sect. 4. The
fourth Quere, a senseless complaint of Jedition, and a slanderous imputation of
reproach of the Army, answered: The fifth Query of imputation of calumny and
flattery of Lieutenant General Cromwell convicted of absurdity, slander, and
selfe-contradiction. p. 9. Sect. 5. The sixth Quere of the imputed breach of
privilege of Parliament, in saying that some of them favor the way of
Independencie, and the like charge of the Assembly answered. p. 11. Sect. 6.
His seventh Querie, Whether Mr. Ley ought not to be questioned, for meddling
with this worthy and authenticke Author, because the Clerk of the Honorable
House of Commons his Deputy signed his Passages for the Press. p. 14. Sect. 7
A clear and full refutation of a slander of his written Copy, (which was not
printed) wherein the Writer absurdly suggesteth, that Mr. Leys Book sticks
upon the Printers hand to his loss, the same day when as he says it was first
published. p. 18. Sect. 8. Some Anti-queries returned to this querulous
Pamphleter by another hand. p. 20.
To Mr. John Saltmarsh, late Pastor of Brasted in Kent, John Ley wishes such
soundness in judgment, and sincerity in affection, that he may truly, and
cordially salute him as a Brother and a friend: And Shows in this Epistle his
unfitness to undertake the discussion of a Controversy, or to be taken for an
Antagonist in any Question of the Doctrine of Religion, or of the Discipline or
Government of the Church.
SIR,
YOu have taken upon you in the Title page of your last book to make a full
Answer to mine, but the fullness you speak of is but the tympanie of a
promise, for your performance is so empty of real satisfaction to intelligent
Readers, that some of them (who have impartially perused our papers on both
sides) have seriously advised me not to take such notice of it, as to vouchsafe
an Answer unto it; and the rather, because you your self make such distinction
betwixt a refutation and an answer, that, though you expressly profess the one,
I will not say I have made here a Refutation of yours, (that is, of your Book)
Smoke. p. 51.
you will not say you have made good the other.

And for mine own part, I will deal clearly with you, and let you know my
mind, not only for the present, but for the future; and it is this. For the
present,

I do not take you to be such an adversary as may discourage a man, though but
of mean parts, (if not with all of too pusillanimous a spirit) to be your
Antagonist; since you lay your self open to so much disadvantage, as may
rather invite him to begin with you, then dishearten him to hold on when you
provoke him to proceed.

But yet (besides the disswasions of my judicious friends, who think I may
right my self as much by a silent neglect of you as by a loud conquest over
you) I will give my resolution and my reasons.

And for hereafter my resolution is not to misimploy precious time, (whereof my
many engagements in public service may make me more parsimonious then other
men) in a reciprocation of a controversy with you; and my reasons are these.

First, because I see your genius is rather Rhetorical, or Poetical, then
Polemicall; and will not keep close to a question to bring it to an issue; and
so you scatter your conceptions like drops of quicksilver out of the quill; or
like beads broke loose from the string, so that it is matter of difficulty, and
sometimes rather of impossibility, to gather them into an argument, since they
have more in them of the complexion and trappings of Phrasiologie, then of the
constitution of sound Divinity; which makes me (besides that I had rather
contend with an Antichristian Adversary then with a Christian Brother) more
willing to take the confutation of the most learned part of Bellarmine for my
task, then to wait upon your wandering and new sprung notions, though now and
then you present your Reader with a Primrose of pretty expression to make him
to mistake the sent of a weed for a flower, of an old error under the name and
notion of a new truth.

Secondly, For your Logical marshalling, etc. Smoke p. 16.
you profess your self to have no good liking of Logic, forms of art, and
methods of reason; and Page 60.
renounce prudence and consequences as the great engines of will worship; and
if you be of that mind you are fitter to write Poems, or Essays, or
Characters, then to maintain a Dispute in matter of Religion.

Thirdly, I conceive you are the less fit for that purpose because you seem
to me by that I have read in your writings to be a kind of Vbiquitary in
belief, or (if I may not call it belief, being so uncertain as you are) I
must say you ramble about in your speculation of opinions, but (as resolved
upon none of them) settle no where; so that your Adversary knows not where to
find you. One while me thinks you are a Presbyterian, because you dedicate a
Book to those that for the most part are such, as to a most sacred and
reverend Assembly; another while you Smoke in the Temple. p. 65. 68.
reproach the Presbytery, and gloriously set forth the Church way of
Independents, and In your Epistle to me, pab. the beginning.
bring in your self as one of them: sometimes I take you for an Anabaptist, at
least for an Antipaedo baptist, for in your exceptions against Presryterie (and
I must take your Tenet to be rather against, then among the Presbyteriall
positions) you Smoke in the Temple. p. 9.
say, That Baptism is not to be received by generation now, as Circumcision
was, but by regeneration, or visible profession as at first; nor are the
carnal seed now any more the children of Abraham, but the faithful, and that
no Ordinance is now to be administered upon legal consequences, but on Gospel
precepts: and of Master Tombs his book (in answer to my objection concerning
the delay of Baptism by Christ's example) you say thus, Ibid. in your answer to
me. p. 37.
I cannot dispute that here now, Master Tombs will sat is fie you at large in
his learned Examen, where he has made work for an whole Assembly; wherein (to
give you a word by the way) you are much mistaken, both in the man, and in the
matter; and you will see cause (within a while) to conceive otherwise of both,
then now you do; and that there lies no obligation either of necessity or of
conveniencie upon the Assembly which may engage them to the examination of his
Examen. Nor is Master T. with his most complete armor so formidable a
champion, as that there should need an army of Divines to be mustered against
him, there be diverse David's who are ready for single encounter with that
braving Goliath, and some have given his cause such a wound already, as (though
he may play the Mountebanke with it and skin it over) will never be cured at
the bottom.

But this only obiter, passing by him, and his book, (as a parenthesis or
parergon to that which is before me at the present) I must follow you a little
further, and see whether (tracing the steps of your opinions by the print of
your pen) I can overtake you, and at last find you in any place, or posture of
consistence, or settlement.

In your Discovery of Independencie you deliver downright Anabaptisme in many
particulars, (without any word of exception or caution to your Reader) as that
Smoke p. 10, 11.


Smoke p. 10, 11.
Those who were baptized under Prelacy were baptized by an Antichristian power,
and that they are no right baptized members of Churches.

That all consequences drawn from circumcision, are of no more force, then
from the Cloud, and the Sea, and the Rock, and Noah's Arc, and other typical
and figurative places in the Word, (yet by your leave from some of these there
may be a good consequence to baptism of infants) nor can any legal, or
probable Scriptures make any law or rule for any such Gospel administration,
which is not directly in Scripture words to be found.

That childrens Baptism in the Church is a way never to have a Church of such
baptized believers, as in the Apostles times.

That Baptism, being a visible sign, cannot rationally be administered upon
one that can neither see, nor discern what is done, to whom the water can be
no sign, but they are only told of it when they come to age. Baptism is as a
flash of lightning, (as was well observed by one) Circumcision was as a fixed
star, so much difference in these two rites.

Institution of Baptism is to duty as well as grace, which children cannot
perform, and so answer the sign.

Institution of Baptism is doctrinal in the very act of it, as is acknowledged
by all of the present Baptism, Matthew. 28. now this implies a capable and
teachable subject. You have other positions symbolizing with the sect of
Anabaptists, but I note only those, which have nearest congruitie to the title
of that Sect.

While such opinions as these, which you seem rather to confirm then to
confute, incline me to take you for an Anabaptist, I am induced to doubt
whether you be not somewhat else, somewhat worse, by such exceptions as Smoke
in the Temple. p. 13, 14, 15.
these.

First, That Matthew. 28.18. (it should be verse. 19.) and Mark 16, etc. are
rather, and far more probably to be expounded of the Spirits Baptism, then
of Baptism by water.

Secondly, That the Baptism of Jesus Christ by water, was only in the Name of
Jesus Christ.

Thirdly. That the form by which they Baptize (viz. ^ ^aptize thee in the Name
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,) is a form of man's devising, a tradition
of man, a mere consequence drawn from supposition, and probability, and not
a form left by Christ.

Fourthly, That to preach in the Name of Jesus Christ, or to do any thing in
the name of Jesus Christ, is not always in that gross manner (as it is taken)
viz. naming Jesus Christ, or the naming of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost
over them, but in the power, virtue, efficacy, Ministry of Jesus Christ, or
the Persons of the Godhead, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Fifthly, Page 17.
That none ought to give Baptism now, because none can give the gift of the
holy Ghost.

Sixthly, Page 18.
That the fullness of time is not yet come for ordinances, for as there were
several seasons for giving out of truth before, so now.

The next Title (under which you sort the opinions of these times into several
professions) is of seeking and seekers, and there, (besides other new Doctrines
which you deliver) you say that Page 17.
all shall in the last times be in a secret, invisible inward and spiritual
glory, no more in gross, carnal, visible evidences, and material beams of
gifts, and miracles, and this is to know Christ no more after the flesh; which
cannot be the meaning of the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 5.16. (for gifts and
miracles continued after the time that he wrote those words) but either that he
did not conceive of Christ as of a temporal King, as the Disciples sometimes
did, Luke 24.21. Act. 1.6. and our Savior himself denied, Joh. 18.36. or that
his affections to Christ were not such as theirs that had conversed with him in
the flesh, and had been taken only, or chiefly with the comeltnesse of his
person, or had the sensible evidence of his miracles, or had a carnal
conviction of his resurrection, as Thomas Didymus had, Joh. 20.27. but that he
did spiritually participate and communicate with him, deriving life and virtue
from him, as the members from the head, as where he says, I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live, I live by the faith of
the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20.

Another position (which you give out among the exceptions to the way of
Seekers, which to orthodox Divines is a mere paradox) is, Page 18.
that there is no such power for ordinances as is pretended, but believers as
disciples may administer, and so did the Apostles and believers formerly as
they were disciples.

I looked to have. found the Antinomian Tenets among the rest which you report,
but your silence concerning them in a place whereto their discovery was so
seasonable and pertinent, is thought by some, who have read over your book of
Free Grace before I saw it, that you thought too honorably of that Sect to
bring it in there, where you intended to set Page 19.
the strength and weakness of each opinion before it self, that as on the one
side it may glory, so on the other side it may fear and be humble; and that
book shows you plainly to be an Antinomian, though you pretend to maintain
your Tenets by the consent and testimony of many sound Divines, page 204. etc.
wherein they say you deal by them, as other Antinomians have formerly dealt
with Luther, bringing their words against their minds as they did his; and I
the rather believe it, because making trial of the sincerity of your
allegations, in that Book by the quotation which came next to my hands, viz.
that which you cite out of Mr. Samuel Boltons Book of the bounds of Christian
Freedom; I find you allege his Page 213. of your Book of Free Grace, and
the flowings of Christ's blood.
words with a guilefull reservation, breaking them off with a subtle, etc.
whereas if you had gone on to those that follow next, you would have showed the
Reader a flat contradiction to the Cardinal Tenet of the Antinomians, (which
gives them their name) in these words, Page 74. of Mr. Boltons book.
acknowledge the moral Law as a rule of obedience, and Christian walking, and
there will be no falling out, whether you take it as promulgated by Moses, or
handed to you and renewed by Christ; is not this such a piece of sophistry in
proof as a Quirinus Cnoglerue in a little book in 12. (but spider-like full
of poison) called Symbol. in Symbol. Calvinian.
malicious Papist used against Calvin, when he brought him in, saying, I would
the names of the Trinity, Person, homoousios, etc. were buried, but left out
these words; So that the truth of those Articles of the Christian Creed were
received and embraced by all; we say the Papist in this corrupt and maimed
allegation followed the devil in his quotation of the 91 Psalm against our
Savior, Matthew. 4.6. where he brings in a Text of divine Providence, He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up,
left at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone, verse. 11, 12. but leaves
out the limitation, they shall keep thee in all thy ways.

In this example I have done you a favor to compare you to a Papist, and the
Papist justice in matching him with the devil, whose proper sin (as a
devil) is 2 Timothy 2.
slander.

And I would take you for an Antinomian (as many do) but that in the same
book whence they have learned to suspect you for one of that Sect, I find
somewhat which shows you are not settled in their way, and it is your equal and
indifferent dealing in part betwixt the Antinomians and their opposites in
these words; Occasional word prefixed before the flowings of Christ's blood.
page 1, 2.
Some hearing the Doctrine of Free Grace, think presently there will follow
nothing but looseness, and libertinisme, and others hearing of holiness of
duties and obedience, think there will follow nothing but legalnesse, bondage,
and selfe-righteousnesse; upon these jealousies one suspecting the others
doctrine, bends against another in expressions something too uncomely for both;
and there are some unwarrantable notions to be found on all sides: and yet
after a little impartial equipoyse betwixt both parties, and their opinions,
you sway all that follows so for Free Grace, as to cast disgrace upon the
Law; for you say, Ibid. page 56.
If Christ had been more in the Divinity of these times, in their preachings
for Reformation, and Moses less, we had had not only more of his grace, but
more of his glory then we see.

Whereas indeed by filling out of this new wine too freely, (to use your Ibid.
page 9.
phrase) many have played the loose and wicked wantons, and have sinned the
more that grace might abound, Romans 6.1. because they thought themselves not
bound to the Law as to a rule of life.

All this while having endeavored to discover of what Religion you are, I
cannot yet find that you have made choice of any.

You would have me take it for a part of your praise that you Smoke in the
Temple p. 11. of your answer to me as it is in the second edition.
were not hasty to believe; but is there not a faulty slownesse of faith, which
our Savior reproves in some, calling them Smoke in the Temple p. 11. of your
answer to me as it is in the second edition.
fools for not being forward enough to believe, Luke 24.25. but you take it
perhaps for a point of prudence, to keep your self unengaged until you see
what variety the Smoke page 7. and of your Answer to me, page 47. 63.
toleration you stand for (if it be obtained, as I hope it never will be) will
bring forth; and you tell us that yet Smoke, page 3.. 11.
we are but in our comings out of Babylon, and the fall of Babylon not yet, the
smoke yet in the Temple, the Angels but yet pouring out their vials, the Angels
that enlighten the earth not yet flying through the heavens: and yet toward
the later end of your Page 66.
book you say, Now the spiritual dispensation being come, even the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, there is a fullness of spirit let out upon the Saints and people
of God, which gathers them up more closely, spiritually, and cordially then the
power of any former dispensations could do.

In the prosecution of this third reason of my refusal to take you for an
Antagonist hereafter, if I have been too copious, it is because you have been
too various and diffusive in your fancies for matters of religion, so that I
sincerely profess I know not where to find any certain fixing of your faith,
nor in what predicament of profession to place you, whether directly or
reductively. And I think it my part rather to pray for you that God would
establish you in his truth, then to trace you through the multiplicitie of
opinions dispersed in your papers, especially when they are not more untrue in
themselves, then uncertain to your Reader whether they be yours or no.

Fourthly, If I could tell of what mind you are now, I should have little
encouragement to set upon the confutation of your present errors; because you
are a man so unstable, that I may probably suspect a prevention of my pains,
or disappointment of my purpose, viz. your c^nviction therein, by your
voluntary departure from your precedent opinions, (before it could reach you)
upon a pretense of new light, and further enlargement of Gospel Grace. That
this is no slander of you, nor sinister surmise, will appear by your Smoke in
the Temple, for having alleged some passages of your Book of Policy against
your opinion professed in your New Quere, you answer me thus; Smoke in the
Temple, p. 13.
For some things in my Book of Policy I look on them as a part of the
darkness I was in, and I can freely join with any in censuring my
unregenerate part in me, as I esteem much of my carnal reason to be.

And upon another quotation of mine out of the same Book, you reply again,
Ibid. page 45.
I told you before I dare not allow my self the privilege of an Aphorism of
light then, when it was rather night then day with me; and a third time urging
you with your own words out of the same book, you answer me again; Ibid. page
59.
I told you my Politics were written by my dimmer light; and yet let me tell
you Sir (and I believe all judicious Readers of your Dictates will be of my
mind) that book was the best that ever you wrote, and therefore the best
because freest from error, and freest from error, because it sets down the
practice of Policy in a Christian life, taught from the Scriptures, as you
express it in your Title Page, and consists of aphorisms, grounded upon a
Text of Gods word, for the most part pertinently and truly applied.

A fifth Reason why I shall but this once, not hereafter take you to task in a
word war, is this; I perceive you glory in the quick dispatch of your work,
that is, to mine understanding, in bestowing little study and taking little
pains for what you publish, or, (as the Proverb has it) in making more haste
then good speed. For in your Letter to me you say thus; Smoke, p. 2.
You see my labors, deducting the time of their printing, are of about two
weeks growth, younger by some six weeks if I mistake not then yours; where
you mean not I suppose that I was six weeks in answering a sheet of paper of
yours, and that you answered fifteen sheets of mine in two weeks; for you
know not what private time I took for it out of public employment; but
comparing the publication of my book from the Press about the tenth of
December, and of yours about the sixteenth of January following, the
computation you make in that respect is not much mistaken: But why Sir should
you confine your self to two weeks time, when it was in your power to have
allowed your self more? and it should have been a part of your prudence not to
have tuckt your self up to so little, especially if you conceive, (as you say
in your Letter to me,) I have much advantage of learning and experience; Sure
if you thought so indeed, you would be more wise then to give me so much
advantage by your overhasty, and unconcocted effusions, as you have done; Nor
is this the first time of your precipitation and boasting in this kind, for in
the year 1643. you set forth an Examination of Mr. Fullers Fast Sermon,
(preached at the Savoy, July 26. and afterward printed), and you dedicated your
Book to those Divines (under the Title of The most Sacred and Reverend
Assembly for Reformation of the Church convened by Parliament) whom now you
mention with a meiosis of estimation, as if all of them together were but a
company of such despicable dwarfes, that Mr. T. the confident Antipaedobaptist
might defy them, as Goliath did all the army of Israel; and in the first lines
of your Epistle Dedicatorie to them, you say you have but the thoughts of an
afternoon to spread before them, and that you examined in the same pace you
read. Now truly Sir, if this be true, I cannot commend your discretion in such
expedition; I know you will not plead for your warrant the words of our Savior
to Judas, Joh. 13.27.

You pretend as the motive to such hasty motion, that your intent was, if it
were possible, truth might overtake an error before it went too far, and you
hope for pardon if your zeal to the truth made you see another faults sooner
then your own; but you should have considered, that your adversary was a man
of eminent parts, much more advised in what he published in the Pulpit, and by
the Press, then your self; and that following him in such post-hast, before
you had well weighed what you wrote against him, it was not like to fall out,
that (at long running) truth should overtake error, but rather that many
errors on your part should overtake some errors on his; and that the zeal
which made you see another faults sooner then your own was too like that of
the hypocrite, Mat. 7. verse. 3, 4, 5. and not to be thought more capable of
pardon then of reproof; for the truth had no stead of, nor was it like to have
any aid by such an extemporary undertaking of a cause of so great moment as the
reformation of the Church.

And if your Adversary had been so contemptible (as he was not) that nothing
could be too slight for him which came from you, the Assembly of Divines, to
whom you dedicated your printed paper, should have been more venerable with
you, then that you durst offer such sudden conceptions to their perusal and
acceptance by way of dedication, unless you conceived that their aspect and
protection could help and heal what was weak and sick in your overhasty
birth; and I confess you seem (but whether I should take it for Poetry or
flattery, I cannot tell) to attribute so much unto them, in your Epistle; where
you say, That ayring your assertions under their Patronages will heal them;
for so they brought forth the sick into the streets, that at least the shadow
of Peter might touch some of them. But this perhaps you will say was written by
your dimmer light, when it was rather night then day with you, (as before I
have noted) and I believe it was, for your whether imaginary or adulatorie
ellusion is a strain of elevation of them, both above their merit, and
acknowledgement.

But that which at the present I must press a little further upon you, is the
coercion of your Pen, that you put it not upon such speed as if it were yet as
a quill in the wing. I suppose being a Poet you have read, and not forgot that
of Horace concerning Lucilius, -- In h^ra s^pe due^^tor Vt magnum versut
dictabat stans pede in une. Cum flueret lutulent^^ (...) qu^d collere velles.
Her. Sermon. l. 1. p. 212,
pouring out two hundred verses in an hour and standing on one foot; in which
though somewhat were worth noting, yet his stream run muddily. And he
commends those verses most which have been made with -- in versu facieudo
Saepe caput scaberet, vivos and roderet ungues. Hor. Ibid. p. 237.
often scratching of the head and biting of the nails to the quick; and
discommends such as have not taken up -- carmen reprehendite quod non Multa
dies, and multa litura cocrcuit, atque Perfectum decies non castigavit ad
unguem. Hor. de Art Poet. p. 369.
many days, nor come under many blots, even to a tenfold correction; this in
respect of number, and for time he would have -- si quid tamen olim Scripseris,
in Metii descendat judicis aures, Et patris, and nostras, nonumque prematur in
annum. Hor. Ibid. p. 373. 374.
many dictates kept under the file even to the ninth year, which Quintilian the
famous Rhetorician (whom Hic sere omnes Latinos scriptores repreheudit, uni
Quintiliano assurrexit. Bucolzer Index Chronol. ad an. 1465. p. 420.
Laurentius Valla who carped at almost all Latin Writers, did singularly
reverence) did so much approve of, that he kept his books in his private study
long; that (as he gives the reason for it) Vsus Horatii consilio qui in Art
Poetica suadet ne praecipitetur editio nonumque prematur in annum, dabo iis
otium ut refrigerato inventionis amore diligentius repetitos tanquam Lector
perpenderem. Sic Quintil. in Epist. Tryphoni Bibliopola. praefix, Instit. Orat.
the affection which naturally men bear to their own invention may be cooled,
and that a man may come to review of his own writings with the indifferency
of an ordinary Reader.

It may be for the dispatch you make, and make your boast of, you expect the
praise of pregnancie of wit, as Thebis hebetes and brutos nasci relatum est,
Athenis scribendi dicendique acutissimos, ubi penes colitam pueri mense citius
eloquuntur praecoce lingua. Tertul. deanima. Tom. 2. Edit. Rhenan. p. 331.
Tertullian commends some Athenian children for their forwardness to speak at
a month old, and as Septennes pueri concionantur in ordine Francisci. Phil.
Bosq. quarta Naufrag. Tabula. in ord. Francisci in Dominic. pt. Pentecost. p.
241.
Philip Bosquier does his Franciscan Brenthren of whom he says, That boys at
seven years of age preach in the Order of Francis, or (which is commendation
enough for any man's belief) as Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. Sanct. l. 4. p. 220.
col. 2.
Sixtus Senensis reports to the praise of Co^nelius Musse, that at twelve
years old he was an eloquent Preacher. And for those rude times that might
deserve praise which in this knowing and learned Age may need pardon,
especially if without need any man will obtrude that upon a rational Reader
which has more affinity with the nimblenesse of conceit, then with the
soliditie of judgment; and how soever sudden sparks and flashes of fancy may
take with the vulgar, they will not hold reputation with the wise, but rather
stir up indignation and disdain. And if I should say that your Answer to me
has had no better acceptance with some very judicious and godly Divines, I am
able to prove it, how fondly soever your self, or your seduced followers
conceive of your papers. I deny not but sometimes a man may be unexpectedly put
upon it, to do that extempore, which he would not willingly undertake but upon
deliberation; and I have been necessitated on the sudden to preach even in the
University, and in other places some of my Dictates have been divulged with
more dispatch then I wished; yet I was always of the mind of David (and know
no cause to be a changeling in it) who would not offer unto God of that which
cost him naught, 2 Samuel 24. nor would I so far undervalue the judgment of
men, especially in this learned age, as to offer any thing to their perusal,
which had not come under a threefold censure on this side the Printing House;
the first of mine own serious and rigorous revisall; the second of some middle
capacity, that I may know whether it be obscure or no to an ordinary Reader;
the third of some judicious Critic, that I might not justly come under the rod
of an accurate Reader.

And in the choice of Books I would be glad to know not only the Author, who
makes them, but what time and study has been employed upon them; and if they
have taken up ten years time, as did Perer. his His first Tome was set forth
an. 1589. and his last an. 1598.
Comment. upon Genesis: or Adric. Delph. Prasat. in Theatr. Terrae ^ Sanct. p.
3.
Thirty years, as Theatrum Terrae Sanctae made by Adrichomius Delphus as he
professes in the Preface of his Book: or Emau. Sa. Aphorism. praefat.
Lectori. p. 2.
forty years or thereabouts, which Eman. Sa. spent upon his Aphorisms, I like
them so much the better (caeteris paribus) as they were done with more advice,
study, and premeditation.

I will conclude this reason with a domestical story which may be pertinnently
applied to our case; A noble man had a controversy in law with a Brewer, who
had a garden and dwelling house bordering near upon his, the Brewer gave a
charge to his servant to put in so many hogsheads of water more into all his
brewings then he had wont to dee, telling him that such a supply would bear
the charge of his suite with his Adversary; which being overheard by the
Nobleman, he sent presently to the Brewer, resolving he would not go any
longer to law with him, who upon such easy and cheap terms could manage his
part of the suit; I will make bold to apply it (upon confidence that you will
do ^s you say, Smoke in the Temple in answer to me. p. 13.
for interpreting any thing from me on the better side of it,) while you suffer
your fancy to fly abroad so fast, and have such a fluid inkpot as ready at
hand as the Thames to the Brewer, in such a cause to write in a fortnight more
then an abler man then your self would undertake to do in a month, I shall
not think it fit to draw out this dissension betwixt us to any further length,
nor have I leisure, or if I had, for the for^^^ reas^^s I should have no list
to wiredraw a debate or Controversy of this kind with you, or any one else who
makes no more of the matter then you do.

Sixthly, It is needless for me to be engaged any further in this quarrel;
since,

First, I am assured by very convincing evidence that your interposition for
delay in setting up the Church Government (which at first I feared would prove
a Remora unto it) is not like to give any impediment to the expedition desired.

Secondly, Others, who think I might be better employed in more public
service, me willign to take me off this controversy, and to undertake you
themselves, as occasion shall require.

Now Sr. having done with you as an Adversary, I would close with you upon
kind and Christian terms, if I knew under what notion to take my leave of you,
with your good liking; and I am doubtful what relation to make use of, since
you say, In your Design of Reconcil. p. 5. nu. 17.
We may be in one Christ though diverse, and we may be friends though not
Brethren,. If we be in one Christ I should rather say we are Brethren, though
not friends; but if we be friends and in Christ, we must needs be Brethren,
sons of the same Father, and heirs of the same hope, and inheritance in
heaven; although not knowing, or suspecting each others interest, we may be
more unfriendly among our selves then we should be: And though you be less a
Brother then you have been, for (as I hear) you acknowleldged before the
Honorable Committee of Examinations that you have renounced your Ordination,
the ground of your Ministerial Brotherhood in the Church of England, yet since
you are pleased to call me both So in the inscription of your Letter.
Friend and In your Smoke p. 26.
Brother; I shall (with much hearty sorrow to see your good parts so ill
employed, as they are, on the wrong side, and my fervent prayers to the Father
of lights to give you light for smoke, to guide you into the way of Truth and
Peace, and to settle you in it) sincerely subscribe my self

Yours in the affections and offices of a friend and Brother JOHN LEY.

LIGHT FOR SMOKE: OR, A Clear and distinct Reply to a dark and confused
Answer of Mr. John Saltmarsh, etc.
SECT. I. Of the Title Independent, in what sense it is disclaimed, in what
acknoweldged; and of subordination idenied by Mr. S. and purity in the Church
held necessary by him.
Smoke. Page In the former edition the answer to me begins a new order of
figures, so this quotation is p. 2. but in the second edition it is p. 12.
12.

FOr the notion of Independencie you speak of, I dare not own it, because I
account my self both under a spiritual and civil supremacy, under Jesus
Christ and the Magistrate severally, and exempt from neither.

Light. Your pretended dependencie on the Magistracy will not exempt you from
the name or notion of Independencie, (a title diversely entertained by the
Anti-Presbyteriall party, while some own and honor it, some disclaim and
abhor it, Mien Exam. of the New Quere. p. 2.
as I have formerly showed) for you give the Magistrate so little power in
matter of Religion, that Smoke. p. 62. 63.
you would have all left to a liberty of conscience science therein; cnceiving
that, as M. SAltm. Epistle to the Believers of several opinions. p. 1.
though the ways be diverse to the City of London, some traveling from the
North, some from the South, some from the East, and some from the West, yet all
come thither, though there may be some mistaking of the way in each, so is the
gathering of the Saints into heaven. Which if you mean of so many several
Sects of believers as in this Book, and some other of your Pamphlets you plead
for, you mean it of some who are as far out of the way to heaven, as if a
man at Lichfield should travel not Soth-ward but Northward to go to London,
or as if at Barwicke he should travel not Northward but Southward to come to
Edenborough.

Smoke. Page 12. We dare not be Classical, Provincial, National, these are
no forms of wholesome words, to which we are commended, nor know we any such
power, but that of Brethren, Ministry, and Fellowship; and if you call the
Churches of Christ Independent for this, we must suffer till the Lord bring
forth our righteousness as the noonday.

Light.The graduall subordination of Assemblies against the Independencie of
Congregationall meetings is made good by the large and learned Book of Mr.
Samuel Rutherford, so that it is needless to take up their defense in this
place, at least with you, who (as I have observed your genius) are not fit to
be taken for an Antagonist in any Polemicall point.

And for that you say, they are no forms of wholesome words, it is no more
then the Arians said of the words Trinitas, Essentia, Hemoeusios, and Persona,
because they found them not in the Scripture; And if you were not swayed by a
spirit of Libertinisme, you would think them very wholesome words, as
signifying sovereign remedies against the ruptures of Schism, and uleers or
gangrenes of Heresy.

Smoke. Page 12. Nor know we any such power, but that of Brethren, Ministers
and Fellowship.

Light. Do you not know Sr. that that which is Ministry and service in
respect of God, may be rulel and authority in respect of men? are there not
Officers in the Church called Elders? and are not those Elders Rulers? and
those Elders and Rulers Fathers? and is there not a spiritual fatherhood and
begetting through the Gospel? 1 Cor. 4.15. and must not these by the fifth
Commandment be honored and obeyed under that Title above the relation of
Brotherhood, and Fellowship? and are there not children in the Church as well
as Fathers? and may not the father, as the child gives him cause, use both the
rod and the spirit of meekness? if not, surely the Apostle would not have put
this Question to the Corinthians, Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love,
and in the spirit of meekness? verse. 21. of the same Chapter.

Smoke. Page 12. And if you call the Churches of Christ Independent for this,
we must suffer until the Lord bring forth our righteousness as the noonday.

Light.If I were worthy to give a Name to the Churches of Christ, I would call
them Dependent, for the most of them are subordinate to Classical, Provincial
and National Assemblies; not Independent, as the fewest are, and of those few
some of them are so unsound in doctrine that they deserve not the title of
Churches to be put upon them; and if you profess your self Independent in
that sense you have acknowledged, and for that be so called, I pray you Sr.
what suffering do you complain of? is it any suffering to you to be called by
your Name Mr. Saltmarsh, which you own? and foro the bringing forth of your
righteousness as the noone day; I must tell you Sr. your dawnings of light are
come to this noone days discovery, that all may see, (but those whose eyes are
darkened with your Smoke) that the unrighteousness of those Sectaries, whom
you embrace as Independent Brethren, in broken forth as the smoke of the
bottomless pit, Revel. 9.2. with great danger to corrupt the air into an
Epidemicall contagion.

SECT. II. The Objection of unseasonablenesse of Mr. Saltm. his Quare
justified, and his gross mistake or wilful falsification of my words detected.
Smoke. Page 14. What better season could I come in then such a one wherein
things were but moving and ripening toward establishment? where no thing is
settled, there nothing can be disturbed -- And whereas you say the Parliaments
determinations were final, that holds better for me who might have spoken to
much less purpose had I staid till and had been done, and the determinations
ended and become final; sure it was a time then to speak or never; and by
your own account too, for you are pleased to reckon up the proceedings of the
State in the business of Religion, which are such as had I staid I had had a
worse season.

Light.In the Title page of my Examination I said your Quaere was unseasoanble,
and gave reasons thereof, page 4, 5. and among others I reckoned up four
particulars of the subordination, and exercise of the Presbyteriall Discipline,
set out already by Authority of Parliament, in respect whereof your Quere and
determination upon it came too late; and it might have been more seasonable
either while the matters were in debate of the Assembly of Divines, or when
first the votes of the Assembly were presented to the Parliament; but when both
Parliament and Assembly, after much debate, were so far, and so publicly
engaged for the Presbyteriall Government, it was too late for such a novice as
you by so poor and trifling a paper as you put forth to offer to oppose it;
which was not like (being of so little worth) to be of any great weight with
the Parliament, (though some Independents who will have all their Geese to be
Swans, said of it, it was a very rational piece, whose fond opinion of it
advanced it to the reputation to be thought worthy of a refutation) all the
mischief it was like to do (for no good could reasonably be looked for from
it) was to interpose betwixt the command of the Magistrate, and the obedience
of the people, and to prepare such as are silly and perverse to a prejudice,
and to make them refractory against reformation intended; and this is one part
of the Independents good service they do to the civil Authority.

Smoke. Page 15. For bayting my Quere with truth and peace, you allude to
Christ's allegory that we are fishers of men, and if I have no worse things to
bayte with then these two, truth and peace, none need I hope to be afraid of
the hook.

Light.In the second Section of my Book having set down the Title of your
loose sheet, A new Quere, etc. I say thus; He knew well enough the humor of
listening after news prevails with our people of all sorts, and therefore
being to fish in troubled waters he puts upon his hook that bait at which
it was like many would be nibling. Where it is plain as may be, my meaning was
that your bait was Novelty, not Truth and Peace, where with I begin a new
sentence, and speak distinctly of them afterward, and therefore I may well
come upon you with your own Quere, (misapplied to me) Why deal you not more
heartily? Smoke. p. 16.
why are you not more faithful in your interpretation to the Original?

SECT. III. Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, no bar to the
establishment of the Prosbyteriall Government; Mr. Saltm. his distinction of a
State and public conscience and a personal conscience.
Smoke. Page 17. SInce you will help me to prove you are welcome, you have
furnished me with one Argument more, you are a fair enemy to l^nd out your
own weapon; and n^w you have made your Argument half for me I shall make the
other half my self. What the Imposers of Government cannot do in faith they
sin, this is your half Argument, but you take it for granted our Imposers of
Government are not such, but such as are fully persuaded, and can set up the
Government in faith.

Light. Page 9. of mine Exam.
I showed you should frame your Argument, according to the scope of your Quere,
rather against the establishment of a government by the Magistrate, then
against submission to a government by the people; and you seem to take this as
a courtesy from me, but you ill deserve it, for you repeat it so imperfectly
as to obscure the light of it, and to impair the strength of it; for you bring
it in thus: What the Imposers of Government cannot do of faith they sin;
whereas in my Book, out of which you should fairly, nd faithfully have
transcribed, the argument has it more dearcly and fully in these words: Those
that set up a Government whereof they are not fully persuaded in their mind,
and which they cannot do in faith, do sin. To this major you add a minor and
conclusion, as follows.

Smoke. Page 18. But the Parliament cannot be fully persuaded of this
government, therefore if they set it up they sin; and they cannot be fully
persuaded, because the State or public conscience cannot consent at this
time; and the State conscience cannot consent, because it has no Scripture to
secure it; for how can the Parliament be said to be fully persuaded, etc.
unless they could fully sign it with a jus divinum, or divine right? nothing
but Scripture and the Word can properly fully persuade.

Light. Those that set up a Government, etc. This you call my Argument, but it
is yours; for I deny your minor proposition, and consequently your conclusion,
wherein you impute sin unto the Parliament, if they set up Presbyteriall
Government. And you tell us of a State or public conscience, and of that you
say in the last page of your book, it is with a public or State conscience as
it is with a personal and particular conscience, what is done must be done in
faith, or else there is weakness, doubting, and sin; now where there is not
a full consent, and persuasion from the Word of faith, there cannot be faith
properly -- if the laws of truth were founded, as the laws of civil States, in
a mere legislative power, then Popery has had as good assurance as any, they
have had most voices, most councols. I wonder Sr. how you that so contract the
Church into a particular Congregation, and who will not endure to hear of a
Church of such a latitude, as to be called National, can allow of such a large
conscience as a State and public conscience: and you reduce it to the same
rule that you do a personal, and a particular conscience, and of both you
say, they cannot have a full consent and persuasion but from the word of faith;
and do you mean thereby, that whatsoever the State allows must have a
particular warrant from the word of God? and that the civil Sanction must be
set on nothing but that which has the stamp of a Jus Divinum upon it? if so,
you so much pinion the civil power, as to make it of little use for
Government, either of Church or State.

Although again you be as much too loose (as here you are too nice) in that to
the Magistrate you give liberty to different Religions, all pretending to the
word of God, though in many points repugnant one to another.

For that of the Apostle, whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. it
imports (as some expound it) that all the works of Infidels are sins, that
it belongs also to believers, and boundeth them so in their Christian
practice, that they must do nothing against conscience, nothing with a
doubting conscience, nothing at all which has not warrant from the Word either
in general principles, or particular conclusions; and it serves likewise to
shut out mere humane inventions from the worship of God, and the luxuriant
fruitfulness of humane fancy, against which the Ancient and Orthodoxe Tert.
depraescript. advers. haeret. Hilar. in Psalm. 132. Hieron. contra Helvid. Aug.
contra. Petil. l. 3. c. 6.
Doctors have given many cautions, which Protestant Writers pertinently bring
in against Popish Traditions, and additions thereto. But makes nothing either
against the States establishing of the Presbyteriall Government, nor against
the peoples yielding to it for want of faith, since for a great part of it, it
is grounded on the Word of God, and is in no part of it repugnant to it.

SECT. IIII. Mr. Saltm. his unequal dealing in distributing his own and his
adversaries work: The Presbytery not like Prelacie in unwarrantablenesse by
the word of God. Of Prudence how for of lawful use in Religious matters.
Smoke. Page 20. NOw you are to prove more then perhaps you thought on, that
is, to clear a Church Covenant, which many of your way are against, for though
you condemn it in some Churches, yet a National Church Covenant you plead
for.

Light.By what law would you put me to clear a Church Covenant? it is no part
of my work in the task I undertook, and if you may decline discussing the
imposition of Protestations (as you do in the next precedent paragraph) though
mentioned by me as a proof against you, and as you do the objection made from
the deferring of our Saviors Baptism till he was about thirty years of age,
Smoke. p. 37.
as you do likewise in the further prosecution of your Reply, why should you
take upon you to appoint me an impertinent work, and which is more, that which
is repugnant to my judgment? for you say it is to clear a Church Covenant,
which is rather your office then mine, who think it fitter to be accused then
cleared.

Smoke. Page 20, 21. You grant that the Government is but in some parts
warrantable by the word of God, so was Episcopacy and Prelacy in some parts of
it, there is not any false worship or way but it has some parts of truth in
it, the great image had a head of gold, etc. truth must be all one and the
same, and homogencall, not in parts.

Light. You allow your self too much liberty in changing my words, which have
their weight and pertinency, from whence if you vary, you mar the matter; I
said not the Government is but in some parts warrantable by the word of God,
but in the chief parts, which you will not say of Prelacy, for that consists
in being chief, in assuming a Lordly preeminence over their brethren of the
Ministry; but the chief parts of the Presbyteriall Government have their
warrant in the word, and why not the rest? Besides, it is not enough to have
some parts, or the chief parts of government warrantable by the word of God,
but it must be in no part contrary to the word of God; and so we may say of
Presbytery, not so of Prelacie. You say truth must be all one and the same,
homogencall in all parts, that is, if you speak to the point, all truth must
be only Scripture truth; but has not the light of nature taught the heathens
many truths who never saw the Scripture? and is any government reduced to
practice without some prudentiall supplies, in diverse particulars wherein the
Scripture is silent? as for the Elders in a Congregation, how many they should
be, whether perpetual or annual, and what their qualifications should be for
the measure of knowledge, and other abilities, and whether they should be
maintained at the charge of the Church, and there are many Queries concerning
the particulars of the Deacons office, which cannot be resolved by any
direction of the written word.

Smoke. Page 21. Nor are grounds of prudence any Scripture grounds; to rule by
prudence has let in more will worship then any thing; Prelacie had its
prudence for every new additionall in worship, and government; and if
Presbytery like prudence too, let the Reader judge what may follow.

Light.There is prudence which in the habit is an endowment from God, in the
exercise a duty from man, Matthew. 10.16. whereby every ordinance of God is to
be ordered to the best advantage for his honor, and the edification of his
people. Opposite to this on the one hand is the corrupt and pragmaticall
policy of such, as when they profess themselves wise they become fools, Romans
1.22. and such are they who pretend to perfect the Church of God by their
inventions and traditions; and there is on the other hand a neglect and
contempt of prudence, which has brought a contemptible confusion upon the
profession of Religion, and this is most found among the sects most opposite to
Presbytery.

Smoke. Page 21. And what is that, not directly from Scripture, yet not
repugnant? surely, Christ's rule is not such, he opposes any tradition to the
command of God, net directly from Scriptures is repugnant to Scriptures, such
is the oneness, entireness, indivisibilitie, and essentialitie of the truth;
He that is not with me is against me.

Light. Not directly from Scripture (say you) is repugnant to Scripture; if you
mean it universally, it is false, (as the precedent particulars do evince) if
you mean it of the substantials of faith and practice, you say true, but not
to the purpose; of such as these is the authority of our Savior, He that is
not with me is against me, Matthew. 12.30. but of circumstantials it is sound, he
that is not against me is with me, Mar. 9.40. And though it be for the honor
of the word to be received for a rule of Religion both affirmatively and
negatively, yet to wring it and wrest it to serve all turns, where God meant
to leave men to prudentiall accommodation of times, persons, places, and
occasions, is to abuse and dishonor it, and so do most of those who pretend
most to magnify the majesty of the word.

Smoke. Page 21. And for the Reformed Churches as a rule, that is to set the
Sun by the Dial, and not the Dial by the Sun, we must set the Churches by
the word, and not Church by Church, and the word by the Church.

Light. The Reformed Churches are not only as the Dial to the Sun, but as the
clock to the Dial, and the word as the Sun to both; when the Sun does not
shine, nor the dial give a shadow, the clock must be heeded for the hour of
the day; and sometimes one clock may be a direction to another: and though one
individual person or Church has not power over another, yet many may have
power over one, for the spirit of the Prophets is subie^t to the Prophets, 1
Cor 14.32. and whether they have rule and power over each other or no, one
Church may be a pattern to another so far as the word of God is a pattern
to it, as Paul said to the Corinthians, Be ye followers of me, even as I also
am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. or (where it is silent) so far as the light of
reason directs.

SECT. V. Whether Classical, Provincial, and National Presbyteries be like
the Independents gathering of Churches.
Smoke. Page 23. ANd when people are instructed, still your work remains to
prove your Presbytery over Congregations, or a Church gathered out of a Church
to be over a Church; which may upon the Presbytery more instly be recriminated
then where you do so often recriminate upon gathered Churches; and me thinks
to me it is unreasonable to tax any for Church-gathering, when your Presbytery
is maintained by such a kind of principle; What is your Classical, your
Provincial, your National Presbytery, but a Church gathered out of the rest,
call it a veronall, or representative, or what you please?

Light. Still your work remains? You are still putting work upon me (as I
told you before) which was no part of my undertaking, when I examined your
Quere; and as unwilling to perform your own, for you say in the next precedent
paragraph; it is not your work to dispute the Interest of Elders and people
distinctly, and yet you have taken upon you a Discourse of Church order in the
opening of Mr. Prinnes Vindication; I did not so, nor was it needful in the
thing it self, being fully done by others, nor directly incident to my Answer
to your paper; Nor if I thought it fit to argue and to discuss that
controversy, would I do it in a debate with you, for the reasons
fore-alleadged.

And for your recrimination, that Classical, Provincial, and National
Presbyteries are gatherings of Churches out of Churches, which the
Presbyterians condemn in your party, it is a very impertinent and perverse
comparison; wherein there are many considerable differences, (that make it
criminal in your Church, and commendable in Classical, Provincial, and
National Assemblies) which besides many other are these;

First, These subordinate gatherings are not made out of any conceit favoring
of singularity, disdain, or contempt of entire communion with those out of
whom they are gathered, as in your gatherings of Churches, but out of care and
compassion to them to consult and provide for their good, as the gathering of
the principal Patriots out of the country to be united in the House of
Commons, is not for making of a Schism from their country, but for meeting in
counsel and care for their country.

Secondly, This gathering into Classes, etc. is with consent and free choice of
those Societies out of which they are gathered, as it is in the choice of
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses for the Parliament: not so in your Church
gatherings, for those who are left out, when you admit of Members in your
selected choice for Church Way, are displeased with your neglects of them, and
refusal to administer all the ordinances of God unto them.

Thirdly, Those who you call out as Members of your new gathered Churches,
might more conveniently join together in the administration of holy things, as
they are by Gods providence disposed of in Parishionall dwellings, then your
covenanted members, who are many times in their habitations as far distant as
London and Dover, yea, sometimes as far as London and Amsterdam, Raterdam,
Arnhem, or New England: But the gathering of Pastors and Elders into
Classical Assemblies, is made with much convenience, and withal in a kind of
necessity, because the Churches whom they represent cannot possibly all of
them convene in one place, or if they could, they would be too many to be drawn
from their dwellings, too many to be admitted to counsel and censure.

Fourthly, Gatherings of Ministers and Elders into Classes, etc. makes much for
preservation of truth and peace in Parochial congregations, but your
gatherings of Churches are, and have proved the means to broach e^^ours, and
breed schisms.

Fifthly, The gathering of Elders for consultation and provision for the
welfare of other particular Churches, as it has sure ground of religious
reason, so has it the honor of most ancient and honorable prescription from
the Bin. Tom. 1. Council. page 2. Excus. Paris. 1636.
fourteenth year after the resurrection of Christ, Act. 15. to this day,
whereas your gathering of Churches out of Churches in a State, and a time of
reformation, is a new device, never practiced, or approved by the godly in
former ages.

Sixthly, The gathering of Ministers and Elders into Assemblies Classical,
etc. is authorized by the Parliament, the supreme Iudicatory of the Kingdom,
whereas your Church gathering is not allowed by authority, but taken up
without it, and against it.

SECT. VI. It is unreasonable to require an undertaking, that the best
government in constitution should he faultlesse in execution; tyrannic more to
be feared in Independency then in Presbytery.
Smoke. Page 23. But what if such at your self and some other godly meek of
your way may propound nothing but ways of meekness, can you undertake to
secure the people for hereafter, and for all, and for the way in its own
nature?

Light. It is a most unreasonable thing that you should require such a
security of those who have the greatest authority in their hands, much less
should you look for it from any private man, Minister or other; since no
government how warrantable so ever, if managed by sinful man, can be secured
from all abuse, either by falling short of duty, by remisenesse, or
overshooting it by rigor; But Sir any rational man that knows the regular
constitution of the Presbyteriall Government, and the experimental execution
of it in the Churches where it is established, may be more bold to undertake
for it, both for the government it self, and for the most probable
consequences of it, then any may engage for the way of Independency, and the
manifold evil effects and fruits of it, whereof see Mr. c. 3. a p 59, etc.
Bailey his Disswasive from errors.

Smoke. Page 23. You know Episcopacis began in meekness, and Bishops were
brought in first for good, and for peace, but how proved they? tyranny had ever
a countenance of meekness, and love, till it got seated on the throne.

Light.Episcopacie began at such a time as this wherein we live, and upon
occasion of such an evil as now is much complained of, viz. the turning of
Religion into Faction, and it was taken up as a remedy against it; but when in
stead of an Antidote against contention, it became an Engine of oppression, by
the slothfulness of some, as well as by the ambition of others, (for if some
had not been willing to do too little, others had not been able to usurp too
much) Presbytery was by the Reformed Churches restored, and the presidencie
which before was perpetual, (for fear of the return of tyranny) was made so
mutable, that none might be ambitious of it, or injurious by it. And if tyranny
have (as you say) a countenance of meekness, and love until it get to be
seated on the throne, it may be probable that Independencie is preparing for a
tyranny, for it pretends much meekness and love, and if it could prevail, it
is like it would soon set up the tyranny which now it disclaimeth in others;
For the observation of Machiavell would in all probability prove true in many
of those who meet in Independencie, Homines subinde magis magisque ambitioso^
fieri, primo enin^ co spectare ne ab aliis, opprimantur, postea etia^^ co euiti
ut ipsi alios opprimere possins. Machiavel. disp. l. 1. c. 46. p. 188.
Men (says he) grow more and more ambitious, for first, they see to themselves
that they be not oppressed, but afterward their endeavors are to oppress
others; So it was with the Anabaptists in Germany, and so it would be in many
of the same spirit, especially such as are hardened by the wars in all kinds
and degrees of inhumane hostility; and if we may judge of their spirit by the
spightfull, disdainful, and wrathful writings, and threats, and facts of many
of them who sort themselves under Independency, and their opposites under the
name of Popish, Antichristian, and profane, we can expect no moderation or
mercy from them, if their might were matchable to their Malignity.

SECT. VII. Of the power of the Presbytery for reformation of manners, compared
with Prelacy; the evil effects of Independencie; the difference betwixt a
discipline; and the discipline, Mr. Saltm. his precipitancie in writing, and in
divulging what he has written of Popery in the Covenant, or under the Covenant.
Smoke. Page 24. Look into other Reformed Kingdoms, and see what power of
godliness is there by reason of it; do we not see huge bodies of Nations very
sinful, corrupt, and formal? for Scotland, our Brethrens preaching and
watchfulness, it may be more powerful in a reformation of them then their
government; and further I deny not but a Government of that nature may much
reforms the outward man: Prelacy and Bishops had a government which was
Antichristian, yet by an exact execution, etc.

Light.In granting that you do, I shall not need to trouble my self with what
you deny; it is enough for the present point, which you yield, that the
Government may much reform the outward man; and for the inward, you
acknowledge preaching and watchfulness may be more powerful, (as in the
Kingdom of Scotland) and so do I; and for that you say of the Presbyteriall
Government, if it be Antichristian, as you say, it is not like it should be
blessed with so good success as the Christian Government of the Presbytery;
and if that be deficient to reformation (as no power put into the hands of man
is every way perfect in any Kingdom) the defects may be referred to some other
requisites to such a purpose, rather then to Presbytery it self; but where
other Ordinances are not wanting, either in a right rule, or in a regular
practice, there Presbytery formed up to such directions and examples as are
found in Scriptures, and the best reformed Churches, is a better means to make
men both Civil and Religions, then any Discipline or Government which has been
ordained and observed in the Church, since Popery and Superstition were
excommunicated out of it.

As for Independency, which is your darling on which you dote, and in zeal
unto it, hate the Presbyteriall Government, we see by sad experience that as it
has prevailed, heresies, schisms, and all manner of licentious exorbitancies
have increased, though it have not been set up by Authority, but suffered by
connivences what might be expected from it, if (which God forbid) the
solicitations and endeavors for it should advance to a toleration of it?

Smoke. Page 24. For your other reason, that my Texts make against not only
the suspending for a time, but for ever, I answer: It is true, principles and
circumstances considered, for if neither the Government be Christ's, nor the
people Nationally a Church, etc. -- how or when can you settle it, or what will
you settle, or upon whom?

Light. For your other reason, that my Texts make against not only the
suspending for a time, but for ever: Sr. in these words (though they be but
few) as spoken in my name there be two great (...), for they are contrary both
to your meaning and mine; to yours, because there is your misprision of one
word for another, yea for a contrary, for you should say for, and you say
against the suspending, etc. but as to me it may be thought my corruption, for
you make me to allow of your Texts, as making for your purpose, whereas I say,
Mine Exam. and Resolution. p. 10.
For those two Texts which he alleges for the deferring of the Government,
(and if there be any weight in them as to that purpose they make against it,
not for a time only, but for ever) I commend to his consideration, etc. but
you leave out the parenthesis, which intimates my mind to be, that those Texts
do not make for your purpose. And whereas you demand how, and when can you
settle it, or what will ye settle, or upon whom? these are no Questions meet to
be propounded to me, (who take not upon me to settle any government) but to the
Parliament, who in part have really answered them already, and will do it I
hope more speedily and more fully then you would have them.

Smoke. Page 25. I plead for a delay only in setting up a Discipline, not the
Discipline; or more plainly, that the Discipline be such that the Covenanters
may not violate that Article wherein they are bound to do every thing
according to the Word, and so prove unfaithful in their Covenant, while they
are most zealous for it.

Light.And the Presbyterians plead not for a Discipline in common, but for the
Discipline in special, which is most agreeable to the word of God, against
which they will admit of nothing; and if to it they add something (wherein the
word leaves them to make out by prudence, and exemplary conformity what is of
necessary practice, and not prescribed in the Scriptures) they are not to be
charged with doing any thing either against the Word, or against the Covenant.

Smoke. Page 25. And for the title of Popery which I put upon such an
obedience, which you say cannot be, because discovered in the next Article of
the Covenant; I answer, the Popery is not in the Covenant, but in the
misinterpretation upon it, and the mistaken practice of it, which is the thing
which I only aver.

Light.This passage, as the last but one, to which I might add many more,
shows your precipitancie in sending forth your fancies to public view; you
glory in the quick dispatch of your Pen, and that there may be no delay at the
Press, one Printer will not serve your turn for your Book, though of no
great bulk, but two at the least must be employed for expedition in it; and
when it is Printed, though there be very many and gross escapes, it must not
stay to be revised, that any thing mistaken by a Catalogue of the Errata may be
corrected; so all things concur for application of the Proverb to your
Dictates, Festinans canis caecos parit catules; and so do you put discovered
for disavowed in the next Article; betwixt which words there is so great
difference, that discovered is for your opinion, disavowed for mine; but you
have your discovery, and it is of Popery, not in the Covenant, but in the
interpretation upon it, and the mistaken practice of it; but whose
interpretation is this? to me it appears to be yours, by your next words.

Smoke. Page 25. Oh how soon may we be Popish under a covenant against it^ I
had as great a tithe once as another, but I could not hold it so, neither by
Covenant, nor Gospel.

Light.And may we soon be Popish under a Covenant against it? very soon; (for
so much your pathetick interrogation imports) then Sr. comfort your self, as
you are a Patron of Heretics and Schismatics, (pleading for indulgency to
them, and toleration of them, though you know the Covenant is made expressly
against them) for how soon may Heresy and Schism increase under a Covenant
against them?

SECT. VIII. Tithes not Jewish and Popish, as Mr. Saltm. pretends.
Smoke. Page 25. What are the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes? Jewish and
Popish undeniably, yet no notice of this at all.

Light.How? Jewish and Popish undeniably? as undeniably as the Sabbath was
Jewish when the Prelates so called it, or the Doctrine of the Trinity Popish as
Valentinus Gentilis took it when he disliked the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches in that Article, Quod Ecclesia reformatae adhuc in fide Trinitatis cum
Papistis conveniret Bell. praefat. in libr. de Christo. Tom. 1. sccund
Controvers. general. p 271.
because they agreed with the Papists therein. You are grossly mistaken Sr. in
the tenure of Tithes; for though there be a clamor taken up against them, by
such as make no scruple either of slander, or of sacrilege, and some would
change the Ministers portion, which is their Masters wages for his own work,
and reduce them to voluntary pensions of the people, because they would have a
liberty to beggar them, who will not humor them in their fond, and false
opinions, and licentious practices, but oppose them as of conscience they are
bound to do, neither you nor all your party can prove them either Jewish, or
Popish, as they are allowed, and received for the maintenance of the Ministers
of England; And because you are so confident in your opinion of Mr. Nigh, whom
with Mr. Goodwin Smoke. p. 14.
you cite for a worthy saying touching the Golden Ball of Government, I refer
you for satisfaction to him, who will tell you as he has done diverse others,
that Ministers of the Gospel may hold, and receive Tithes for their
maintenance, by a right and title, which is neither Jewish nor Popish, but
truly Christian; and there is nothing Jewish or Popish in Tithes but the
Assignation of the decima decimarum from the Number. 18.28.
Leviticall Priests to the high Priest, from the high Priest to the In
veterilege primitiae debebantur sacerdotibus, decima autem Levitis, and quia
sub sacerdotibus Levitae cram, Dominus mandavi^ ut ipsi loco decimarum
solverent summo sacerdor^ decimam decimae: unde nunc cadem ratione tenentur
Clerici summo pontifici decimam dare si exigeret. Aquin. Sum. 22. q. 87. a. 4.
ad 3. Soto 9. Just. q. 4. art. 4. ad 3. Lorin. in Number. 18. v. 28. p. 687.
Pope, and from the Pope to the King; when first Pope Vrbane gave them to
Richard the Second, to aid him against Charles the French King, and others that
upheld Clement the Seventh against him, as Polydore Virgil Polyd. Virgil. Hist.
l. 16.
relates. And King Henry the Eighth taking from the Pope the title of Head of
the Church to himself by An. 26. Hen. 8. c. 1. Polt. Abri^^^. p. 561.
Act of Parliament, took from him the Ibid. c. 2. p. 565.
Tenths, and other profits annexed to that title, which were settled upon the
Crown by Statute in the twenty sixth year of Henry the Eighth; so that the
Jewish high Priesthood being expired, the Papal Lordship abolished, the Tithes
paid under those Titles may be called Jewish and Popish, but not that which is
assigned for the maintenance of Ministers, because they are yet to do service
to their Master, and so to receive the maintenance of his allowance for his
work, which fellow servants cannot take upon them to take away without
presumption; their door neighbor will not allow them a power to appoint the
wages of their servants, much less may they usurp upon the Right of God, and
his Ministers, to alienate them from the support of his service and worship;
for that is rather Popish, for the Pope has translated the Tenure from the
Ministers to the Monasteries, to Nunneries, and to what purpose he thought fit
to assign them, and thence came in the translation of titles from the
incumbent Ministers, the making of Leases by the Bishop, Patron and Incumbent,
without stint and term of years to Lay persons, until they were restrained
by the Sr. Edw. Cook in the first part of the Institut. of the Laws of
England. l. 1. c. 7. Sect. 58. fol. 44. p. 1.
State in the 1. of Eliz. 13. so that if you have given up your tithes to your
Parishioners of Brasteed, and told the Committee of Examinations so, (as you
imply in the passage repeated) you are more Popish therein then other Ministers
of the Gospel, who retain them and officiate to the people that pay them in
all the Ordinances of Christ, which you refuse to do; and as I hear, you have
renounced your Ordination to the Ministry; if so, there is no reason you
should have them, whether they be lewish, Popish, or Christian.

You will say perhaps I make this plea of the tenure of Tithes for my profit,
whereas it would be more for the security of my conscience, and support of my
credit against the imputation of covetousness, to give them up as antiquated
Coremonies, as you have done; and truly Sr. if I had ever thought them either
Jewish or Popish, I should rather have set you an example of resilling them,
then (being your Senior, as I am) have suffered you to be before me as my
pattern for a conscientious recusancie of such a revenue; But I never read in
any Book, much less in yours, (wherein in case of Tithes you play not the
Disputant, but the Dictator) which could make me suspect them to be
Anti-Evangelicall; nor has any respect to advantage made me of a better
opinion of their title then yours, since I have rejected the offer of thrice as
much benefit by Tithes as now I have. And if Tithes were taken away, I am
confident I should be no loser by another allowance; though it may be I may
fall under a misrepresentation, as if I argued for them as Demetrius for the
honor of Diana, when I mind ^^^^ing more then the gain of Tithes, as he did
the gain of her silver Shrines; and I may the rather suspect it from some of
your side, (though not from you) because I find the like charge laid upon Mr.
Edw. by Whisp. in the ear of Mr. Tho. Edw. p. 1.2.15.
Mr. W.W. in his Whisper in his care: wh^ as he is like Luther in the vigor
and freedom of his spirit, so is he, as Luther said of himself, of all sins
the freest from covetousness; and on my knowledge, whereas he has had the
offer of many good Benefices, he resused them, and has no Tithes at all for
his maintenance, but a voluntary pension, which is not competent for his
charge, or pains either in an answerable preportion, or a seasonable payment;
and yet is he contented with it, minding much more the doing of the work he
undertook, then the receiving of the wages.

SECT. IX. Of Mr. Colemans observation of the Church of Scotland.
Smoke. Page 28. TO your other of the blessings, and blessed fruits in
Scotland, th^^ there is no Heresy nor Schism, let Mr. Coleman our learned and
pious Brother speak for us both from his experiences.

Light.I (...) by this passage you have not read the Book you pretend to
answer; for Mr. Colemans experience was not of Heresy, and Schism in the
Church of Scotland, but (as he gave instance) of the Presbyteries usurpation of
the power of banishment; and if you mean Mr. Colemans charge for that, (as I
suppose you do) you might have taken notice of an Answer to it in the seventh
Section of mine Examination of your New Quere, p. 21. which, though it were in
part but conjecturall, is confirmed by a more certain Answer of the Reverend
Commissioner Mr. Mr. Gillespie his Nihil Respondes. p. 24.
Gillespie in these words, What from Scotland? I my self (says Mr. Coleman)
did hear the Presbytery of Edinborough censure a woman to be banished out of
the gates of the City; was not this an incroachment? It had been an
incroachment indeed if it had been so. But he will excuse me if I answer him in
his own Language (which I use not) p. 3. and 5. It is at the best a most
uncharitable slander, and there was either ignorance or mindlesnesse in him
that sets it down.

There is no banishment in Scotland but by the Civil Magistrate, who so far
aydeth and assisteth Church Discipline, that prefane and scandalous persons,
when they are found unruly and incorrigible, are punished with banishment, or
otherwise. A stranger coming at a time into one of our Presbyteries, and
hearing of somewhat which was represented to, or reported from the Magistrate,
ought to have so much circumspection and charity as not to make such a rash
and untrue report. He might have at least inquired when he was in Scotland, and
informed himself better, whether Presbytery or the Civil Magistrate do
banish. If he made no such inquiry, he was rash in judging: if he did, his
offense is greater, when after information he will not understand. And if you
put your cause to the arbitration of Mr. Coleman, you will find cause by the
sentence to conceive him to be no more an Independent, then we have to take him
to be a Presbyterian; and I suppose I may say he is more ours then yours, since
he has put himself into the Association of a Classical Assembly, in the
Province of London; howsoever whether he prove a Participle, or a Neuter, I
know you will not be concluded by his either opinion, or practice, no more
shall we.

SECT. X. A Comparison of young men and old, for prudence and counsel. Of
visions and dreams, where the second of Joel verse. 28. and Act. 2.17. are
vindicated from Mr. Saltm. his mistaking and misapplication of them.
Smoke. Page 29. To that of Job -- which you apply in way of reproach to the
younger, whom you call as it were green heads, etc. Smoke. p.. 29.


Light.In stead of acknowledgement of your misapplication of Job 32. verse. 6,
7. where with I charge you, Sect. 4. page 14. of my Book, you lay a charge
upon me, for reproaching the younger with the name of green-heads. That the
impartial Reader may be the better able to judge betwixt us both, I will set
down first my words to you, then yours to me; my words are these.

For his Epiphonema with the words of Elihu forementioned, which are taken out
of Job 32. verse. 6, 7. Why do not days speak, and multitude of years teach
knowledge? they make nothing for his purpose; for the meaning of them is not,
that Government, or Discipline, or any other useful thing should not be with
all convenient speed established, but that the ancient with whom is wisdom,
Job 12.12. the gray headed and very aged men, Chap. 15.10. who have had the
experience of many days and years, should be heard, and heeded in matters of
advise, and consultation, before such green-headed Counselors as Rehoboam
followed to his ruin, 1 Kings 12.13, 14.

Smoke. Page 29.And your Answer to them is, The elder I esteem as Fathers, and
the younger we know are such in whom the Lord speaks more gloriously, as he
himself says, Your young men shall see visions, and upon your sons and
daughters will I power out my spirit, your old men shall dream deames. Now
whether is it more excellent to dream dreams, or to see visions? The Lord
delivered Israel by the young men of the Provinces; Surely we may more safely
hearken to the younger that see visions of reformation, then to the elder that
dream dreams of it only.

Light.I spoke no more either in praise of old men, or disparagement of young
then conduced to clear the Text in question betwixt us, yet thence you have
taken occasion to magnify young men, and to vilify the old, alleging the
saying of the Prophet Joel, Your old men shall dream dreams, and your young
men shall see visions, and thereupon demanding, whether is more excellent to
dream dreams, or to see visions: you resolve the Question your self thus;
Surely, we may more safely hearken to the younger that see visions of
Reformation, then to the elder that dream dreams of it only.

And do all, or only, or most young men see visions of Reformation? and all,
or only, or most old men but dream dreams of it? If there be not such an
Antithesis betwixt them, your comparative thesis is an error of youth, a
slander of age, and I shall not doubt, if you take up a duel with me in this
quarrel, with the old man's crutch (bring what weapons you will or can) to beat
you out of the field, or at least to give you the foil.

But besides your disparagement of old men, I have some what to say to you for
mistaking and misapplying the words of the Prophet, Joel 2.28. brought in by
the Apestle, Act. 2.17. first, for the defense of old men; you make as if it
were safer to hearken to young men then to them, as if the young men were wiser
counselors then the old.

I grant beforehand that sometimes there may be young men, (as Joseph, Daniel,
and Samuel,) who may have a spirit of wisdom, and thereby may be fit to give
counsel, and to govern the ways of the aged; but setting aside singular and
extraordinary examples, compare age and youth in the general, and the
resolution of reason and example will be, that old men are fitter to direct and
guide the young, then contrariwise; for in old men the passions and
perturbations of the mind (which give great impediment to prudence, (for they
are to reason as fumes and vapors about a candle, which dim the light
thereof) are more subdued then in young men. Besides experience (which is both
the parent of wisdom, of which it is begotten, and the nurse which brings it
on to a further growth and proficiency) falls not within the fathom of a young
man's reach, but of the old man; hence is it that Solomon says; The hoary head
is a ^rowne of glory if it be found in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16.31.
and that by the law, the younger sort were to rise up before the hoary head,
and to honor the face of the old man, Levit. 19.32. For with the ancient is
wisdom, and in length of days understanding, Job 12.12.

And hence it is, that the Counselors and Governors of Commonweals, are
called Senators, and their Assembly Senatus nomen dedit aetas, nam i^dem.
patres sunt. Quintil. Instit orat. l. 1. c. 6. p. 38.
Senatus, from age: and in the old Testament they are called the Elders of
Israel, and in the New those whose function requires of them a wisdom of the
best kind, and highest degree, (for it must be such a wisdom as must go
beyond his subtlety who deceives all the world, Rev. 12.6.9.) are called
Presbyters, a word in Greek of the same signification with Elders in English.
And for example you cannot be forgetful of the Story of R^h^boams old and
young Counselors, 1 King. 12. nor what prelation is given to the old above
the young in that Story; and while you remember it, you should not sway the
preeminence on the young men's side against the old men, as you have done.

Besides the Scriptures, there be manifold instances against your fence in the
difference of age and youth, I will mind you of some, as that of Tuum est
undecunque evocare and ascribere tibi (exemple Mosis) senes, non juvenes Ber.
de Cons. lib. 4. cap. 4. col. 886.
Bernard counselling Eugenius to call to him Counselors (as Moses did) that
were old men, not young men; and of the Lacedaemonians, of whom Apud
Lacedaemonies ii qui amplissimuns magistratum gerunt, ut sunt, sic etiam
appellantur senes. Cicer. Cat^. Major. seu de Senect. Tom. 3. ^p^rum Cicer.
page 408. in fol.
Cicero says, that they who are the chief Magistrates, whose authority is of
most ample extent, as they are, so they are called old men.

And among the Romans aged prudence was so much honored, that Vt quisque atate
antecellit, ita sententia principatum abtine^. Ibid. page 415.
in the College of Sages, Sentences were partly valued by senioritie. And
there is good ground for this great estimation of old men, Maximas Respub. per
adolescentes labefast^s, a senibus suste^^ates and resti^^as reperiatis. Ibid.
p. 408.
for great Commonweals, as he shows, which have been ruined by young men,
have been repaired and restored by old men. Such as Agesilaus was, whom (though
among the vulgar Egyptians, (when he came into their Country, and they saw no
stately train about him, but an old gray beard laid on the grass by the
seaside,) a little man that looked simply on the matter, in a thread bare gown
fell a laughing at him) yet the chief Captains and Governors of King Tachis
honorably received, and were marvellously desirous to see him, for the great
fame that went abroad of him and he was famous for his wisdom both Military
and Civil, as Plutarch. in Agesil. page 629.630.
Plutarch reports in the Story of his life. To him I could add many examples
of later time, and nearer home; I will name only one, and that is my Reverend
brother See his book de Diphthongis aut Bivocatibus.
Mr. Tho. Gataker, who though he have been an old man a great while, has given
(of late since his sickness, and secession from the Assembly) such a specimen
of a pregnant apprehension and faithful memory, as may assure a judicious
Reader, that albeit his body be weak, his brain is not so; though his head
have been long gray, his wit is yet green and flourishing.

Secondly, Now for mine other exception against your comparison; In it you not
only give preeminence to young men before old, but prefer them in this, that
young men see visions of reformation, and old men dream dreams of it only;
wherein you wrap up three particulars, which you take for granted, but it will
be an harder task then you imagine to prove any one of them.

First, That Revelations by visions are more excellent then those that come by
dreams.

Secondly, That visions ascribed to young men are denied to old men.

Thirdly, That young men have visions of reformation, old men only dream of
it; whereas

First, Duo Revelationum modi, per somnium scilicet and per visionem
imaginariam vigilanti objectam, non se superant mutuo ratione excellentioris
potentiae vel praestantioris modi cognoscendi, cum uterque perficiatur in
imaginativa. Jacob. Bonfrer. in Numb. 12.6. page 78^. col. 1.
some learned men have resolved that visions are not more excellent then
dreams, and the reasons may be; First, because in Scripture they are brought
in as Revelations, though different, yet without prelation of the one before
the other, as Numb. 12. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make
my self known unto him in a vision, and speak unto him in a dream, Number.
12.6. Secondly, as great matters are represented in dreams as in visions, as
the affliction of the children of Israel in Egypt, and their deliverance was
revealed to Abraham in a dream, Genesis 15.12. and the intercourse betwixt heaven
and earth, in the ministry of Angels was represented to Jacob in a dream,
Genesis 28.12. It was in a dream that Solomon had the singular wisdom imparted
to him, 1 King. 3.5. By a dream was the conception of Jesus Christ by the Holy
Ghost revealed to Joseph, Matthew. 1.20. and the plot of perdition against him,
with the way to prevent it, Matt. 2.13.

Thirdly, as for the matter, so for the manner, Revelation by a dream is as
clear, and as sure as by a vision; as in that of Abraham, of Jacob, of
Solomon, of Joseph forementioned; to which we may add that of Abimelech, Genesis
20.3. and out of humane Authors; the dream of Hieron. Epist. ad Eustoch. de
custod. Virg. Tom. 1. p. 146. 147.
Hierome, wherein he was brought before the Tribunal of Christ, and denied to
be a Christian, because he was too much a Ciceronian, and was adjudged to be
scourged, and was so, and in the morning he found his shoulders blew with his
beating; and the dream of Hospinian. in Hist. Sacram. part. alt. fol. 26. and
Rivet. Exercit. in Genesis 28. Exercit. 123. p. 603.
Zuinglius against the Masso, had an evidence of the matter very clear (though
for the Author he was uncertain.)

But we may say further that dreams have an excellency above visions, and the
reason is this: That which has more of God, and less of man, is more
excellent then that which contrariwise has more of man and less of God: now
in dreams there is more of God, and less of man; because in sleep the senses
are bound up, and so there is more communion betwixt the spirit of God, and the
soul of man, and less interruption in that communion then to men awake; so
that in dreams there is no disturbing of the Revelation by the concurrence of
sensual objects, no denying or suspending of assent by examination of reason,
as Dr. Rivet. ubi supra.
Rivet well observes. And the reason is ratified by natural Philosophy, for
the mind (says Viget animus in somniis, liberque sensibus ab omn^ impeditione
curarum jacente et mortuo paene corpore. Cicer. de Divinat. lib. 1. page 274.
Cicere) in dreams is vigorous, being free from senses, and from all
interruption of cares, the body, the while being in a manner dead. And
elsewhere he Dormientium animi maxim declarant divinitatem suam, multa enim
cum remissi and liberi sint futura prospiciunt, ex que intelligitur quaeles
futuri sint cum se plane corporis vinculis relaxaverint. Cicer. de Senect. p.
417.
says, that the minds of men asleep declare their divinity, for when they
are relaxed and free, they foresee many future things, whence it may be
gathered what they will be hereafter, when they are wholly released from bonds
of the body.

The second Particular which your comparative speech implies is, that visions
ascribed to young men are denied to old men; whereas old men have their visions
as well as young; as John the Evangelist though he were young when he came
first to be a Disciple of his and our great Master, had his Revelations by
vision in the Isle of Pathmus when he was old, viz. in the 96. year of Christ,
which must be at least the 80. year of John's age, if we suppose him to be but
14. years old at the entrance of his attendance on him, and younger we cannot
reasonably imagine him to have been at that time.

A third thing which in your comparison of young men and old for visions and
dreams. I may not admit of, is, that you bring it to the matter of
reformation, and make it as if the young men had seent a vision, and that old
men had but some dark notions of it, like unto a nightly dream; which is so
presumptuous and groundless a conceit that your most waking thoughts cannot
make it seem otherwise to any sound understanding, then a vapor of a young
man's brag, or the vanity of a sick man's dream.

SECT. XI. Mr. Saltm. his insufficient answer and figurative trifting unworthy
of an Answer.
Smoke. Page 29. FOr that of the conversion from Paganism to Christianity,
there is no such disproportion, etc.

Light.If the indifferent Reader will turn to the place, page 15. of my Book,
he shall perceive your Answer to my Text (which you do not faithfully repeat)
is very insufficient, and if he read your words first, and mine after, he will
take them for a confutation of yours, not yours for a confutation of mine; and
the like has been said by a judicious Reader for a great part of your Reply.

Smoke. Page 30. But we are speaking of the spiritual building or Church here,
which is the image of the Church above; and as that is of true, real,
essentially spiritual living stones, so the Church below is to consist at
least of such as visibly and formally appear so.

Light.In this and many other passages of your Book you are rather typical in
representation, then topicall in proof; you follow your Allegory so far,
that to follow you therein is rather to dally then to dispute; Besides, the
result of your exception either closes with my sense, or strayeth from the
question in difference betwixt us; and if in such particulars I do not trace
your steps, think not I could not answer you, but that I would not trouble my
self, nor tire the Reader with trifling impertinencie.

SECT. XII. A comparison of Presbyterians and Independents in point of
strictness and looseness in admission of members; of the mixture in the
Church of Corinth.
Smoke. Page 32. LEt the doors of our Churches be as strait as you imply, I am
sure your doors are set open, or rather cast off the hinges.

Light.That the doors of our Churches are no straiter may be partly imputed to
some of your party, who have no mind of such a through reformation as would
deprive them of an opportunity and occasion of gathering of Churches; which
could have no pretense, if the Reformation were wrought up to such a pitch as
the Presbyterians desire.

And if our doors be set too open, or cast off the hinges, it is in permitting
Independents such a liberty of Lecturing in our Churches, to preach against
Presbytery, as they would never yield to Presbyterians, were it in their power
to prohibit them.

But Sr. I believe, in some respects neither commendable, nor warrantable, your
doors are more open then ours, your hinges more loose then ours, your walls
much more wide, or rather you have neither doors, nor hinges, nor walls to
bound your membership; for if you had, how could people of London, Holland, New
England, be members of the same particular Church, as before has been
objected unto you? but this is not cardo controversiae betwixt you and me.

Smoke. Page 32. To that of your challenge that I should show any such example
in the New Testament, of taking out the best when there was a mixture of holy
and profane; I answer: These were Gospel Churches gathered by the Word and
Spirit into Gospel fellowship, and when you make your Parishes to appear such
Churches, then I shall tell you more, till then I shall suspend your challenge.

Light.By this Reply I see (though you take time to answer a challenge) you
will rather foil your self, then seem to be foiled by your Antagonist; for
if Gospel Churches, gathered by the Word and Spirit into Gospel fellowship, as
you state the case, may consist of such godly and ungodly members, as were in
the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.21. then for all your pretense of your Gospel
way you have no warrant for such a separation as you take upon you to make.
Besides, Sr. the separation of people is not to be varied in regard of the
Church way of gathering into fellowship, which is extrinsecall, but in regard
of the difference of persons as they are holy or profane; but with you, it
seems, if the manner of gathering be such as you call a Gospel way, it matters
not much whether the matter of the Church be holy or unholy; and indeed, though
you exclude from coming into your Churches some kind of wicked ones, you admit
of those whom without repentance God will never account of the communion of
Saints, such as are notoriously covetous, proud, slanderous, and malicious, who
have no more visible interest in Christ then a fornicator, or drunkard, a
swearer, or Sabbath-breaker.

SECT. XIII. To whom Christ is an Head, and how; of his rod of Iron and his
Golden Scepter, and of his being a Lord and a servant; gentle, yet terrible.
Smoke. Page 34. IT is true, Christ is an head, but he is not an head to every
body, he will have a body proportionable to his head; is a Nation of all sorts
a fit body for such an head? is he not a pure, holy, and glorious head in his
Gospel dispensation? and is a body so leprous, so wicked, so formal, so
traditionally, and Antichristianly corrupted a fit body? Shall I take the
members of my body, says Paul, and join them to an barlot to make one flesh?
God forbid; what then shall the head do with such members?

Light.It is true, Christ is an head, and not an head to every body, but is he
not an head to his own integrall members, because the wicked mingle with them
in an outward profession? have hypocrites any more consanguinity with the pure
blood of Christ then profane persons have? yet Christ is head of that Church
where reprobates are reputed to be members; and are there not some branches of
the Vine which bear no fruit, and are to be taken away? Joh. 15.2. who cannot
for all that hinder the vital influence into other branches, as in the example
of the Church of Corinth.

And for that you say of a body so leprous, so wicked; as applied to our
Reformation in furi, or in fact, it is very falsely reprod chfull, and savours
of ungratitude to God, and of Pharisaicall disdain of purer Churches then
those you stand for; wherein you grossly digress from the moderation whereto
you protend.

Smoke. Page 34. To that of his ruling with a rod of iron as well as a golden
Se^p^er, I answer.

And does he rule any in his Church with his rod of iron, who were not called
in first by his golden Scepter?

And for that of his iron rod in Psalm. 2. it is spoken of Christ not as King of
his Church, but of the Nations.

Light.By this Answer you seem to forget your own Argument, which was to
prove an unsutablenesse of the Presbyteriall Government to the Person of
Christ; and when I have showed that the Person of Christ is not only amiable
as a Savior, but formidable to offenders as a Lord, having an iron Rod, as
well as a golden Seepter, you say by way of distinction that he has his iron
scepter as King of the Nations, not as King of the Church; but if his Church
consist of golden Saints and gilded Hypocrites, (for you say it consists at
least Smoke. p. 31.
of such as visibly and formally appear so, and hypocrites appear so, and the
appearance of Saintship is the most that is in them) he has and uses an iron
rod to drive away, and to crush, as well as a golden Scepter to invite and call
to his presence; for were not Ananias and Saphira members of the Church after a
Gospel dispensation? and were they not ruined as well as ruled, when they were
both of them suddenly smitten dead for their hypocritical profession? what
could an iron rod have done more, if they had taken up heathenish hostility
against the Church? and was not this exemplary punishment laid upon them that
the Church might fear Christ as a Lord, as well as love him as a Savior of
his Church, that they might fear his iron rod, as well as love his golden
Scepter? sure I am it wrought that effect upon Christians in general, for
fear came upon all the Church, and upon at many as heard these things, Act.
5.11.

Smoke. Page 34. For your other Texts of Christ's being a servant and a Lord, a
Lamb and terrible, you only prove what I grant, that he is more a King and a
Lordin his Government, then in any other of his Gospel dispensations.

Light.In this particular you give me occasion to return a piece of your own
Rhetoric upon you, and to call you as you do me, Page 17.
a fair enemy, for you repeat my proofs so fully here (though elsewhere you
miserably maime and mangle them) that you may be thought to have done as
Bellarmine is said to do in his Controversies, viz. to bring in more of the
Protestants Objections then he is able to answer; But when you say that I prove
only what you grant, that he is more a King and Lord in his Government, then
in any other of his Gospel dispensations; you invert the order of the words you
should observe; for you should have rather said, You now grant what I have
proved, for I never knew so much of your mind in this matter before; and you
grant so much as might have spared a great part of your Reply to me; for the
Lordship of his Government was the matter in question, and that being granted
by you, the Presbyteriall Government is not so inconsistent or unsuitable with
the condition of Christ's description of himself as you would make it.

SECT. XIV. The Presbyteriall Government not unsuitable to the condition of
Christ; the prevailing of Independents, and of the Sects that meet in
Independencie, much more terrible then the Presbyteriall Government can be.
Smoke. Page 34, 35. But all this will not prove the Lordship of such a
Presbytery or Government; cert ainely you intend a terrible government, because
you bring in these Texts that have judgment and severitie in them, which
Christ threatens to the Nations and Kings of the earth and not to his Churches;
will you make Christ rule in his Church as he does in the World? well, let your
Presbytery enjoy the iron scepter, while the Churches of Christ enjoy the
golden, and try if you ruin not more then you rule.

Light.These proofs were not brought to prove a Presbyterial Government, but
dato sed non concesso, that it was severe, it was not sounsutable to the
condition of Christ as you pretended. And for that you say, certainly you
intend a terrible Government, though you speak to me, you do not mean it of
me, for you have said Smoke, p. 23.
before, What if such as your self, and some other godly meek of your way
propound nothing but ways of meekness to your selves, can you undertake, etc.
whereby you seem to acquit me from the accusation of such rigor as you
suspect in others; and if that be your meaning, you are not mistaken in my
spirit, for if I know any thing of it, it is far from that height of heat
against any opposers whatsoever which was in the Disciples of our Savior
against the Samaritans, when they received him not, Luke 9.54.

And I confess, in the presence of God who knows the hearts of all men, that
if a spirit of meekness, and sweetness, and of all affectionate and fair
insinuations would prevail with the most perverse and blasphemous heretic to
win him to be cordially Christ's, I could wish the golden Scepter held out to
invite him into the communion of the Church, rather then the iron rod to
bruise, or break, or to affright him from the Church. And though you mean
this of others, who show themselves Zealots for the Presbyteriall Government,
you are too inconsiderate, too uncharitable, too confident in your charge; for
how can you be so certain as you make your self, when the thing they move for
has no terror in it; It is true, that according to the French Proverb, He
that would have his neighbors dog hanged gives out that he is mad; so your
party that would have the Presbyteriall Government literally suspended, and
made away as a mad dog, as if it would (as Paul was before his conversion) be
mad against the Saints, Act. 26.11. and breathe out nothing but threatenings and
slaughters against them, Act. 9.1. give out that it is an intolerable Tyranny,
and ten times worse then the Prelaticall Domination: When indeed if men will
lay aside all prejudice, partiality, and passion, they shall find the spirit
of Independencie more terrible then that of Presbytery. For,

First, that which is so much stuck at as an incroachment upon Christian
liberty, and a means of the Ministers domineering over the people, the
suspensio^ from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, are not the Independents
more rigid then the Presbyterians are? for they generally suspend whole
Parishes from the Sacrament (except some few of their covenanted disciples) for
diverse years together, without any law or rule at all; the Presbyterians
generally do not so; or if some do forbear communions for a time, it is not
upon such principles as the Independents maintain; and they do all they can
to expedite the removal of all scandals from the Sacrament, wherein the
Independents refuse to join with them.

Secondly, the Independents deny not only the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
as has been said, but they deny the Sacrament of Baptism to all such as are
not the children of their covenanted members; the Presbyterians accept of them
for a federall holiness professed by their parents; and if there were no more
but these two differences betwixt them, it were enough (if men would not give
up themselves to be grossly befooled by flattery and calumny) to cry out upon
the Independents for their injurious invasions upon Christian liberty, and to
love the Presbyterians for their mildness and charity in these particulars:
but further,

Thirdly, The Independents Government (though to speak properly, Independency
is rather Anarchy then Government) is more terrible then the Presbyterian;
because under it are united all sorts of sectaries, among whom many are of
furious spirits, men of blood and Belial, and such as have made many bloody
massacres in Germany, and have threatened if otherwise they may not have their
will, (their liberty they call it) that they will have it by the sword; for
have they not an Independent army to force their way against the
Presbyterians? I quoted to this purpose Mr. Prinnes fresh Discovery, and Dr.
Bastw. Preface to his second part of Independency, but I quoted not their
words, now I will, became since Mr. Edw. put forth his last Book, some of that
sect have spoken bloody words against his person; and (though he be so
confident in the goodness of his cause, and the integrity of his intentions,
that he believes he should less fear to be killed, then any to kill him) yet
since I find the Independents deal with the Presbyterians as Ahab did with
Elijah, charging him with his own fault, 1 King. 18.17. and that like the beast
in the Revelation, they speak like a dragon, Revel. 13.11. and are horned
rather like a ram then a lamb, I think it fit that their spirit be better
known, that they may be less trusted; especially, where they pretend more
meekness then they find among Presbyterians; their words are these,

Two Predicant Captains apprehended, and questioned for preaching in Newport
Pannell against the Ordinance of Parliament of the 26. of April, 1645. among
other speeches averred, Mr. Prinnes Epist. Dedic. before his Fresh Discovery of
some prodigious new wandering blazingstarres and firebrand. fol. 3. p. a.
That if the godly and well affected party were thus persecuted, they should be
forced to make a worse breach then what was yet, when they had done with the
Kings party; telling one Ensign Ratford and his Soldiers that they were worse
then Cavaliers; and that when they had made an end of the war with the
Cavaliers, they should be forced to raise a new Army to fight with them. And in
Dr. Dr. Bastw. his second part of Independency not Gods Ordinance, in the
Preface. fol. 14. p. b. and fol. 15. p. a.
Bastwicks Preface to his second part of his Independency not Gods Ordinance,
he says thus; Among those they think they may confide in, they affirm they
will not be beholding to the Parliament nor any body else for their libertia,
for they will have it, and ask them no leave; they have the sword now in their
hand, and they think their party strong enough to encounter any adverse and
opposing party; and they profess they care not how soon they come to outting
of throats, and speak of nothing but the slaughtering and butchering of the
Presbyterians.

And though I confess there may be many Independents (and some I know to be
such as your self) of a meek and gentle disposition, yet as Peter Du Moulin
said of many of the Priests in France, that they were for their loyaltis not
beholding to the maxim^^ of Italy, so I say, for their mooknesse they are not
beholding to the Principles of Independency; for where they most prevail they
puff men up in pride, selfe-conceipt, and disdain of their Christian
brethren, though in gifts and graces far better then themselves, many of them
being Anabaptists, and of the spirit of that ins^lent heretic, who, when Cum
ego humaniter pro liuguae mea more cum compellarem, nunquam aliter dignatus est
mecu loqui, quam si cum cane sibi negotium fuisset. Cum introductus fuisset in
Curiam, voluit primo Syndico assidere; inde repulsus, caput oculosque
torquendo, Propheticam Majestatem simulans, etc. Calvin. Epist. Farello, p. 62.
Calvin had conference with him, and entertained him with terms of humanity,
vouchsafed him none other language then if Calvin had been no better then a
dog; and he showed the arrogance of his mind by his carriage, and behavior,
as well as by his words, offering to sit next to the prime Syndick of the
Senate of Geneva, and upon the repulse, by the motion of his head, and eyes,
signifying great weath, he took upon him a Prophetical Majesty. And albeit
some take it for a proof of the goodness of their cause, that they have
engaged many great and rich men in it, which makes them, as is truly Mr. Baylie
his Disswasive from Errors. cap. 3. page 53.
observed, Though the smallest of all the sects of the time for their number,
yet the greatest for worth of their followers, yet that in a true Christian
consideration makes rather against it; for by getting so many rich and great
men unto their party, and aiming so much at such disciples (with such neglect
of others as is observed) shows that they are not minded as the Apostle was,
when he said to the Corinthians; I seek not yours but you, 2 Cor. 12.14. but
rather contrariwise; so that if they would say, what many by their actions
speak, they should tell their converts; I seek not you but yours, or rather
yours then you. And secondly, when rich and great men embrace Independency, it
may give great cause of suspicion that they do it, because, as rich, they are
apt to be high-minded, 1 Timothy 6.17. and all high-minded men are the most
legitimate sons of lapsed Adam, who would be Independent upon God, and be a
God of himself, and so they are apt to take up Independency, rather out of an
humor of pride, then out of conscience toward either pictie, or truth.

Fourthly, It is apparent to all how ambitious many Independents are of all
places of honor, of power, and profit, of being Members in the Parliament,
prime Officers in the Army, Committee men; and if any cross them, what ways
they find out to be meet with them, sending them tickets, and calling them in
question, when they know there is no just cause of exception against them, of
purpose to cast an awe upon all men, as if the authority of the State were at
their service, to secure their credits against all complaints how just so ever,
and to discountenance those who in an ingenuous and generous spirit oppose
their usurpations, which are now so visible to the view of all that are not
wilfully blind, that it is matter of great wonder, that the Presbyterians (who
are more in number, and dignity, then any sect whatsoever, and if they were as
active as they, might much overtop them in power) are so dull and indulgent
toward them, as to suffer them still to carry on their design as they do;
which in some Presbyterians for the time past may be imputed to their patience,
and meekness of mind, being loath to offend such; but if it should be so
general hereafter as it has been, it might be ascribed to a negligence, and
coldness in that cause which they should endeavor to promote with all their
might in all warrantable ways of zeal, of industry, circumspection, and
prudence.

Fifthly, Though you assign the iron Scepter to the Presbytery, the golden to
your Churches, the truth is, if the Independents were once as Independent as
they would be, they would be Masters of both metals, both gold and iron; and
some of their party brag they have both the purse and the sword in their
power; if so, (and in such a degree as they would have it, but it is true but
in part, though too much) they that now renounce appeals to Classical,
Provincial, and National Assemblies, would appeal to the sword, and then
they would be ready to ruin those that would not be ruled by them, to break
those that would not bow unto them.

Sixthly, You cannot find any thing in the Presbyterians principles, nor in
their practice, as they are Presbyterians, which may be matter, I say not of
conviction, but of suspicion of such a terrible government, as you take upon
you, with so much confidence, to charge upon them.

SECT. XV. A pleasant reproof of a misapplication of Scripture is no offense,
against the majesty of the word; how, and in what cases a taunting speech may
be allowed.
Smoke. Page 35.I Wonder that one of your experience in the majesty of the
word should be so pleasant with a Scripture allegory.

Light.Here you impute unto me that, which (if truly objected) would require a
penitential confession on my part; if untruly, no less on yours; that it may
be more manifest, it will be meet to take notice how my words come in upon
yours, and yours upon mine. Upon your misapplication of Matthew. 9.17. Neither
do men put new wine into old bottles, my Mine Examination. p. 20.
words are these. Conceiving the Penner to be a sober man, I must think in
this passage the Printers brain was troubled with the fume of new wine, to
conclude with nonsense for a rational consequence; and I believe no new wine
and old bottles, how new or old so ever, can worse agree together, then the
foregoing evidence and the final sentence of this paragraph. Upon my words
your Comment is,

Smoke. Page 35. Because the Scripture is of wine, you jest on it, as if it had
made the sense less sober. I am sorry my younger pen should reprove the aged
for jesting, which the Apostle says is not convenient. And truly it is not
comely for the servants to play upon the master of the Feast, or any thing in
his house, especially upon his wine, which alludes so to his blood, and which
he has promised to drink with us new in his Fathers Kingdom.

Light.To which I answer; First, That the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.4. forbidding jesting
under that word, which in Moral Philosophy is the title of a virtue, does not
forbid all kind of jests, toward all persons, and in all cases; for what was
the Irony of God to Adam, Genesis 3.22. and of Elijah to the Priests of Baal, 1
King. 18.27. but a jesting reproof?

Secondly, There is a great difference betwixt jesting at Scripture, and at a
misapplication of Scripture; this may be taunted without any relish of
irreverence at all to the other; for example, a man may give all religious
respect due to the words of our Savior, Ioh. 21.16. Feed my sheep, but when
Bellarm. Tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 1. de Verbo Dei. p. 184 and 185.
Bellarmine abuses them, by wresting them and inferring from them the proof
of the Supremacy of the Pope over the universal Church, I may deride the
absurdity of his sequel, without any impeachment of the antecedent
allegation. The like may be said of Psalm. 91.13. as brought in by Pope Fox
Martyrolog. Vol. 1. page 265. printed London. Ann. 1641.
Alexander, to prove his proud usurpation over Princes, when at Venice, Anno
1159. he set his foot upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick Barborosse; the
Story whereof, though Bin. Tom. 7. council. part. altera. p. 629. col. 1.
Binius say it was fained by Henetiques, Vicars Decapl. in lib. Psalm. in p.
91. page 268. col. 2.
is set out and is to be seen in a Table at Venice; and of the Sea Paraus in
Genesis 28. ver. 12. col. 1597.
inference which some make of the ubiquitie of the body of Christ from the
vision of Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12. And what resolution can be made of a
Popish gloss on Genesis 1.10. (according to the Latin Translation,
Congregationem aquarum vecavit maria, applying it to the praise of the Virgin
Mary) without such a scoff as may expose the Authors ridiculous descant to
scorn and laughter? which repeated by a learned Hebrician he begins the report
with Audi Lector and ride. Sixth. Amam. Antibarbar. Bibl. l. 2. p. 287.
hear Reader and laugh. And if I thought your quotation of Matthew. 9.17. were
as wide from the scope, and as weak for the proof of that for which it was
produced by you, as some of these now mentioned allegations are, (wherein there
are diverse judicious and religious Readers concurring with me) I might
(reserving all due respect to that sacred Text) entertain your misapplication
of it, rather with a jesting correction, then a serious conviction.

You will say perhaps, (as in Smoke. p.. 59.
another place you have done) that mis-application is a word sooner written
then proved, and Ibid.
you would have the Reader judge (so would I, if he be neither imprudent nor
partial) whether it be your misapplication or my misinterpretation; and let
him judge also whether mis-interpretation be not a word sooner written then
proved, as well as misapplication is; and let him further judge whether these
words of yours [I am sorry my younger pen should reprove the aged for is sting,
which the Apostle faith is not convenient] should have been uttered by you in a
jesting or jeering way, as they are; and whether now you should not be sorry in
good earnest, that your younger pen was so forward to blet the face of the aged
with such a black aspersion, as uncomely jesting at the Scripture, and (being
but a servant) playing upon the Master of the Feast, or any thing in his hause,
especially upon his wine which alludes to his blood, and which he has promised
to drink new with us in his Fathers Kingdom.

It would better have becomed you (especially professing such respect to me as
you do in your Letter and Smoke. p. 16.
elsewhere) to have taken my jesting, as I meant it, with a candid
acceptance; as the laughter of Ioh was received by younger men then himself;
If I laughed (faith he) they believed it not, and the light of my countenance
they cast not down, Job 29.24. that is, (as the Last Annotations expound it)
they thought a man of my gravitie would not be so familiar with them, or as
Grotius makes the note: Etiam joca mea putabant aliquid occultare serii. Grot.
in Job 29.24.
They thought some serious matter lay laid under my jesting, and my
familiarity did not cause them to grieve, be angry, or contemn me, or
Authoritas mea mihi apud ipsos constabat. Grot. Ibid.
my authority suffered no diminution by that means, or upon that occasion.

You frame the like objection against me for Smoke. p. 41.
being too pleasant with your expression of the truth by a star, because it
is the very allegory of the spirit, and so was that which Barchoche has alluded
unto, Numb. 24.17. yet was his misapplication of it justly entertained with a
taunt, and his name with derision turned into Be^^bozba, the son of a lie,
for which I quoted two grave Authors in mine Page 27.
Examination of your Quere. You say there was more lightsomnesse then light in
that passage, and I believe there was more light also then in most parts of
your Book, which you have smoked in every page; you will say perhaps that here
again I am too pleasant with your Scripture evidence, but let me tell you Sr.
without offense, you are observed to play upon the Sacred groundwork with too
much boldness, and wanto^nesse of wit, to make many allusions which are but
illusions of your own misinformed sancie; and they take the Title of your Book
to be very fantastical, and (besides many jests which have passed upon it by
some ingenuous Readers, which I forbear, lest I should make you angry with
that which made them merry) while I was writing this, there came to my hands a
Latin Letter form a very learned and religious Divine, with whom I have a
commerce of Letters in that Language, wherein he takes your Answer (which you
call a full answer unto me) to have none other fullness in it then a
Persuafissimum habco -- postertorem ejus (scil. libri) partem, quae responsum
tuum perstring it, merum fumum esse, sacillimeque uno tctu calami tui
dissipatum iri, etc.
fume and vapor, which will easily vanish into nothing.

SECT. XVI. Of the Presbyteriall and Independent Government how affected; the
slow proceeding of the Church Government made no Argument for it, nor mentioned
to the disparagement of the Parliament; Mr. Saltm. brings the Parliaments
Authority under popular liberty; of the wheat in Independent Congregations.
Smoke. Page 38. PRove your Argument (Government, you would say) first to be
Christ's, the particulars and entirenesse accordingly, and then I shall allow
you your Argument; but you grant it to be but partly Christ's, partly the
Assemblies, or of prudence.

Light.It is no part of mine undertaking to prove the Presbyteriall Government
to be Christ's Government, nor is it needful so to do; for I have told you
where it is done already, which no man has refuted nor can do; nor is it
needful to assert every part of it by express Scripture; and if the
Independent platform be according to the pure Gospel pattern, as you phrase
it, why have not your Brethren cleared that doubt all this while, having been
engaged thereto by promise, and often called upon for performance thereof?

Smoke. Page 38. To your last that the Reformation has proceeded by slow
paces, and degrees; What, would you prove it by its slow proceeding to be
Christ's Government, and therefore to be settled? that were a strange kind of
reasoning.

Light.I see it is not strange with you to mistake, or pervert a plain truth;
for did not you plead against the speedy settling of the Presbyterian Government
by the example of Christ? and was not mine See Sect. 8. p. 23. of mine
Examination.
Answer to this purpose, Christ was not so long in settling of his Government,
nor the Parliament and Assembly so hasty as you pretended. Is this a proof of
mine opinion, I pray you, or a confutation of yours?

Smoke. Page 41. Why should you speak of the Governments fluttering on a
limetwigge at Westminster? sure the State or Parliament may deserve better of
any of the Assembly, then to be thought their Retarders or limetwigs.

Light.Here you make as if I spoke without due respect, or rather with terms
of reproach unto the State or Parliament, for bringing in the Government as
fluttering upon the limetwigge at Westminster; and thereupon you say, Sure the
State or Parliament may deserve better of any of the Assembly then to be
thought their Retarders or limetwigs: and you strive to strain up the words to
an higher degree of guilt, by an aggravation of ingratitude, in that they have
honored them above their Brethren.

To which I answer: First, that my words, Sect. 9. p. 26. are these; It has
been, if not the fault, yet the ill hap of our Church and State, to have the
Government fluttering upon the limetwig of deliberation at Westminster, when it
should be upon the wing of actual execution all over the Kingdom.

Secondly, that if I had mistaken terms of diminution of the dignity of the
Parliament, for terms of honor, and grateful acknowledgement, there is no
reason that for my fault the Assembly should be involved in the imputation of
an offense; since I did not write by any either command from them, or
consultation with them.

Thirdly, confining the charge to my self, I may challenge you for a failing
in charity, and memory. First, in charity, in that you make so ill a
construction of my words both really, and personally; really interpreting the
limetwig in a sense of defilement, whereas I meant it only as a let and
impediment; (which may befall the deliberations of the best and wisest men) and
personally, in turning the term upon the State or Parliament, in an offensive
signification toward them, whom I never meant, nor mentioned with a thought or
expression of disparagement. Secondly, in memory, in that you forgate a
precedent passage in my Book, which might (had you remembered it) have
prevented such a sinister surmise of the metaphor I used; my words which
manifestly hold out a confutation of your corrupt gloss on these now in
question, are these,

Yet they cannot make that speed with the Government which by most is desired,
and very much desired by themselves (as we of the Assembly can witness who
have often been sent to by that Honorable Senate to quicken our work, and to
ripen our debates to a full resolution) because as with us the liberty of
speaking (wherein every one is frce to propose and prosecute any doubt)
prolonged the Government in our hands; so the like liberty in the Honorable
Honses (or rather our liberty is like theirs, it being the prototypon)
longthens the debates, and delays the votes of that most Honorable Senate;
and so much the more, because they are more in number then we in our Synod, and
because their determinations are final as ours are not.

But when you have made the worst sense you can of them, you come in with this
allay; it may be you call your dissenting Brethren the limetwigs. I do not
that neither, for I do not so confound persons and things as to mean men to
be the limet wigs, but their deliberations, objections, and obstructions that
step in, and keep out deciding votes, and resolutions of debates; wherein if I
mean your Independent Brethren had their part, and fault, I do them no wrong;
but then you make as if I wronged my self, defiling my argument with a
limetwigge and be wraying our slow proceeding to have been rather of
constraint then conscience; which is a me are inconsequence, for we neither
endeavored, nor desired such a precipitation of conclusions as should not
admit of necessary or competent consideration, and discussion beforchund; nor
such a slownesse of proceeding as should wiredraw a dispute for a week or a
fortnight, which would not have taken up one whole day, if there had not been
some such among us as Rem planam argumentatione facere dubiam. Hieron. advers.
Ruffin. Tom. 2. operum p. 217.
Hierome tax^th for cavilling a clear truth into abscuritie.

And now I have cleared my self of your imputation of disrespect to the State,
or Parliament, I may rooriminate some contempt in you toward that most
Honorable Assembly.

For, First, you seem to think it a matter of praise to your partic, that So
in your Letter to me.
you are more on the Magistrates side then the Magistrate on yours; as if the
Magistrate were bound to tolerate your way against law, and the pence and union
of Church and State, as much as you are bound to allow them their power, and
authority for preservation of the public welfare.

Secondly. In your design for Pence, (as far as you dare) you project a way
to decline the Magistrates Authority about religious matters, which an advised
Reader may perceive, though your terms be very cunningly chosen, and covertly
couched together, where you say, Smoke. p. 4. nu. 13.
Let not abose believers who have the advantage of the Magistrate, strive to
make any unwarrantable use of it one against another, because Scripture
principles are not so clear for it.

Thirdly, you for your part cast a notorious calumny upon the Parliament;
calling Ibid. p. 25.
the maint enance of the Ministers by Tithes undeniably Jewish and Popish,
which are confirmed by Ordinance of Parliament, whereof you cannot be ignorant;
and it cannot be avoided if Tithes be of that nature, but that you make the
Parliament Patrones of Iudaisme and Popery, and that is such a notorious
reproach, as you should not have entertained in your most secret thoughts, nor
whispered in the care of any friend, much less have proclaimed it in Print, in
such peremptory terms as you have done.

Fourthly, you give up the Magistrates Authority to the peoples liberty,
leaving it in their choice to receive, or refuse Church Government, as they
like or dislike it; for thus you would have it propounded unto them, Smoke. p.
14.
People, here is a Government, which to some of us seems to be a government
according to the Word of God, take it and examine it, if you be so persuaded,
and if the Word of God hold it forth clearly, embrace it; if not, do not obey
any thing in blind and implicit obedience; this were fair dealing with
conscience. But it were foul dealing with the Magistrate, yea and the people
too, for it would bring all to Anarchie and confusion, as Judge. 17.6. If you
say, you mean it in respect of the Assembly or Ministers, they present it not
to the people until the Parliament have ratified it by their Authority; and
so your meaning must be, that they should put that to the peoples choice, which
the Parliament has concluded in their Votes, and imposed both on Ministers,
and people by their civil Sanction; and what is this but to subject the
Supreme Authority to the popular liberty?

Smoke. Page 44. You say we gather out the wheat, it is well you observe we
have wheat amongst us, which some of your Brethren will scarce allow ut, and
you very hardly.

Light.Truly Sr. if you came truly by your wheat I would allow it you; but
though I allow that you have wheat in fact, I say you have not that wheat in
right, which you have gathered out of other Churches; for your gatherings are
upon the grounds of Brownisme, with injury and calumny of the Churches from
whence your covenanted members are collected.

SECT. XVII. The settling of Government falsely suggested to be heretical, with
an implicit reproach upon the Parliament. Of the truth of Sleidans story of the
Anabaptists in Germany. A rash censure of Luther, and the Lutherans in Germany
for opposing them. A caveat to England to take warning by Germany. The
Ministers practice slandered, and the Magistrate dishonored by Mr. Saltm.
Smoke. Page 45. Whether may not your settling things thus be as great an
heresy as you complain against? Be sparing, you may call those truths which
you now call heresies. See the like. p. 13.
Paul preached that Doctrine after, which before be destroyed.

Light.What settling do you mean? the debates, and votes, and advice of the
Assembly to the Parliament, (which is all they do) are no settlings of any
thing; for when they are presented to them, they come under their examination
again; but nothing is settled in Government, until, after their discussion
and resolution, their civil Sanction be set upon it; and how should this be an
heresy, as great an heresy as we complain of? we complain of all heresies,
what will be the consequence of this implicit charge? can the Parliament settle
heresy and not be heretics? nay worse then so, for it is far worse to
settle an heresy, and to authorize it to so many thousands as are under the
power of the Parliament, then for any, or many particular persons to hold an
heresy. And whereas you intimate a change of my mind, so far as that I may
be like, after the example of Paul, to preach for that Doctrine which now I
destroy, I trust (not in my self, but in the support of Divine grace) that I
shall always be so far opsite or adverse unto you, until you be settled, as
to be constant to the truth I have believed, and professed, while you run
your self giddy in the circle of erroneous, or heretical opinions.

Smoke. Page 46. To that of the Anabaptists and Sectaries quenched by Luthers
mediation you say, I dave not believe your Historian, nor take all against them
from the Pen of an enemy. He that takes the Parliaments Batiels from an Oxford
Pon, shall read nothing but rebellion rather them religion. And me thinks I
observe much here in your observation to the contrary.

Light.You say you dare not believe my Historian against the Anabaptists, more
then an Oxford Pen concerning the Battles of the Parliament, from whence you
shall read nothing but Rebellion rather then Religion; as if the war of the
Anabaptists were as warrantable as that of the Parliament, or John Sleydan as
contemptible, and incredible a Writer as Mercurius Aulicus, or Mercurius
Academicus; which makes me think you have not read Sleydan, for if you had,
you would observe and acknowledge in him as many (...) of a true Historian as
in most, whether of the ancient or latter Ages, and so the most judicious
Protestants esteem of him; The Papists I confess undervalue him as you do,
and some of them Surius Preface in Ioh. Naucler. generat. Beruard. Dorhof.
Apodeix. Calvinist. non esse Aug. Confess. c. 4. Claud. Verderii Censiones. p.
8. b.
vilify him, as if he partially inclined to the Lutheran party against the
Popish; yet some of them give him the praise of a good Historian, as Joh. Bod.
Method. hist. c. 6. p. 48, 49.
John Bodine in his Method of history; and for the story of the Anabaptists and
their fanatic fancies, and furious uprores, they are not only recorded by
Sleydan, but by others, as by Philip Lonicerus. Theatr. hist. p. 107, etc.
Philip Lonicerus, and by Bulliuger adversus Anabapt. l. 2. c. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Bullinger in his Book against that Sect; by Fred. Spanbemii Diatrib. Histor.
de Orig. progres. etc. Anabaptist. in Appendice ad Clepenburgil Gangranam
Anabaptist. p. 386. etc. where he cites Luther, Melancthon, Zwingliut, Menius,
and Regius. Ibid. p. 393.
Spanhemius, by Courad. Heresbach. I. C. historia Anabaptist. de factione
Monasterionss anno 1534. ad Erasm. Roterod. Epist. forma anno 1536. descript.
excus. Amsterdam. per Henricum Laurentium.
Conradus Heresbachius, Theodor. Strachii hypomnemat. and notae in illam Epist.
eisdem loco and anno excus.
Theodorus Strachius, and by Lambert. Hortens. lib. tumult. Ansbapt. anno 1548.
Bafil. edit ^^.
Lambertus Hortensius.

Smoke. Page 46. We may rather think that Germany is a field of blood to this
day for shedding the blood of so many consciences for some points of
difference, and for Luthers mediation against them: look well and tell me how
much the Lutherans there have advanced in the reformation, have they not rather
stood like Ioshuahs Sun where he left them?

Light.This again shows that you have not read, or not well considered of
the principles and practices of the Anabaptists; which were such both against
God and man, as could not consist with the safety either of the Church or
State; and therefore your censure of the sin and judgment of Germany, and of
the Lutherans, is a presumptuous perching into Gods Tribunal.

Smoke. Page 46. Let England take warning by Germany.

Light.Good counsel I confess, but not in your sense, in favor of such
Sects, or fear of opposing their fancies, or stopping their proceedings; but
let England take warning by Germany for being too indulgent to them, upon their
illusive pretenses of more illumination, and spiritual communion with God,
then other men enjoy.

Smoke. Page 46. Let your warfare be spiritual, your weapons not carnal, put
on the armor of light, and take them by a Gospel siege, and we are satisfied.
But if you take them with the power of the Magistrate, with swords and staves
as they took Christ; if you come in this Gospel controversy to take them as
the Parliament takes in their Towns and Cities, as your instance seemer to
imply, take heed left you ^^ed were spiritual blood to that under the Altar,
that (...) ceases to cry, How long Lord, how long?

Light. If you speak this to the Ministers, their warfare is none other then
spiritual; nor is the Magistrate their minister, to take Sectaries with swords
or staves if their transgressions deserve it, since therein they do their own
work, whereto by their office they are obliged; and when they do so, you
should not so disparage the Magistrates as to match them with such wicked
Officers as set upon our blessed Savior, and with violent hands violated the
Majesty and Piety of his Person; nor so honor such heretical Incendiaries,
and slaughter men as those Anabaptists were, as to compare them to Christ. And
for your caveat against shedding of spiritual blood, if you mean by that
phrase the blood of Sectaries, or Heretics, whom some take to be more
spiritual then other men, they are many of them very carnal Gospellers; and
if spiritual, rather such as are led by a wicked spirit, the suggester of
heretical untruths, and tempter to diabolical blasphemies, and outrages, then
such as are guided by the Spirit of truth and holiness: and if by spiritual
blood you mean (as the most judicious commonly use and understand the phrase)
the blood of souls; it is that which ingageth the Magistrates to repress
heretical Teachers, for by drawing others to heresy they are guilty of the
blood of souls; and they are all guilty of that blood who do not all they
can, according to their place and power, to prevent the shedding of it by
seducing Doctors; for zeal in this cause I have cited some lively and vigorous
sayings of the Ancients in my former Sect. 12. p. 13.
Book, to which I remit you.

Smoke. Page 46. So as you will have an hazard run both in State and Church
for a new experiment upon the Ministers; but sure your Statists will tell you
it is not safe trying experiments with States, they are too vast bodies for
that; what think you of that Physician who will cast his Patient into a
disease to try a cure on him? you know the old moral Adage, Turpius ejicitur
quam non admittitur hospes.

light. To your exception we have not yet any experience of our new Clergy, my
Examination of the New Querie. Sect. 10. p. 32.
Answer was, Then they cannot yet be charged with misgovernment of the people;
and how can there be experience of them, if there be no Government to try them
withal? but we have experience of much evil for want of Government, as Ibid.
I told you before. And for that you say, your Statists will tell you it is not
safe trying experience with States, which you illustrate by a similitude of a
Physician casting his Patient into a disease to try a cure on him: I like it
very well in those, and being rightly applied it makes much against you, and
the toleration you plead for, for we have found it by woeful experience, that
some politic Mountebankes have made a perilous experiment upon our State by
connivence at, and pressing for a toleration of many erroneous, and some very
heretical Sects; the cure whereof the longer it is delayed will be more
difficult and more dangerous to the souls of the people, in whom error and
heresy spread, and eat like a canker, or gangrene as in the Greek, 2 Timothy
2.17.

SECT. XVIII. The Toleration desired by Mr. Saltm. neither safe nor sound,
opposite to the mind of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.10. Gal. 5.10.12. Of the comparison of
the two ambitious Brethren to ten more humble and moderate; The Presbytery not
proved by Magistrates, though approved by them; Of the pretended truth of
Sectaries, and of the prescription of Bishops and Independents.
Smoke. Page 47.I Would there were more such, (that is, such as would give full
scope and liberty to multiplicitie of sects) I am sure it is safest, and
soundest; It is safest, for there is no such danger in that of crucifying
Christ in ignorance, or fighting against God; and soundest, for so they die out
most naturally by their own unsoundnesse, without noise and commotion.

Light.In this you have delivered a most unsafe, and unsound paradox, which is
disproved by the experience of former ages, and foraine parts; but most of all
by that of our own Kingdom within these four years last past: witness Mr.
Edwards his last Book the Gangrene, which if you were so unpatiall and
patient, as to read without prejudice or passion, you could not patiently
review your own writing in this particular.

Smoke. Page 47. Oppose with words, as Paul did, but not with sword, and
turning the edge of authority against us.

light. In this you are opposite to Paul and your self both; to Paul, who
expressly presses to union in mind, in judgment, in speech; 1 Cor. 1.10.
and wishes them cut off who trouble the Church, Gal. 5.12. whereas you would
have sects to be left to themselves: and to your self; whereas before you
would have them let alone, to die out most naturally without noise, now you
would have them opposed with words, as Paul did; but can there be words of
opposition without any noise? And for that you say against the coercion or
execution by the sword, it is impertinently proposed to the Presbytery, who
take not upon them to turn the edge of authority any way; and prejudicial to
the prudence and power of Magistrates, as if they knew not when to use it,
unless they were admonished and moved by others unto it, or might not use it
against disturbers of the public peace of Church and State.

Smoke. Page 48. But how came you by such plenty (as ten) of the better sort
for two of the worse?

Light.There meeds none other answ, to this quest. then to repeat your words
and mine aright: Your self said See my Examination of the New Querie. Sect.
10. p. 34.
I question not but some Presbyterians may be like the ten, yet there are
others like the two brethren, who strive who should be the greatest. To which
mine Answer is, If we keep the proportion you brought in, and make application
accordingly, we may say, for two ambitious Presbyterians it is like there may
be ten that are more modestly and humbly minded, then to affect such a
preeminence above their brethren.

Smoke. Page 48. Indeed you are able to prove by the Magistrate that Presbytery
is some of it Christ's way, that is an argument of power, not of Scripture.

Light.How far the Presbyteriall government is Christ's way is sufficiently
set forth by the forecited Author, who has professedly handled it; but who I
pray you offers to prove by the Magistracy that the Presbytery is Christ's way?
they may prove it to the Magistrate, but to do it by the Magistrate, is
neither undertaken, nor required by any.

Smoke. Page 49. We had rather be a few with truth, then a multitude against
it.

Light.If that were your mind, you would rather close with Presbyterians, whom
you cannot deny to be sound and Orthodox in all matters of faith, and
godliness, then with so many extravagant Sectaries, who are so contradictory
both to the Scripture, and to themselves, in their opposite Tenets, that there
must needs be very much untruth in their Tenets.

Smoke. Page 50. The Bishops had a better prescription even by Law for their
Government then we: (i.) then Independents.

But how is this? is a legal prescription better hold the a Gospel
prescription?

Light.In this and some lines next following you take that for granted, which
we cannot yield, nor can you ever prove, viz. that your Independency is purely
Evangelicall; which if you can make good (but the Texts you have crowded
together at the end of your opening of Mr. Prinnes Vindication will not do it)
you shall make me of your Religion, when you let me know which it is you will
choose, and stand to when you have chosen.

SECT. XIX. Of the pretended modesty and humility of the Independents, by way
of comparison with the Presbyterians.
Smoke. Page 50. But there is one Government set up already, a Civil,
Parliamentary Government, and will you set up another above that, or coordinate
with it? will you set up one government to rule another, or tutor another?

Light.And if your Independent Government were set up, which you account an
Evangelicall and Scripture Government, Christ's golden Scepter, Christ upon his
Throne, should that Government be above the Civil Government, or coordinate
with it? would you set up this government to rule the other, or tutor the
other? when you have answered these Queries put upon Independency, you will see
it will not be difficult to answer the like concerning Presbytery; yet it is
evident to all that make any serious observation on both ways, that the
Presbyteriall Government is more moderate, more subordinate to the
Parliamentary Government then the Independent, because that is humbly submitted
to the debate of the Parliament for approbation of it, and waits for their
Civil establishment before any part of it is put into execution and practice,
the Independent Government (in this respect Independent on the Parliament, as
well as on Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies) comes under no
such trial of them, but is set up without any authority from them.

Smoke. Page 50. And must you needs set up as large a dominion as the civil
power has? must your Presbytery be as ample, as high, as supreme as the
Parliament? will no less territory or kingdom serve it, but all England,
whole Nations? must Christ's government be just as long, as broad as the worlds?

Light.Here is a great deal of aggravating Rhetoric, to bring in a suspicion
of a vast, and unlimited domination of the Presbytery; and I pray you, Sr, if
Independency were the Parliaments darling, as you desire it, would nor you wish
it, and, if you could, procure it to be set up in every City and Town in
England? would not you that think it a good government, the best government,
advance your good opinion of it, and well-wishings to it, according to the
maxim, Bonum que communius, comelius? Every good thing the more common, the
more commendable? We observe your sedulitie in spreading your opinions into
remote regions, and cannot but conceive, by your zeal and activitie for your
cause, that you are ambitious, like the Spaniard, to enlarge your Religion, as
he his Dominions; whereof Myraeus Comment. de bello Bohemic. p. 7.
Myraeus says, that the Sun never sets, but always shines in some place or
other where he reigns.

Smoke. Page 50. Now Reader judge which government affects dominion? which
brings in whole nations under the scepter of it? poor Scripture government can
be content to sit down in a village; To the Church in thy house, says the
Spirit; in a City, as Corinth; and over but a few there, the Saints only in
fellowship; to the Church in Corinth, in a Country, not over a Country; To
the seven Churches in Asia, not of Asia; not the Church of Asia, or the Church
Asia, a Church taking in half part of the world.

Light.And let the Reader judge how much of roving fancy and fond affection,
how little judgment is in this paragraph. Which Government, say you, affects
dominion? etc. speak properly Sir, and the truth will better appear, and be
more ready for sentence and judgment, and then your question will be; which
sort of those that stand for Government (for the government as abstracted from
them has no affections at all) affect dominion more? You say poor Scripture
government can be content to sit down in a village, to the Church in thy house,
etc. where you assume and presuppose (which I deny) that Independency is a
government either poor or pure according to the Scriptures. And for
Independent Ministers when you see them so placed in the City, in the chief
City of the Kingdom, culling out of men's charges the fairest and fattest of
their flocks to be the materials and members of their newgathered Churches, and
so ordering their Sermons, and covenanting with their hearers, that they have
the most populous congregations, all sects coming to hear them, and adhering
to them as to their Patrons, who will not come to the Sermons of the most
Orthodox and able Preachers of the Presbyteriall way;

When you know, or may know that most of them are eminently richer then other
Ministers, how can you, how dare you brag of the humility, and poverty of
Independency sitting down contented with a village? especially, when none of
those who set up Independency in England planted themselves in a village,
except in vicinitie to some great City where they might have the profit, and
comfort, and the best accommodations of City and Country?

And for the small Church in a house, or a particular City, in a Country, not
over a Country, in Asia, not the Church of Asia; This makes no more for
Independency then for Presbytery, when there were too few professing the faith
to be sorted into Congregations Classical, Provincial and National
Assemblies; and so your instance cannot be a fit pattern for these times,
wherein the profession of the Gospel is received all over the Kingdom.

SECT. XX. Whether Christ, if he would have a national comprehensive Church,
was bound to have begun the practice of it over whole Kingdoms, as Mr. Saltm.
says; and whether imports more pride, to desire a subordination of
Assemblies, Parochial, Classical, etc. then to be adverse to it.
Smoke. Page 50, 51. SVre if Christ would have had such a national
comprehensive Church, he would have converted Kings and Princes first, and they
should have given up their Kingdoms to Jesus Christ in the way of a
Presbyterian.

Light.To this I oppose your own words, both in your New Querie repeated in my
Examination. Sect. 12. p. 38.
Querie and in your Smoke, in both which places, you tell your Reader that the
publication of the Gospel and the proposal of Church government were brought
in at distance: heresies, say you, might have grown from John's first Sermon to
Paul's Epistles, and the sending of the Spirit, but you see there was no
government settled till afterward upon the people of Gods and in your last you
tell me, that Smoke. p. 54.
you showed me that no government began with the Gospel manifestation, by which
(say you) I made it appear, that if government had been of such moral
necessity, why was it not given out with the Gospels first giving out?

Albeit then the Gospel began not with the conversion of Kings and whole
Kingdoms, yet the progress of it has been so prosperous as to prevail so
far, and with the extent of it, may the government of the Gospel be extended
also, and it may be set up after it, by your own confession rather then with it.

Smoke. Page 51. Nay it ought to have been so, Jesus Christ was bound in the
way of righteousness, to have begun the practice and model to us over whole
Kingdoms, having not left it in precept in the whole Gospel; and we ought
either to have practice or precept to order and command us in what we obey.

Light. What? ought Christ, or was he bound in the way of righteousness to
begin the Gospel with conversion of Kings, and whole Kingdoms, if he meant to
have such a National and comprehensive Church as the Presbyterians plead for?
was he not free to begin the publication of it where he pleased, in the
wilderness of Judea, rather then in the City Jerusalem? and to whom he
pleased, to Shepherds in the field, rather then to Augustus in the Court?

If it had begun there; First, It might have been suspected as a Politic
devise, like that which Machiav. disp. lib. 1. cap. 11. p. 63.
Machiavel commends in Romulus and Numa, setting up religion by fained
revelation.

Secondly, Then the Doctrine of the Gospel, condemned as folly by supercilious
and secular wise men, 1 Cor. 1.23. had not appeared so wise and powerful as it
was, verse. 18, 19, 20. of the same Chapter; nor,

Thirdly, Had it had so many illustrious confirmations, both by miracles, and
martyrdomes, as we find upon record both in the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical
Histories.

And was it not in his own choice to make his own pace for the proceeding both
of Gospel and Government? If you will so confine Christ to your ways of
working, you make him Dependent, while you claim an Independent privilege to
your self.

And for that you say, for practice or precept, to order and command us in what
we obey, we have both in the Gospels of our Savior, and Epistles of the
Apostles, and the History of their Acts, (according to which the Assembly have
given up their advice to the Parliament) warrant for Church Government, and so
we hope it will come down from them by a Parliamentary approbation, and
constitution for the establishment thereof throughout the whole Kingdom. And
yet is not the Presbyteriall Government more ambitious, or domineering then the
Independent; Nay, let the Indifferent Reader observe, and consider the
difference, and let him then resolve, whether the Presbyterian or Independent
be more affected to preeminence, or more willing to come under rule and
government.

First, The Presbyterians carnestly desire the union, whereto the Apostle
emphatically exhorts the Christian Corinthians; Now I beseech you brethren,
by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and
that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together
in the same mind and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.

Secondly, This union cannot be without a rule of consent; the rule of consent
cannot be of any force, unless it have the power and obligation of a law; this
law requires, as well subordination, as union; and this subordination is
agreeable not only to reason, but to Religion and Scripture, for the spirits
of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.

Thirdly, The Presbyterians, who yield to this subordination, especially to the
Superior Assemblies, not knowing, and the most of them not expecting to be
members either of Provincial, or National Assemblies, do all of them in
their allowance of graduall appeals submit themselves to the consures of
others, which is an act not of dominion, but of subjection. But the
Independents will be as diffusive in their Church Way, and grow on from Cities
to Countries, from Countries to Kingdoms, and will be like little Kings, or
Free States in their own Congregations, and will admit of no subordination, or
submission to any Ecclesiastical Assembly whatsoever, though there be many
cases which reach, beyond the limits of their covenanted meetings, to occasions
of common concernment to many Churches; yea some of them are so comprehensive,
as to belong to all the Churches of a Kingdom, which can neither be
sufficiently considered, nor ordered for the general good, without a more
general convention and consultation of Church governors.

The Pope, though hated and scorned by you as an Antichristian Caiaphas, is a
great, and I may say the supreme Independent in the Christian world; and his
Independencie consists in this, that he will be judged of none; and herein
truly Sr. you symbolize too much with the Papal ambition; in that as much as
you can you free your selves from all Ecclesiastical subjection; and this
being a chief part of his Antichristian exaltation, Independencie is rather
Antichristian, then Presbytery.

There is another part of the Papal pride, which is to require that all be
subject unto him that he may censure and judge of all; and if I should strain
your words, as you sometimes do mine. I should say you are flown so high in
your fancy, as to be got above the high pitch of the Popes Mitre; for he took
not upon him to judge, or give laws to Christ (though to all Christians) as
you do, where you say that Christ ought, and was bound in the way of
righteousness to have begun the practice and model to us over whole
Kingdoms, etc.

SECT. XXI. Mr. Saltm. his mistake touching the building of the Temple. Of the
difference of the pattern of the Temple and the pattern of the Government of
the Gospel. Mr. Saltm. confusedly jumbleth them together.
Smoke. Page 52. TO the difference I made of the material and Gospel pattern
you say nothing, and that is the only considerable. It may be, as you said of
me, you are best able to deal with the other.

Light.I confess I passed over somewhat in your Quere, more in your last
Book, but nothing in either wherein I conceived there was any thing of weight,
or pertinencie to the cause in difference betwixt us. Yet to that difference
Sect. 11. p. 37.
I said something in its proper place, and Sect. 5. p. 16, 17.
referred you to another Section where I observed more differences then you
brought in; and whether I owe you any thing for that particular, the Reader
shall judge; and if he find I was in your debt, he shall see I shall make ready
payment of what is behind; and it may be by that time I have done with your
objection, you will think it better you had taken no notice of this omission,
then occasioned me to make such an amends for it as now I must do.

In the last lease of your Quere, when you had brought in your reasons for
retarding the Government, you bring in two objections, and make Answers to
them; the former is this, New Quere. p. 7. Ob. 1.
But the Temple was builded with all speed in Nehemiahs time, and Haggai calls
to the building, Is it time, etc. Hag. 1.4.

Before I bring in my Reply to your Answer, I must mind you of a mistake in
your single sheet; which though it be but short is liable to a very just
exception for an error in Story; and you should have heard of it sooner from
me, but that I observed it not my self until I found I was misguided by your
allegation; for I took it upon trust from you, because I did not suspect you
would misalledge any thing, which did no way conduce unto your cause, as the
time of the building of the Temple does not; now though the error were
originally yours, the correction may be mine, which you may better receive from
me, then I might take misprision from you; you say the Temple was built in
Nehemiahs time, but the truth is it was not, as you affirm, built in, but
before Nehemiahs time, for the foundation of it was laid in the second year
of Darius, Hag. 2.10.17. (i.) in the year of the world 3452. 519 years before
the Incarnation of Christ; and it was finished in the sixth year of Darius,
Ezra 6.15. that is, in the year of the world 3456. 515 years before Christ's
Incarnation; but that building of Nehemiah was the building of the walls of
Jerusalem, Nehem. 2.17, 18, 19. and this was in the year of the world, 3527.
about 444. years before the birth of the Messiah; this work about the walls
was a work but of 52. days, Nehem, 6.15. the former about the Temple lasted
about 4. years, as from the Scriptures forealledged may be inferred.

Now for your Answer it is this, Yea but the material pattern was more
clearly left, and known then the Gospel patterns, the other were more in the
letter, and these more in the spirit; now there must be a proving of all
things, else there may be more haste then good speed, as the Temple may be
built by a false pattern as well as by a true; and then better no building
then no right Cedar to build withal.

This is all for which you challenge my silence; and whereas you intimate some
soliditie in it, which I was not so well able to deal with, as with the other
part of your Answer: Truly Sr. I neither had, nor have any such opinion of it;
it seemed to me at first, and it does so now upon the review, to be an
intricate, perplexed, and confused jumbling of Metaphorical, and literal
expressions together; and not more dark for lack of light, then weak for want
of strength to that purpose for which it was framed: and therefore I thought it
more fit for a tacit preterition, then for an express examination. But if you
will have this rather, you shall have it; and so I say unto it,

First, that if the pattern were more clear for building the Temple, then the
Gospel pattern for the setting up of a Church Government, why are you so
confident, and peremptory, and punctual for your Gospel pattern?

Secondly, Why tell you us of Gospel patterns in the plural number? is there
any more then one pattern of Government in the Gospel? if so, though the
Independent pattern be yielded to be a Gospel pattern, (which cannot be
proved) the Presbyterian may be so too, for if there be more then one, that
rather then any other may be allowed to be another.

Thirdly, when you say the other were more in the letter, these more in the
spirit, what is your meaning by these words? were there more forms and
patterns of the Temple then one? if there were, why do you not speak more
clearly to the point of difference, betwixt them? if not, why say you they
were more in the letter? and when you say these Gospel patterns are more in the
spirit; I would know whether they be written, or not written; if they be
written, they are as much in the letter as the other; if they be not written,
how can you tell they be Gospel patterns?

Fourthly, whereas you say, The Temple may be builded by a false pattern, if
you mean it of the material Temple, you deny the clearenesse of the pattern
which before you professed. And,

Fifthly, When you say, The Temple may be builded by a false pattern, as well
as by a true, if you mean it of the material Temple in Ezra's time, what is
that to the Gospel Government, in, or since our Saviors time? or if any thing,
it is to contradict your self, who make the Temple pattern so clear that
there is no danger of a false pattern of misguidance. If you mean it of the
Government of the Gospel, why do you so confound what in the beginning of your
Answer to the Objection you pretend to distinguish, to wit, the material
Temple and the Evangelicall order of the Church?

Lastly, whereas you say, Better no building at all then no right Cedar to
build withal, what is your meaning by this metaphor? Cedar was the matter to
build with, not the pattern whereby the building was to be formed, and set
together; which was the thing, whereof you would make the Reader believe you
made a fit comparison, and showed a material difference why the building of
the Temple might be hastened in Ezra's time, and yet the setting up of
Government should be delayed in our time; for which you have said nothing
either to declare, or assure what you took upon you to illustrate, and make
good unto your Reader, whom I require now again to judge betwixt us, whether
this passage of your Quere were not better omitted by me, then remembered by
you, to put me to make such an Answer unto it as I have done.

SECT. XXII. Of staying for the Spirit to give light of instruction to the
reformation of the Church.
Smoke. Page 52. IS not that a very Gospel way to stay for the Spirits coming
into the servants of the Lord? take heed of denying inspired disciples, you
know it is a part of the fulfilling of the great Prophecy, Act. 2. Indeed some
of the Prelates, many of them being uninspired themselves, and having little of
the spirit or none, would needs say therefore that all inspirations and
spiritual inlightnings, were ended in the Church, because ended in them; and
because they were so carnal themselves, they thought none was spiritual; and
you remember how they made laws even against the spirit in prayer.

Light. First, I confess it is a Gospel way to stay for the spirits coming
into the servants of the Lord; the Apostles were commanded by our Savior not
to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait there for the promise of the Father,
Act. 1.4. and they did so, and there the Holy Ghost came upon them, Act. 2.3.
And so the Prophecy of Joel of pouring out the spirit in the last days, Joel
2.28. was fulfilled, and is so implied by Peter, Act. 2. verse. 16, 17.

Secondly, by the last days is not to be understood our present Age, 1645
years after our Saviors first coming, and God knows how many before his second
coming; by the last days may be understood not precisely those which are next
to the worlds end, but after times; as in the prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 19.1.
which sometimes may be further, as in that of Jacob and Joel, sometimes nearer
hand, as the Prophecy of Peter that there should come in the last days
scoffers, 2 Pet. 2.3. which was fulfilled, and so is recorded in the last of
the Apostolical Epistles, for in the 17. and 18. verses of Iudes Epistle,
says he, Beloved remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you there should be mockers in the
last times, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts; but the days of
the Gospel are called the last times, because after that is brought forth we
must look for no more changes of Religion, and the manner of Gods worship, as
there was before in Moses time from what was in use before with the Patriarchs,
and since Christ's time from the Ceremonials of Moses.

Thirdly, though I do not nor dare put limits to the Spirit, which is free as
the wind that blows where it lists, Ioh. 3.8. and do acknowledge and
bless God for it that there is (...) spirit of grace and supplications, Zach.
1^.10. poured out upon many of Gods people; and not only upon Preachers, but
also upon diverse others which are not: and that it was a wicked part in diverse
of the Prelates (for all on my knowledge were not guilty of it) to stint the
Ministers of the Gospel, as they did by the (...) form in their Conan, which
was rather a bidding invitation to prayer, then a prayer it solfe.

Yet fourthly, since the Apostle Paul foretells of the later times, that there
shall be (...) spirits, and dectrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1
Tin^. 4.1.12. and John the Apostle gives a caveat against credulity in this
case, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of
God, 1 Ioh. 4.1. and that Christians are admonished to try all things, 1 These.
5.21. and the Church of Ephesus is commended for trying those who said they
were Apostles and were not, and found them lyors, Revel. 2.2. and the trial is
to be made by the law, and by the testimony of the Scripture; and if they
speak not according to this, it is because there is no light in them, Esa.
20.8. And since I have read of many horrid and abominable things committed upon
pretense of revelation of the spirit;

Lastly, since the Government of the Church is not a matter of private
inspiration, but of public direction, and use to the whole Church, and that
the Word of God, as a standing ru^e, is to give us directions in Gospel
dispensations, I dare not expect where that speaks nothing, that the defect
will be made out, or made up with the whisperings of a private spirst,
especially against the concurrent judgment of the most Orthodox Divines of the
Reformed Churches.

SECT. XXIII. Of expedition or delay in setting up of Government; Whether Moses
and Christ, the Jewish and Christian state be so contrary, that there is no
conformity between them.
Smoke. Page 54. ANd now after all this discourse and ravelings out of time
from John's Sermon, etc. what have you gained, not that the Government was so
one (...) the^ you have proved much to my advantage, and a clourer and fuller
computation then I did the contrary; so as you have been taking some learned
pains, if you well observe, and the Reader will observe you, to prove that the
Government as first was not suddenly cast into a (...), or brought forth in
practice, which is the very thing I aimed at: and truly your pains in it have
been more then mine, and I thank you for it.

Light.I must recall you to our former intercourse to give light for the
clearing this exception; New Quere. p. 7.
you bring in a second Objection against the delay of it thus: But vica,
beresies and sehismes grew too fast, and you answer it thus: Ibid. p. 8.
so they might have done from John's first Sermon to Paul's Epistles, and the
sending of the Spirit, but yet you see there was no Government till after
settled upon the people of God. And not showing how long after, I calculated
the time for you; and you are pleased in the end of the precedent Paragraph to
commend my pains as more exact then yours, and to thank me for it; but yet
withal you make as if I had ravelled into time to prove your Tenet against
mine own, wherein I shall easily disprove you. For you brought in the putting
off the government from John Baptists time until Paul's Epistles, and the
sending of the Spirit; (where you confusedly shuffle things together, which
should be carefully distinguished) and if you mean it of the time from See
mine Examine. of the New Quere. p. 39.
John's preaching to the pouring out of the Spirit at the Feast of Pentecost, it
is but five years; if to the first of Paul's Epistles, but 21; if to the last,
29 years; and before the end of that Epistle that Government was written which
we find in Scripture. Now take which of these times you will, and compare it
to our time and State, and it will not serve for any cause or ground of
adjournment, or putting off the Church Government to a further Date, as you
would have it.

For, if that Government which the Scripture has laid down be offered to
acceptance, and establishment, shall we take 29 years time, or 21 years
time, or 5 years time before we will admit of it? especially since we have
been for many years together conversant in the Scriptures, where it is
founded, and have had the practice of it exemplified unto us in many Reformed
Churches for 100 years together; so that though 5, or 21, or 29 years, were
to be taken for a long time in respect of the first age of the Church, before
the government of it was settled upon the people of God, (and yet it was but a
while, the progress of the Gospel duly weighed) it makes nothing for the
delay of Government you drive at: and so disappointing your purpose, which was
out of that instance to make some show for the slacknesse in Government which
you desire, I pleaded not your cause, but the truths, and mine own in
prosecution of it against your exception. I shall be willing in some other way
to do you a courtesy, and to deserve your thanks, but expect not I should be
so unfaithful, or fickle, or simple, as to desert the defense I have
undertaken, or so to manage it, as to give mine adversary advantage by it.

Smoke. Page 55. For that of old Elyes indulgence which you speak (...), you
are still looking upon Moses, though you tell us of Christ; make the Kingdom
of Israel and of England the same, a Jewish and a Christian State the same, and
then we shall allow you both Elyes sin, and his sons maintenance by tithes
and offerings.

Light.Having cited the example of old Ely, against indulgence to such as
reproach and scandalize Religion, especially against toleration of blasphemers,
as Paul Best, who made blasphemous verses against the Trinity; you tell me, I
am still looking upon Moses, though I tell you of Christ; you mean by like
that I am still upon mine Annotations on the Pentateuch, but they are printed a
good while since; and I do not think you have often found me looking upon
Moses, since I had occasion to look upon you as an adversary; but if you
looked upon him oftener, and understood him better, I believe you would be a
more sound and Orthodox Divine then as yet I can account you.

It is the manner of the Antinomians (of whose impious and pernicious opinions,
some of your writings have a strong savor) to show their slightings of Moses
upon all occasions; But Sir, though his Ceremonials be abolished, his Indicials
not established in Christian Commonwealths, (yet for some penal laws, I
think we should be better governed if they were more Mosaicall) yet his face
still shines, and shall do to the end of the world, in the piety, equity,
regularitie, and utilitie of the Moral Law, which he brought from the Mount.

After your reproof of me you appoint me a task, and make me a promise; the
task is, that I must make the Kingdom of Israel and of England the same, a
Jewish and a Christian State the same; Why I pray you, Sir, must I make them
all one, because I bring an example of Caution out of the Old Testament?
neither upon that ground, nor your command do I find my self obliged to such
an undertaking; nor is it any man's work so to compare or resemble them as to
make them the same, since they do, and of necessity must differ in many
things; and though they differ much, yet in diverse things they do agree
likewise, as the Apostle shows in part, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3; 4. and that their
sins and punishments should be warnings to us (for which purpose I cited old
Elyes case) he shows by many examples out of the Old Testament, from verse. 5.
to the 11; was it the Apostles duty (having so done) to undertake a proof of
the paritle or identitie of the Corinthian or Christian and the Jewish State?

Now if I make good this, you promise to allow me both Elyes sin, and his
sons maintenance by tithes and offerings; but I will not take you at your
word, for this liberal offer; keep Elyes sin to your self if you please;
and since I know you are displeased with Tithes, put them upon me, and I will
either prove them lawful, and I think I have done it already; or give them up
as you have done.

SECT. XXIIII. Truth not to be parted with for peace, the Magistrate
dishonored, and the Presbyterians slandered by Mr. Saltm.
Smoke. Page 55. YOu would prove truth to be precious to the disadvantage of
peace, and therefore you bring in the Fathers against the Arrians, and no
against the Papists, and Christ against Peace; but what, would you prove that
truth ought to be established against peace, and peace to be no way to truth?
surely, truth and peace do meet together, nay they are so much one, (...)
there is even a truth in peace.

Light. In your exception against the example of Ely; you play the Antinomian,
in this and the next ensuing paragraph you take up the Tenet of the Anabaptists
against the lawfulness of war, though not theirs only, for some of the
Fathers, and some famous Papists have been of that opinion, but I find you not
much versed in the writings of the Fathers, and very averse from the opinions
of the Papists, and but too kind and complying in conceit with Anabaptists,
therefore I suppose a symbolizing rather with them then with either of the
other Sects; whereto I would make a return, and that return should be a
refutation of that fancy, but that I have done it in print already, in In my
Sermon of the Fury of war and folly of sin, p. 10. ad 15.
my Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons, April. 26. 1645.

Smoke. Page 56. You say there will be work for the Magistrate enough to
punish the contumacious, etc.

That is in English, the Presbytery will keep the Magistrate doing; and now
who disparage the Magistrates? who set them on work? who make them their
Deputy punishers? nay who is the Satante whom the excommunicate are delivered?
it is an expression not much besldes your principles; and who disparages the
Magistrate in that?

Light.A little before you pleaded too much for peace, and now you would break
the peace, and play the makebate betwixt the Magistracy and the Presbytery,
and to that purpose you make crooked consequences from right words, and upright
intentions, that you may at last put the name of Satan upon the Magistrate in
the name of a Presbyter; but take heed Sir, lest some say (though I do not)
you deserve the other name of that Arch-malignant, viz. (...), to be returned
upon you, which is a fit title for a false accuser, and so used by the Apostle,
2 Timothy 3.3. For how could you with truth, ingenuitie, or charity, make such
deductions as you do from my words, in Answer to yours? you say, (to make the
Presbyteriall Government needless,) New Quere. p. 8.
If moral transgressions stir, let the Magistrate be set on in every place.
I ask, Sect. 12. p. 41. of mine Exam.
set out by whom? and how? Does he mean that the Magistrate is as a shepherds
dog, to be set on the wolf that comes to make spoil of the flock? we
cannot have so mean a thought of the Magistrate, as to make mention of him in
such terms of disparagement. Neither dare we take upon us, either so much
interest in all Magistrates, or so much power in any, as to give them the
watchword when to draw the sword, and to expect that they should wield it as
we would have them. And not withstanding the preaching of the Presbyters, and
exercise of the Presbytery, there will be work enough for the Magistrate to
bring them under a civil trial, etc.

Are these words capable of such a gloss as you make of them, that the
Presbytery will keep the Magistracy doing, and now who disparages the
Magistrates? who sets them a work? Not the Presbyterians, but you, and your
party rather; for your words are, Let them be set on. Who makes them Deputy
punishers? Not the Presbyterians, who take no such power upon them as to
appoint them to punish any one; nor (if they do punish) account them Deputies
to any, but doers of their own work. Nay, who is the Satan, to whom the
excommunicate are delivered? The Magistrate, as you imply, and impose that
reproach upon Presbyterians; For you say, it is an expression not far beside
your principles, and who disparages the Magistrate in that? But stay good Sir,
what Presbyterians expound those words of delivery unto Satan, 1 Corinthians. 5.5.
1 Timothy 1.20. with an application to the Magistrate? neither Calvin, Beza,
Marl^rat, Piscator, Deodate, nor In his late Book against Erastus cap. 11. q.
7. page 354, 355.
Mr. Rutherford, nor any Presbyterian that ever I read, make the Magistrate the
Devil in these Texts; no nor Vatablus nor Aquinas, of the Popish Church; and I
think it will be hard for you to find any Author of note, of what Religion
so ever, that so takes, or rather mis-takes the words as you do; and
impossible to produce any Presbyterian principles, which with any color or
probability may be drawn, or by any violence and importunity be dragged to
such a sense of disparagement of the Magistrate, as you have suggested; and so
the calumny and contempt of their calling must be laid at your door, to father
it as an ill-favored brat of your own begetting.

SECT. XXV. The Magistrates assistance to the Ecclesiastical Government, no
argument to prove it no Gospel Government; the sword of God and of Gideon, of
Church Discipline, and civil severitie, how lawful and useful; zeal against
toleration of evil commended connivence at it blameable.
Smoke. Page 57. YOu say you cannot divide discipline from his assistance who
can make it effectual, that is, from the Magistrate, this is a sign without
further argument, that you do not hold your government for Christ's, because it
cannot be effectual of it self without help below.

Light.Here as in many other places you show little ingenuitie in repeating my
words, which are not as you cite them; but thus, Examination of the New Quere.
Sect. 12. page 42.
We cannot think it meet to divide subservient means from the supreme power,
nor the exercise of Discipline, and government from his Assistance who can make
it effectual, that is, (say you) from the Magistrate; and that is, say I, your
maledicta glossa which corrupts the Text; my words import not the inferior
efficacy of the Magistrate, but the superior of God; and therefore your
inference upon it is a second injury, and violence you commit against my saying
and sense; and yet though the Discipline be Christ's, we must crave the consent
and sanction of the Civil Magistrates, that we may put it in practice, as the
Presbyterians of the Dutch and French Churches in London; and with their
assistance it may be more effectual then without it it can be, as the
Magistrates antheritie may have a more awful operation upon the people if
assisted by the Ministers in their Sermons, and popular exhortations; and yet
you will not deny but that Magistracy is the ordinance of God, Romans 13.1.

Smoke. Page 57. Nor is the sword of God and Gideon any fair, or just proof
for joining Presbytery and Magistracy, it only ioynes God and the Magistrates.

Light.I join the sword of God and Gideon, not as a proof for uniting
Presbytery and Magistracy, but as an illustration of association of different
means to the same end, or of concurrent operations to the same purpose; and
yet if the cause of God in the hands of the Presbytery do need, and have aid
in the hand of the Magistrate to help it forward, there the sword of the
Spirit, which is the sword of the Lord, in the mouth of his Ministers, and the
sword of Gideon, that is, the sword of the Magistrate, may be said to be joined.

Smoke. Page 57. You say your godly it alousie will set up as many securities
as may be. But then they are warrantable and Gospel ways of security; that is
no godly jealousy which sets up other ways, as Herod killing all the young
children to secure his kingdom, David dissembling to escape, Jacob to get a
blessing.

Light.To that you said; New Quere. page 8.
It is the Papists and Prolates jealousy to keep up their supposed truths by
suspecting every thing that appears for an enemy: My Answer was; Examination
of the New Quere. Sect. 12. page 42.
There is a jealousy which the Apostle cal^ godly jealousy, and such a one is
that which would set up as many securities as may be against heresy, and
impiety; among them Church Government is one; of which, they that stand for it
are not afraid to let it go^ abread, but have made it public, and exposed it
to the view of all eyes. To this you put in a Reply with a condition of
warrantable and Gospel ways of security, and an exception of wicked ways,
such as Herod's killing all the young children, etc. I instanced only in the
Church Government, which the Presbyterians propound, and plead for as a Gospel
way; you bring in Herod's bloody business, as if there were near
consanguinitie betwixt the Presbytery and his barbarous cruelty; this is
(though not to slay innocents as he did yet) to wound and blast innocence, as
much as may be, and to bring it under an evil suspicion to make it odious;
this is no Gospel way Mr. Sa^^m. but a very wide aberration from it.

Smoke. Page 57. You say that some fear Gods anger for communion with
heretics, etc. you know all such fear is only warrantable in the Church,
not in the world; you have liberate to withdraw and separate, as they from you;
if it be national or civil communion, then you pluck up the tares before the
time of harvest.

Light.You still give me cause to complain of your unfaithful dealing with my
words, by such alteration, or omission of them as may make them more obvious to
your exception, then as I set them down, for they are thus in my Book; Exam.
of the New Quere. Sect. 12. p. 43.
But there is it fear which we profess, and I hope without offense, it is a
fear of Gods anger, and of imminent danger for communion with, and connivence
toward heretical and wicked men; and I brought examples, and sayings of John
the Evangelist, of Polycarpe, Hilary, and Jerome to that purpose, which you
take no notice of at all; but say, such fear is only warrantable in the
Church, not in the world; but for that there is a remedy that men may separate
from Church Communion; but what if many will not, as the weaker and looser sort
are as ready to run to heretical Teachers, where they exercise, as the
people of Israel to the Idolamous worship of the golden Calves; and shall such
be suffered to (...) them that through the ignorance of their minds, or
unrulinesse of then lusts are willing to be seduced? Will your conscience with
the Papists tolerate the Stews, not in the Church, but in the City? it is not
so broad, nor loose I hope; no more should it be so indulgent as to allow of
inducements to spiritual whoredom, (...)
which is as dangerous to men, and more dishonorable to God: The Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, I am sure, is commended by the Holy Ghost because he could
not bear them which were evil, Revel. 2.2. and for h^ting the deeds of the
Nicolaitans, verse. 6. as on the contrary the Angel of the Church of P^^ga^^^ is
blamed for suffering such as held the Doctrine of Bala^m, and those that held
the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, verse. 12.14, 15. and so is the Angel of the
Church of Thyatir^ for suffering the woman J^^^bal, which ^^lleth her self a
Prophetess, to teach and seduce the servants of the Lord, verse. 18.20. and if
such seducement may be as dangerous to many where heretics teach in corners,
as where they are admitted to officiate in public Churches, that must be no
more endured then the other.

And for that you say of plucking up the tares before the harvest, it makes
nothing against the caution I mean, which is not to extirpate all heretics
out of the world, but to put such a restraint upon them, that they may not have
power to seduce simple souls to such pernicious errors as may endanger them
upon eternal damnation; and yet I hope you do not mean but some wicked men
may be so wicked, and so destructive in their principles and practices to
Religion, and States, that it may be lawful not only to keep, or put them
out of all Church Communion, but to take them quite out of all communion in the
world, by capital punishment, else you will have the Civil Magistrate to
bear the Sword for naught, against the determination of the Apostle, Romans 13.

SECT. XXVI. Mr. Saltm. his dangerous supposition of equality of Number and
power, with diversity of Religion; of incorporation of two powers; and what
may be expected should the Sectaries prevail.
Smoke. Page 58. SVppose those you call heretics, and who (as you say a little
Smoke. p. 57.
before) think they have as good Scriptures to esteem you so, were of equal
number to you; and both of you equally numbered with Magistrates.

Light.What cause or need in this difference betwixt you and me to take up such
a terrible supposition as you make? for there would have been no ground of
suspicion, if there had not been too much indulgence showed to heretical, and
schismatic seducers; and what do you mean by supposing equality in
number, power, and spirit for contestation about contrary opinions? is it to
make the Presbyterians believe that the party they take to be heretical is,
or is like to be so many and masterfull, that they will not suffer the Church
Government to be settled without clashing of swords, and bloody doings? Truly
your courting of military men as you do, and others solicitations of them, and
brags of their power and purpose may be a just ground of suspision of so bad an
intention in some of your side, which now plead for liberty of conscience, that
if they had might to their minds they would assert it with other instruments,
and would secure it with circumscription, if not prescription, of the Civil
power; as the King of Spain did the liberty of election of the Emperor at
Frankford (against King Francis the first King of France his competitor for the
Empire) who sent thither an Army of 30000 men, that the choosers might be free
and not forced, Guicciard.
whereby he so overawed them that they durst not make their choice but in the
family of the house of Austria.

Smoke. Page 58. This is an image of your Incorporation of your two powers,
that you so plead for in this kind.

Light.Now truly Sr. you are a very sorry image-maker, that draw your picture
so imperfectly, so grossly, like the rude Painters of old, who were fain to
their misshapen pourtraitures to add an Inscription, this is a man, and this is
an horse, or else a man could tell no more then a horse what the pictures
resembled. If you had not told your Reader this is an image of your
Incorporation, etc. he would never have thought you meant any such thing by
what you have said; and now you have made your description, and set your
subscription to it, it is yet so smokie and obscure, that I doubt he cannot
understand it, I am sure I cannot perceive any truth or sense in it: for what
incorporation of powers do we make and plead for? you should have showed what
powers you mean, what incorporation of them we make, where and by what
arguments we plead for it; till you do this, I shall think your image a mere
imagination, and a fantastical Chimera.

Smoke. Page 58. If we were equally principled for persecution as you are, and
alled by your spirit, ah what a Kingdom would here be?

Light.What principles of persecution do Presbyterians hold, set which they
have not warrant from the word of God? all with you is persecution which in any
sort opposes your lavish toleration of all Religions, though never so
dishonorable to God, and damnable to man; the godly party in the time of the
Prelates cried out upon pluralities, and soule-murdering Non-residencie,
accounting it an high and heinous crime in those who withheld spiritual food
from the souls of the people, and held that the State was bound to do them
right, to see them supplied with necessary provision for their salvation; and
is there not a soul murdering by poisoning the peoples souls with pernicious
principles, as well as by withholding from them found and salutary Doctrine?
and is not the State bound to provide against this spiritual peril, as well
as the other? which if it may be done without drawing of a drop of blood, it is
so much more pleasing to conscientious Presbyterians, as it is less grievous
to heretical seducers; the wild beast may be kept and fed within the grate,
and the Fox confined to the length of a chain, though they be not suffered to
range abroad, and make havoc on the flock. And how are they armed for
persecution of their adversaries, when they not only live, but thrive and
flourish, and are advanced to places of honor and trust all over the Kingdom.

If the Presbyterians were so spirited, and so armed with power as you pretend,
how came the Independents to enjoy such a prosperous condition as they do? And
for the persecution of the Tongue and Pen, (for there may be words as keen and
cutting as very swords) was there ever any so sharp and bitter as theirs, who,
pretending to hate and persecute persecution, jeere and revile Presbytery and
Presbyters with so much virulence that all the scoffing Ishmaelites, Lucians,
Martin Marprelates (of which last Josias Nichols in his Book called the Plea of
the Innocent.
Josias Nichols a godly Nonconformist said he was stirred up by Satan to hinder
the work of Reformation) put together make not up the measure of their
malignitie who plead for toleration of all Religions, as you do, and whose
spirit appears to be so furious (though yours be more calm) that could they
advance to the height of their hopes, and aims, it is manifest by their own
written words, that they would not tolerate a Presbyterian, but would bring him
under intolerable slavery; for they would have the So in the Arraignment of
Persecution, p. 36. Printed by Martine Claw-Clergy Printer to the Reverend
Assembly of Divines for Bartholomew Bang-Priest, and are to be sold at his shop
in Toleration street. Anno. 1645.
Presbyterian Tribe led in a string from Westminster to Algate in leatherne
jackets, and mattocks on their shoulders, and the words that follow presently
after, and close up the Paragraph are, they would do the State better service
with their Canonical girdles (which very few of them wear) were the knot tied
in the right place, the words are no such Riddle as to need an Oedipus to
expound them; Sir, I will return you your own words again, and let the
Reader judge whether they were more fitly objected by you, or retorted by me.
If we were equally principled and armed for persecution, and acted by your
spirit (yours who breath out such threatenings and slaughters from Toleration
street against Presbyterians) ab what a Kingdom would here be?

SECT. XXVII. The Authority of the Parliament not pleaded by the Presbyterians
as a supplement of Scriptures, as Mr. Saltm. suggesteth; nor slighted by them
as by Mr. Saltm. it is; of the pretended danger of the Magistrates engagement
with the Ministers; of the pretended tenderness of consciences in Sectaries.
Smoke. Page 58. But you close up with that of the Lords and Commous in an
Ordinance, etc. I am afraid those are such proofs as you intend most in your
Presbytery, to make your supplement of Scriptures by Authority -- and to make
us believe what you cannot persuade us to believe, and to make it out by an
Ordinance what you want by Scripture.

Light.You had made it a matter New Quere. p. 8.
of Popish and Prelaticall jealousy, to keep up their supposed truths by
suspecting every thing that appears for an enemy; Whereupon Exam. Sect. 12.
p. 44.
I showed that there were other motives for opposing of Heresy and Schism,
(besides such a jealousy) and I showed it by instances of zeal against
Heretics in diverse of the Ancients, and concluded with an Ordinance of
Parliament of the 20. of October, 1645. wherein they endeavor for the complete
establishment of purity and unity in the Church of God; hereupon you say, you
are afraid these are such proofs as we intend most in our Presbytery; proofs
for what? If you take it for constitution of a Presbytery, we have proved that
by Scripture before it was offered to the Parliament; if for execution, you
must either intend it of an Ordinance of Parliament, to enable us to set up the
Presbytery, or for the particular proceedings in the Presbytery; If you mean
it of the former, we must urge the Ordinance of Parliament for it; if any one
question it in a Civil Title, we must plead it by such a warrant as the
Ordinance; if for the particular proceedings, they must have such profes and
evidence as in other cases of difference, by personal contestation.

Smoke. Page 58. But I hope that Honorable Senate will rather let you argue
from the Scripture against us, then from their Authority.

Light.Do you hope then that the Parliament will not establish the Presbytery
by their Authority? or if they do, that we will make no use of their
Ordinance, to maintain the purity and unity which that Honorable Senate
intended, against the confusion of Heresy and Schism? If so, I doubt not but
you will be deceived in both; and yet Sir the Presbyterian cause will be made
good against the whole circumference of Sects, who Center in Independency, for
toleration of multiplicity of professions in matter of Religion.

Smoke. Page 58. But I have not to do here with answer of Ordinances of
Parliament. I contend not, but submit to them in every Ordinance for the Lords
sake; nor does my Argument lie against any thing of theirs, but yours: I dare
not undervalue them to count them as Parties, but Judges, in our difference I
appeal to the Parliament as to Caesar; nor is it a fair proof of truth to
draw the Magistrates sword out of the scabbard.

Light. But I have not to do with an Ordinance of Parliament, say you, you
might have let it alone; I laid no such weight of Argument upon it, as did
engage you to answer it. Now whereas you say, you submit to them in every
Ordinance, it is but a complement, for were you serious and sincere in this you
profess, would you do as you, do cry down Tithes as Antichristian, which the
Parliament by Ordinance has established? or cry up such a liberty of
conscience, and Preaching without Ordination, as they by Ordinance have
forbidden? I could put the same Quere upon other particulars, wherein you make
no more scruple in practice to go cross to the Parliament, then in your words
to contradict me.

Yet you say, you dare not undervalue them as to make them parties but Judges
in our difference: Then their Authority must decide the difference; and if the
decision stick on your side, will you not accept, or make use of it to
countenance your cause against us? you will not, you cannot deny it; why then
should you say in your next words, It is no fair proof of truth to draw the
Magistrates sword out of the scabbard: If they be Judges, as you call them, and
appeal be made unto them, (as by you it is) why should you impute it as a
faulty drawing of the Magistrates sword out of the scabbard to produce their
sentence, or make use of their Authority?

Smoke. Page 59. You wonder considering who was engaged I would so undervalue
them, to compare them with Papists and Prelates.

Light. You wonder? My Exam. of your New. Quere. Sect. 12. page 44.
I said, If you had well considered who were engaged for the establishment of
Church Government, and how far, before you published your New Quere, you
would not sure have so far undervalued their piety and prudence, as to
compare them with Papists and Papal Prelates.

Of these words you have made a wonder; you have not only much freedom of
fancy, but a great liberty of conscience to amplify, or extenuate, or
exchange the words of your adversary as you please; and you do it so often,
as to make your credulous Reader, who does not examine whether you have cited
my Examination aright, to conceive that you have answered, yea conquered in the
Controversy; when you have but slandered my Text, declined the strength of it,
smoked the light of it, and confounded the order of it, and gotten the victory
only of your own abusive allegation, or interpretation thereof.

Smoke. Page 59. I did confider who was engaged, a Parliament, etc. and had I
not highly valued them, I had not ventured so far in my Quere.

Light.Not so far as to oppose, retard, and reproach the Church Government,
wherein they were so far, so publicly engaged; is this to value them, to
value them highly? if such be the price you set upon such Honorable Patriots,
I shall never be ambitious of your good acceptance, nor solicitous of your
estimation of me, whether the rate you set upon me be precious or vile.

Smoke. Page 59. I considered the fatal troubles which attended the
Magistrates engagements with the Ministers.

Light.If the Ministers engagements in Religion be right, it is a happiness
that Magistrates be engaged with them, and therefore on the one side promised
as matter of great joy, and glory to the Church, that Kings should be unto it
as nursing Fathers, and Queens as nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.23. and on the
other required as a duty to pray for Kings and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. and in
all Ages to this day the orthodoxe party have much desired the Patronage of
Princes and civil States in their Religious ministrations, as a means to
propagate the Gospel in the power and purity of the Ordinances of Christ; and
if the Parliament should (which the Lord forbid) yield to such a toleration of
Religions as you propound, I would know whether you would not desire the
security of State for that license you lust after, if any should oppose you
therein; and would you not have the power that granted it engage so far, as
to make it good unto you, and to suppress those who would debar you of the
liberty allowed you? We know the spirit of your party by their speeches, and
some practices so well, that we doubt not of this, and we have cause rather to
believe that you would not wait upon the Magistrates leisure, to right you in
such a case, if you had power for more speedy remedy in your own hands.

Smoke. Page 59.And I considered the blood which has been poured out by
National compulsion of teader consciences.

Light.In what Nation do you mean? if in England, as I suppose you do,
either only or chiefly, I confess that in the time of Popish Tyranny there
was much blood poured out of the ve^^es of such as had tender consciences, so
tender that they could endure death more willingly then Idolatry. And I deny
not but the domination of the Starchamber, and the High Commission were very
Tyrannical, and injurious to tender consciences, and very bloody (especially
the Starchamber) to the porsons of such as came under their censure; for I have
read the reports of the cruel usager of Mr. Prim^^, Dr. Bastwick^, and Mr.
Burton; and truly Sir, I could not but be affected with compassion toward Mr.
Lilburne, and with indignation toward his persecutors (though he have often
bewrayed a bitter spirit by many disdainful contumelies against them) upon the
reading of the late Relation of his sufferings proved before the Right
Honorable the House of Peers, Feb. 13. 1645. wherein it is testified that
Page 3.
he was whipped from Fleet bridge to Westminster so cruelly, that the cords
bruised his shoulders, and made them swell as big as a penny leaf, and
wheales on his back bigger then a Tobacco-pipe; and that the Warden of the
Fleet caused him to be gagged in such a cruel manner as if he would have torn
his jaws in pieces.

But did not the Parliament so far abominate the Tyranny of these Courts as
utterly to depose them, and to exclude the Bishops out of the House of Peers?
and will you compare their engagements for the purity and unity of a reformed
Religion, and Government, with the intolerable-Tyranny of such merciless
oppressors?

And for the tender consciences so much, so plausibly pleaded for by you, and
your party, many who had good means to know Sectaries, and no bad minds to
mis-report of them, find that for a few tender consciences among them, there
are many leprous, ulcerous, blinded, hardened, and cauterized consciences; to
which if the State should be so tender as you would have them, it would be
cruel to far better Christians.

SECT. XXVIII. What a Trumpeter Mr. Saltm. is; his reproach of the Parliament
plain enough, though rather implied then expressed; A challenge of him to
prove his insinuated suggestions of Treason, Blasphemy, etc. in my Examination
of his New Quere.
Smoke. Page 59. ANd like a spiritual watchman I could not but blow my
Trumpet.

Light. The premises considered, your Trumpet is as the Trumpet of Sheba the
son of Bichri sounded to sedition, a Sam. 20.1.

Smoke. Page 59. And for my comparison of Papists and Prelates, I appeal to
the world if there be any reproach, whether it be not in the Interpreter rather
then in the Author.

Light. For my comparison of Papists and Prelates, If you compare Papists and
Prelates, it is not so great a reproach to Prelates for the most part to be
matched with Papists, as for the Presbyterians to be likened to the worst of
either, as you make the comparison; but you should have said further, for my
resemblance of such as desire and endeavor the speedy setting up of Government
to Papists and Prelates (for so you made it in your Quere, p. 8.) I appeal
(not to the world, that is too wide a compass for a Iudicatory as well as for
a Church, but) to the ingenuous and impartial Reader, whether the Parliament,
making as much haste as they can to finish the Government, that they may
establish it by their civil Sanction, be not implicitly taken into that
imputation; and let him judge also whether the reproach be in the Author or in
the Interpreter.

Smoke. Page 59. If it be lawful, say you, to draw in consequent conclusions,
and then father them, I could prove you to speak Treason, Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Atheism, Heresy, nay Independency, which some of you may think
worse, Anabaptisme, Separation, which would seem to be as hateful to you; but
I judge you not in any such sort; nor had I spoken so far now, but in a just
vindication.

Light.If it be lawful? why should you doubt of it, but that it is lawful? If
I have any premises which you can make parents to bring forth such corrupt and
criminal conclusions, spare me not Sir; nay I challenge you to lay down your
antecedent in my words, and bring in your consequent of Treason, Blasphemy,
Idolatry. Atheism, etc. out of them; which if you can do by any fair and
unforced deduction, I will take you for an unerring Oracle, and follow you with
an implicit faith, with punctual observance and imitation of you whithersoever
you go, through all your vatiations of Heresy, and Schism, though you ramble
all over the Catalogue of them, as Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Philastrius,
Brixlensit, and Augustine of old, or any later Haeresiographers have set them
forth; but if you cannot do this, (as I know you cannot) with what conscience
do you give out a suspicion, or insinuation of such abominable guilt? what an
ungodly guile is this? how far from the Christian charity of a man pretending
the spirit of meekness, and moderation, as you do? Smoke. p. 2. nu. 3.
Let a spirit of meekness (say you) run in the Artery of Preaching and
Printing; how far from finceritie, to raise such a smoke of infamy and
reproach upon the reputation of him whom you style sometimes In the Inscription
of your Letter.
a Friend, sometimes Smoke. p. 26.
a Brother, and to whom you profess a threefold respect for his age, learning,
and place, in your Letter unto him? this s^rely is the beam in your eye Your
Letter to me. p. b.
you spoke of, while you are curious to take out the mote in mine eye; and for
that you say of Independencie worse thought of then Treason, Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Atheism, etc. I know no Presbyterian that thinks so of
Independencie, ut sic, abstractively, but considering the concurrence of many
dangerous and damnable opinions with it, and their protection and propagation
by it, it may perhaps be truly said, that Independencie extensively,
comprehensively, and effectively, though not formally, or intensively may be
worso then other errouts, or heresies, forced under that supposed golden head,
or embraced in its ^^ver (...), though they be at the best but as the belly and
thighs of brass; and at the worst as legs of iron, and feet in part of iron,
in part of clay, as in Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2. verse. 32, 33.

I should require and expect your ingenuous acknowledgement of this injurious
and uncharitable charge, but that you have directed me to another remedy of
the wrong you do me; where you say in your Epistle to me, If you find any
passions in my Book, charge them upon mine unregenerate part, for I find that
when I would do good evil is present with me.

According to this distinction a female disciple of some Antinomian Teacher
(who would be thought too good a Christian to be a member of any Congregation
that met in a Steeple-house) made her evasion from an accusation of these; for
when her Mistress charged her for stealing her linnens, and other things,
which she found in her chest, or trunck, she denied that she stole them; and
when she asked how came they to be laid and locked up there, Did not you do
this? No, said she. It was not I, but sin that dwells in me.

That this is no tale fained, or taken up on trust to reproach such professors
as pretend to an extraordinary strain of Evangelicall perfection, but a true
story, will be made good by evidence beyond exception to such as shall
question the truth thereof: But whether true, or false, you will happily say,
what is this to you? Truly so much as her excuse for her theeverie has the
more conformity with your excuse for your calumny; but I bring it in but
occasionally, and it is more pertinent I confess to mind you of your own
faults then of others.

Smoke. Page 59. You say you will conclude with my Politics, etc. The Answer
to this see in the Epistle.

SECT. XXIX. The charge of misapplication of Revel. 18.1. justified against Mr.
Saltm. his denial. The expectation of new lights which some Sectaries teach,
Papisticall, fallacious, and dangerous.
Smoke. Page 59. YOu say of my Text, Revel. 18.1. that at I began, so I and,
with misapplication of Scripture; Misapplication is a word sooner writ then
proved, and my resons were rather crowded then ordered in my paper; the
Scripture was this, For the Angel that came down from heaven has great power,
and the earth is lightened with his glory.

Light.If you would clear the Scripture from misapplication, you must show how
it came in with a for, as a reason of the precedent passage: your next words
before it are, The Gospel dares walk abroad with boldness, and simplicity,
when traditions of men like melancholy people fear every thing they meet will
kill them; and then immediately (not a word between) you say, For the Angel
that comes down from heaven has great power, and the earth is lightened with
his glory.

If this be not a misapplication of Scripture, I add further, if it be not an
absurd one, and your defense of it ridiculously vain, and your appeal to the
Reader a presumption, that you take him to be very stupid, or so fond as to
follow you in all you say with an implicit faith, let the judicious and
impartial Reader judge.

Smoke. Page 59. Which Scripture there applied does hint to any that will not
rather cavil then interpret, that my reason for delay of Government was in
this; An Angel was yet to come.

Light.You said before your reasons were rather crowded then ordered, (though I
know not why you should put your self into such a precipitation of haste) If
so, it is not strange they should be misplaced, and those cast behind which
should come before, as in a crowd it falls out. And truly for this
testimony, and the reason of it, with what went before it, it comes in a great
deal too late to be pertinently applied; for you had ended your reasons, (such
as they were) for the delay of Government a good while before, and now were at
the end of your second Objection, where there was room enough, before you
loosed your Pen from Paper, to have made a reference of that Text to its proper
place, and to have told your Reader what you meant by it as now you do; and
then I should have told you that that Text is as much misapplied for want of
truth, had it come in where it might seem to be most certain, as here for
want of sense and sutablenesse to the precedent words. For,

The Government of the Church is, (as you have acknowledged before) a Scripture
Government; and unless you wait for an Angel from heaven to bring another
Gospel, who by the doom of the Apostle, should he come, should be welcomed
with a curse, Gal. 1.8. you must not look for another Gospel Government; if
you refuse the Scripture light in expectation of Evangelicall Revelations, take
heed you comply not with the Papists, (whom you pretend to abhor) making
Bellarm. de notis Eccles. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 15. p. 278.
Prophetical light or revelation a note of the Church, and pretending
Revelations from Legend. aur. fol. 255. p. 1. col. 1. Portifer. seu Breviar. in
usum Eccles. Satisbur. part Estrval. in Festum Sri. Egid. Sept. 1. lect. 9.
printed Paris pervid. Francisc. Regnault. an. 1555. Thelmes of the Saints out
of Villegas and Ribad. vol. 1. part. 1. p. 87, 88, 98.
Angels. And if you say your Brethren the Anabaptists have their revelations,
and many others besides them talk of new lights. I doubt they are for the most
part but like your Book, which offers Smoke for light, and some of them very
destructive illusions of Satan; as that of the Anabaptist of Sleydan Comment.
ad an. 1527. l. 6. fol. 87. b.
Sangalli a Town of Helvetia, who cut off his own Brothers head in his
parents presence, telling them it was revealed to him, and commanded him of
God, he should do so; and none of them such as may be a rule of direction to
any society of pious, and prudent men, much less to those by whose Authority
the Government is to be set up, and settled throughout the whole Kingdom.

Smoke. Page 59. An Angel was yet to come with power and glory.

Light.The Angel whereof John prophecy was to come after his time, but now
about sixteen hundred years are passed since he had that vision, and how can
you say he is yet to come, in respect of the time wherein we have this debate?
what Angel or Spirit has stood by you, as by Paul, and told you that we must
yet expect such an Angel to come, and when he will come? that when he comes he
will bring a revelation of Church Government with him, which has been kept all
this while in the dark? if you have any warrant, any good ground for such a
vision, and revelation from heaven, show it; it is a matter of too great moment
to be taken upon trust, upon your bare word, or of any man's alive; and it may
be Sir you may wait for this Angel as long as the Jews have done for another
Messiah, and at last fail of your expectation as they have done, and for ever
must do.

Smoke. Page 59. Or the Gospel will fill the earth with more light.

Light.You sent forth your Dawnings of light the last year, but in stead of
fair day light next to follow, you present us with a Smoke; what Gospel Light
you mean is too dark to me, and it may be also to your self; If you mean
the new lights that Sectaries brag of, they are, and I bele^ve all
Scripture-learned Christians will take them but for the glimmerings of an ignis
fatuus, some illusive flashes from the shining of Satan, when he puts on his
holy day habit, and presents himself as in the apparition of an Angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11.14.

To me they represent the juggling imposture of a Popish Priest, of whom
Erasmus writes in one of his Epistles, that he got together many Crab-fishes,
and tied pieces of Wax candles lighted at their claws, who crawling up and
down in the Churchyard in the night, made the lights moveable to and fro; and
the simple people seeing them at distance, (for they durst not come near them)
the Priest made them believe they were souls come from Purgatory, which
needed and craved the prayers of good people for their release. As many as have
not their eye sight hurt by your Smoke (for Solomon shows, Prove. 10.26. and
experience complains of it as ill for the eyes,) will take many of the new
lights, so much talked and boasted of by diverse of your party, rather for such
false illusions, then for true illuminations.

Smoke. Page 59. So as we should not shut up our selves too soon in the dark;
And now Reader judge whether it be my mis-application or his
mis-interpretation,

Light.That we might not be shut up too long in the dark, I have brought all
this light of truth to dispell your vapor of error, and slander; and now I
may, I doubt not, the premises considered, and judiciously weighed, conclude,
as you do, with an address to the Reader, but with a necessary transmutation
of your terms, Now Reader judge whether mis-interpretation be not a word
sooner said then proved, as well as mis-application, and whether it be my
mis-interpretation, or his mis-application. Here he ends his exceptions against
me; and here I fix my period of Apology against them.

A Postscript in Answer to Mr. Saltmarsh his Postscript, consisting of two
testimonies of Claudius Salmasius, the one against the form of Baptism in the
name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost; the other for Independency of
Churches.
1. Of Baptizing in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
YOur allegation out of the excellently learned Salmasius is liable to manifold
exceptions.

First, In that you make him a German Writer, whereas he is not a German, but a
Frenchman borne; nor is he a Writer in Germany, for he is an honorarius
professor at Leyden in Holland, where you say, he is employed by the State to
write.

I suppose (you are so addicted to noveltie) you will not for your defense have
recourse to a record of Antiquity, which Salmas. de Primatu Papae. c. 17 p.
261.
Salmasius cites out of Marcellinus, wherein both Germanyes and Belgium were
comprehended under the name of France.

Secondly, But to come from the man to the matter, your allegation out of him
consists of two particulars; the first whereof is of the manner of Baptism,
for that you cite Salmasius thus.

First, That the Baptizing in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is
not the way of Baptism practiced by the Apostles.

Secondly, The Baptism of Apostolical use and institution is in the rivers,
not with invocation of the three persons, seeing the Apostles baptized only in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; the later of these you set down in the words
of Baptisma in aquis perennibus Apostolici instituti and moris, sed non
invocatio Trinitatis super Baptizatum, cum Apostoli in solo nomine Jesu
Baptizarent. Salmas. in Apparat. ad lib. de Primatu Papa. page 193.
Salmasius in Latin; wherein three things are to be considered.

1. The form of Baptism, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

2. The matter of it, River water.

3. The scope of Salmasi^^ in these assertions of Baptism.

First, For the form of Baptism, Salmasius does not, as you do, Except
against that form of Baptism at all, much less for this reason, Smoke. p.
13, 14. of the first order of figures.
because Jesus Christ left it not made up to the hands of the Apostles; for if
the Apostles baptized only in the Name of the Lord Jesus, it does not appear
they had any form for that left unto them by Christ, no more then of the
other, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. And if the Apostles
used that form, it was not because the other was unlawful, but because it was
that wherein the practice of Baptism began in the Ministry of John Baptist.
Act. 19.4. and yet from your own Smoke. p. 14. n^. 6.
Exposition of Baptizing In the Name of Jesus Christ in your next word (...)
will follow, that it is as lawful to baptize In the Name of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, as in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, For the matter of Baptism, River-water, you differ much from
Salmasius, for he takes it literally, Smoke. Ibid. page 13.
you figuratively.

Thirdly, For the scope, Salmasius his aim in what he said of the manner of
Baptism, and other Rites, was to show the diversity of them, and various use
of them, for confutation of the superstitions of Papists; but you bring it in
to plead for the presumption, and countenance the continuacy of Antipopish
Sectaries.

Your other Testimony you bring in thus, Salmasius his Testimony against the
present Presbyteriall way.

You might have added, (as you English it afterward) for the Independency of
Churches. If he write for Independency of Churches against the Presbyteriall
way, he is an Independent, and then I may retort the Testimony upon you, and
make the Title thus, The Testimony of Salmasius (...) Independent for the The
Presbyteriall way, against Independency; For I can bring as good evidence for
the Presbyteriall way out of Salmasius, as you can do against it; and yet is
not Salmasius a That Mr. Saltm. may not think me too youthful in bringing in
this paranomasie, and so with an affected gravitie take upon him to reprove me
for it, I will present him with some examples of paranomasies in the Hebrew of
the old Testament, as (...) God shall enlarge or persuade Japhet, Genesis 9.27.
and in that (...) Dan shall judge his people, Genesis 49.16. and in that (...)
Nabal is his name and folly is with him, 1 Samuel 25.25. and in the Greek of the
New Testament, as (...). Romans 1. verse. 29.31. and in the Fathers, as in
Augustine, who speaking of Faustus the Manichee, says thus, Legent qui volunt,
and invenient aut falli imprudenter, aut fallere impudenter, Aug. contr. Faust.
Manich. lib. 22. cap 32. and in another place; Nihil opus est ut e^ cum
discrimine definiantur, quae sinc crimine nesciuntur: Aug. de Trin. lib. 8.
cap. 5.
Saltmarshius, mutable in his Tenets, unconstant and contradictory to himself,
as you are.

His words that seem to make for you, you ^^t down first in Latin, which you
so cite, as he that takes you for a faithful Scribe, must take him for a very
poor Scholar, and ignorant of Grammar, (who is acknowledged by competent
Judges of his abilities, abundantly witnessed in works, to be a man eminently
furnished with all kind of knowledge) for in fourteen lines you set down no
fewer then seventeene errors, which must imply either gross ignorance, or
supine negligence in your self, or in those whom you employed in the printing
of your book, as he that diligently compares his original, and your
transcript will acknowledge: and secondly in English, thus,

Duobus modis haec Independentia Ecclesiarum accipi potest, si vel respectum
non habeant ad viciu^s ullas Ecclesias, aut si non pendeant ab authoritate
aliquot Ecclesiarum simul in unam Classem vel Synodum conjunctarum, cujus
convent^^ partem and ipsae faciant; prior modus similior reperitur primitivae
Ecclesiae praxi, consuetudini ac usui, quo voluntaria haec communio inter
Ecclesias fuit: posterior magis convenit cum instituto quod postea juris humani
dispositione introduction est. Hoc pos;teriore modo liberta^ particularium
Ecclesiarum magis imminuta videtur quam priore. Sed quod ab initio fuerit
voluntatis, post^^ facta^ est juris. Hoc jus sane positivum, atque
Ecclesiasticum, humanumque, (...) divinum; juris est quidem divini ut una sit
Ecclesia Christi, unita^ autem eju^ non gregalium aut concorpor^lium plurium
adurata collectione consistit, sed in (...) doctri^^ un^^imi cons^nsion^.
Salmasius in apparatu ad libr. de Primat. Papae; page 265. 266.
This Independency of Churches may be taken two ways; either as not having
respect to any neighbor Churches, or as not depending on the authority of
some Churches, that are joined in some Classes, or Synod, of which the Churches
themselves may make a part; The former way is found to be more like the
practice, custom, and use of the Primitive Church, whereby this voluntary
communion was among the Churches. The latter way does more agree with the
institution which afterward was introduced by a humane authority. By this
latter way the liberty of particular Churches seems to be less (more, you
should say) diminished then by the former. But that which from the beginning
was arbitrary, afterward is made necessary [as a law.] This law truly is
positive, and Ecclesiastical, and humane, not divine. It Is by a divine law
that the Church of Christ should be one, but the unity of it does not consist
in the union [or collection] of many that are of the same flock or body, but
in the unanimous consent, agreement in faith and doctrine.

In this saying of Salmasius, you have not a word against the lawfulness of
the subordination of Churches in the Presbyteriall Government; and that which
sounds in favor of Independency, is but this;

First, That the States of Churches by themselves, without respect, or relation
to any neighbor Churches, are more like the practice, custom, and use of the
Primitive Church, where a voluntary communion was among the Churches. He does
not say our Savior did institute that Government, nor that the Apostles gave
any order for it, nor that it was the same that was in the Primitive Church,
but that it was like the practice, custom, and use of the Primitive Church.

And so we say of Baptizing in rivers, of receiving the Sacrament at night, of
the love feasts, greetings with an holy kiss, and community of goods, and
many other particulars; but it will not follow that in our time, and State it
is better to Baptize in rivers then in Churches, to receive the Sacrament at
night then in the morning, and to continue those love feasts, and kisses of
love, which for the abuse of them were left off by the religious many hundred
years ago; nor that community of goods is better then the propriety of
them, as in the present age.

Secondly, He says, The later way, that is, of union of Churches in Classes,
and Synods, does more agree with the institution which afterward was
introduced by humane authority. To which I answer, that the Institution of it
might be before, and the practice of it according to the Institution come in
afterward; or if it were but instituted afterward by humane authority, it
does not follow that it was without, much less against authority divine; for
he says, as you cite him, it is by a divine law that the Church of Christ
should be one; if so, it is a dictate of natural prudence, which is a beam of
divine light, (though not an express and positive law of God) that all just
and fit means to preserve this union, so far as the State and condition of
the Church, and time will permit, be made use of it; and that is an union in
Classical, and Synodicall Assemblies.

Thirdly, That by this later way, that is, the way of association, and
subordination in, and to both Classes, and Synods, the liberty of particular
Churches seems to be more diminished; where he speaks cautelously, saying,
it seems to be more diminished; it may seem, and yet not be as it seems;
but if the liberty be more diminished, the safety of it by that means is
more assured, and the authority of it the more strengthened, while it
governs aright, in that if the censures of it be slighted, while they are
just, they will be ratified by the superior Assembly, and the contumacy of
offenders the more kept down.

Fourthly, That what from the beginning was Arbitrary, afterward was made
necessary as a law, this law truly is Positive, Ecclesiastical, and Humane,
not Divine. It might be arbitrary from the beginning, while there were few
Christians for Churches, few Churches for union, and those perhaps not so
situate that they could with convenience, or safety come under such a
combination, or subordination as was requisite for the Churches security
against heresy and schism; but if after the beginning (how long, or little a
while is hard to know) it were thought so necessary, as to be formed up into a
law, (though it were not divine but humane, positive, and Ecclesiastical) and
coming under no complaint for impiety against God, or injury to man, and
withal conducing directly to such ends as but now I noted, it is more for
subordinate Presbytery, then that which has been alleged for the
Independency, which you and your party so importunately plead for.

All this considered that you have produced in the name of Salmasius for the
Independent, and against the Presbyteriall way, will do you little good,
especially if it be known what he writes against Independency, of which, since
you silently smother it, I will make some supply.

An express and clear Testimony of Salmasius against Independency.
-- Quod tamen nullo modo iis suffragatur, qui censent unamquamque Ecclesiam
habere potestatem Independentem, nec probant plurium Ecclesiarum conjunctionem
sub directione Classium, ut vocant, vel Synodorum; and paulo post,
Which notwithstanding makes nothing for them, who think every Church has an
Independent power, and approve not the uniting of many Churches under the
direction of Classes or Synods. And a little after he says; Totalis, inquit,
Indepenentia earum ab omni alia Ecclesia minime laudanda, nec recipienda.
Salmal. Apparat. ad lib. de Primat. Pap. p. 265.
Their total Independency upon any other Church is neither worthy of praise,
nor of acceptance.

And again he says, Si eo tempore cum Spiritus Christi Ecclesias per Apostolos
suos regeret, ac dirigeret, non tamen eae Independentes fuere, quanto minus
nunc in hac Seculorum extrema colluvie, cum tot haeresibus, quasi loliis and
Zizaniis Ecclesia tota inquinata sit, admitti oportet hanc Ecclesiarum
singularum (...) absolutam; qua non debeant ad vicinos refer conventus cum
nodus apud sc vi^dice dignus inciderit, nec a concilio plurium Ecclesiarum
simul junctarum ex viciniae commoditate gubernari sustineant. Vnit^s omnium
toto orb dispersarum Ecclesiarum, sub uno Pastore Christo, and in unam
Doctrinam consentientium non potest constare absque communione, nec communio
absque communicatione, communicatio autem nulla esse potest ubiom^^s inter se
sunt Independentes. Salmas. Apparat. ad lib. de Primatu Papae. p. 267.
If the Churches were not Independent at that time when the Spirit of Christ by
his Apostles ruled and governed them, how much less in this last colluvies of
ages, when the whole Church is p^stered with so much cockle, and tares of
heresies, should this absolute self-ruling of all Churches be admitted^
according to which, if they meet with a knotty difficulty, they may not
refer it to their neighboring conventions, nor will they be governed by an
Assembly of diverse Churches, which vicinitie has commodiously united. The
unity of all the Churches dispersed through the world, under one Shepherd
Christ, and consenting to one Doctrine cannot stand without communion, nor that
communion without communica^ation, which can be none where all are Independent
on each other.

And that this is the mind of Salmasius, without imposing any thing upon him,
or wresting his words to any other sense then he in^ended, (as you do) I am
assured by the Testimony of a godly, and learned Divine, of great integrity
and reputation with those that know him, who had conference with Salmasius in
Holland, while his Book was at Press (and where, counting the time of
printing and accidental pawses it Prodit ecce tandem noster de Frimatu Papae
Tractatus, and prima quidem tantum sui part, diu a multis expectat^, quia diu
sub praelo mor^s traxit, ob varias and Sonticas causas, mode absentiae meae,
modo valetudinis, interdum and aliarum occupationum saepius interruptus. Ante
quinquenuium excudi coeptus hoc demum tempore lucem videt. Salmas. initio
Epist. Lect. praefix. Apparat. ad lib. de Primatu Papae.
continued five years together) and told me that his scope in that Book was
to oppose the extremes, Popery on the one side, and Independency on the other,
and to assert the middle and moderate way of Presbyteriall Government.

These two quotations out of Salmasius, the one a little before, the other the
next page after the Testimony produced by you, may give just cause of
suspicion, that you meant to delude your Reader with a maimed allegation;
omitting what made against you, by a fraudulent Apharesis, and Apocope of the
precedent, and subsequent words; unless it be more like that you never saw the
Book, but had the Testimony sent you in some piece of paper, which contained
no more then you have made use of. Which we may the rather believe, because the
mistakes were so many in Salmasius his Text, as could hardly have been if you
had taken your Testimony at the first hand.

FINIS.

