A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS: At Margarets
Westminster, upon the 26. day of August 1645. being the day of their solemn
Monthly Fast.

By JOHN LIGHTFOOT, A Member of the Assembly of Divines.

London Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

A Catalogue of such Books as have been published by Mr. Lightfoot.
OBservations on Genesis. -- On Exodus. Harmony of the four Evangelists. Elias
Redivivus. A Sermon on Luke 1. 17. at a Fast before the Commons House of
Parliament, March 19. 1643. A Commentary on the Acts, with an Ecclesiastic
History.


TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled IN PARLIAMENT.
IF ever Sermon met with disadvantages whereby it might be made unacceptable to
an Auditory, this was it. For besides mine uttter disabilities to prepare any
thing fit for so learned and discerning ears and Judgments; the two things
that might spoil delivery when the child, such as it was, was come to the
birth, were come upon me, and those were straitness of time, and perplexity
of spirit; for the sear of stopping your other occasions did so still lie
before me, and the fear of mine own poor Family in the inundation of the
Enemy in the Association at that very instant, did so follow me, that in this
strait between these two, I stood your Orator at that time.

Yet I see it is not in vain, but a comfort and happiness to labor to serve
and obey you, seeing your acceptance cherishes and encourages such poor
endeavors.

The subject I fixed upon, I purposely chose, that the Millenary Opinion, which
I cannot but judge erroneous, might not go on altogether uncontrolled, and one
man take it at another for a truth without gainsaying; but that it might
receive some check by the way, and it might be showed, that Posse vinci
Hannibalem, that there is a fair possibility that that Opinion is but a
falsehood. Errors sometimes, and uncertainties often, do get the repute of
undoubted truths by going too long uncontradicted. As I cannot but challenge
that opinion which is so current and common, and has so long run from hand to
hand for an unquestioned certainty, that now it is become unquestionable, and
that is, that the supper mentioned in the 13 of John's Gospel was the Passover
supper, and that Judas his going out after the sop, was his departure away
before the Sacrament: where as if it be not certain, which to me it is, and I
conceive may be very well proved to others, that that supper was not the
Passover, but a common supper; and that it was not at Jerusalem, but at
Bethany fifteen furlongs off, and that it was not on the Passover night, but
two nights before: If this I say, be not absolutely certain at the first
sight, as to convince of its certainty, yet is it very well worth the weighing,
and the contrary opinion not to be suffered to go unexamined, which among the
most men it does.

Your Honorable House weighteth all things, the Lord hold out and reveal his
will to you more and more, and crown all your Undertakings and Consultations
with all prosperity and success.

September. 12. 1645. Your servant in the Lord, John Lightfoot.

A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable House of Commons, at their Monthly Fast,
August 27. 1645.
Rev. Chap. 20. Verse. 1, 2. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven having
the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.
And be laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil and
Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.

NOw I would this Angel would bow the heavens and come down, and bring his
chain with him and bind the Devil now, for never was there more need, never
was it more time: for if ever he were loose he is loose in these times, and
if ever he raged he rages in this nation: Alas for the inhabitants of
England, for the Devil is come down among them, having great wrath, and yet
we know not how long his time is; how lamentable and doleful is it, that that
prophecy should ever be so true of us (which is uttered against Babel) as it
is proved to be at this day, that Zijim and Ijim and Obim, satyrs and fiends
and devils should dance and domineere, and rage and ravin as they do in this
nation, and when and how they shall be restrained, we cannot tell? Only
there is some comfort in the text, and this indeed is all the comfort we have,
that the Angel in the Text can master the devil if he will but do it, and
he has a chain in his hand that will bind him, if he will but tie him in it.

The Text is held to be the hardest piece in all the Bible by many degrees:
For as Prophetic writings are the difficultest pieces of all the Scripture,
and the Revelation of all Prophetic writings, so is this Chapter of all the
Revelation, and these Verses of all this Chapter; and so does a learned
country man of our own censure upon this place, that it is Res omnium totius
Scripturae Propheticae abstrusissima maximeque admiranda: Mr. Mede in loc.
A matter the most abstruse of any part of the Prophets writings, and the most
to be admired. I might spend the time that is allotted me to produce the
opinions and the arguments to prove those opinions that are given upon this
place. But I shall but tell you that some Popish writers apply this prophecy
and victory of the Angel in the Text to the Pope, some to Pope Calixtus the
second, who bound the Dragon, say they, when by an Vid. Marlorat. in loc.
Anathema he caused Henry the fourth to renounce the custom of installing
Bishops and Abbots. Others to Pope Innocent the third, who bound the devil by
approving the orders of the Dominicans and the Franciscans. I need say no more,
such expositions as these, it is more then enough to have but named them.

I shall but tell you neither that some expositors of a better school, apply
this victory of the Angel over the Dragon to Brightman.
Constantines conquering of Maxentius Herculeus and Lieinius those persecuting
Emperors, and that he bound the devil when he ended tyranny and
persecution, which had continued against the Church so long: and so they will
have the thousand years to begin from him.

But I must do more then barely tell you, that the gloss and exposition upon
this prophecy which has got the deepest root and the highest seat in the
hearts and estimations of very many in these times, and carries the greatest
cry with it, is the opinion of the Chiliasts of old, refined by the Millenaries
alate, which take this matter about the thousand years, strictly and exactly
according to the very letter. An opinion so strange to me that I must confess
I could not but make it a sad omen and presage a good while ago what opinions
we should fall into in time, when such an opinion as this could be so
swallowed down and entertained as I saw it was.

I say such an opinion as this.

That when Antichrist is destroyed the Jews shall be called, their calling
shall be home to the land of Canaan, (for let me take up all the shreds of
this opinion that I find scattered in the writings of the abetters of it) that
Christ shall have a glorious reign here upon earth, that himself shall
personally and visibly dwell here among his Saints: that this glorious time
shall last a thousand years, that Satan all this while shall be bound, so
that there shall not be the least disturbance or trouble in the Church, but
all prosperity and Sunshine. That these thousand years are that that is called
the day of judgment: that this day of judgment of a thousand years long
shall begin with a bodily resurrection of the martyrs only, and shall conclude
with the resurrection of all the dead: and the beginning of these thousand
years is conceived by some to be but about one and twenty years off: Thus
the exposition of this place according to that opinion.

I shall not trouble nor tire your patience with the examination of the truth
of these particulars; I shall only lay before you six groundless and mistaken
principles as I conceive, from whence I apprehend this exposition and opinion
to have risen, and refer them to your own censure and judgment; three from
this Chapter that is before us, and three from other places in the Scripture.

First, the maintainers of this opinion, seem not to have taken proper and
serious notice of one phrase in this Chapter which the holy Ghost has twice
mentioned, that it might be be sure to be taken notice of, and that is, that
Satan is bound for a thousand years that he should not deceive the nations:
for so it is expressed in plain terms in the third verse upon his binding,
and so is it hinted and intimated in the eighth verse upon his loosing* now
this opinion of the Millenaries speaks much of Satan's binding, so that there
shall be no persecution nor offensivenesse in the glorious Church they dream
of, but all peace and happiness, and tranquillity and glory, whereas this
prophecy speaks of no such matter. It speaks not a word of Satan's binding,
that he should not persecute the Church, but it speaks of Satan's binding,
that he should not deceive the nations. And how vast a difference there is
betwixt persecuting and deceiving, and betwixt the Church and the nations, may
be referred to any one to judge: And the missing to observe pressely, this
phrase and this difference, is to miss of the very key that lets in to the
understanding of this prophecy.

Secondly, as this doubled phrase is little observed, so another doubled one is
much observed, but as much misinterpreted, and that is of the first
resurrection of which there is mention in the fifth and the sixth verses. For
though they will not deny the Apocalyptick to speak in borrowed phrases, and
figurative speeches all along his book hither, yet here they will have him to
speak nakedly and literally without any such borrowing, and to mean the very
bodily rising of the martyrs from the dead: whereas in all this Chapter there
is not one word of their bodies arising, but of their souls living, nor one
word of their living on earth, but of their reigning with Christ.

Thirdly, they conceive that the very method and place of this Chapter in which
it lies, does infer their gloss and interpretation; for that mention being
made of the ruin of Antichrist in the next Chapters before, and of Christ's
Kingdom for these 1000. years, so immediately after, in this they think it
must not be denied, that these 1000. years must not be begun till Antichrist
be ruined: whereas the method of the Evangelist if it be pressely followed
will appear of a clean differing scope.

For as Moses in the book of Exodus, has three times described Exodus 25. etc.
and 36. etc. and 40. Exodus 35.
the fabric and fashion of the Jewish Tabernacle, in the pattern, in the
making, and in the setting up: and has made a fourth summary of all the
materials that went to the making of it, though they were named in the other:
Even so has the Evangelish done by the description of the Christian Church in
this book: From the beginning of the fourth Chapter to the end of the eleventh
he has described its state and persecution, but the persecutor not named:
From the beginning of the twelfth Chapter to the end of the nineteenth, he
has described its state and persecution, and pointed the persecutor out; in
this Chapter he sums up in brief what he had spoken in the two other parts
at large, and in the two Chapters following he sets his Tabernacle up in her
perfection, and describes the Church in her holiness, and communion, and
participation of Christ.

It is not proper for this time and place, to insist upon the proof and
confirmation of this to be the Evangeliffs meaning and method, which might
clearly be done, I refer it to your own thoughts and consideration. And as
the parties that we are dealing withal, do thus mistake and misconstrue upon
this Chapter, so do they also upon other places of the Scripture.

For fourthly, they hold that Rome is the fourth beast, or monarchy or kingdom
in Daniel: and because that Daniel has told in his second and seventh
Chapters, that after the destruction of the fourth beast or kingdom, Christ's
glorious kingdom shall be set up, they therefore imagine that this kingdom
of Christ is yet to come, and yet shall not come, till Antichrist shall be
destroyed, which they hold to be a part of the fourth monarchy: whereas, to
let pass diverse other reasons, which might sufficiently prove the contrary,
Daniel himself in his seventh Chapter at the eleventh and twelfth Verses, does
show most plainly, that it is impossible that the fourth beast should mean
the Romans: for he there tells expressly, that even when the fourth beast
was slain and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame, the rest of
the beasts had indeed their dominion taken away, but yet their lives were
prolonged: Now what sign of life shall be to be found of the other three
Monarchies, when Antichrist shall be destroyed, it is utterly unimaginable to
apprehend.

Fifthly, and which is much agreeable to the former, they conceive that Daniel
prophecieth of Antichrist: of whom he speaks not one word, nor treats of
any particular times or stories of the Gospel, but only holds out that
gerall prophecy which all the Prophets did, with one consent of the calling of
the Gentiles, and of Christ's glorious kingdom among them in the Gospel. For
it is a groundworke necessary to be laid by him that will make any thing of
the book of Daniel and of the Revelation; That where Daniel ends John
begins and goes no further back, and where John begins Daniel ends and
goes no further forward. For Daniel shows the state and the persecutors of
the Church of the Jews, from the building of Jerusalem by Cyrus to the
destruction of it by Titus, and he goes no further. And there where the
beloved Prophet concludes the beloved Disciple begins and takes at him in
this book, and shows the state Dan. 10. 11. John 21. 20.
and the persecutors of the Christian Church, from the destruction of Jerusalem
to the end of the world, and reveals a new Jerusalem coming down from
heaven when the old one on earth is destroyed, and one persecuting monarchy and
state of Rome equalling in mischief and cruelty against the Church all the
four that had gone before it.

Sixthly and lastly, they hold that Antichrist shall be destroyed, before the
Jews shall be called: which is not only not to be proved by any Scripture
throughout all the Bible, but easily to be disproved both by Scripture and
reason, and it were no hard task to show, if it were seasonable, that the
eleventh Chapter of this book, by the killing of the two witnesses intends
persecution against the two Churches Jews and Gentiles, when they shall be
knit together at the Jews calling.

Upon these six foundations is that opinion built which in it self is so
exceeding strange, and yet (which is as strange) is so exceedingly entertained;
I leave the balances in your hands to weigh the weight or the lightness of
them: and now crave a little leave, to present you with six other particulars
on the other hand for the clearing and explaining of the Text before us.

First therefore, by Satan's deceiving of the nations (from which he is bound
up in the Text that he shall do so no more) is to be understood that blindness
and ignorance in which he kept the heathen for so many hundreds of years,
before the appearing of the Gospel, deceiving them with strong delusions to
believe lies, especially with his two great cheats and cousenages that misled
all the world, Idols and Oracles: And that this is the meaning of that phrase
deceiving the nations may be concluded upon, not only by the term nations,
nor only by the truth of the thing it self, for that was the great deceiving
of the world, nor only by the phrases of the Scripture that express the
errors and delusion of the heathen, but even by the very tenor and scope of
this Chapter it self, for it sets down the two great cousenings and
deceivings of the world by the Devil, the one under heathenisme before Christ
bound him, and the other by Antichristianisme when he was let loose again.

Secondly, by the Angels binding the Devil in the Text, is to be understood
Christ's overthrowing the power of the Devil among the Heathen, (for I suppose
it needless to prove that the Angel is Christ) his casting down those strong
holds of Satan, Ignorance, Idolatry and lying Oracles, by the light and power
of the Gospel preached among the Gentiles, his bringing them home to the
knowledge of the truth, and his curbing of Satan, that he should no more cosen
the world with those delusions and heathenisme as he had done.

Thirdly, this change of the Heathens condition, from the darkness of Ignorance
to the knowledge of the truth, from worshipping of Idols to the worshipping of
the living God, from seeking after lying Oracles to the studying of the holy
Scriptures, from the power of Satan to the glorious kingdom of the Lords dear
Son, this change I say out of that condition so sad, and that condition in
which they had lain above 2000. years, was as their changing from death to
life, and as it were a resurrection from the dead. And so is it called in the
six and twentieth of Esaias and the nineteenth Verse, and most expressly by our
Savior in John 5. 24, 25. And this is that first resurrection that is spoken
of in this prophecy in the fifth and sixth Verses: and when the Jews shall
be called, which now lie in a condition much like to the old Heathens, that
shall be as another resurrection, for so it is also called, Romans 11. 15.

Fourthly, if I should make a chronology of these 1000. years, I should date
the resurrection of the Gentiles and their calling in and Christ's setting up
his kingdom among them from the destruction of Jerusalem, from which time John
also dateth his revelation. For although the Gospel were preached to the
Heathen abundantly before Jerusalem were destroyed, and almost all the world
was brought in, to the knowledge of the Gospel, and obedience of the faith
before that time, yet is the date of these things more especially from that,
because that then Judaisme was wholly ceased, and Christianity only set up,
the old people of the Lord cut off, and the Gentiles chosen and taken into
their stead. And hence it is that so great things are spoken of the day of
Ierusalems destruction in the Scripture: as that it is called the great, and
terrible, and notable day of the Lord, Joel 2. 31. Acts 2. 20. as if it were
the day of judgment and the dissolution of the old world: and our Savior
discourses it and the end of the world so mixtly together that you cannot know
them asunder they are so like, Matthew. 24.

And to this purpose is the Masoretick note upon the first of Genesis and the
second of good use, which tells us that the phrase Haarets tohu Vabohu, The
earth was without form and void, is never used again in Scripture but once,
and that is in Ier. 4. 23. where the Prophet is speaking of Ierusalems
destruction, as if then the world were ended and returned to its Chaos again.
For here it was that the old world of Mosaic rites, the old heavens and the
old earth of the Jewish Church and State ended and came to ruin, and hence it
was that the new heavens and the new earth, the new world, the new Jerusalem,
the new state of the world, and the new Church of the Gospel began, and then it
is no wonder if this be called the first resurrection: Here properly began
that which in Scripture is so renowned and called the kingdom of heaven: that
is, Christ's kingdom in the Gospel set up among the Gentiles when the earthly
kingdom of Rites and Ceremonies among the Jews, the kingdom of hell in
ignorance and Idolatry among the Gentiles was now finished, and the kingdom
everlasting of righteousness and holiness set up. And at this time it is that
the thrones are said to be set up in Dan. 7. and in the fourth Verse of this
Chapter, and as our Savior expresses it, the Apostles sitting on twelve
thrones judging the 12. Tribes of Israel, that is, the Apostolic doctrine
judging and condemning that unbeleeving nation, and showing their rejection to
be most just because of their unbeleefe: This period of time thus observed and
taken notice of would help to facilitate and clear many things in Scripture,
which for want of observing this, do fall under misprison and
misinterpretation, as instance in that in Act. 2. 17. It shall come to posse in
the last days, etc. Conceits are taken up by diverse in our times upon this
place, as if visions and prophetic gifts, and I know not what should be
powered upon men toward the end of the world, misconstruing the phrase of the
last days to mean the later end of the world, whereas it means the last
days of the Jews world or state, and misconceiving the term, the great and
terrible day of the Lord, to mean the day of judgment, whereas it means
nothing else but the day of Jerusalems destruction. Were I then to Chronicle
these 1000. years in the Text, I should begin them from this date: but I shall
not be punctual to determine that at this time: Begin them whether you will,
either there, when the Gentiles only began to be the Church, or begin them
when first the Gospel came among the Gentiles, either by Peter to Cornelius or
by Paul to the western parts of the world, (for the publishing of the Gospel
to the heathen was the binding the devil that he should no more deceive the
nations) begin at whether date you will, it is easy to cast where the 1000.
years end, according to your choice of their beginning.

Fifthly, from either beginning, the end of them will fall in the very pitch of
the Kingdom of Antichrist as I may so call it, when now the world began to be
in deepest darkness again, and to become heathenish anew, and then is Satan in
justice loosed again, and deceives the nations a fresh by Antichrist, and for
a season the world becomes no better then the old heathens for Ignorance and
Idolatry.

Sixthly, in this thousand years space, persecution haunted the Church in a
most miserable extremity: partly by the Heathen Emperors, partly by Antichrist
when he appeared, and many thousands were put to death for the witness of
Jesus and for the word of God, and which neither worshipped the beast of the
Empire nor his Image Antichrist when he was risen up, and these though they
were miserably tortured and slaughtered in regard of the body, yet their souls
reigned with Christ and were in happiness. And the Evangelist in the fourth
Verse, speaks but in the tenor that Daniel does in his twelfth Chapter and
second Verse: where treating of the miserable afflictions to be caused by
Antiochus, he comfort those that should fall under them with assurance of
the resurrection and eternal felicity: So the Apocalyptique here, being to
discourse of the persecution that should befall by Rome, first heathenish, and
then Papal, he solaceth and incourageth all chose that should suffer it, with
this assurance, that though their bodies should be destroyed, yet their souls
should reign with Christ: and as for the others that worshipped the Beast and
his Image, they never obtained the first resurrection of recovering out of
their heathenish and blind estate into the embracing of the light, but they
continued dead in ignorance and error till even after these thousand years,
and then the world slipped into the darkness and delusions of Antichrist as
into heathenisme again. And so I have given you the sense of this place, and as
I conceive the very sense of the holy Ghost: If I have been a little overlong
in it, it is but according as the difficulty of the thing it self requires,
and I hope you will pardon me.

Before I come to take up the words, I cannot but observe this to you, from
what has been spoken last, namely that Error and deceivednesse in the things
of God is a verier devil and Doct.
more dangerous then open persecution. For the Text accounts the Devil bound,
when he is tied up from deceiving, though he be at liberty for persecuting,
I do but name this here, I shall have occasion to make use of it hereafter.

And now in the Text you may observe two things; first, a description of Christ
and a description of the Devil; and secondly, a mastery of Christ over the
Devil.

The description of Christ in the first Verse, a description of the Devil in
the second, and the mastery of Christ over the Devil in the conjunction of
both.

I might observe many things out of the words in either verse, but I shall
only take up that which both the Verses conjoined do mainely and clearly
hold out unto us, and that is:

That, be the Devil never so devilish, Christ has power to overpower him.
Doct.
It is worth your observation, that the Text seems to be at strife with it
self, whether to set out the Devil in his devilishnesse, or Christ's power
over him, in the higher expressions; for as on the one hand it has set out the
Devil in five of his attributes, if I may so call them, as that he is a
Dragon, a Serpent, an old Serpent, the Devil, Satan; so in as many terms on
the other hand has it set out Christ's power and victory over him, namely that
he lays hold on him, binds him, casts him into the bottomless pit, shuts him
up, seals him up for a thousand years, as if it purposely intended to
proclaim this to us, which I cannot but repeat again, That be the Devil
never so devilish, Christ has power to overpower him.

The truth of this doctrine was the very first thing that was held out in the
world, after sin came into it: and as soon as the Devil had showed his
devilishnesse in the overthrow of Adam, the Lord proclaims the power of Christ
to conquer the devil, and that before ever any censure or sentence be passed
upon Adam, Genesis 3. 15.

And this truth shall be one of the last things that shall be held out in the
world, when the devil shall receive the reward of all his devilishnesse; when
he, his Angels, and his instruments shall receive this sentence from him, Go
yet cursed, etc.

And as for the space betwixt these two periods, or from the beginning of the
world to the end of it, the Scripture is so full of testimonies, and the world
so full of experiences of Christ's power and mastery over the Devil, that it is
needless to prove it, the Devil himself dare not deny it, Matthew. 8. 29.

I shall confine my discourse upon this subject unto these particulars.

Namely, to show you how the power of Christ meets with the Devil to master
him; first, in the utmost evilnesse of his nature, as he is a Serpent:
Secondly, in the utmost vigor of his power, as he is a Dragon, the greatest
of Serpents; thirdly, in the utmost practice of his subtlety, for he is an
old Serpent; and fourthly, in the utmost exercise of his malice, for he is a
Devil; and lastly, in the utmost violence of his cruelty, for he is Satan;
the utmost of any of these, the utmost of all these either in himself, or in
his instruments or members, all the Devils in hell, all the wicked on earth,
Christ is too big for them, he can, he does master, quell and conquer them at
his pleasure.

The first thing to be considered in the Devil to our purpose in hand is the
evilnesse of his nature, and that the Text intimates unto us, when it calls him
a Serpent, a beast that carries poison within him, death comes from him, and a
curse is upon him: We may say of his nature as he is a Devil, as the
Scripture speaks of the frame of man's heart, as it was unframed by the
Devil, he is wholly evil, only evil and evil continually.

There is a question among Divines whether there be a summum Aquin. part 1.
quaest. 49. Art. 3.
malune as there is a summum bonum, a chiefest evil, in that sense that there
is a chiefest good: They hold it negatively, and there is good reason for it,
but certainly if any thing come near to the pitch of such a thing as a summum
malum, it is that evil one we have in hand.

For first, look upon him in his being evil, he is absolutely so, he is
intentionally so, he is irrecoverably so, he is maliciously so.

Secondly, look upon him in causing evil, and he was the father of sin,
the first cause of Gods dishonor, the voluntary cause of his own ruin, the
malicious cause of the ruin of mankind.

And thirdly, look upon him in his acting of evil, and he did it at first
without a tempter, he does it since as a tempter, he committed it then at the
height of sin, he does it now as a depth of sin and punishment.

I might enlarge my self in all these particulars, but I shall only recommend
to you the consideration of these two things, the perverseness of his will
incorrigible; and the desperateness of his condition, irrecoverable: And thus
is he most truly and primarily that which Jude speaks of some of his
children and members, twice dead, to be plucked up by the Jude verse. 12.
roots. Mankind, though it fell into the hands this thief, and were stripped,
and beaten, and wounded and undone by him, yet left he him but half dead: not
in the sense that some would make of it, as if some power and moving to grace
Luk, 10. 30.
were in his nature when he was fallen, but in a sense contrary to the
desperate estate of the devil, that man's will was curable, and his fall
recoverable.

So was not the devils, either the one or the other.

The devil is in this in a direct diameter or contrariety to the good Angels
that stood, that as they cannot sin, so can he do nothing else: and as they
can will nothing but good, so can he will nothing but evil; and as they shall
never fall, so he shall never recover.

First, the incorrigible perverseness of his will is intimated in these
expressions of Scripture: There is no truth in him, and when be speaks a lie
he speaks of his own, John 8. 44. And the devil sins from the beginning,
1 John 3. 8. And your adversary the devil walks about seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. And others of the like tenor concluding to us that the
devil is in a continual motion and practice of sinning, and can do nothing
else because there is no truth or goodness in him, but he is spiritual
wickedness itself, as he is called, Ephesians. 6 12.

Now this obduration of the devils will in evil, proceeds not only from the
justice of God, reserving him in such chains of darkness to the judgment of
the great day, but from two cursed principles within himself.

First, whereas the evils that men fix their affections upon, are chosen by
them as appearing to them to have good in them, as pleasures, profits and the
like, and so poor men are deluded by shadows: the devil in his fall chose
evil even under the notion of evil, he being of a knowledge that could not
be deluded, and being in a state that could not be bettered.

And secondly, because he does adhere unto the choice of that evil that he
first made, and that not only in regard of the fixednesse of an Angels choice,
which as the Schools tell us, cannot change his choice which he has once
made, quia apprehendit immobiliter per intellectum, but also in regard Aquin.
part 1. qu. 64. art. 2.
of that malitiousnesse that poisoned his first choice, and has venomed his
whole will, and cannot be wrought out of.

And thus is the Devil incorrigible in regard of his cursed will, and then it
is no wonder if he be irrecoverable in regard of his cursed estate: for if
any wicked one deserves that sad doom of He that will be filthy let him be
filthy, this wicked one deserves it, and it is laid upon him. It was once
indeed the conceit of some that the Devils should in time repent and be saved,
but the Devils themselves are of another opinion, as it may be seen, Matthew.
8. 29. for God and their own conscience has told them so, James 2. 19. and
the Scripture tells us so, Jude Verse. 6.

Now two reasons may be given of this besides these two mentioned before, Gods
justice, and their own obduration, and these are, first, in regard of the
heinousness of their sin, for it was against the Holy Ghost; and secondly,
in regard of the height of their happiness, for they were in termino viae, at
their journeys end.

First, not to trouble you with any large discourse what the sin against the
Holy Ghost is, if ever it were committed, no doubt it was committed in the
first sin of the Devil.

Secondly, when Adam sinned he was but setting forth on his journey toward
heaven, and that eternity that God had appointed him unto: for his happiness
in paradise was not the utmost happiness that he must look after, but an
happiness in heaven whereof that in Paradise was but a type and pledge, and so
poor man he stumbled and fell at the very threshold as he was setting out on
his journey, and God out of pity set him on his feet again, or else mankind
had never tasted of that infinite good for which God created it.

But the devil, as soon as ever he was created, being created an Angel of
light, he was already in the utmost happiness he must ever attain unto, he
was in heaven, he was in eternity, already he was with God, and what would
he, what could he have more? And therefore for him in portu impingere, to
shipwreck himself when he was got into the Haven, for him to despise God,
heaven and eternity when he now enjoyed it, it has made him utterly
desperate in regard of his condition, and never to be repaired or recovered.

And thus have you seen something of the Devils nature and constitution: And I
have been the briefer in the treaty of it, because I would not keep your
patience too long upon such a discourse, and yet have I taken up such a
discourse because I know it would be exceeding profitable if it could but
bring us to see the devil in his own colors indeed. For if to behold God in
his essence does fill the will so full of divine contentment, as that (as the
Schools speak) it can never turn again from God to delight in sin; then
certainly on the contrary, to behold the devil in his colors and complexion,
would so fill the will with the abhorring and detestation of him, that it would
not readily turn again to the devil to forsake God: And therefore if I were
to make a threefold wish as Austen once did, I cannot tell what to wish for to
more profit and advantage then to know God as he is, the devil as he is, and
our selves what we are.

But to pursue what we are about.

As you have seen the evilnesse of the Devils nature especially in these two
particulars, in the incorrigible frowardness of his will and the irrecoverable
cursednesse of his condition: So now look how the power of Christ meets with
him and over powers him for all this his crooked and cursed disposition. And
this is considerable also in two particulars.

First, in that though the will of the devil be thus desperately and
precipitately bent upon evil, yet Christ does so overpower him as that he
produces good out of the devils actions to his own people. Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth, much more can any good thing from the devil? can any
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, but one; He that brought
light out of darkness at the beginning, fire out of water at the sacrifice of
Elias, sight out of blind eyes stopped up with clay, the same can bring good out
of evil, good to his people even out of the wickedness of the devil, by that
mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things, even the devil to
himself.

I might be copious in showing what good the Lord produces out of the devils
temptations practiced by himself, what good out of the devils persecutions
practiced by his instruments: even honey for Samson out of the very carcass of
the devouring Lion, and meat for Elias out of the mouth of the carrion Raven. I
might show you, how Adam had a better condition, Job a better estate, Joshua
the high Priest better clothes gotten, out even of the assaults of the devil;
I might show you what carfulness is wrought in the people of God, what
clearing of themselves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement
desire, yea what zeal, yea what holy 2 Cor. 7. 11.
revenge, as the Apostle speaks in another case, and all this even from the
very devils temptations.

I might show you how the Church has been increased, the Gospel propagated,
God glorified, Atheists converted, and the enemies confounded, even by the
devils persecution: But I need not to go far for examples and experiences in
this kind: look at home, in these times and distractions where the devil is
so busy, and as we may sadly see him raging, and let loose in these doleful
wars, so may we as visibly see Christ doing good to this poor kingdom out
of this his evil. For,

First, how many rotten hearts, and how many rotten members has the devil, or
God rather out of the devils activitie discovered in this nation in these
troubles, which like a moth and corruption were devouring a poor kingdom, and
she knew not who hurt her: What Junctoes of hell have been found out, what
plots discovered, what Cabinets of letters detected, what actions described,
what hearts anatomized? Popery, Prerogative, Protestations, Plotters, Prelates,
all come to light and found desperate and devilish, and all this done by the
great business of the devil, God overpowering him, and making him to prove a
tel-tale of his own counsels, and as it were a false brother to his own hell
and fraternity.

Secondly, how have these troubles beaten men and the kingdom out of their
fooleries and superstitions, their trumperies and ceremonies, customs and
traditions? which how hard it would have been to have got off from them, if
they had not been thus brayed in this mortar, the great tenaciousnesse of them
with diverse even in this mortar is evidence sufficient: This dross would never
have been got away if it had not passed such a furnace: and our Israel would
never have shaken hands with Egyptian Idolatry, if it had not been beaten out
of it by Egyptian affliction. So that let me take up the manner of speech of
our Savior with some inversion; Oh England, England, Satan has desired to
winnow thee as wheat, and he has winnowed away a world of his own chafe.

Thirdly, how many profane and ungodly wretches has this war cut off,
Papists, Atheists, Epicures, Devils incarnate, that would not only have layen
in the way, as so much rubbish to hinder the work of the Temple, but that
would have proved Sanballats, Tobiahs, Geshems, and such Samaritans, utterly to
oppose it with all their might? It is a sad thing to see so many of Israel
perish in the matter of Baal Peor; yet there is this comfort in it, that the
entering into the land of promise will be the speedier when these untowardly
and ungratious ones are taken a way.

Fourthly, how many prayers and petitions at the throne of grace has he
pressed out in these extremities? the fool making a whip for his own back,
for so prayer is styled, flagellum Diabolo, and helping forward his own
destruction.

And thus all things, even the very evilnesse of the Devil himself, work for
the good of Gods people, and he that would have run Phereus thorough; cures
his impostume and kills him not, and all through the overpowering power of
Christ, who is able to subdue all things unto himself, and does dispose all
things for the good of his.

Secondly, Christ's mighty power meets with this evilnesse of the Devils nature
and overpowers it, when he delivers men out of the very same evilnesse of
nature, and works it out of them, by the work of grace and renewing, and brings
them to become new creatures: We have heard a sad story of the doleful nature
and constitution of the Devil, we may say each one to himself as Nathan once
to David, by thy natural condition thou art the same: As one Blackmore may see
his complexion in another Blackmores face, so may we our own nature in the
devils; he is our father by nature, and we as like him as we may look; and the
two Sosiaes in the Comedy were not liker one to another, then we to him in our
original temper: God at the first made us like himself, but our degeneration
has made us so like to Satan, that all the evilnesse, perverseness,
cursednesse that we hear or read of of the Devil, is all our own, and who
shall deliver us from this body of death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord: He has a power that can pull and redeem us out of this estate; and
surely this power is not small. And therefore the Apostle speaking of this
work wrought upon a poor soul, he calls it the exceeding greatness of his
power to them that believe, Ephesians. 1. 19.

1. This is the next work of wonder and power to the work of the Incarnation,
for as in that God became man, so in this man becomes like God. 2. It is a
work beyond that of the creation, for in that there was no resistance in the
subject wrought upon, in this there is. 3. It is a change beyond all changes,
for a Devil to become a Saint, a child of Satan to become the child of God,
and a man from the very nature of the Devil, to become partaker of the Divine
nature: And 4. it is a greater work then casting out seven Devils or a Legion
of Devils, for it casts out even all the Devils of hell out of a man, for the
nature of them all is in him: And then how great is this power of Christ that
can thus change our devilish nature to become like his glorious nature through
his mighty working?

A second thing considerable in the Devil, and to which Christ's power is more
diametrically opposite in overpowering him, is his power, even that great and
wondrous power of the Devil, for so I may call it, that no bodily creature is
able of it self to resist, and no man almost able to express or apprehend:
He carries power in his name, he carries power in his nature, he carries
power in his number, and he shows power in works.

1. He carries power in his name, for he is called a Dragon here; A strong
man armed, Matthew. 12. 29. The Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. The
God of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Principalities and powers, Ephesians. 6. 12.

2. He carries power in his nature, as being an Angel, and so he is called
even in his devilish estate, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge
the Angels, that is, the Devils? and so should I understand that in 1 Cor. 11.
10. A woman ought to have power on her head because of the Angels, that is, a
woman ought to have a covering on her head in the public meetings, lest the
devils should tempt men with the exposall of her beauty: Now Angels excel in
strength, Psalm. 103. 20. as being spirits, which are of an activitie
incomparably beyond bodily creatures. Nor has the devil lost his power by his
fall, since that was not so much any part of his holiness and happiness as it
was an essential faculty of his nature.

3. He carries power in his number; there being a numberless multitude of
devils that fell together. Some Divines of old have held that they are equal
in number to all the people of God that shall be saved from the beginning of
the world to the end of it, and that God in eternity did decree: to make up
the number of fallen Angels, by an equal number of elect men. Whether this be
so or no, and whether the air be full of devils, as others have conceived, we
will not examine; certainly it is that we read of a Legion in Mark 5. 9. and
doubtless it is, that the number of them is exceeding many.

4. And lastly, as he carries power in these respects, so he shows power in
his works and actings, in so much that his power has been mistaken for the
mighty power of God, Act. 8. 10.

I shall not need to insist upon it to show you how he can, 1. Hurry bodies up
and down in the air, Matthew* 4. 5. Luke 8. 29. 33. 2. Raise tempests, Job 1.
16. 19. 3. Bring diseases both of body and mind, Luke 13. 16. and Luke 9. 37.
compared with Matthew. 17. 15. 4. Overthrow houses and buildings, Job 1. 19. 5.
Break chains and bars, Mark 5. 4, etc.


It is our comfort Christ has a chain in the Text will hold him: And be his
power never so great and wonderful in it self and in the eyes of men, yet
Christ has power beyond him and over him, and this he exercises partly
immediately by himself, partly mediately by his instruments.

1. Christ overpowereth the devil immediately by himself: for,

1. He suffers him not to do his own will: This day is this truth
fulfilled in our eyes, and in our persons, it is written even on these walls, as
holiness on the bells of the horses, Zach. 14. 20. for if the devil might do
his own will, where had we been by this time that are here now alive and
safe before the Lord? If his power were as large as his malice, no flesh should
be saved, but for poor man's sake that chain is shortened.

2. He makes him to do his will: as the Commander in the Gospel, he says to
one go and he goes, and to another come and he comes, and to a third, do
this and he does it, and they cannot, they dare not but obey him.

3. He can do nothing without his will: As 1. not walk further then he
gives him chain; for as in the Text Christ has a chain in his hand, so in
Jude verse. 6. he has the Devil in a chain, and he cannot go an inch
further then he gives him liberty.

2. He can tempt no man without his permission, as in the case of Job, Job 1.
and 2. of Ahab 1 King. 22. 21, 22. no not enter into the heard of Swine without
license, Matthew. 8. 31.

3. He cannot recover himself out of his desperate condition into which he is
fallen.

4. He can as little recover his servants and agents from any misery into
which they fall.

5. He cannot take off any plague that the Lord lays on.

6. He cannot force any man's will to evil; for if the devil could carry the
will whither himself would, he would carry all flesh to hell.

These particulars I might enlarge, to show the weakness of the devil for all
his great power, and Christ's power over him infinitely greater; but that may
best be seen, by that power of Christ over the Devil, which he shows in,
and by his servants, over him. As,

1. Christ's power in a poor believer: a spectacle for men and Angels to look
upon and to wonder at: That a poor lump of clay, a worm, a moth, a nothing,
yet drawing power by faith out of the everlasting fountain, should conquer him
that can remove mountains: tread under foot the great Dragon, and through
Christ be more then a Conqueror over him; and this we see by constant
experience.

2. Christ's power which he has committed to Ministers and Magistrates; the
two hands of Christ whereby he visibly conquers the devil in the fight of
men: the Jonathan and and his armor-bearer: the Priests with trumpets, and the
gathering host, that one after another destroy these Philistims, and that both
together help to lay the walls of the City of hell flat. Upon this object do I
specially look in the exercise of these two offices; that they have not to
fight against flesh and blood, but against Principalities and powers: and this
consideration is some satisfaction to me, and helps to settle me about that
matter which is now so much controverted, namely about Chrurch power; for to
me it seems, the acting of these two offices to be thus, the ministry to
cast the devil out where it may be done, and the Magistrate to bind the
devil where he cannot be cast out: and ubi desinit Philosophus ibi incipit
Medicus: where the power of the one cease the other takes at it and
finisheth the work: The Ministry by the preaching of the word, and by prayer,
striveth to cast the devil out: and if it do it, well, but if it cannot do
it, it can go no further; and then the Magistracy comes in and binds him
that he trouble not others, though the Ministry cannot cast him out from
vexing the party himself. It is needless to show how Christ overpowereth the
devil by both these: the matter is so apparent and conspicuous I shall not need
to go about to show it: It is enough to say that the ministry of the Gospel
overthrew the Idolatry of the Heathen, and that the Magistracy can hang a
Witch. And so have we done with a second particular, the Text hinteth unto us,
the Devils power, and Christ's overpowering it.

I should now take up the other considerations concerning the Devil that the
text holds out: and first I might show his subtlety, from that title that it
gives him, an old Serpent: A Serpent, the craftiest of all beasts, Genesis 3. 1.
and an old Serpent of 5573. years continuance and experience within one month
or there-abouts.

I might have showed how in all this time,

1. He has observed the course of nature: 2. The course of Gods providence,
and 3. the temper of men, and has reaped policy and experience from all these.
How,

1. He plays Gods Ape, in having his miracles and oracles as God has his,
and how he imitates his works.

2. Can transform himself into an Angel of light: as he did to Eve who took
him for a good Angel.

3. Baiteth his hooks with the good things of God, as with show of Religion,
with Gods mercy and patience, to entice to presumption, etc.

4. Changes his temptations as occasions change, as he did by Christ: one
while tempting him to a great work of power, to turn stones into bread: and
another while to a work of the greatest weakness, to worship the devil.

5. Deceives men with Kids flesh in stead of Venison, and fixes them on the
creature in stead of the Creator.

6. Kills men with love of themselves as the Ape does her young ones with
embraces.

I might also have showed the subtlety and policy that he exercises by men,
as well as he does to men: and here might I take up the master pieces of
hellish policies practiced by our enemies in these times.

And I might show how Christ overpowereth the Devil in regard of this his
subtlety, in

1. Giving strength to his people to overcome his temptations. 2. In
discovering his plots. 3. In defeating of them. 4. In bringing them on his and
his instruments own heads.
Secondly, I might likewise have showed some glimpse of the malice of the
Devil, as he is named in the Text, Satan or an enemy.

As, 1. That he fell through malice to man: and this the most proper cause of
his fall, though pride were mingled.

2. That he continues in the same malice by which he fell, and cannot do
otherwise.

3. That it has no bounds either in regard of himself, or of the object, but
he is ever malicious, and malicious to all extremity; and that both against
God, and against all men, and against all men alike, though in regard of
external persecution he shows some difference.

I might show withal how Christ overpowereth him in regard of this
maliciousness.

1. By bounding the execution of his malice, though his malice it self be not
bounded.

2. By loading him with the greatest condemnation, even hatched and generated
by his own malice.

And lastly, we might have considered the cruelty of the devil, as he is a
devil: as

1. That he is cruel even to himself that he may mischief others: and
brings the more condemnation upon his own head, by bringing men into
condemnation.

2. That his cruelty is his only comfort, and that he has no solace at all
for his own destruction, but merely this cursed one, to bring men into the
same case with him.

But Christ overpowereth his cruelty:

1. By the Saints patience. 2. By his own providence.
All these things would require a large discourse to illustrate and comment
upon them, but in regard of the time they must be passed over: I shall now
only crave leave to have a word or two of application of what has been spoken
and so have done.





I am God all-sufficient, says God to Abraham, walk before me and be thou
perfect, Genesis 17. 1. Be perfect, that is, in this doctrine of my
al-sufficiency, or al-powerfulnesse (for so the word means, and not that
perfection that some dream of, as if Abraham kept the whole law) and then
faith will gather strength and extent, because the power upon which it
anchoreth is Omnipotent. But these things I do but touch.



For first, if we consider the power of the Devil, and the weakness of our
selves, and yet our preservation in both these circumstances, we have great
cause to admire and adore that power that does preserve us. The safety of the
three Princes of Judah in the furnace, and of Daniel in the Lions den, and
Jonah in the Whales belly, is hardly a greater wonder, then is our constant and
continued preservation: so many Devils to be hovering about us, as is their
number, so much power to be in them, as there is in them, both in regard of
their number and their nature, so much malice to be in their Spirit, and so
much cruelty in their acting as there is, and yet we preserved in the midst of
all this, I want words to express the mercy; let us never want hearts to
observe that power that does preserve us. The Devil can remove mountains,
overthrow towers, rents rocks, tear up trees, do almost any thing, and yet
our poor lump of dust is preserved: acknowledge the power, be thankful for
the mercy.

And secondly, in regard of the Kingdom: Let us but turn aside and see this
great wonder, how it comes to pass that this bush that has burnt so long is
not yet consumed that this poor carcass of a Nation, like that of the
Prophet, though it be even killed by this Lion, yet is it not quite torn to
pieces: that the fury, and policy, and mischievousnesse of Satan has hurryed
it to the very precipice of confusion, as Christ to the pinnacle of the Temple,
and yet it is not thrown down into it. Certainly it is no strength nor power
of our own that does preserve it, for who is able to resist the violence of
this enemy? but it is the great power of our dear Savior, which I leave to
your own thoughts, for I do but touch here neither.



Surely his hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that
it cannot hear, but it is some thing that has separated betwixt us and our
Savior, and that makes him to stand as a stranger that looks on, and works
not for us whilst the power and fury of the devil does thus tread upon us.

It is easy to answer that our sins have done it, and me thinks God has
dealt with England much like as he did with Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the
book of Exodus, when admonition upon admonition was given to them, and
exhortation upon exhortation was pressed upon them to hearken to God and to let
Israel go and they would not do it, then God lets the devil loose among them
in visible shapes, as they sat in the three days darkness to terrify and
perplex them, as it is apparent by Exodus 10. and Ps. 78. 49. compared together:
In the very like manner is it now with us: the Lord has long bin treating with
this nation for her conversion, by precept upon precept, line upon line;
precept upon precept, line upon line, by exhortation, admonition, mercies,
judgments, all things; what could have been done more then has been done to
England? but when still we are as unreformed and unconverted as ever, and when
nothing that the Lord has done to us will amend us, the Lord has now at last
turned Satan loose among us with all his power and all his fury: our sins
have as it were broken the chains, and now he rages without restraint, as
never did he more in any nation. But this is not all I have to say.

It is most undoubted indeed, that our former sins have brought us and our
p^esent sins continue us under this rage and insultations of Satan that we
now feel in all these miseries that lie upon us, but if I may freely speak
mine own thoughts, I do verily believe that a maine reason why the devil is
no more bound among us, is, because he is not bound; my meaning is this: that
God has put into our own hands exceeding much toward the binding of the
Devils that do undo us, and we do not do it. It is in our own power to curb
and quell the Devil that forrageth and ruineth us, and we curb him not, and
then it is no wonder, nay it is but justice if he worry us, if he destroy us.

I will not speak of that Devil that spoils all before him, the fury of our
enemies, nor will I examine whether it may be restrained any more then it is,
your wisdoms best know what you have to do in that particular.

But it is not the Enemy only that has done us this displeasure that we
feel, for then we could better have borne it, or hid our selves from him, but
it is some of our own party, some of our friends, of our familiars, with whom
we have taken counsel together, and have gone with them to the House of God
as friends, which do prove Devils to us, or at least raise up Devils among us,
that ruin and undo us, that help on our sorrows, augment our miseries, bind
on those plagues that the desert of our sins has brought upon us. Our own
Quarters are become as the Land of the Gadarens, where two possessed Parties,
as I may so say; or rather two possessing Devils, are so exceeding fierce that
none may pass by them, none can be quiet near them. And these two are,
Injustice in oppressiom, and erroneousnesse in Opinion.

These are they that lose you friends, procure you enemies, and keep off
Neuters, that undo at home, and exasperate abroad, that lose you more hearts,
then all your Armies can subdue Persons; and do more mischief to your Holy
and Honorable Cause, then all the other Devils of hell can do, then all your
enemies on earth have done. Our sad case at this time is like the case of the
four Lepers under the walls of Samaria in the Book of Kings, if they went
into the City, they went upon famine, if they went from the City, they went
upon the enemy: If we go to the Enemies Quarters, there the Devil of their
cruelty devoures us; if we abide among our own, one or other of these Devils
is ready to destroy us; so that as it was with them of old, it is with us at
this day, Abroad the sword devoureth, and at home is death.

First, we looked for Justice, but behold a cry, (for give me leave to use
the words of the Prophet, and to speak of bitter things in the bitterness of
my spirit) the people of your own party expected Judgment, Equity, and
Comfort from your Sitting, and from your Counsels, and they concluded with
themselves, much like as Micah did in another case, Now will it be well with
us, now we have such a Parliament to take-care for us, to defend us, and to
advice in our behalf; but behold, instead of their expectation, injuries,
oppressions, wrongs, injustice, violence, and such complaynings and cryings out
in all Quarters and Parts even of your own party, that let it not be told in
Gath, nor published in the streets of A^kalon, lest the circumcised triumph and
exalt over us in it.

Mistake me not, it is far from me to charge your honorable Court with any
such thing, for I may say in this as he and she did in another case, my Lord
David knows it not, 1 King. 1. 11. 18.
but it is too many that act under you, that cause this complaining and that
do this mischief, yet I cannot but say withal that the injustice will become
yours if it be not remedied.

Now oh that Englands grief in this particular were thorougly weighed, and her
calamity and complaints were laid in the balances together: Oh that the cries
of all the oppressed in this kind might meet here this day together in your
ears, as we desire our cries and prayers might meet this day in the ears of
the Lord: what sad complaynings, lamentings, grievings and cryings out, would
come almost from all parts and places in your own quarters? I will not take
upon me to particularize in any, only, might I have but the quarter of that
time and patience at your bar that I have here, and but some preparation for
it as I had for this exercise, to do the message of mine own Country, as I now
do the message of the Lord, I doubt I could tell you so sad a story as would
make your ears to tingle.

It is well observed by Divines, that though God for man's redemption, could
have conquered the devil by power, yet did he rather choose to do it by
justice: He that spoke the word and brought light out of darkness, and the
world out of nothing, could by the same powerful word have commanded mankind
out of the jaws of the devil, and it had been effected: but his wisdom
rather chose, that his own Son should take flesh, perform the Law, and
suffer death, and so that the devil should be conquered by very justice; and
not only his power quelled, but his mouth stopped.

This is the way for you to conquer and no way like it: A little execution of
justice is of more victoriousnesse, then a great deal of military preparation:
the stoning of one Achab does more good toward the taking of Ai, then three
thousand trained men could do.

By this way must you either quell and conquer this devil of injuriousnesse
and oppression, or he will spoil your cause, he will overthrow your armies.
And you cannot get so much ground abroad as this will lose you ground at home
if it be not prevented.

I do most humbly recommend it to your most serious thoughts, and conclude
this matter in the phrase of the Prophet: Do judgment and justice, judge the
cause of the poor and needy, of the wronged and oppressed, and then may you
eat and drink and prosper, and it will be well with you and with your cause,
as Jer. 22. 15.

But secondly, there is yet a second devil that undoes us, and worse if worse
may be; a white devil, that changes himself into an angel of light, and so
destroys the more, by how much he is suspected the less, and that is,
erroneousnesse in opinion, too common, too violent among us at this day.

I told you erewhile, that error and deceivednesse in the things of God, is a
verier devil and more dangerous then open persecution, and here I cannot but
take it up again: And I may give you some arguments to prove it: as,

1. I may use the style of our Savior, Fear not that devil that can kill the
body, but when he has done that, can do no more, but fear that devil that
can cast both soul and body into hell: persecution can only destroy the body,
but error destroys both body and soul.

2. I believe that persecution never destroyed a Church since the world stood,
I am sure errors have done diverse: Nay I question whether corruption in
manners can nullify the being of a Church, I am sure corruption in doctrine
has done.

The seven Churches of Asia though some of them were exceedingly corrupt in
point of conversation, and so corrupt that they had left and lost their first
love, yet are they all golden candlesticks, because for the general they
retained the purity of doctrine.

The open persecution of our enemies has not nor cannot do that destruction
and mischief to us that errors do and have done among us; and my heart does
never sink so much in fear of our cause, as when I consider the growth of
these in the midst of us, for these threaten ruin to the very being of the
Church and of Religion.

How sad and doleful a thing is it to consider, and for Gods sake take it
seriously to heart, that so glorious a Church as this was but a while ago,
should now be so overgrowne with these cursed weeds as it is, and is more and
more every day, as is no reformed Church under heaven: That God should be so
blasphemed, his truth so polluted, the moral Law so despised, repentance and
begging pardon for sin, so pleaded against, the immortality of the soul
written against, duty cried down, and I know not what so cried up, as is in
the erroneous opinions that are among us, what a misery is this in the midst of
our other miseries!

A Canker, a Gangrene has seized upon the land, and devours unsensibly, but it
devours desperately and devillishly, and Aut tu illum, aut ille te, either bind
this devil, or this devil will have all in his power and kingdom of
darkness before we are aware: How he gets ground, and grows and devours and
destroys, who is there that sees not? and for Siont sake who can hold his
peace? Souls lie ableeding by this as well as bodies by the enemy, the Church
is undone by this, as the land by them, this spoils our truth as they do our
peace, and when these are gone, whither shall we go?

I shall not take upon me to be your director or instructor for the manner or
means of stopping of this mischief that it grow no further, and for the
suppressing of that growth which it has already made, it is above my skill,
your wisdom will best contrive that; but I shall humbly crave leave to be
your remembrancer of some thing that may tend unto it.

1. There is great talk of, and pleading for liberty of conscience, for men
to do in matters of Religion, as Israel did in the book of Judges, whatsoever
seems good in their own eyes; and how that proved there, there are sad
stories that relate: I shall not go about to determine the question, whether
the conscience may be bound or not, though for mine own satisfaction I am
resolved it may, and do hold it a truer point in divinity that errans
conscientia liganda, then ligat, but certainly the devil in the conscience may
be, nay he must be bound, or else you act not according to that vigor that
Christ has put into your hands: nor according to that exactness that Christ
requires at your hands. It is true indeed which is so much talked of, that
Christ alone must reign in the conscience, but it is as true also, that he
does so by the power that he has put into the hands of the magistrate, as well
as by his word and spirit.

2. I hope you will find some time among your serious employments to think of
a review and survey of the translation of the Bible; certainly that might be a
work which might very well befit a reformation, and which would very much
redound to your honor.

It was the course of Nehemiah when he was reforming, that he caused not the
Law only to be read, and the sense given, but also caused the people to
understand the reading, Neb. 8. 8. And certainly it would not be the least
advantage that you might do to the three nations (if not the greatest) if they
by your care and means might come to understand the proper and genuine reading
of the Scripture, by an exact, vigorous, and lively translation.

I hope (I say it again) you will find some time, to set a foot so needful a
work: and now you are about the purging of the Temple, you will look into the
Oracle, if there be any thing a miss there and remove it.

3. I shall not beg of you to cherish learning, for that has no enemy but
ignorant ones, nor shall I beg, that you would cherish a learned ministry, for
that may challenge cherishing: but I beseech you take care that none intrude
upon the ministry or to preach the word that have not a calling to it, and some
competent ability for it.

This is a maine wellhead from whence flow all the errors that are among us,
when mechanics, unlettered and ignorant men will take upon them to be
preachers, and to instruct others when they need teaching themselves; and this
if it be not stopped, will overflow all with a puddle of errors and heresy:
you have made good orders for the stopping and preventing of this, but
execution is all.

4. I beseech you hasten the settling of the Church: These weeds grow, while
government grows not; I rejoice to see what you have done in platforming
Classes and Presbyteries: and I verily and cordially believe it is according to
the pattern in the mount.

The Lord speed and prosper you in working up the furniture for this fabric.
Especially he be your director in the two great things that are now under
your agitation, Church Power and suspension from the Sacrament: I am most
unable to hold out to you any thing, that may direct you in matters of such
weight: And if my judgment were any thing, yet should I be sparing to show
it, because I must confess that about these matters I differ in judgment from
the generality of Divines, and I hold it not any happiness to be singular in
opinion, nor do I hold these to be times to broach differences, I shall ever
follow you with my desires and prayers, and write the success of the good hand
of our God upon you.

FINIS.

