THE EXCEPTIONS OF John Lilburne Gent.

PRISONER at the BAR, TO A Bill of Indictment Preferred against him, grounded
upon a pretended Act, entitled, An Act for the Execution of a Judgment given
in Parliament against Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn: WHICH Judgment is by
the said Act supposed to be given the 15 day of January, 1651.

London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the Seven-stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door, 1653.

The Exceptions of John Lilburne Gent. Prisoner at the Bar to a Bill of
Indictment preferred against him, grounded upon a pretended Act, entitled, An
Act for the Execution of a Judgment given in Parliament against Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn, which Judgment is by the said Act supposed to be given
the 15 day of Jan. 1651.
THe said John Lilburne Prisoner at the Bar says, That the said Indictment is
insufficient in the Law; and he humbly offers these Exceptions following
against the same:

Except. 1.
The said Indictment is grounded only upon an Act, ineituled, An Act for the
execution of a judgment given in Parliament against Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn; And it does not appear, either by the Title of the said Act recited in
the Indictment, or by any thing contained in the said Act, that either the said
Act it self, is an Act of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, or of
the Parliament sitting at Westminster; or that the said supposed Judgment, for
the execution whereof, the said Act is supposed to provide, was given in the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England or in the Parliament sitting at
Westminster. Nor yet when the said Parliament did commence or end; or whether
the same was held by prorogation or otherwise. And it is evident in Law, that
no Law could at that time be made, but by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England; for by the Law then in being, the power of making Laws was only in
those persons which were known and distinguished by that Title of The
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; and in that name only Addresses were
made to them, both by the People of England, and by all Foreign States and
Princes, and all Addresses refused that wanted that Title. Now for ought that
appears in the said Act, whereupon the said Indictment is grounded, it may be
as well an Act of a Parliament in France, or Scotland, or Naples, as an Act of
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; so that it does not appear, that
the said Indictment is grounded upon any Law of England; or that John Lilburne
Prisoner at the Bar, is Indicted for any fact that is a Crime by any Law of
England, and then the same is void in Law.

Except. 2.
The said Indictment is grounded upon a pretended Act, entitled, An Act for
the Execution of a Judgment given in Parliament against Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilburne; and so relates only to some Judgment supposed to be given in
Parliament against the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn; and if no such
Judgment were given, the Act were void, and the Judgment also. Now it does
not appear, that any Judgment for any Crime whatsoever, was given in
Parliament against the said Lieut. Col. John Lilburn. 1. Before any Judgment
can be given in Law against any English man for any Crime, there must be either
an Indictment, Presentment, or some Information or Accusation against him; to
that Court that judges him, for some crime supposed to be committed by him. 2.
The party accused must either apear before that Court or be outlawed for not
appearing. 3. If the party apears he must either confess the crimes or
misdemeanors, whereof he is accused or else plead to the Indictment, presentment
or information, or accusation against him, and come to trial thereupon. And as
some of these ought in Law to precede a judgment against any English man, so
also some of these aforementioned proceedings in order to a lawful jugment
ought to be entered upon such Record, wherein any such judgment is entered, and
unless it does appear upon the Record wherein any judgment is entered against
any Englishman for any crime, that some such proceedings as abovesaid have been
made be fore the judgment passed against him, the judgment is to beholden for
erroneous and void, and ought so to be reputed: now it does not appear either
by the said pretended Act as it is recited in the Indictment, nor by any Record
of the supposed judgment produced, nor any otherwise: that there was any
Indictment, presentment, or information to the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England against the said Lieut. Col. John Lilborn, or if there were it does
not appear that he ever appeared to the same, nor that he was ever outlawed
for not appearing, neither does any pleading by the said Lieut. Col. John
Lilburn to any such Indictment or information appear, not any trial of him for
the same; and therefore if any such pretended judgment be entered, as the said
supposed Act, and the Indictment of John Lilburn prisoner at the Bar thereupon
does relate unto, the same is erroneous and void in Law; and by consequence the
said Indictment is void.

Except. 3.
The said Indictment is erroneous and insufficient in Law for that it is only
grounded upon, and recites an Act, which Act is declared to be made for the
execution of a judgment, passed in Parliament against Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburne the Fifteenth day of January 1651. when in truth there was no such
judgment either in matter or form passed in Parliament on the said 15th day of
January 1651, as is enacted by the said supposed Act to be executed against the
said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, and as is also recited in the said
Indictment to be enacted by the said act, to be put in execution against him.
First, there was no judgment, passed in Parliament upon the said Fifteenth day
of January 1651. That the said Lieut. Col. John Liburn should depart out of
England within 20 days, after the said 15th day of January 1651. as is
mentioned in the said Indictment. Secondly there was no judgment passed in
Parliament the said Fifteenth day of January 1651. that the said Lieut. Col.
John Lilburn should depart out of England, Scotland and Ireland or the Islands,
Territories, or Dominions thereof, within any limited time whatsoever, or under
any penalty whatsoever, as is mentioned in the said Indictment. 3: There never
was any Judgment, passed in Parliament the said 15 day of Jan. 1651. That the
said L. C. John Lilburne should be executed as a Felon without benefit of
Clergy, in case the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne should be found, or
be remaining in England, Scotland, or Ireland, after the Expiration of Twenty
days, or any other time whatsoever to be accounted from the said Fifteenth day
of January, 1651. and if no such Judgment does appear to have been passed
against the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne as is aforesaid, and as is
recited by the said Indictment to be Enacted to be put in Execution against
him, then the original ground of the said Indictment is null and void: Which is
a Judgment supposed to be passed in Parliament against the said Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn in matter and form as aforesaid, upon the 15 day of
January 1651. which is enacted by the said Act recited in the said Indictment
to be put in execution; whereas no such Judgment ever passed; and therefore
cannot be supposed or admitted by the Law to be enacted to be put in execution.
And upon this ground the Prisoner at the Bar conceives the said Judgment to be
insufficient in the Law.

Except. 4.
The said John Lilburn further excepts against the said Indictment as
insufficient in the Law, in regard of the uncertainty of the same; the Law
requiring all allegations against any man to be certain; for that the said
Indictment does recite and ground it self upon an Act made for the execution of
a Judgment passed in Parliament against Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn. And
then charge John Lilburn late of London Gentleman, to have been found in
England; that is to say in London, contrary to the said Act; but averreth not
that the said John Lilburn now prisoner at the bar, Indicted by the name of
John Lilburn late of London Gentleman is one and the same person with the said
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn meant and intended by the said Act, by reason
whereof, and for that there are several persons known and distinguished by the
name of John Lilburn of London Gentleman; and for that the said John Lilburn
Prisoner at the Bar does not acknowledge that he now is, or at the making of
the said Act, or passing the said supposed Judgment, was a Lieutenant Colonel,
or that he could be notified and distinguished by that Title. He the said John
Lilburn Prisoner at the Bar cannot join any certain issue with the Keepers of
the Liberties of England upon the said Indictment: for the said Indictment not
averring the said John Lilburn now Prisoner at the Bar to be the same person,
and not other or diverse from that John Lilburn intended and meant in the said
Act, and distinguished from all others of the same name, by the Title of a
Lieutenant Colonel, if the Prisoner at the Bar should plead the general issue
of not guilty, he should confess himself to be the same John Lilburn intended
by the said Act; else he is not concerned to plead to the said Indictment; and
by consequence, if the Prisoner at the Bar should plead not guilty to the said
Indictment, the only issue to be tried in point of Fact between the Keepers of
the Liberties of England and the Prisoner, would be whether John Lilburn
prisoner at the bar was found in England upon the 15 day of June 1653. and by
consequence the Prisoner at the Bar, though he be not the person intended by
the said Act, might be ensnared and condemned as a Felon, only because his name
is John Lirburn; and if any other John Lilburn should in like manner plead to
the said Indictment, he should suffer because he is called John Lilburn.

For all which errors and insufficiencies in the Law in the said Indictment,
Act, and supposed judgment the said John Lilburn prisoner at the Bar, humbly
prays, that the said Indictment may be quashed, and in case the honorable
Court be not fully satisfied in the said errors and insufficiencies of the said
Indictment: He prays that Council learned in the Laws may be assigned him,
and a competent time given for him to advise with them, and for them to prepare
their arguments upon all the said matters of Law; and that the case being of
very great difficulty, and much concernment to the liberty of all the people of
England, and being a case without any president, and the shedding or sparing of
innocent blood, depending upon a resolution thereof: He humbly prays, that
the said difficult points of Law, arising upon the case may be argued before
the reverend Judges of the Law, as has been accustomed in such cases that
their opinions may be had thereupon.

John Lilburne.
Presented the 16 of July, 1653.
FINIS.

