A COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN to Collonell Henry Marten, a Member of the House of
Commons, by Lieutenant Collonell Lilburne. July 20. 1647.
SIR:
YOUR Delitory and unjust delaying to make my Report to your House according to
your duty, has so hastened forward the ruin and destruction of me, my wife
and tender infants, and riveted the House of Lords fast in their tyrannical
domination, That I cannot now style you either a friend to me, the
Commonwealth, or to justice, truth, or honesty, and of all men in the world I
should least have dreamed to have found such unworthy and unjust dealing from
you; But yet notwithstanding by reason of a Paper come from the Army, a copy of
which I have even now seen, ( which desires of the House of Commons that I,
etc. may immediately, and legally be tried, or if the great Affairs of the
Kingdom will not suffer them to debate my business at present, that then I may
be bailed,) I therefore desire you to acquaint the House, that the Law of the
Land is clear and plain, that the Lords in the case in controversy betwixt
us, have no jurisdiction at all over me, or any Commoner of England whatsoever,
and I have justly protested against them, and legally appealed Which Appeal,
you may read in the freemans Freedom vindicated page 9, 10, 11.
* above a year ago to your House for justice against their insufferable
usurpations and incrochments; ( the enjoyments of which is principally hindered
by your self) and therefore I require according to Law, justice, equity,
conscience and reason; either to be justified or condemned by your House.

And as for bail I will by the goodness of God be cut in 1000 pieces, before I
will in this case stoop the breadth of one heir, or do any act that in my own
understanding shall declare my owning of their jurisdiction in the least over
me* with my giving bail or so much as my roll, would do, within my
apprehention would be a granting that their most divilsh tyrannical illegal
sentensing of me, to pay 4000 l. and to be seven years in Prison; and forever
to be disfranchised of the Liberties of an English man, were just and legal,
and therefore if you will discharge your duty after above a years unjust delay
in making my Report to your house I shall yet thank you, but if you will not, the
blood, and ruin of me and mine* be upon the head of you and your posterity, and
the righteous and just God of heaven and earth, either incline your heart to
make my Report for me now at last, (let the issue be what will I care not, as I
fully told you in my last large Epistle to you of the 31. of May 1647 now in
print page 4, 5, 6.) or else speedily avenge my cruill sufferings *by your
means) with out mercy or compassion upon you and yours. Sir in shor^ if your
house will as they ought give me my Liberty, without intanglements, I will take
it if not I am resolved to stick so closse to my just cause, till I be forced
to eat my own flesh for want of bread, which in the eye of human reason can
not be long, before I be forced to do it; but assure your self that if the
putting forth all the resolution in a man that for this ten years, neaver feared
death, tortures, nor torments; (no, nor yet knew what belonged to a base
fear,) will save me or do me good, I will by the strength of God leave no means
whatsoever unattempted or unassaid though it lose me all the earthly props and
relations, I have in the world, and I advise you as a friend to look well to
your self and do not continue such insupportable burdens upon me by your
delay of justice, as after suffering ship-wracke of my estate and fortunes, by
the grand tyrannical Tyrants of England, for above ten years together, as I
am not able longer to bear without evident destruction to me and mine, and so
at present I rest, and wish I could subscribe myself.

Your Servant JOHN LILBURNE.
From my causlesse, and most unjust Captivity in the Tower of London, the place
of my fixed and resolved resolution, to spend the last drop of my heart blood
against the house of Lords Usurpations, over the Legal Rights, and freedoms of
all the Commons of England, this 20. of July. 1647*

