Officium Eucharisticum. A PREPARATORY SERVICE, To a DEVOUT and WORTHY
RECEPTION OF THE LORDS SUPPER. Designed for a person of Quality; and now made
Public for Common Use.

St. Luke xxiv. 36. He was known to them in Breaking of Bread.

London, Printed by T. Milbou^ (...) Christopher Wilkinson at the B^ (...) over
against St. Dunstans' Chur^ (...) street, 1673.

Good Reader,
THis little Manual of Directions and Prayers for the Holy Communion, First
designed for a Private use, now shows it self in Public, on presumption it
may help thee in thy Closet-retirements toward a Pious preparation thereto,
and a worthy Reception thereof.

I omit to Preface it; because I cannot call it Mine: It Is a Collection, and
recommends it self unto thee clothed in the Language not of any Private
Conception; (of such the world is already full;) But of Primitive Liturgies; of
that of our Holy Church, and some of the most Devout Fathers of it, Bishop
Andr^ Bishop Cosins, and that Great and (...) Man Archbishop LAUD, who (...) a
Patron, and dyed a Martyr of (...)

The Author, (who e're he (...) curious, or Sollicitous to think, How it may
go down with a sort of People, whose unweildy zeal has transported them under
a pretense of Spuing out Popery, to disrellish and traduce any thing that is
Primitive: But, the Sober and Devout Christian, who lives in the Communion of
This Church, He is secure of. And that it may further thee in the Attainment of
our Common Salvation, is his sincere and hearty desire; in return to which, he
beggs thee nothing, but to Recommend him now and then in these thy Private
Addresses to the Throne of Grace.

A Preparatory Office For the H. COMMUNION.
THe nearest and most solemn Intimacy and Communion we have with God in this
World, is exhibited to us in the Blessed Eucharist; that is to say, the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, wherein (according to our Church-Catechism) the
Body and Blood of Christ, are verily, and indeed taken, and received by the
Faithful; and hence it is called by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Communion of
his Body, and the Com^nion of his Blood; so that by a du^ (...) worthy
Participation hereof, we are re^ (...) ^corporated into Christ; we dwell in Ch^
(...) Christ in us; we are made One wi^ (...) and Christ with us: In regard of
(...) liable Privilege, as well as the great danger which attends the
contrary, now especially we are to heed our selves in our Addresses to it,
being careful to perform all Devotional Acts of Worship and Piety, which may
conduce to a good acceptable Celebration of so Divine a Mystery: St. Paul has
comprehended them all under this One Word and Duty of Examination, 1 Cor.
11.28. which includes more than we can readily conceive: I shall not enlarge
upon those Graces of Faith, Repentance, and Charity, about which it should be
chiefly conversant; but, do immediately proceed to those Preparatory Acts of
Devotion, which should be exercised in order to a due Reception of this Blessed
Sacrament.

I begin then, as you should in this, and all other Duties of Religion, In the
Name of God; and Exhort, that having received Notice from God's Priest of a
Communion to be Celebrated the next Sunday, you forthwith set your self to ^is
great Work, of fitting your self for a right ^cipation thereof. Whatever you
do, let (...) ^er and anon be uppermost in your (...) ^ts that whole Week,
reflecting on your (...) Estate, and specially on that Time, (...) has lent
you from your last Re^ (...) that Graces you have Improved? (...) omitted? What
Sins committed? And out of a hearty Resentment of them, breath forth these, or
the like pious Ejaculations:

I have sinned; What shall I do unto Thee, O Thou Preserver of Man! Lord, I am
not worthy to come under thy Roof; But speak the Word only, and thy Servant
shall be Healed! Adding these two Collects to your Private Devotions, both at
Morning and Evening, that whole Week.

ALmighty God, who of thy tender Mercy, did give thine only Son Jesus Christ,
to suffer Death upon the Cross for our Redemption; and did institute, and in
thy Holy Gospel command us to continue a perpetual Memory of that his precious
Death, until his Coming again: Hear me, most merciful Savior, I most humbly
beseech Thee, and make my Groanings, my Desires after this Holy Sacrament,
answerable to my needs of it: But oh Lord! How shall such a Wretch as I da^ to
approach thy Holy Table? I am a (...) How shall I presume to take the C^ (...)
Bread? I have often trampled those (...) things under foot, either carelessly
ne^ or unworthily receiving those H^ ^ries! O Lord, my horrible Guil^ (...) me
tremble to come, and yet makes me not dare to stay away; for, Where shall this
polluted Soul be washed, but in this Fountain opened for sin, and for
uncleanness? Hither then I come; and Thou have promised, that him that comes
to Thee, Thou will in no wise cast out: Grant me therefore, Gracious Lord, so
to eat the Flesh of thy Dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Blood; that my
sinful Body may be made clean by his Body, and my Soul washed through his most
Precious Blood. Amen.

I Will not presume to come to thy Table, O Merciful Lord, trusting in my own
Righteousness, but in thy manifold and great Mercies declared unto Mankind in
our Lord Jesus Christ; for whose sake, give me, I pray Thee, such a Preparation
of Soul, as may qualify me for a worthy Approach thereunto; To this end, make
me heartily sensible of my Sins and Unworthiness; raise up my dull and earthy
Mind from grovelling here below, and inspire (...) with a Holy Zeal to seek
those things that (...) ^bove: Let that infinite Love of Christ in (...) for so
wretched a Sinner, inflame my (...) and kindle in me that Sacred fire of Love
(...) ^ain, and to all those whom He has (...) Command and Example to Love,
(...) well as Friends, and that for his sake: Cloth me, O Lord in the Wedding
Garment; and make me, though of my self, a most unworthy, yet by thy Mercy, an
acceptable Guest at Thy Table; that I may not eat or drink my own Damnation,
but Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Having thus recommended your self unto God in your private Retirements: I do
earnestly exhort you to frequent the public Prayers of the Church: (nothing
but a charitable, or some very urgent occasion can now, or indeed should at any
time excuse you;) and to attend them with all possible Devotion: Heed your
self, this Week especially, your Thoughts, Words and Actions, that they be not
wicked nor vain; or if at any time they should, that you forthwith recall and
check your self thus,

Lord have Mercy upon me!
Christ have Mercy upon me!
Lord have Mercy upon me!
I Said, I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my Tongue! O God,
who know us to be set in the midst of so man and great Dangers, that by
reason of the f^ty of our Nature, we cannot always stand (...) right; grant to
me such strength and Prote^ on, as may support me in all Danger (...) carry me
through all Temptations (...) Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Set apart the Friday of every such Week as a Day of Holy Fasting and
Abstinence, rising Earlier than usually, if your Health will permit you, at
Five of the Clock.

When you Awake, Pray,

LIghten mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in Death.

Then meditate upon, and acknowledge Gods goodness for Preserving you the last
Night, who might, and deservedly too, have Suffered Death to Seize on you whilst
Sleeping, and hurryed you hence to render an account of what you have done in
the flesh: the result of which, will be to Think. How (on the Supposal of this
Dreadful Surprise) you were Prepared; and to Conclude, --

Happy is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find Doing his
will! And then humbly commending your self to God, Say,

Unto thy hands, O Lord, I commend this Day my soul and my Body, beseeching ^ee
to be ever with me, to direct, sanctify ^overn me in the ways of thy Laws, and
(...) works of thy commandments; that (...) thy most mighty protection both
"here and ever, I may be preserved both in Body and Soul, to serve Thee the
only True God, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

After which; Presently Arise: and at your Up-rising; Say,

JN the name of God; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; Amen. Blessed be
God, the Holy and undivided Trinity, now and for ever, Amen.

I Arise from my Bed to Glorify Him; He, of his infinite mercy, Bless and Keep
me this Day, and for evermore; Amen.

I Laid me down, and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord has Sustained me.

At your Apparrelling; Say,

Cloth me, O Lord, with the Ornaments of thy heavenly Grace; and Cover me with
the Robes of Righteousness. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; and make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

At the Washing of your Hands, say,

WAsh me clean, O Lord, from my ^edness; and Cleanse me from my (...) Amen.

Supposing you thus Apparralled (...) by Six of the Clock; It Is tim^ (...)
retire your self, to your ordinary Morning Prayers, which I would advise you,
e're you Kneel down, to begin with Prostration thus,

At the Name of Jesus, God blessed for ever, let every Knee Bow, both of
things in Heaven, things in Earth, and things under the Earth; Glory be to Thee
O Lord most High.

Then upon Your Knees, Say:

GOd be in my Head and in my Understanding, that I may know in this my Day the
things which do concern my everlasting peace.

God be in my Eyes and in my Seeing, that they may always be looking up to thy
Mercy-Seat, and that they be not as so many Casements to let in Vanity.

God be in my Mouth and in my Speaking, to guard and fence it from Idle Words,
and that it may at no time be a Door to let out Folly.

God be in my Ears and in my Hearing, ^t they may be always open to sound and
^lsom Counsels, and deaf to corrupt and (...) Communications.

(...) be in my Heart and in my Thinking, (...) ^erve it from being a sink of
Unclean^ (...) that it may never be suffered either (...), or deceive others.

God be at my End and my Departing, that so my Death may be precious in the
sight of the Lord, with whom I pray that I may live for Evermore; Amen.

And so,

"Prevent me O Lord in all my Doings with thy most Gracious Favor, and further
me with thy continual Help, that in all my works begun, continued, and ended in
Thee I way glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy mercy may obtain
everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Adding, Our Father, etc.

My Voice shall Thou hear betimes, O Lord; early in the Morning will I direct
my Prayer unto Thee; and I will look up.

O Lord, open thou my Lips;
And my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise.
O God make speed to save me;
O Lord make have to help me:
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, etc.
As it was in the Beginning, is now, etc.

Psalm. xcv. O Come let us sing unto the Lord; etc.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

After which, read One or more of Davids's Psalms in order; Beginning with the
First, and so onward, concluding each Psalm. with

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Then a Chapter out of the Proverbs of Solomon, or the New Testament: and after
that,

We Praise Thee O God, etc.

Or,

Especially in the Holy Time of Lent.
O All ye Works of the Lord, Bless, etc.

Or,

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc.

Goncluding the Two last of these Hymns with Glory be to the Father, etc.

Then the Creed, I Believe in God, etc. After which Kneel and Pray,

Lord have mercy upon me,
Christ have mercy upon me,
Lord have mercy upon me,
Our Father, etc.

Blessing, and Honor and Glory, and Power be unto him that Sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever, Amen.

GLory be to God on high; on earth Peace; good Will amongst Men; I Praise Thee;
I Bless Thee; I Worship Thee; I Glorify Thee; I give thanks to Thee for thy
great Glory and Goodness, O Lord God, Heavenly ^g, God the Father Almighty: For
thy Son Jesus Christ manifested in the Flesh to destroy the works of the Devil;
and who is the fountain of all those mercys both Spiritual and Temporal so
freely and plentifully bestowed on me thy most unworthy Creature; particularly
that thou have protected me this last Night from all perils ghostly and
bodily, and brought me to see the light of another Day, whereas thou might
justly have suffered me to sleep in death by reason of those manifold and
heinous sins wherewith I have from time to time offended thy Divine Majesty. I
have sinned! and what shall I say unto Thee, O thou Preserver of Man? I have
left undone those things which I ought to have done; and I have done those
things which I ought not to have done; and there is no health in me: But thou O
Lord, Have mercy upon me a most miserable offender! Oh Thou, who desire not
the Death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and
Live, Have mercy upon me. Spare and Restore me, who do here in all humility
confess my faults, and do desire to be Penitent for them. Have regard to thy
Blessed Son who is our Advocate with Thee, O Father, and the Propitiation for
all our sins; for whose sake mercifully Grant unto me true Repentance, and the
assistanc^ of thy Holy Spirit, which may teach and ^able me to please Thee
hereafter in all g^ things, to deny ungodliness and wordly (...) and to live
Godly and soberly in this pr^ World, that so at last I may come to (...)
^ternal joy, through Jesua Christ (...) Amen.

ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who of thy Great mercy have promised
Forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty Repentance and true Faith turn
unto Thee; Have mercy upon me, Pardon and Deliver me from all my sins; Confirm
and Strengthen me in all Goodness, and bring me unto everlasting Life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought me to the beginning of this Day; Preserve me in the same, and all other
Days of my Life from all sin and Danger; and by thy Gracious Governance,
dispose all my Thoughts, Words and Actions this Day to thy Glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

MOst Gracious God, I humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in General, so
especially for Him, who is the Supreme Governor thereof: O Lord, Grant the
King (...) long Life, that his Years may endure, as man Ages; furnish him with
safe and wise Coun^ and give him an heart of Courage and (...) ^ancy to pursue
them; Oh! Prepare thy ^ing Mercy and Faithfulness for him, that (...) preserve
him; Let thy Name O God (...) defend him; send him help from thy Sanctuary, and
strengthen him out of Sion: And let us his Servants under Thee, see with joy
that Thou helpest thine Anointed, and that Thou will hear him from thy holy
Heaven, even with the wholesome strength of thy Right Hand; so will we always
sing Praises unto thy Name through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

BLess, O Lord, the Queens Majesty, the Duke of York; and all the Royal Family;
Prosper them with all Happiness, and make them all Instrumental to the
furtherance of thy Glory in this World, and bring them to thine Everlasting
Kingdom in the World to Come, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

GIve Grace O Heavenly Father to all Bishops and Curates; especially to Him
whom by thy good Providence thou have appointed my Spiritual Pastor and Guide;
Grant that I may reverence his Person, and have regard to his good and
wholesome Counsell^ so that by him I may be conducted, and (...) ^ther with him
enter into thine Eternal (...) through Jesus Christ, Amen.

O God the Creator and preserve (...) mankind, I beseech thee for (...)
conditions of Men, and especially for thy Holy Catholic Church, that one
Faith may be Uniformly professed as thy Church is and can be but one; purge it
from all Atheism, Heresy, and Schism; and grant that all they who do profess
thy holy Name may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and hold the Faith in
unity of Spirit, in the bond of Peace, and in Righteousness of life, through
him who is the only head over all things to his Church, Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

O God of Mercy's and Father of Comforts, have Mercy, and comfort all those who
are any ways Afflicted or Distressed in Mind, Body or Estate; Relieve them
according to their several necessities, give them Patience under their
sufferings, and an happy issue out of all their Afflictions, for Jesus Christ
his Sake, Amen.

GRacious Lord, bless all those who are near or dear unto me, and make them
near and dear to thine own self: All my Kindred, ^re insert ^est Re^
All other my Friends, Acquaintants and Benefactors particularly, ^arti^ whom
Forgive me and them all our sins, and continue us thy servants in life and
death, Amen.

To these, or the like, your Morning Prayers, subjoyn on every such fasting
day, the two Collects for preparation for the Communion above written, and the
cxliij. Psalm. still kneeling:

Hear my Prayers O Lord, and consider my desire, etc.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Conclude all with,

The Lord fulfill the desires and Petitions of thy Servant, as may be most
expedient for me: The Lord bless me, and keep me: The Lord lift up the light of
his Countenance upon me, and give me Peace both now and ever-more. Amen.

Arising from Prayer, you must presently set your self to recollect your Life
past, especially since you last received by that Catalogue of sins set down in
the whole duty of man, or, by that (which is more concise) at the latter end of
that most excellent Manuel of Bishop Andrews, page 82. of his Directions for
the Sick; reading it consideringly over; and at every particular, ask your
Soul, whether you are guilty of that sin^ and commit to writing those Sins you
disco^ your self guilty of, with their respective ag^ ^vations, viz. If they
were committed (...) knowledge, or on mature deliheration, or (...) the
resistances of Conscience, etc.

I suppose this duty of self examina^ (...) cated by the Apostle, 1 Cor. xj.
28. and most necessary to this great work, dispatched by nine a Clock, when
taking the paper in your hand, humbly prostrating your self, say,

The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord
God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the Purisication of
the Sanctuary.

Then kneel and pray, Psalm cxxxth.

Out of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord, etc.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

O God to whom Vengeance belongs, O God to whom Vengeance belongs, show thy
self, but let it be in pity and compassion to thy wretched and unworthy
Servant, who in all humility confess my self a Wicked and Sinful Creature. I
acknowledge those sins, which if I would, I cannot hide from thee, my sins of
Pride and Vainglory, of Hatred and Envy, of Gluttony and Wantonness; I accuse
my self of my wicked desires and thoughts which I have conceived (...) these
marks (...) recourse to ^s noted in ^er.
of my wanton and evil words which I have spoken (...) these marks (...)
recourse to ^s noted in ^er.
of my naughty and ungodly deeds which I have committed (...) these marks (...)
recourse to ^s noted in ^er.
; I acknowledge and bewail these (...) ^old sins and wickednesses, which I from
time to time most grievously have committed by thought, word, and deed against
thy divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against me.
I do earnestly repent and am heartily sorry for these my misdoings; the
remembrance of them is grievous ^o me, the burden of them is intolerable. Have
mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most merciful Father, for thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake, forgive me all that is past; and grant, that I may ever
hereafter serve and please thee in newness of Life, to the honor and glory of
thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Forgive me my sins, O Lord; forgive me the sins of my Age, and the sins of my
Youth; the sins of my Soul, and the sins of my Body; my Secret and my
Whispering sins; my Presumptuous and my Crying sins; the sins that I have done
to please my self, and the sins that I have done to please others.

Forgive me my Wanton and idle sins; forgive me my serious and deliberate sins;
forgive me those sins which I know, and those sins which I know not; the sins
which I have labored (...) long to hide from others, that now I have (...) hid
them from my own memory: Forgive (...) them, O Lord! Forgive them all; of the
(...) mercy let me be Absolved from all my (...) and of thy bountiful goodness,
let (...) ^vered from the bands of those sins, which by my frailty I have
committed; Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, our
Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

Adding this short Litany, and the following Prayers.

O God, the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon me a most miserable sinner!

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon me a most miserable
sinner!

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son, have mercy upon
me a most miserable sinner!

O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons, and one God; Have mercy
upon me, a most miserable sinner!

Remember not Lord mine offenses, nor the offenses of my Forefathers, neither
take thou Vengeance of my sins: Spare me, good Lord, ^re thy Servant whom Thou
have Redeemed (...) thy most precious Blood, and be not an^ with me for ever.
Spare me, Good Lord.

(...) all evil and mischief, from sin, from the (...) assaults of the Devil,
from thy wrath, (...) ^verlasting Damnation, Good Lord Deliver me.

From all blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vainglory and Hypocrisy; from Envy,
Hatred and Malice, and from all Uncharitableness, Good Lord Deliver me!

From Fornication and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord Deliver me!

From, etc. [Here insert those sins of which you have found your self guilty,
and wrote in the paper,] Good Lord Deliver me!

From hardness of Heart; from Contempt of thy Word and Commandment; from any
evil thought which may assault and hurt my Soul, Good Lord Deliver me!

From all Adversities which may happen to the Body; from noisome and infectious
Diseases, and from sudden death, Good Lord Deliver me!

By thine Agony and Bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious
Death a^ Burial, and by thy Victorious Descention in^ Hell, Good Lord deliver
me!

By thy Glorious Resurrection and (...) on; and by the wonderful coming of
(...) Ghost, Good Lord Deliver (...)

In all time of my Tribulation, in all time of my Wealth, in the hour of Death,
and in the ^ay of Judgment, Good Lord Deliver me.

I who am a most miserable sinner, do beseech thee t^ hear me, O Lord God; to
keep and strengthen me in the true worshipping of Thee; and to give me Grace to
serve thee in Righteousness and Holiness all the days of my Life, I beseech
Thee to hear me, Good Lord.

That it may please Thee to be my Defender and Keeper, giving me the Victory
over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, I beseech thee to hear me, Good Lord.

That it may please Thee to endue me with true knowledge of thy Word; with
Grace, Wisdom, and Understanding, I beseech Thee to hear me, Good Lord.

That it may please Thee to give me increase of Grace, to hear meekly thy Word,
and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, I beseech thee to hear me, Good
Lord.

That it may please Thee to give me an heart ^ve and Dread Thee, and diligently
to live (...) Commandments, I beseech thee to hear me, Good Lord.

(...) may please Thee to strengthen me and; to comfort, and help me when I am
weak-hearted; to raise me up when I fall; and finally to beat down Satan under
my feet, I beseech Thee to hear me, Good Lord.

That it may please Thee to succor, help, and comfort me, when I am in danger,
necessity and Tribulation, I beseech thee to hear me, Good Lord.

That it may please Thee to give me, as at all times, so now especially, due
preparation of mind, that I may worthily participate this holy Sacrament, I
beseech Thee to hear me, Good Lord.

To this end may it please Thee to forgive mine Enemies, Persecutors, and
Slanderers, and to turn their hearts, I beseech Thee to hear me, Good Lord.

That it may please Thee to give me true Repentance; to forgive me all my sins,
negligences, and ignorances; to endue me with a lively and a steadfast Faith,
and a sincere Resolution to amend my Life according to thy holy Word, I beseech
Thee to hear me, Good Lord.

Son of God, I beseech Thee to hear me.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of (...) World, Grant me thy Peace.

O Lamb of God, that take away the (...) the World, Have mercy upon me.

O Christ Hear me.

Lord have mercy upon me!
Christ have mercy upon me!
Lord have mercy upon me!
Our Father, etc.

Deliver us from Evil, Amen.

O Lord, deal not with me according my to sins.
Neither reward me after my Iniquities.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, after thy great Goodness; according to the
multitude of thy mercys do away my offenses, etc. Psalm. lj. [Repeat the whole
Psalm kneeling; ending with Glory be to, etc.]

O Lord, I beseech Thee mercifully to hear me; and spare me, and all those who
do confess their sins unto Thee, that they whose Consciences by sin are
accused, by thy merciful Pardon may be Absolved, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

O most mighty God, and merciful Father, who have compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not (...) Death of a sinner,
but rather that he should (...) from his sin, and be saved: Mercifully (...) me
my Trespasses, receive and comfort (...) am grieved and wearied with the bur^
^y sins: Thy property is always to have (...) Thee only it appertains to
forgive sins: Spare me therefore, Good Lord; spare me, spare thy Servant whom
thou have Redeemed; enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, who am vile
earth, and a miserable sinner; But, so turn thine anger from me, who meekly
acknowledge my vileness, and truly repent me of my faults, and so make have to
help me in this world, that I may live with Thee in the world to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

TUrn thou me, O good Lord, and so shall I be turned; be favorable O Lord, be
favorable to thy Servant who turns to Thee in Weeping, Fasting, and Praying:
For, thouart a merciful God, full of Compassion, long-suffering, and of great
pity; Thou sparest, when we deserve punishment, and in thy Wrath think upon
mercy: Spare thy Servant, good Lord; spare me, and let me not be brought to
Confusion! Hear me, O Lord, for thy mercy is great; and after the multitude of
thy mercies, look upon me through the Merits and Mediation of thy blessed Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe Lord bless me, and keep me; the (...) lift up the light of his Countenan^
(...) me, and give me peace, now and for ev^ (...) Amen.

The time following to Eleaven of the Clock; you may bestow in dressing, and
fitting your self for the public Prayers of the Church, which then you must by
no means fail to be present at. In the mean time, let no sinful thoughts
possess your Soul, no vain or idle Communication proceed out of your mouth, but
such as may tend to edifying. Examine, exhort, encourage your Servants, or
those about you, whom you have commanded, or who purpose to Receive this B.
Sacrament with you; and be careful to avoid the Conversation of those who may
probably tempt you to sin and vanity.

Returning from Church, or Chapel about Twelve of the Clock, Humble your self
again before God, and Pray,

Our Father, etc.

Deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the xxxij. Psalm. Still upon your knees.

Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, etc.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Almighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive th^s of all them that are penitent; Create, (...) ^e in me a new and
contrite heart, that I (...) lamenting my sins, and acknowledging (...)
^chedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty and most merciful Father, who for my many and grievous Sins committed
against thee, since the last solemn time of my Humiliation and Repentance,
might most justly have cut me off in the midst of my days; But, in the
multitude of thy mercies have hitherto spared me: Accept, I most heartily
beseech thee, mine unfeigned sorrow for all my former transgressions; and grant
that I may never so presume of thy mercy, as to despise the riches of thy
goodness, but that thy forbearance and long suffering may lead me to Repentance
and amendment of my sinful life, to thy honor and glory, and my final
Acquittance and Absolution at the last day, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, make clean my heart within me.
And take not thy Holy Spirit from me.
In the Name of God; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

I who am a wretched Sinner, here personally appearing, and prostrate unto the
Majesty of the Great and dreadful God, and in the presence of his Holy Angels;
having in remembrance the exceeding mercies of his great Goo^ (...) Here Throw
your self (...) the Ground.
wards me, as in manifold instances, so especially in this; that in the day of
my Christ'ning, I was so happily and holily Vowed and Dedicated unto God, to be
his Child, and to live in his continual Service; and that contrary to the
profession which was then made in my name, I have so many and sundry times so
grievously violated my vows, and profaned my sacred promises, and employed my
Soul to the service of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. At length recalling
my self, and with all lowliness and devotion, casting my Soul and Body
prostrate before the dreadful Throne of his Justice, do acknowledge, confess,
and yield my self a miserable wretched Sinner, guilty of that Death and Passion
which Christ once suffered for me upon the tormenting Cross: But turning my
self to the Throne of his infinite mercy, and with all my might and force from
the very Deep of my heart, detesting the iniquities of my fore-pass'd Life, I
most humbly beg and crave pardon for the same, with an entire Absolution from
all my sins, e^ for the precious Death and Passion sake of (...) Lord and
Savior, unto whom I promise (...) ^onfirm again, I do avow and solemnly re^
(...) sacred Profession of loyal service and (...) which was made in my behalf
unto him (...) ^ly Baptism, renouncing unfeignedly (...) of this wicked World,
the lusts of the Flesh, and the suggestions of the Devil; and converting my
self to my most gracious and merciful God: I desire, deliberate, purpose, and
fully resolve to honor him, serve him, and obey him for ever hereafter; giving
and dedicating to him for this end, the faculties of my Soul, and the members
of my Body, to be his faithful, loyal, and obedient Subjects and Servants for
ever; without unsaying, revoking, or repenting me of this my holy and sacred
promise, or, any part thereof. And, I most humbly beseech Almighty God, the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost to confirm me in this constant resolution of
abandoning these my sins, and living an holy Life: and to accept of this my
broken and contrite heart, which he has promised not to despise, entirely
desiring his Fatherly goodness, that as he has given me a will and desire to
purpose, so he would give me strength and grace to perform all holy actions
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd, I pray thee, that thy Grace may always prevent and follow me, and make
me continually to be given to all good wor^ through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd, I beseech thee grant thy S^ Grace to withstand the temptat^ (...) the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; an^ (...) pure beart and mind to follow thee
the only true God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, Receive
my humble Petitions; and though I be tied and bound with the chain of my sins,
yet let the pittifulness of thy great mercy loose me, for the honor of Jesus
Christ our Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

O Savior of the world save me! who by thy Cross and Passion have Redeemed me:
help me, and save me, I beseech Thee O God.

To the King Eternal, the Immortal, Invisible, and only Wise God, who is the
ever Blessed and Adorable Trinity, be all Honor and Glory, now, and for ever.
Amen.

Having thus ended your midday Devotions, review your Catalogue of sins: Fix
on that sin, you find your self mostly addicted to; labor for a Godly sorrow,
and relentings of heart on the sight of it; resolve against all future
perpe^tions of it, carefully using all remedies which ^y tend to suppress it:
To which purpose, (...) ^ine your self concerning those occasions (...)
^ucements which lead you to it, and pro^ ^ell as you can against them, noting
in (...) ^k those Occasions and Remidies which reason or experience may prompt
you to: As for example.

Suppose your self guilty of Irreverence, or want of Devotion in the service of
God: write down, what does commonly induce you to it, what remedies are most
proper to the cure of it. Thus,

In the year 1673 March 28th. being Good Friday (or be it any other day) I
Fasted, being to Receive the Communion the following Sunday; and in the
exercise of this holy Duty on Exammination, I found my self much guilty of
Irreverence in the worship of God, an^ discovered these Temptations to it. Too
much addicting my self to childish an light Deportments at all times; and
therefore can hardly remit of them, when I come into Gods Presence. 2. Listening
too much to the vain Discource, and observing the impertinent Actions of
Others. 3. Want of Consideration in whose Presenc^ I am; to wit, of the Great
Majesty of Heaven; of that God who, if I do not reper^ will strictly call me
to an Account for tha^ and all other my sins; etc.
From which Occasions you may eas^ ^ceive what remedies to use against it; 1.
To labor for a Grave and modest Carriage of my self considering my Age,
quality, Degree; etc. 2. To avoid vain and light Persons; or if that may not be
done, not heeding them, or seriously rebuking them. 3. To entertain all awful
and Dreadful Apprehensions of the Great God, who sees what I do, and how I
comport my self: As also, of the Holy Angels who may truly enough be Believed,
from the intimations of the Apostles St. John, Revel. viii. and St. Paul, 1
Cor. xi. 10. to be present at Holy Mysterys. To these may be added 4. Lifting
up my Eyes to Heaven; or, fixing them on the Priest; not in the least letting
them loose on whatever objects may present themselves. -- These I then Resolved
to consider, and practice; and will therefore frequently Read them over:


Even so, Amen: Lord, Let thy Grace be ^fficient for me! Lead me not into
Temptation; (...) Deliver me from evil. Amen.

(...) Kneeling down, Pray for Devotion; (...) any other Grace, the contrary
sin (...) you have now found your self guilty of, and Resolved against. You
will find Prayers to this purpose at the latter-end of this Book: As for
Devotion; Thus,

MOst Great God, who have not only permitted, but invited us needy and
miserable Creatures to present our Petitions to Thee: Oh! let me set a true
value on this most inestimable privilege. I come unto Thee, O Lord, as a Worm
to my sovereigne Maker; I come as an heinous offender to a just and severe
judge: Let I pray Thee my Addresses in thine House be with a Reverence someway
answerable to thine awful Majesty; Give me an hearty desire to pray, and such a
pure intention and sixedness of mind upon Thee, that I may no more incur the
Guilt of Drawing nigh unto Thee with my Lips, when my heart is far from Thee;
But may so Ask, that I may receive; seek, that I may find; knock that it may be
opened unto me; that so from praying to Thee here, I may be Translated to the
Praising Thee Eternally in thy Glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

This exercise being finished about thre^ (...) the Clock, the time appointed
for the Ev^ (...) service; At your Return from the Church (...) Chapel, if you
have not fully satisfied yo^ own Conscience, but require further Comfort or
Counsel, you are to go to some Discreet and Learned Minister of Gods word
(especially to him under whose Ministry God has placed you, not being Curious
or censorious in your choice as to this particular) and open your Grief by
Confession, that so you may receive the benefit of Absolution, together with
Ghostly Counsel and advice to the quieting of your Conscience, and the avoiding
of all Scruple and Doubtfulness.

This being done, (as it ought to be, with Submission and sobriety) you may
with Comfort Retire into your Closet; and upon your Knees, Say,

Our Father; etc,

Deliver us from evil; Amen.

ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid; cleanse the Thoughts of my heart by the Inspiration of thy
Holy Spirit; that I may perfectly love thee, and worthily Magnify thy Holy
Name through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then Read, upon your Knees, the Ten Commandments as they are set down in Our
Communion Service.

(...) Spoke these Words; etc. after each Com^dwent; Say,

Lord have mercy upon me; and Incline my heart to keep this Law!

Thou shall not Covet, etc.

Lord, have mercy upon me; and write all these thy Laws in my heart, I beseech
thee.

O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God; vouchsafe, I beseech thee to direct,
Sanctify and Govern both my Soul and Body in the ways of thy Laws, and in the
works of thy Commandments, that through thy most mighty Protection, both here
and ever, I may be preserved both in Body and Soul, through our Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Then stand up and heartily repeat your Creed, I believe in God, etc. After
which Kneel again, and pray:

Almighty everlasting God, heavenly Father, I give thee humble thanks, that
thou have vouchsafed to bring me to the knowledge of this faith in thee; and do
beseech thee, that thou would keep me steadfast in this faith, and evermore
defend me from all adversities, who live and reignest one God World without
end. Amen.

Lord have mercy upon me!
Christ have mercy upon me!
Lord have mercy upon me!
OH Christ Hear me! and Remember now that Hour, in which thou did once
Commend thy Blessed Spirit into the hands of thy heavenly Father, when with a
Torn Body and a Broken Heart, thou did show forth the Bowels of thy mercy,
and Dye for us. I beseech thee, O thou Brightness and Image of God, Assist me
by this thy most precious Death, that being Dead unto the world, I may live
only unto Thee; and at the last hour of my Departure from this mortal Life, I
may Commend my Soul into thine hands, and thou may receive me into life
immortal, there to Reign with thee for ever and ever, Amen.

Grant me, in the mean time, Gracious Lord, a pure intention of heart, and a
steadfast resolution to despise all vanity, to fight the Battles of the Lord
manfully against the world, the flesh and the Devil, to spend my time
religiously and usefully, to speak gracious words, to walk always in thy
presence, to preserve my Soul and and Body in holiness fit for the habitation
of the Spirit of God; Amen.

(...) Lord, and my God; Give me I beseech (...) wise, a sober, a patient, an
understand^ ^evout, a religious, a Courageous heart; (...) ^temperate reins and
thoughts; a soul full of Devotion to do thee Service; and do thou make my
services acceptable to thee while I live, and my soul ready for thee, when I
Dye, Amen.

O Lord, Increase in me Faith and Devotion, replenish my heart with all
Goodness, and of thy Great mercy keep me in the same; Give me true humility in
prosperity, patience in adversity, and continual joy in the Holy Ghost. Amen.

O Lord, Give me Spiritual wisdom, that I may discern what is pleasing to thee,
and follow what belongs unto my Peace; and let the knowledge and Peace of God,
and of Jesus Christ our Lord be my Guide and my portion all the Days of my
life: Amen.

O Lord; make me humble to my Superiors, and friendly to my Equals; thankful
to my Benefactors, loving to my Relations, and Charitable to my Enemies; to be
Gentle and easily entreated, slow to anger, and readily admonished; fully
prepared, and thoroughly furnished for every Good word and work: Amen.

O Lord; Give me a peaceable Spirit, (...) quiet life free from Debt and deadly
Sin; give me Grace to abstain from all appearance of evil, and to do nothing
but what is of good report; to confess Christ and his holy Religion by an holy
and obedient life, and a mind ready to dye for him, when he shall call for me;
and then, O Lord, Assist me! Amen.

O Lord Jesu! I Give thee my Body, my Soul, my substance, my Fame, my Friends,
my Liberty and my Life; Dispose of me, and of all that is mine, as it seems
best to thee, and to the Glory of thy Holy Name: Amen.

I Am not now Mine; But, Thine: therefore Claim me as thy right, Keep me as thy
charge, and love me as thy child: Fight for me, when I am assaulted, heal me
when I am wounded, and Revive me when I am destroyed: Amen.

O God, from whom all Good things do come; Grant to me thy humble servant,
(...) thy holy Inspiration I may think those (...) that are Good, and by thy
merciful (...) may perform the same, through Jesus (...) Lord; Amen.

GIve me modesty in my Countenance, Gravity in my behavior, Deliberateness in
my Speech, and righteousness in all my Actions: Let thy mercy cleanse me from
my Sins; and let thy Grace bring forth in me the fruits of everlasting life:
Amen.

O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and Great Dangers,
that by reason of the weakness of our nature we cannot always stand upright;
Look I beseech thee, on my frailties and Infirmitys; and Grant me such Health
of Body, that both in my Soul and Body I may evermore serve thee with all my
strength and might; through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen.

GRant, O Lord, that I may live in thy Fear, Dye in thy favor, rest in thy
peace, rise in thy power, reign in thy Glory, for thy only Beloved Son's sake,
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

ASsist me mercifully, O Lord, in these and all my Supplications and Prayers
and Dispose the way of thy servant toward the attainment of everlasting
salvation; (...) among all the changes and chances of (...) ^tal life, I may
ever be Defended by the (...) Gracious and ready help, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: Amen.

GOd the Father bless me! God the Son Defend me! God the Holy Ghost preserve
me! God the Holy Trinity be with me, now and for ever more! Amen.

After this apply your self to read some Choice portion of Scripture;
particularly, the History of our Saviors passions as in the Gospels for the
Holy week: Read, with as much affection and heartiness, as is possible; all
along reflecting on his Innocence, and your self, as being one of those Guilty
Wretches, for whom he Suffered all this.

And think thus with Your self.

I Have occasioned more torment to Him, then his very Crucifiers; they
crucified him Once; but I have as much, as in me lay, cruci^ed him Daily: they
crucified him, because ^y knew him not; but I have known him, and ^et have
still continued thus to crucify him afre^.

(...) Meditations, as they should work in (...) Sorrow for our sins past, and
a great (...) and a firm resolution against them for the time to come; so
likewise should they quicken and stir up our Faith in, our Love of, and our
Thankfulness unto Christ, for his so Great Mercy in Redceming us by so dear a
Price.

Nor must your Prayers end here; they are not Complete without Intercessions,
nor acceptable without Charity, which is a main requisite to a Worthy
Communicant.

At six of Clock therefore betake your self again to Prayer for All Men; for
Christ's Holy Catholic Church; and for all, who either by Relation,
Acquaintance, or more particular Desire, may claim a share in your Prayers.

Our Father; etc.

Deliver us from Evil; Amen.

ALmighty God, who of thy tender love toward Mankind have sent thy Son our
Savior Jesus Christ to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer Death upon the
Cross, that all Mankind should follow the examp^ of his Great Humility;
Mercifully Gra^ that I may both follow the example of (...) Patience, and also
be made partaker of (...) Resurrection, through the same Jesus Chr^ our Lord,
Amen.

ALmighty God, I beseech Thee, (...) to Behold thy Family for which ou^ (...)
Jesus Christ was contented to be Betrayed, and given up into the hands of
wicked men, and to suffer Death upon the Cross; who now Lives and Reigns
with Thee and the Holy Ghost, ever One God, world without end, Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, by whose Spirit, the whole Body of the Church is
governed and Sanctified; Receive my Supplications and Prayers which I offer
before Thee for all Estates of men in thy Holy Church, that every member of the
same, in his Vocation and Ministry, may truly and Godly serve Thee, through our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the Death of a sinner, but rather that he should be Converted and
live: Have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidells; and take from them all
Ignorance, hardness of ^eart and contempt of thy Word; and so ^ch them home,
Blessed Lord, that they ^ay be saved among the Remnant of the ^rue Israelites,
and be made One Flock under (...) ^aperd Jesus Christ our Lord, who liv^ (...)
^eigneth with Thee, and the Holy (...) God world without end, Amen.

ALmighty God, who have purchased to thy self, an Universal Church by the
precious Blood of thy Dear Son; mercifully look on that part of it in these
Kingdoms, so miserably shattered and distressed. I confess, O Lord, our sins
have justly deserved that thou should remove thy Candlestick from us, and by
some extraordinary judgment make us a scorn and a Byword to the World; But, I
beseech Thee, Reverse those Plagues which we have deserved; and continue those
mercys which we have hitherto enjoyed, especially the comfort of thy Gospel,
and liberty of thy Truth. Oh! Let not our Adversarys, neither Papists, nor
Schismatics ever roar in the midst of our Congregations, and set up their
Banners as signs of Victory, and Conquest over us; But shield and Protect us
with thy mercy, that in thy Holy Church we may still Glorify thy Name, through
Christ our Lord, Amen.

O God, the unspeakable Author of the World, Creator of Men, Governor o^
Empires, and Establisher of all Kingdom^ who out of the loins of our Father
ABR^HAM did choose a King, that became the Savior of all Kings and Nations of
the Ear^ (...) Bless, I beseech Thee, thy Servant and (...) Dread Sovereign
Lord King CHAR^S with the richest blessings of thy Grace; and Establish him in
the Throne of his Kingdom by thy mighty Aid and Protection: visit him, as thou
did visit Moses in the Bush, Joshua in the Battle, Gideon in the Field,
Samuel in the Temple: Let the dew of thy abundant mercies fall upon his Head,
and give unto him, the Blessing of David and Solomon: Be unto him an Helmet of
Salvation against the face of his Enemies, and a strong tower of Defense in the
time of Adversity; let his Reign be prosperous, and his Days many: let Peace,
and Love, and Holiness; let justice and Truth, and all Christian Virtues
flourish in his time; let his People serve him with Honor and Obedience; and
let him so duly serve Thee here on Earth, that he may hereafter Everlastingly
serve Thee in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

I Beseech Thee, O Lord, to Save and Defend all Christian Kings, Princes and
Governors; especially thy Servant CHARLES, King, that under him we may be
godly and ^tly governed; and Grant unto his whole ^ncel, and to all that are
put in Authority ^der him, that they may truly and indiff^en^ Minister Justice,
to the punishment of W^ck^ess and Vic, and to the mainte^ (...) thy true
Religion and Virtue, Amen.

ALmighty God, the God of all mercy, I humbly beseech Thee to pour down the
riches of thine abundant Goodness upon the Head of thine Handmaid our most
Gracious Queen KATHERINE, that she being continually beautified with the Royal
Ornaments of thy heavenly Grace, may be holy and Devout as HESTER, Loving to
the King as RACHEL, fruitful and wise as REBECCA, and Obedient as SARAH; and
with long life and glory continuing in her high and Princely estate, she may at
the last be brought to the great happiness of thine everlasting estate
hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, I humbly beseech Thee to bless the
most Illustrious Prince, James Duke of YORK, and all the Royal Family: Endue
them with thy Holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly Grace, prosper them
with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who alone workest great Marvels, Give grace to all Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, especially to those under whose Despensations I live:
Illuminate them with true knowledge and understanding of thy Word; and grant
that by their Preaching and living they may set it forth, and show it
accordingly, and also rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments: Grant
this for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

O Thou God of Truth, Bring into the way of Truth, all such as have erred and
are deceived! O Thou Father of Comforts, succor, help and comfort all that are
in danger, necessity and tribulation; preserve all that travel by land or by
water; all women laboring of Child, all sick persons and young Children; show
thy pity upon all Prisoners and Captives; provide for the Fatherless Children
and Widows, and all who are desolate and Oppressed: yea, have mercy upon all
men, especially those whom thou have called to the Knowledge of, and Faith in
thy Son Jesus Christ, Amen.

ALmighty God, who have commanded me to honor my Father and my Mother; Grant
me of thy goodness and Grace so to love and honor them, to fear and obey them,
to help and to pray for them, as thou in thy holy Word have directed and
charged me to do, that both in their lives and Deaths their Souls may bless me:
Give them I pray Thee peace and plenty, Defend them from all dangers both of
body and soul; keep them in the stedfastness of thy Faith, and in the obedience
of thy holy Commandments: Bless them O Lord, and all other my Relations and
Benefactors, make us doubly dear to each other, both in the flesh and in the
Lord, and that for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O God from whom every good and perfect gift proceeds; Accept my Praise and
Thanksgiving which I offer unto thee for all thy Mercys and Benefits from time
to time vouchsafed unto me; For my Health, Peace, Liberty, Friends, and all
other Blessings of this Life; For Jesus Christ the Fountain of all; for his
Conception, Birth, Circumcision; for his Baptism, Fasting, Temptation; for his
Holy and most exemplary Life; for his bitter, cruel, and yet patient and
Meritorious Death; for his Victorious Triumphant Desension into Hell; for his
Glorious Resurrection and Asension; for the Coming of the Holy Ghost, the
Eternal Comforter upon the Apostles on the Day of Pentecost; And from that
time, for the constitution of a Catholic and Apostolic Church, which is to
Continue to the end of the World. and I beseech that O Lord, Give me that due
sense of all thy Mercys, that my heart may be unfeignedly thankful; and that I
may show forth thy Praise not only with my Lips but in my life, by giving up my
self unto thy service, and by walking before Thee in Holiness and Righteousness
all my Days, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who by thy Holy Apostle have taught us, not only to make Prayers
and supplications; but also to Give thanks for all men: I offer up unto thee
most high Laud and humble thanks for all thy wonderful Graces and Virtues which
thou have declared in All thy Saints; chiefly in the Glorious and most Blessed
Virgin S. Luke (...)
MARY, the Mother of thy Son Jesus Christ; and all others who have Departed
this Life with the Seal of Faith, and do now rest in the sleep of P^a^e; such
as were the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors; Holy
Virgins, pious Matrons, and 1 Timothy ^.3, -- 16.
Devout Widows, who have washed the feet of the Saints: Beseeching Thee, that
we ^ay still continue in their H. Communion, and enjoy the comfort thereof
while we are on earth, fol^ving with a glad will and mind their holy Examples
of godly living and stedfastness in thy Faith; and that at the last Day we with
them, and They with us may attain to the Resurrection of the just, and have our
perfect Consummation and Bliss both in Body and Soul in thy eternal and
everlasting Glory through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with Thee and the Holy
Ghost be Ascribed by us, as it is by Angels and Archangels and the whole
Company of Heaven, all Honor and Glory, World without end. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Son's Name; I beseech Thee mercifully to incline thine Ears unto me, now that
in his Name, I have made my Prayers and Supplications unto Thee; and, grant
that those things which I have faithfully asked, according to thy Will, may
effectually be obtained to the Relief of my Necessity, and to the setting forth
of thy Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe Peace of God which passes all understanding; The Blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; the virtue of Christ's
Blessed Cross and Passion, be with Me now, at the Hour of Death, and in the day
of Judgment. Amen.

Thus may you end your Course of Prayers for every Friday, preceding a
Communi^-Sunday: They are such, I think, as may ^t your Leisure and Condition;
if not, you are prudent enough to leave out, or alter what you see good: I have
too all along supposed your Constitution strong enough to hold out such a Fast;
if your Health will not bear it, in God's Name, Eat; but, moderately, and let
your Food be Mean and Ordinary; such as a Crust of Bread, a little Wine, or a
Glass of Small-Beer, etc.

However at Seven of the Clock with cheerfulness depart your Closet: let not
your Behavior be without Innocent Alacrity; but, let your special Care be to
comport your self at these your Fasts, that they may not (if possible) be taken
notice of by any, but your self and God; as being mindful of that Command of
our Savior, St. Mat. vi. 17, 18. Anoint thy Head, and wash thy Face, that thou
appear not unto Men to fast: Be sure then, to avoid all Sullenness, and
Moroseness; but, give ready and cheerful Answers to any that shall demand you.

Thus disposed, you are ready for your Supper by Seven a Clock, which the
present Custom and Law of the Church you live in, will not allow to be Flesh;
but Fish, Eggs, or some such thing; whereto, notwithstanding your l^g
Abstinence, you must not let loose your A^etite; but Eat more sparingly than at
other ti^s.

Those few Hours from Supper, to Bedtime, you cannot better bestow than in
Reading, or Walking, and Meditating on the particular Exercises of your Fast;
examining your self, Whither you have been as Intent, as Devout in the
Performance of them as is requisite? And where you have failed, heartily bewail
your self to God, Resolving within your self to be more serious and careful for
the Time to come. Be frequent and diligent in looking over your Accomptal,
observing every Week since you last Communicated, what your Carriage has been?
How you have amended, especially in those Particulars, in which you have
formerly taken notice of your Miscarriages, and Vowed Reformation?

Sometime before you retire to your Evening-Prayers, Return to your Closet; and
there let your Charity crown your Devotions, [1 Cor. xv. 2.] Setting apart, and
Devoting somewhat unto God of what you have to the Relief of his wanting
Servants; distributing it, when you see Occasion: In the mean time, Separate it
from the rest of your store, and ever after look upon it as Devote, and not to
be touched, except to be dispensed to the Poor; when you do thus Consecrate it
unto God, use this, or the ^ke Ejaculation;

WHat I give, O Lord, is of my Own, as thou have prospered me; if I have
wronged any One, I am ready to restore fourfold. St. Luke xix.viii.


O Lord, whose is the Earth, and the fullness thereof; I offer unto Thee, What
by thy Gift and Blessing I have, this small Testimony of my Thank-fulness, to
be bestowed on those Poor Christians, whom thy Providence shall give me
opportunity to Relieve: Be thou pleased through the Blood of my Savior to
accept it, and pardon all my vain Expenses. Amen.

Thou art my God; my Goods are nothing unto Thee; All my Delight is upon the
Saints that are in the Earth, and upon such as excel in Virtue.

About Ten, or Eleven of the Clock, betake your self to your ordinary Prayers
for the Evening; which begin, with this Clause,

O Lord, I do again humbly present my self before Thee; let my Prayers be set
forth in thy sight as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands an
Evening-Sacrifice, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

Then Read a Psalm; which conclude with,

Glory be to the Father, etc.

After it, a Chapter out of the New Testament, at the end of which,

Sing unto the Lord a new Song, etc. Psalm. xcviii.

Or,

God be merciful unto us, etc. Psalm. lxvii;

Concluding either, with

Glory be to the Father, etc.

After which devoutly repeat your Creed,

I Believe in God, etc.

The Lord be with me! Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Deliver us from Evil. Amen.

ALmighty and most merciful Father; but a most severe and just Judge, to all
Obstinate and Impenitent Sinners; I acknowledge and bewail my manifold Sins and
Wickedness, which I from time to time, most grievously have committed, in
Thought, Word, and Deed, against thy Divine Majesty: I have sinned! And what
shall I do unto Thee, O Thou Preserver of Man? I have left undone those things
which I ought to have done; and I have done those things which I ought not to
have done, and there is no Health in me! But, Thou, O Lord, Have Mercy upon me,
a mos^ miserable Offender! Oh! Thou, who desire^ not the Death of a Sinner,
but, rather that he should turn from his Wickedness and live, Have Mercy upon
me; spare and restore me, who desire in all humility to confess my Faults, and
to be Penitent for them: Have regard to thy Son Jesus Christ, who is our
Advocate with Thee, and the Propitiation for all our Sins; for whose sake,
Grant me true Repentance, and the Assistance of thy Holy Spirit, to please Thee
hereafter in all things, to Teach and Enable me to deny all Ungodliness, and
Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Godly, and Righteously in this present Evil
World, that so at last, I may come to thine Eternal Joy, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, who of thy great Mercy, have promised
Forgiveness of Sins to all them that with hearty Repentance, and true Faith
turn unto Thee, Have Mercy upon me; Pardon and deliver me from all my Sins;
confirm and strengthen me in all Goodness; And bring me to Everlasting Life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty and Ever-living God, who have commanded me to Pray for all Men; I
^mbly beseech Thee, most mercifully to receive these my Prayers which I offer
unto thy Divine Majesty; beseeching Thee to inspire continually the Universal
Church, and specially that part of it in these Kingdoms with the Spirit of
Truth, Unity, and Concord: Bless him who is Supreme Governor over it, our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord K. CHARLES; Treasure up in Him all thy Hidden Blessings,
make and keep him a Devoted Servant unto Thee, a Constant Patron of thy Church
and Truth; that he may live long, and be full of Honorable Success all his
days, in his Person, in his Actions, in his Queen, in the whole Royal Family,
in his Servants, in his People; and crowned with Glory after Life: Under him,
Bless the whole State Ecclesiastical and Civil; that Righteousness and Peace
may kiss each other, and we Serve and Honor Thee for ever. Amen.

O Lord, Bless all the Afflicted Members of the Body of thy Son, wheresoever,
howsoever distressed: Send them constant Patience, and speedy Deliverance, as
seems best to Thee, and is best for them: And do unto them according to all
those Mercies, which I would or should desire thou should show to my own
Soul, if at any time Thou shall be pleased to make my Estate as theirs is at
this present; And, O Lord, Be merciful! Amen.

GRacious God, Bless all the places to which Thou have made me have any near
Reference, every Soul contained in them: All my Friends, Kindred, and
Acquaintance; any to whom Thou have made me any way Beholden, especially my
Father, Mother, etc. Lord, I beseech Thee, forgive me and them all our sins,
and continue us thy Servants, both in Life and Death. Amen.

ALmighty God, Father of all Mercies, I thine unworthy Servant, do give Thee
most humble and hearty thanks for all thy Goodness, and Loving Kindness
bestowed on me: Above all, for the Redemption of the World by our LORD JESUS
CHRIST; in Him, for the means of Grace, and for the Hope of Glory: For all the
Blessings of this Life; for thy Creating, and for thy Protection of me all my
Days; and particularly, that this Day past thou have preserved me in my Health,
and assisted me in my Devotions or, prospered me in my Affairs.
. Give me I beseech Thee, a due Sense of these thy Mercies, and Grace and Power
to express it by an Obedience to all thy Commandments. Go on to preserve, and
take me into thy Protection this night: Lighten my Darkness, O Lord, and by thy
great Mercy Defend me from all Perils and Dangers of this night, for the Love
of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

[Subjoyne to these, or the like your Ordinary Devotions, the Two Coll^cts for
Preparation to the Holy Communion, which are abovewritten; as also the Cii.
Psalm, Hear my Prayer, O Lord, etc. Glory be to the Father, etc. Concluding all
with the aforementioned Benediction.]

THe Lord fulfill all the Desires and Petitions of thy Servant, as may be most
expedient for me! The Lord bless me, and keep me! the Lord lift up the Light of
his Countenance upon me, and give me Peace, both now and for evermore. Amen.

AS you Vndress your self, consider that the Time is coming, when your Body
must return Naked unto the Dust; and both Soul and Body appear at God 's
Tribunal, to give an account of all Actions done in the Flesh; In the mean
time, you must endeavor to cleanse it by Repentance, that God, who is of more
pure Eyes then to behold Iniquity, may behold and accept it.

As you enter into your Bed, Say,

IN the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was Crucified upon his Cross, and
laid in^ his Grave for me, I lay me down to rest: He Bless me! and keep me! He
save me! and Raise me up again! and bring me at last unto Life Eternal! Amen.

As you betake your self to sleep, Say,

I Will lay me down in Peace, and take my rest; for it is Thou, Lord, only that
make me dwell in safety. Amen.

Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, Now, and at the Hour of Death! Amen.

Preserve me while I am Waking, Defend me while I am Sleeping; that my Soul may
continually Watch for Thee, and both Body and Soul may rest in thy Peace for
ever. Amen.

Should you in the Nightime lie Awake, Say,

O Lord, Thou have proved and visited my Heart in the Night-Season, thou have
tried me: O Blessed Father, purge me, that thou may find no wickedness in
me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd, give me Grace to make have, and not to prolong the time to keep thy
Commandments; that I may call my own ways to Remembrance, and turn my Feet to
thy Testimonies: And then, at Midnight will I give Thee thanks, because of thy
Righteous Judgments, O Lord, my Strength and my Redeemer. Amen.

In case you are not presently disposed to sleep, devoutly Repeat the Lj.
Psalm, which to that purpose, you must be careful to get by heart:

Have Mercy upon me, O God, etc.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

HAving thus ordered your Penitential Devotions on the Friday; you have the
less to do on the Saturday, nothing but to guard your self more strictly
against Temptations, that they prevail not upon you; to which purpose, Be much
in Reading the Scripture, or some Good Book; particularly The whole Duty of
Man; the Third Partition of it concerns the Lord's Supper, which after
Evening-Prayer read considerately over, applying every Passage to your self, as
being some way or other concerned in it.

PArt of this Day, you may bestow in Offices of Charity: As, Visiting your sick
Friends, or reconciling your self to any with whom you may have had any
Difference, as you shall find occasion; or, as you shall be directed by your
Spiritual Guide.

On Sunday-Morning you rise by Six a Clock; and subjoyn to your Morning-Prayers
those Two Collects for Prepar^tion above mentioned.

After this consider, How you may with due Devotion comport your self at the
Holy Altar? and, what are those particular Duties and Graces you are there to
exercise? You will find an account of them in the Third Partition of the Whole
Duty of Man.

Then examine the State and Temper of your Heart; whither it be Tender, and
affectionately disposed to Relentings for your Sins, Purposes against them, and
a Resolution for a Holy Life? To humble Reliances, and trust on God in our
Savior's Blood for Pardon? To Spiritual Joy and Thankfulness? To Good Will
toward all men? To Charity, and Liberality? and the like: Otherwise, have an
Hearty Desire, and use your utmost endeavor, which will be accepted, to bring
it to such a Disposition.

If after all this be done, you have any Spare-Minutes before Church, or
Chappel-Time; you would do well to bestow them in Reading over the
Communion-Service; by which means you will be able with more Readiness and
Devotion, to go along with the Priest in the Public Ministration of it.

About an Hour before you go forth, Review ^he Account of your sins, noted in
your Paper; (...) your Heart go along with the Reading of them, Sorrowing for
them, and Resolving against them.

After this, humbly Kneel, and Repeat the LI. Psalm.

Have Mercy upon me, etc.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Then these following Collects; or as many of them, as you have Time for.

1. O Blessed Jesu, who did take upon Thee our Nature, and suffer Death upon
the Cross for our Redemption; and have commanded us to continue the Memory of
this thy precious Death, till thy Coming again; Oh! Let not the inestimable
Benefits of it be frustrated by my manifold and grievous sins; But, inspire my
Soul with those Graces which may qualify me to Receive them tendered unto me
in this Blessed Sacrament. O Lord, Thou see that I have no power of my self
to help my self! Oh! Let the pittifulness of thy great Mercy loose me from the
Chains of those sins wherewith I am tied and bound; that being thus set at
Liberty, I may here with Cheerfulness run the ways of thy Commandments and
hereafter enter into thy Joy, O Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

2. Thou O God, and Savior, know how vile I am, and with what Eagerness I
have pursued the Paths that lead unto Everlasting Death! How often has this
Feast been prepared, I lovingly Bidd, and called thereto; but have with
frivolous Excuses absented my self? Or, if I have come; I have brought such
Troops of thy professed Enemies, Vn-repented Sins, along with me, as if, I came
not to adore, but to defy Thee; not to Commemorate, but to Renew thy Passion!
I am not worthy, O Lord! I am not worthy to come into thy presence; much less,
to eat the Flesh of the Sacrificed Lamb: For, my sins, O Blessed Jesu, went
along in Confederation with the High Priests, in Treachery with Judas, in
Injustice with Pilate, in Malice and Cruelty with the People; Oh! what
punishment then shall I be thought worthy of, who have thus trampled under foot
the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the Covenant an Unholy Thing? Where
shall I vile Wretch appear, who have put my LORD to Death! Who have crucified
to my self the SON of GOD afresh, and put thee to an open shame! Where should I
appear, but before my Savior, who has loved, and dyed for me, though I have
hated, and Murdered him? Thy Blood, O Jesu, is my only Refuge! Oh! Let the Cry
of it speak on my Behalf; and may it speak better things than the Blood of
Abel! Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in
Thee; and in the clefts of thy Wounds shall be my Refuge until thy Father's
Indignation be overpast! Oh Blessed Advocate and Mediator Intercede for me
with thy Father and ours, thy God and ours; and grant, that by the Grace which
thou have found, by the prerogative which thou have deserved, by the mercy
which thou have purchased for me, as thou have been partaker of my sufferings
and Infirmities, so I by thy Death and Resurrection and by thy infinite
gracious Intercession may be made partaker of thy Holiness, and thy glory, even
for thy own Merits sake. Amen.

3. O Lord, who have promised, that if I open my mouth wide, Thou will fill it;
I pray thee, to open it; and, not my mouth only, but my heart also: Oh! Create
in thy servant a great hunger, and thirst after the things of thy Kingdom and
the righteousness of it; after all thy holy graces and all the holy ministerys
of Grace; that I may long for the Bread of Heaven, thirst after the fountain of
Salvation, and as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so my soul may
desire Thee, O Lord: Oh! Kindle such an holy flame in my Soul, that it may
consume all my sins and cursed affections, that I may never again desile the
place which thou have chosen for thy Temple. Thou diedst, O Dear Jesu, to
redeem me from all iniquity; Oh! let me not again sell my self, to work
wickedness: I am a sinner, a Grievous one, not worthy to look up to heaven; But
be thou pleased to look down into the Dust, and lift up a Sinner from the
Dunghill; Let me not perish in my folly, or be consumed in thy heavy
displeasure; Give me time and Space to repent; and give me powers of Grace,
that as by thy Holy Inspiration I do Sincerely and fixedly resolve on an
entire Reformation, So by thy merciful Guidance I may faithfully perform the
same. Amen.

4. O Thou Great Physician of Souls; Heal me of those many, and foul Diseases
which my Soul groans under; Grant that I may now so Touch thee that every one
of those loath-some issues may immediately stanch, that these sicknesses may
not be unto Death; but to the Glory of thy mercy in pardoning, to the glory of
thy Grace in purifying so polluted a wretch. Oh Christ hear me! Inspire me with
an holy Zeal to mortify my sins, support me with an Holy Hope, confirm me with
an excellent and unreproveable ^aith, and inkindle in me a never failing
^arity: Let me judge my self, that I be not judged by thee; condemn my self,
that I be not condemned with the world: But, Receiving this Holy Sacrament with
a penitent heart, and a lively Faith, I may partake the great benefits of it; I
may dwell in Christ, and Christ in me; I may be one with Christ, and Christ
with me: The Lord be merciful unto me, and grant this for his own Bowels and
Compassions sake. Amen.

Then these Collects of Intercession.

Merciful God, who have made all men, and would not the Death of a sinner,
but rather that he should Turn from his wickedness and live; to which purpose,
Thou have sent thy Son out of thy Bosom to suffer death upon the Cross for our
Redemption: look down in mercy and pity upon Poor Mankind whose portion is
folly and misery, shame, and Death: Bring all sinners to Repentance: enlighten
all that sit in darkness; all Jews, Turks, Infidels, Heretics and
Schismatics; Take from them all blindness, hardness of heart, and contempt of
thy word and Commandment; so fetch them home, blessed Lord, unto thy fold, that
they may be saved among the remnant of the true Israelites, and be made One
Fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRracious Lord, I do more especially humbly present to thy divine Majesty
this Glorious sacrifice which thy blessed Son made upon the Cross, in the
behalf of all Christans throughout the World: give unto them all, O God, a
portion of all the good Prayers which are made in heaven and earth, the
Intercession of our Lord, and the supplications of all thy servants. Oh! Let us
walk worthy of that Holy vocation wherewith we are called; let us who name the
name of Christ depart from iniquity; and Unite us in the bonds of the Common
Faith, and an holy Charity, that no interests or partialitys, no sects or
opinions may keep us any longer in darkness and division, But that we may with
one mind, and one mouth Glorify thee, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen

O Father of Mercys, Be merciful to this Miserably Divided Church in which we
live; according to all thy righteousness, let thine anger be turned away from
us; let Religion and virtue season all sorts of men therein; Forgive us all our
sins; Turn thee unto us and bless us, that the world may say, Blessed is this,
people whose God is the Lord Jehovah, and Blessed are the solk whom he has
chosen to him to be his Inheritance. Oh! Lord, Hear, and cause thy Face to
shine upon this thy Sanctuary which is thus Sadly desolate for the Lords sake.
Amen.

O King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, give I Pray thee the Spirit of Government
and Holiness to all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors; especially to thy
Servant CHARLES our King; Grant that his people may obey him, and he may obey
thee, and live in honesty and peace, justice and holy Religion, being a Nursing
Father to the Church, an Advocate for the oppressed, a Patron for the Widows,
and a Sanctuary for the miserable and Fatherless, that he may Reign with thee
forever in the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Thou Fountain of all Goo^ness, be pleased to bless and protect our Gracious
Queen CATHERINE; JAMES Duke of York, and all the Royal Family; endue them with
all Heavenly Graces answerable to their Births; make them Instruments of thy
Glory here, and partakers of thy Glory hereafter Amen.

O God, who alone do great wonders; Be Gracious unto all those, who wait at
thine Altar; the Bishops, and all the Clergy: Open thou their Lips, that their
Mouths may show forth thy praise; Inspire them with holiness, and diligence to
preach and declare the will by a Good Life, and wise Discourses, the they may
minister to the good of Souls, and fin^ a glorious reward in the Day of the
Lord Jesus. Amen.

O Merciful God; Be merciful in Succouring all that are in affliction;
Deliver the outcast and poor; Help them to right that Suffer wrong; let the
sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee, and according to the
Greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to dye; Be
merciful unto all who are just now breathing out their last; Grant ease to
those that are in pain, Supply to those that Suffer want: and, To all wicked
persons give thy Grace, that they may Speedily repent, and Live well, and be
saved through the merits of Jesus Christ. Amen.

HAve mercy, and pour down thy Blessings, O God, upon my Father, Mother, and
all other my Relations, Friends, and Benefactors: Grant unto them whatsoever
they want, or wisely and holily desire; Keep them forever in thy fear and
favor; and let their portion be in the Blessing, and in the Service, in the
love, and in the Kingdom of God, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, I beseech thee, forgive my Enemies all their sins against thee, and
me: and, ^ive me that measure of thy Grace, that for their hatred, I may love
them; for their Cursing, I may bless them; for their injurys I may do them
good; and for their persecution, I may pray for them. Lord, I pray for them;
Forgive them, for they know not what they do. Amen.

Finally, O Lord, I pray thee, for all those who shall this day be my
Companions at the Altar; and for all others who do now Communicate in any part
of Christendom; that through this blood of the Cross, we may all be cleansed
from our sins, and be presented pure and unblameable, and unreproveable in thy
sight; for the sake of Jesus Christ, whom I adore, whom I love, and desire I
may still more and more love, and love for ever. Amen. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

But deliver us from Evil. Amen.

The Lord bless and preserve me in my going out, and my coming in; from this
time forth, for evermore. Amen.

Having thus finished your Closet-Devotions, you go forth to the Church or
Chapel, Fasting, that so a Portion from Gods Table may be the first Morsel;
and remember to take something out of your Store to present at the Offertory.

When you enter into the Church, kneel and pray.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

Lord, I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the place where thine
honor dwells. I will wash my bands in Innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to
thine Altar.

Having seated your self, turn to the Psalms, and Lessons, Epistle and Gospel
for the day, that you may more freely attend the Priest in reading them.

Sermon ended, you go up to the Altar, and prostrate before it, say,

Thou art worthy. O Lord, to receive glory and honor, and power; for thou have
created all things, and for thy wills sake they are, and were created.

Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power be unto our
God, and unto the Lamb for evermore. Amen.

Then whilst Others are coming up, and the Priest preparing to read the
Sentences, pray,

ALmighty Lord, who have of thine infinite mercies vouchsas'd to ordain this
Sacrament for a perpetual memory of that blessed Sacrifice, which once thou
made for us upon the Cross; grant me with such diligent remembrance, and such
due reverence, to participate of this so holy and wonderful a mystery, that I
^y be made worthy by thy grace to obtain the ^tue and fruits of the same, with
all the bene^s of thy precious death and passion, even the Remission of all my
sins, and the fullness of all thy graces, which I beg for thy only merits, who
art my only Savior, God from everlasting, and world without end, Amen.

O Lord, our Heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, regard, we beseech
thee, the devotions of thy humble Servants, who do now celebrate the Memorial
which thy Son our Savior has commanded to be made in remembrance of his most
blessed Passion and Sacrifice; that by the merits and power there of, now
represented before thy divine Majesty, we, and all thy whole Church may be made
partakers of all other the benefits of his most precious Death and Passion,
together with his mighty Resurrection from the earth, and glorious Ascension
into Heaven, who lives and reigns with thee, and the holy Spirit, ever one
God, world without end. Amen.

BE pleased, O God, to accept this our bounden duty and service; and command
that the prayers and supplications, together with the Remembrance of Christ's
Passion, which we do now offer up unto thee, may by the ministry of thy holy
Angels be brought up into thy Heavenly Tabernacle; and that thou not weighing
our merits, but looking upon the blessed Sacrifice of our Savior, which was
once fully and perfectly made for us all, may pardon our offenses, and
replenish us with thy grace and heavenly benediction, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Whilst upon your Knees you cast in your Offering; stop, and say,

Blessed Jesu, who did accept the poor Widows two Mites; be pleased
graciciously to accept this from thy unworthy Servant. Amen.

The Prayers beginning again, you must join with the Congregation; and heeding
every passage, let your heart go along with it: keep your mind attentive, not
only to the words and substance of the prayers and exhortations, but also to
every passage, and particular Ceremony in the Consecration; for as much as all
of them have their meaning and reason.

Observe the Priest then breaking the Bread; and remember how Christ's B. Body
was tor'n with nails upon the Cross: Observe him pouring out the Wine; and
remember how his precious Blood was spilt likewise; and then, consider they
were your sins which caused both; which should work in you a great sorrow for
them, and then a great hatred, and a firm resolution against them; and withal,
engage you to thank^lness and love, resolving to express it by an ^niversal
obedience in your Conversation. Again,

Observe the People too, taking and eating the Bread; Taking and Drinking the
Wine; for it signifies their particular laying hold on Christ by Trust and
Faith; their flying to, and apprehending him, as the means of their Salvation,
and the pardon of their sins tendered to them in this B. Sacrament.

When you have thus meditated; If you have time, while the Priest, and others
are Communicating, use these or the like heavenly Aspirations.

I am now before the Altar of God, even the God of my joy and gladness.

I will offer Thanksgiving unto my God, and pay my Vows unto the most Highest.

O lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, Grant me thy Peace!

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, Have mercy upon me!

Grant me, Gracious Lord, so to eat the Flesh of thy Son, and to drink his
Blood, that my sinful Body may be made clean by his Body, and my Soul washed
through his most precious Blood. Amen.

O Lord, I am not worthy, not fit that thou should come under the filthy
Roof of the house of my Soul, because it is wholly desolate and ruinous;
neither have thou with me a fit place where to lay thy head: But, as thou
did vouchsafe to be laid in a Stable and Manger of unreasonable Beasts; as
thou did not disdain to be entertained even in the house of SIMON the Leper;
As thou did not reject the Harlot, a sinner like unto me, coming unto thee,
and touching thee; As thou did not abhor her foul and profane mouth; Nor
yet the Thief on the Cross confessing thee: Even so vouchsafe to admit me also,
an overwor'n, miserable, and out of measure sinful Creature, to the Receiving
and Communicating of the most pure, quickening, and saving mysteries of thy
most holy Body, and precious Blood. Amen.

O Lord God, how I received the Body and Blood of my most blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, the price of my Redemption, is the very wonder of my Soul! yet, my most
firm and constant belief upon the words of my Savior. At this time they are
graciously rend'red to me, and my Faith: Lord, make me a worthy Receiver, and a
Partaker of all the benefits of this B. Sacrament. Amen.

Thou have said, that he that eats thy Flesh, and drinks thy Blood, has
Eternal Life.

Behold the Servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word!

Whilst you eat it, say,

By thy Crucified Body deliver me from this Body of Death.

After Receiving,

By thine Agony and Bloody sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, Good Lord deliver
me!

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Righteous Judgments.

O hold thou up my goings in thy Paths; that my footsteps slip not.

At the Receiving of the Cup, say,

What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits that he has done
unto me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

After you have Received it, say,

O my God, thou art true and holy! O my Soul, thou art blessed and happy!

Oh the depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how incomprehensible are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his Holy Name,
who saves thy Life from Destruction, and feeds thee with the Bread of Heaven!

Glory be to God on high, and on Earth Peace, good Will toward Men. I worshi^
thee, O Lord, and I magnify thy Name (...) ever, who have vouchsafed to fill
my Soul wi^ gladness, and to seed me with the Heavenly Mysteries of Christ's
sacred Body and Blood; humbly beseeching thee, that from henceforth I may walk
in good Works, and serve thee in Holiness and Pureness of Living, to the Honor
of thy Name. Amen.

MOst Blessed Redeemer, I do truly believe, that thy Body was crucified, and
thy Blood was shed out of thy Body, as verily as I have received this Bread,
and this Wine set apart from the Bread: and that for the Remission of my sins,
as well as any others: And I do also believe, that with this Bread and Wine, I
have really and spiritually received thy precious Body and Blood, whereby my
sins are fully washed away, and my Soul purified, and refreshed: This, O Lord,
I believe, help thou my Unbelief! Amen.

Whilst others are Communicating; Meditate, and Say,

HAppy are those Servants, whom, when their Lord comes, he shall find thus
doing.

Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? If any one defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy.

Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee!

The hour comes, and now it is that the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth.

Be we followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in love as Christ loved us,
and gave himself an Offering and a Sacrifice of a sweet savor unto God for us.

At the end of the Communion, say,

To the King Eternal, the Immortal, Invisible and only Wife God, the ever
blessed Trinity, be all honor, and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

Arising and making your Reverence toward the Altar, you depart with a glad
heart, and a cheerful countenance; preserve good thoughts in your mind; yet be
not sullen or morose; but salute any of your Christian Brethren, you meet with.

As soon as you come home, retire into your Closet, and bless God with these
Collects of Thanksgiving.

ALmighty God, the Fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and perfect
gift proceeds; and to whom all glory and honor should be returned: I do
desire most heartily to thank thee, for that thou have vouchsafed to feed me,
who have received these holy mysteries with the spiritual food of the most
precious Body and Blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ; and do assure
me thereby of thy favor and goodness toward me, and that I am a very member
incorporate in the mystical Body of thy Son, which is the blessed Company of
all Faithful people; and am also an Heir through hope of thine everlasting
Kingdom, by the merits of the most precious Death and Passion of thy dear Son.
Oh the height and depth of that unspeakable mercy of thine, who art pleased to
admit me a sinful wretch to have any part in those inestimable benefits, which
I have so often despised and trampled under foot! I am not worthy, O Lord, of
that daily Bread, which sustains the body; but thou have made me partaket of
that living Bread which came down from Heaven; which nourishes the Soul, and,
of which whosoever eats, shall live for ever. O grant that my Soul may
relish this divine food with spiritual ravishments, and love great as the
flame of Cherubims; and grant, that what thou have given me for the Remission
of my sins, may not by any fault become the increase of them; that this holy
Communion prove not unto me, unto Judgment and Condemnation, but may support
and preserve me in every temptation, rejoice and quiet me in every trouble, in
lighten and strengthen me in every good word and work; comfort and defend me in
the hour of my death against all oppositions of the Spirits of darkness, and
further me in the attainment of everlasting Salvation, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

MOst holy God, who art of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; grant, I pray
thee, that no unclean thing may be in me, who have now Received Thee into my
heart and soul; but let this Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to thee, purge my Conscience from dead works to
serve thee the living God; give me grace, that from henceforth I put off
concerning my former Conversation the Old man; which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful Lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of my mind: And that I put on
the New Man, which after thee is created in Righteousness and true Holiness; to
which purpose be pleased to watch over me for good, to keep me both outwardly
in my Body, and inwardly in my Soul: O God, thou see that I have no power of
my self to help my self; thou know me also to be set in the midst of so
many and great dangers, that by reason of the frailty of my Nature, I cannot
always stand upright; grant to me such strength and protection, as may support
me in all dangers, and carry me through all temptations, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

O Thou, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning, let thy holy
Spirit direct me in all things, let thy grace always prevent and follow me, and
preserve me against all assaults of my spiritual enemies, especially of my own
treacherous heart, which is deceitful above all things, wicked, desperately
wicked, O Lord, thou know it: how often has it betrayed me to the breach of
thy holy Laws, to the violation of all these Vows and Promises which I have
made to thee? How often have I turned my back in the day of battle? O let me no
more thus start aside like a broken bow, but be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, resisting the Devil that he may flee from
me, subduing my flesh and bringing it into subjection, Crufying and overcoming
the World. And therefore let those solemn Vows, which I have now made to
forsake my sins, never depart from my mind; but let the remembranee of them
excite me to fight manfully under thy Banner, and continue thy faithful Servant
and Soldier unto my Life's end. Amen.

O Lord, I do here humbly present unto thee my Soul and Body to be a living,
holy, and reasonable Sacrifice unto thee; I beseech thee, sanctify my Body,
that from a polluted Dunghill, it may become the Temple of God: Sanctify my
Soul, and receive it for thy dwelling place, the seat of thy Spirit, and an
house of Prayer and Holy Meditations: Sanctify me throughout, that both my
Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory, world without end. Amen.

THus have you closed your Communion-Devotions; It only remains, that you
bestow the greatest part of the Afternoon in Reading, Praying, Meditating, good
Conferences, and the like: and when your Condition calls you to your usual
Converses, you are still to remember, you have a great business which lies upon
your hands, which is the performance of those promises you have now made to
God; to which purpose frequently recollect them to mind, and let the
remembrance of them be your refuge against all temptations to your old sins,
whenever they assault you; knowing, what a grievous thing it is to break that
Vow which you have sealed in your Saviors Blood, and to have that Blood
(through which only you can have pardon) to witness against you, which God
forbid

To your Evening Prayers, that Sunday night immediately before the Blessing,
subjoyn this Collect.

O Blessed JESUS, who have this day made me a Partaker of thy blessed Body and
Blood; thy Mercy has given it, and my Faith has received it into my Soul: O
let me ever feel the happy virtue and effects of it: Put thy fear into my
heart, to keep those Vows and Promises which I have on this solemnity tendered
unto thee in my mind, that I may not sin against thee; enrich me with all those
graces which come from this precious Body and Blood, and hereafter bring me to
thy everlasting glory, for thy merits and mercies sake. Amen.

THus not to detain you longer, I have recommended to you the aforesaid
Devotions to be used on the Friday in every month, which precedes a Communion,
(especially the Fridays before the three solemn times which our Church has
Consecrated to this Blessed purpose, Christmas, Easter, and Whit-Sunday,)
supposing, that your health and important occasions will permit it, otherwise
you are not tied to the strictness of them, though you are obliged to receive
this Sacrament, whenever an opportunity offers it self.

To capacitate you for a worthy Communication thereof at all times; I do
lastly, and heartily advise you to maintain a constant course of daily Prayers
at Morning and Evening throughout the year; every Night recalling the Actions
of the past-day, and repenting for the sins of it; the practice whereof will
fit you for the Communion at any time, when it is occasionally tendered to you;
I mean, when you are suddenly called to Communicate with a dying person: or
come accidentally into a Congregation, where it is to be received, and all fit
Guests are invited to it; in those cases, you are by no means to turn your back
upon it; but, bestowing that little time which is before you in Recollecting,
Repenting, Exerting your Faith, Love, Thankfulness, etc. Omiting nothing of the
strictness which is required in the Act of Receiving, and performing afterward
to your power what you secretly promised; receive it with the rest in the name
of God, beginning with the Prayers before mentioned, [ page 68.] which are to be
said whilst the Priest is preparing to read the Sentences.

Almighty God, who have of thine infinite mercies vouchsafed, etc.

But this I advise, on supposal you carry about with you such an habitual
preparation, which is acquired by keeping a strict course of daily private
Devotions, otherwise you sin sadly. However, be careful to Communicate,
whenever you are solemnly invited to it, i. e. every month, or oftener, and
with due remembrance of him, whose death you do hereby show forth till he come.

God Almighty make you a worthy participant of his Body and Blood here; that
you may for ever enjoy Him hereafter. Amen.

Collects for particular Graces.
For Faith.
ALmighty God, whom without Faith, it is impossible to please; grant me, I
beseech thee, so perfectly to believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, that my Faith in
thy sight may never be reproved; and being called to the knowledge of thy Grace,
and Faith in thee, and admitted into the fellowship of Christ's Religion, I may
eschew those things which are contrary to my Profession, and follow all such
things as are agreeable to the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For
Hope.
BLessed Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning; grant that I may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Word, I may
embrace, and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ; and that I may therefore purify my
self, even as he is pure, that when he shall appear again with power and great
glory, I may be made like him in his Eternal and glorious Kingdom where with
thee, O Father, and thee, O Holy Ghost, he lives and reigns ever one God,
World without end. Amen. For the Love of God.
O God, who have prepared for them that Love thee such good things as pass man's
understanding, pour into my heart such Love toward thee, that I Loving thee
above all things may obtain thy promises which exceed all that I can desire,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. For Charlty.
O Lord, who have taught me that all our doings Without Charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost and pour into my heart that most excellent gift of
Charity the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen. For Chastity.
O Holy Jesus who were conceived in the womb of a Virgin, I beseech thee, grant
thy servant grace to withstand all temptations of the flesh, and with a pure
and clean heart to follow thee the only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen. For Contrition.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made and do
forgive the sins of all them that are penitent: Create and make in me a new and
Contrite Heart, that I worthily Lamenting my sins and acknowledging my
Wretchedness may obtain of thee the God of all mercy, perfect Remission and
Forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Anen. For Devotion,
MOst great God. who have not only Permitted but invited us needy and miserable
Creatures to present our petitions to thee; O let me set a true value on this
most invaluable Privilidge. I come unto thee, O Lord, as a Worm to my Sovereign
Maker; I come as an Hanious Offender to a just and Severe Judge; let, I pray
thee, mine addresses to thine house be with a Reverence some way answerable to
thine Awful Majesty; give me an hearty desire to pray, and such a Pure
Intention and Fixedness of Mind upon thee that I may no more incur the guilt
of drawing near to thee with my Lips when my Heart is far from thee, but may so
ask that I may recieve, seek that I may find, knock that it may be opened unto
me; that so from praying to thee here, I may be translated to the praising thee
eternally in thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For the Fear of
God.
MOst great God, who only art high and to be feared, O put thy fear into my
heart, that I may not sin against thee; let me never so misplace my Fear as to
be afraid of man whose breath is in his Nosthrills, but fill me, O Lord, with
the Spirit of thy holy Fear, which is the beginning of Wisdom, and let it
preserve me in a perpetual conformity to thy will in all things, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen. For Contentedness.
O God Heavenly Father, who by thy Son Jesus Christ have promised to all them
that seek thy Kingdom and the righteousness theteof all things necessary to
their bodily sustenance; keep me, I beseech thee, under the protection of thy
good providence, and learn me, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
Content; grant me grace to forsake all Covetous desires and Inordinate love of
Riches, and so to pass through things Temporal that I finally loose not the
things eternal, but that among all the sundry and manfold changes of the
world, my heart may surely there be fixed, where true joys are to be sound,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For Diligence.
O Lord, who in thy holy Gospel did sentence the Slothful and unprofitable
Servant to be cast into outer darkness; grant that I may not stand here all the
day idle, but may give all Diligence to make my calling and Election sure; make
me in some measure useful to my self and others both as to This, and a better
life. O let me never lay mine eyes to sleep nor mine eyelids to slumber, but
learn and labor to get my own living, and to do my duty in that State of life,
whereto it has pleased thee to call me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
For Humility.
ALmighty God, who resistest the Proud and give grace to the Humble;
mercifully grant, that I may follow the example of the great Humility of thy
Blessed Son, who did humble himself to take upon him our flesh and to Suffer
death upon the Cross; Convince me that I am less then the least of all thy
mercy's, that as I am vile in my self, so let me be vile in mine own eyes, and
may therefore esteem every man better then my Self. Grant this, O Father, for
thy Son Jesus Christ's sake. A-Amen- For Justice.
O Thou King of Righteousness, who love righteousness and art mighty to save;
give me grace to obtain this love of thine by cleansing my heart and hands from
all fraud and injustice; O grant that I may most strictly observe that sacred
Rule of Doing unto all men as I would they should do unto me; that I hurt no
body in word or deed, but be true and just in all my dealings, that so keeping
innocence and taking heed unto the thing that is right, I may have peace at the
last, even peace with Thee, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For Meekness.
ALmighty God, who have given thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for
sin, and also an ensample of Godly life; give me grace to learn of him who was
meek and lowly of heart to put on bowels of mercy, meekness, and
long-suffering; to be so far from offering the least injury, that I may never
return the greatest: And grant I beseech thee, that the course of this World
may be so peaceably ordered by thy Governance, that I may joyfully serve thee
in all Godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For Sincerity.
O Holy Lord, who searchest the heart, and tryest the reins, try me, I beseech
thee, and seek the ground of my heart; purge it from all hypocrisy, and suffer
not any a cursed thing to lurk within me; give me truth in the inward part, to
be pure in heart, that I may be qualified to see thee in thy Kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For Temperance.
GRacious Lord, who refreshest us with thy good Creatures, and art the Author
of all the good things which we do enjoy; give me grace I pray thee to use them
with thankfulness and moderation; let me never be overcharged with Surfeiting
and Drunkenness, nor my Table be ever made a snare unto me; but may so eat and
drink, that my flesh may be subdued to the Spirit, and I may ever obey thy
godly motions in Righteousness and true Holiness, to thy honor, and glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For Thankfulness.
GRacious God, who have taught me, that it is a joyful and pleasant thing to be
thankful; suffer me not I beseech thee to loose my part in that divine
pleasure, but make me truly and unfeignedly thankful unto thee for all thy
mercies; let thy mercies lead me to Repentance, and give me grace to improve
them all to the advancement of thy glory, and the furtherance of my Salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. For Trust in God.
O God, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast fear and love; Grant I pray thee that I may lean only upon the
Hope of thy Heavenly grace, and in all my troubles put my whole trust and
confidence in thy mercy, casting all my care upon thee, and being careful for
nothing, but to keep thy testimony's, and think upon thy Commandments to do
them. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. For Perseverance.
O Lord, raise up I pray thee thy power, and come among us, and with great
might succor me; that whereas through my sins and wickedness, I am sore let
and hindered in running the Race that is set before me; thy bountiful grace and
mercy may help and strengthen me to hold out unto the end, that so I may be
saved; to be faithful unto death, that I may receive a Crown of life; nourish
me, I pray thee, with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep me in the same,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.

