Elias Redivivus: A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, In
the Parish of Saint Margarets West minster, at the public Fast, March 29,
1643. By JOHN LIGHTFOOTE, Preacher of the Gospel at Bartholomew Exchange,
London.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Green Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE the House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THE great Council of Jerusalem sat near the Temple, R. Sol. in Ex. 21
and the greatest managings of the Council, Luke 2. 46.
were the matters of Religion. Talm. in Sanhed. cap. Dine. mammonoth.
Such has been the posture of your desires, and such the bent of your
endeavors in all your sitting: And as it is ingratitude in any degrees of men
not to serve you, who strive so much to preserve the State, so especially is it
in the Ministers of the Temple, since you labor so much also to serve the
Temple. Obedience to your commands is the lowest expression of such a service,
because it is so naturally due, yet is it the highest that my meannesse can
reach unto; Readiness being joined to that obedience: These are the two mites
that I can tender unto your Corban, and the two Turtles that I have to offer at
your Altar, not having a better or more valuable gift and offering to bring,
your Nobleness will please to accept of the gift because of the heart of the
giver given with it, and like him whom ye represent, to account. To obey, to
be better then Sacrifice, and to hearken, better then the fat of Rams. What in
obedience to your command was humbly presented to your ears and hearing not
long ago, is now upon the like command in the same obedience and humility
presented to your eyes and reading. If it shall find acceptance with you, it
secureth me against al thought or care of inferiors displeasure or exceptions.
I most humbly and submissively cast it, my self, and all that I am or can at
the feet and disposal of your honorable House: and because short discourse
best fitteth your great occasions, cease to trouble you with more words: but
shall never cease to solicit the Throne of grace for continued defense and
blessing upon your persons and endeavors; that the Lawgiver may never fail
till Shiloh come as we desire amongst us: And so ever prays,

Your most unworthy, but truly devoted Servant, John Lightfoote.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at the Public Fast
holden, March 29. 1643. In the Parish Church of S. Margarets Westminster.
LUKE, 1. 17. And he shall go before him in the Spirit and power of Elias to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just.
IF ever the Hearts of the Fathers had need to be turned to the children, that
need is now, and if ever the Disobedient had need to be reduced to the wisdom
of the just, that need is now also: but where is the Spirit, and where the
power? where an Elias, or where a Baptist to do the work? For if ever those
searching and trying times, which were spoken of so long ago by our Savior in
the twelfth of Luke and the three and fiftieth have overtaken any Nation, they
have overtaken this of ours: Five in one house, and they divided, three against
two, and two against three. The Father divided against the Son, and the Son
against the Father; the Mother against the Daughter, Mat. 10. 36.
and the Daughter against the Mother; the Mother in law against her Daughter in
law, and the Daughter in law against her Mother in law. And a man's enemies are
they of his own household. And if ever those irregular and exorbitant
behaviors, which were spoken of so long ago, by the Prophet Esaias, in the
third of Esaias and the fifth, have over-runne and forraged any people, they have
done so by this of ours. The people oppressed every one by another, and every
one by his neighbor: the child behaving himself proudly against the ancient,
and the base against the honorable. These are our sorrows, but where our
remedy? this our misery, but where our redress? For the divisions of Reuben,
there are great thoughts of heart, but who can help them? for the divisions in
the Church, for divisions in the State, divisions in families, divisions in
opinions, divisions in affections, (the Lord keep them out of your two Houses)
divisions in every division, Antonio di Guevarra in Rel^x de los princip. lib.
1. cap. 2.
but who can heal them? As the Host at Nola in the story, who when he was
commanded by the Roman Censor to go and call the good men of the City to
appear before him, went to the Churchyard, and there called at the graves of
the dead, Oh ye good men of Nola come away, for the Roman Censor calls for
your appearance: for he knew not where to find a good man alive. So in these
distractions and distempers of this our Land, if we would find out a joyner of
hearts and a moulder of humors, that could piece again the disunited
affections, and form again the unfashioned demeanours of men toward men, we
might go and look for the mansion of Elias, or go and knock at the grave of
John the Baptist, and call them to come to such a cure as this, for they once
have wrought so great a cure; but who can do it that is now alive? Oh how
happy were the case with us, if the Spirit and power of Elias were as ready to
be found in your two Houses as they were once to be found in John the Baptist,
and as they are to be seen in the words of the text.

But as the Arc and the Ephod at the sacking of Nob, they which should always
have remained together, were by that doleful accident parted asunder, and kept
at distance: even so these two which God once joined together in Elias and in
the Baptist, and which the holy Ghost has joined together in the words of the
text, some evil Counsel has put asunder, so that the Spirit is with you, but
the Power removed a great way off. What our Savior says concerning offenses,
It cannot be but offenses will come, but woe to him by whom the offense
comes: so may we dolefully concerning this, It is our misery that this
divorce is come among us, but woe to that Counsel by whom the divorce first
came, it had been good for that Counselor had he never been borne.

How happy are those days which are spoken of by the Psalmist, when mercy and
truth are met together, and Righteousness and Peace do kiss each other? And
how happily should we hope to see those days, and those things in this Land to
meet, if we could but see these two to meet again that are now so unhappily
removed to distance? Well, all that we can do is to seek to drive them
together with our prayers, and as Moses for the Vrim and Thummim upon Levi, so
we for these united upon you to pray in public, and to pray in private, to
pray on the Lords day, and to pray on other days; and it is to be a maine
petition on this solemn day of humiliation, that as the Lord has put the
Spirit of Elias into your hearts, so that he would put the Power of Elias into
your hands, that as he has made you willing, so would he also make you able,
to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the Righteous.

The words of the text are the last words of the old Testament, there uttered
by a Prophet, here expounded by an Angel: there concluding the Law, and here
beginning the Gospel: Behold, says Malachi, Mal. 4. 5. I will send you Eliah
the Prophet: And he says, the Angel, shall go before him in the Spirit and
power of Elias. And he shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children,
says the one; And to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, says
the other. Thus sweetly and nearly should the two Testaments join together,
and thus divinely would they kiss each other, but that the wretched Apocrypha
does thrust in between: The Apocrypha injurious to the two Testaments.
Like the two 1 King. 6. 27.
Cherubims in the Temple Oracle, as with their outer-wings, they touch the two
sides of the house, from In the beginning, to Come Lord Jesus, so with their
inner, they would touch each other, the end of the law with the beginning of
the Gospel, did not this patchery of humane invention divorce them a funder.

It is a thing not a little to be admired, How the Apocrypha came into request.
how this Apocrypha could ever get such place in the hearts, and in the Bibles
of the Primitive times, as to come to sit in the very Center of them both: But
to this wonderment there may be some satisfaction given, namely because that
these books came to them from among the Jews, as well as the old Testament
and the new. And because that the Jews alone, and alone so long, had had the
knowledge of Divinity and Religion among them, the converted Gentiles could not
but give their writings extraordinary esteem. And because the Talmud not being
yet written, the world was not acquainted with the vanity and strain of Jewish
learning, those insuspecting times did swallow these books, as not tasting as
yet how unsavory that was, nor distinguishing these to be of the same taste. It
is therefore more to be admired, How it continued.
that when the Talmud was written, and the impious and ridiculous doctrines and
fables of the Jewish schools laid open to the world, that then these books
which show themselves to be of the very same stamp in many things, should not
only not be refused out the Bibles and out men's good conceit, but also get
better and further footing in the same: but to this wonderment some
satisfaction also may be given: namely that superstition begun then to grow in
the Church every day more and more, and it became a Religion to do as their
forefathers had done before, and to retain what they had retained, be it
whatsoever it would, and of what ungroundlesnesse soever.

But it is a wonder to which I could never yet receive satisfaction, that in
Churches that are reformed, that have shaken off the yoke of superstition, and
unpinned themselves from off the sleeve of former customs or doing as their
ancestors have done: yet in such a thing as this, and of so great import,
should do as first ignorance, and then superstition has done before them: It
is true indeed that they have refused these books out of the Canon, but they
have reserved them still in the Bible: as if God should have cast Adam out of
the state of happiness, and yet have continued him in the place of happiness.
Not to insist upon this, which is some digression, you know the Counsel of
Sarah concerning Ismael, and in that she outstripped Abraham in the Spirit of
Prophecy, Vid. R. Sol. and R. Menal. in lo.
Cast out the bondwoman and her son, for the son of the bondwoman may not
be heir with the son of the free.

In the words of the text you may see your own work and task: and those two
things that you have so long labored under, and that we have so long longed
after, Reconciliation and Reformation. You may behold in a part of the text,
Reconciliation in these words, To turn the hearts of the fathers to the
Children: and Reformation in the other, and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just. These are the two hands of our master which is in heaven, or rather
the two good things in his hands, after which we his servants have looked so
long, and do look this day, and cannot be taken off till he give them to us.
These are the hands of your two Houses, or rather the two great gifts which we
wait till God put into your hands to conveigh them toward us. These are the
two pillars, 1 King. 7. 21.
Jachin and Boaz, Firmness and Strength, that we long to see set up at the
door of that Temple that you are in building: And these are the two twins for
which the Tamar of our England is in travail and is pained to be delivered, if
there be but strength to bring them forth.

These two things contained in the latter part of the text, are set forth and
illustrated by two circumstances in the former: First, by the party and the
function of that party that must perform so great a work, those included in
these words, He shall go before him: Secondly, the qualifications and
indowments of that party for the function, and for the work, that expressed in
these; In the Spirit and power of Elias. The party rare, the function
honorable, his indowments singular, his work divine, He shall go before him,
etc.

We will take up the words according to this Division, but not according to
this order: for as in nature the agent is before the action, and as in the
text, the workman is named before the work, so are they fit to be considered,
and so will we take them into our handling, and so shall we take them as they
lie in the text, and first of the first, He shall go before him.

Who are meant by the He and the him in this part of the text the dimmest eye
that is, will easily judge and discern, upon its own reading, namely John the
Baptist, and our Savior Christ. Two that were in a very near relation one to
another by nature, for they were kinsmen according to the flesh, but of a
nearer and of a higher relation in regard of their function, for they were they
that began the Gospel, or the one begun and the other perfected; and they were
they that were the two great Prophets of the new Testament, or the one greater
then a Prophet, and the other greater then a man. I cannot omit that which is
not, nor cannot be omitted by any expositor it is so plain upon the him in
this part: namely, that in the verse next before, he is called the God of
Israel, He shall turn many of the Children to the Lord their God, and in this
verse and in this whole passage he is showed to be Christ, of whom is spoken
which gives a pregnant and undeniable proof that Christ is God, against the
wicked Arius that held him for a Creature.

The Baptist went before our Savior in diverse particulars; in his conception,
in his birth, in his preaching, in his death. For the miraculous conception and
birth of John, went before the more miraculous conception and birth of Christ;
his powerful Preaching, before the others more powerful; and his renowned
death, before the others more renowned. But the words do not mean so much his
going before him in time, as his going before him in Ministry, nor his
appearing before him in the world, as his appearing before him to do him
service, as a servant does before his Master to provide for his entertainment;
and so the words following do explain it, He shall go before him, To make
ready a people prepared for the Lord: Luke 10. 1.
And so the seventy Disciples are said to be sent before our Savior two and
two before his face, that is, to prepare men for his receiving against that he
himself should come.

All the Prophets went before our Savior in their Ministry, in their diverse
generations, but John in a more special manner above them all. They like
Balaam in the four and twentyeth of Numbers, did behold him, but not now, did
foretell him, but not near; but he beheld him face to face, and he told of him
standing by. And hence it is, that our Savior calls him more then a Prophet,
Mat. 11. 9. nay as much or more then any mere man that was naturally borne of
a woman: More then a Prophet, because he went before Christ as his forerunner;
and as great as any that was ever borne, because he was the beginner of the
Gospel. The Ministry of John the Baptist, The Ministry of John the beginning
of the Gospel.
and the publishing of the Gospel, like time and the motion of the heavens,
began together, and in one and the same instant. So has Mark conjoined them,
in the very beginning of the Gospel, Mark. 1. 1. The beginning of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, As it is written in the Prophets, Behold, I send my messenger
before thee. So likewise, in the first of the Acts and the two and twenty,
Peter proposing a Disciple to be chosen in stead of Judaas, Of these men, says
he, which have companyed with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and
out among us, beginning from the Baptism of John: And so in the tenth chapter
of the same book of the Acts, and the thirty seventh. The word you know which
was published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee after the Baptism
which John preached. And one place for all. Mat. 11. 13. All the Prophets and
the Law Prophesied until John, and from him began the Gospel. So that what
some of the Fathers say concerning Malachi, That he was Limes Judeismi and
Christianismi, we may not unfitly say, concerning him, that he was the bounds
of Judaisme and Christianity, the limits from whence the Law and the Prophets
took their conclusion, and the Gospel, and the kingdom of Heaven their
beginning.

Now as the ministry of John consisted of two distinct and considerable parts,
The Ministry of John, of two parts.
Preaching and Baptizing, [like as the gift of Prophecy had consisted in times
before, of a double spirit, or to speak more properly, of a double power of
one and the same spirit, to foretell things to come and to work miracles;] so
by both these did he begin the Gospel, and by both these did he go before our
Savior. These were, as it were the two hands with which he laid the
foundation, and began to build up the Fabric of the Evangelicall Temple. And
these two has Mark joined together in his relation, as John did in the
exercise of his function, Mar. 1. 4. John did Baptize in the Wilderness and
preach the Baptism of Repentance.

By both these he began the Gospel, and first by his Baptism: for,

First, Baptism used under the law.
Baptism was used in the times before and under the Law, but it was to admit
Proselytes to the religion of the Jews: But the Baptist now comes with a
Baptism to admit the Jews to another Religion besides their own. Jacob in
Genesis 35. when he is to enter and admit the remnant of Sichem that escaped the
sword into his family and Religion, he does it by Baptism. Put away, says he,
the strange Gods that are among you, and be clean and change your garments,
where, by the second injunction, Ab. Ezr. in Genesis 35.
Be clean, Aben Ezra* well observes is meant the washing of their bodies in
water, and indeed nothing else can so properly be meant, Tom. 1. p. 317. Asure
blah. perek 13.
which what was it else but a Baptizing? And so Rambam or Maimonides in his
Epitome of the Talmud, relates from thence, 1 King. 5. 15. 16.
that in the times of David and Solomon, when Heathens came into the Jews
religion by thousands (for a hundred three and fifty thousand of them helped to
build the Temple) they were admitted thereinto by Baptism, or by being washed,
and not by circumcision. Thus was Baptism used in 49/8 Vid. R. Sol. ^arch in
Ex. 24.
those ancient times, and used to induct the Gentiles into the Church and
Religion of the Jews: But now comes John with a baptism of another and,
namely, to enter the Jews into another Church and religion then their own,
and so by his baptism does he begin the Gospel.

Secondly, And so also did he by his preaching: For whereas the law called for
absolute and exact performance, and cried a curse on him that confirmed not all
the words of the Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. John comes in another tenor,
like God in the still voice, and instead of challenging the strict performance
of works, he Preaches the gentle doctrine of Repentance; that whereas they
could not do what the Law required, they should repent for that they had broke
the law, and thus is the rigorous and terrible tenor of the law, changed into
the sweet and comfortable doctrine of Repentance, and thus both by Baptizing
and Preaching, does John begin the Gospel.

And so by both also did he go before our Savior: By baptism to admit men
into Christ against he should come, and by his Preaching to let Christ into men
when as he came: By his baptizing to make way for Christ his coming among men,
and by his Preaching to make way for men their coming unto Christ: And so much
is intimated by the words that next and immediately do follow the text, To
make ready a people prepared for the Lord. This might be taken only for an
elegancy such as the Scripture uses, to quicken expressions, by repetitions,
but it has its proper vigor and significancy, and in the two several words
denotes the two distinct fruits of the ministry of the Baptist in her two
parts: His Baptism, to make men ready to look for Christ that was now in
coming; and his Preaching, to have them prepared for his receiving when he
came.

The observation that we may take up from hence is this, Observe.
That Christ when he came to show himself in the world had need of a
powerful, and a Spirited forerunner: He was the expectation of the Gentiles.
Genesis 49. 10. He was the expectation of the Samaritans. John 4. 25. He was the
expectation of the Jews. Luke 19. 11. He was the expectation of all nations.
Hag. 2. 7. And yet when he came that was so expected, he had need of a
Harbinger to go before him, and a strong forerunner to make his way; and all
this too little too. For when he came amongst his own, his own received him
not. Joh. 1. 11.

The Jews sansie concerning the cloud of glory, that conducted Israel through
the Wilderness, that it did not only show them the way, but also plane it,
that it did not only lead them in the way in which they must go, but also fit
them the way to go upon: That it levelled all the mountains and smoothed all
the rocks, that it cleared all the bushes, and removed all the rubs. No less
preparatives were required for our Saviors coming to make way for him, in the
entertainment of men, or to make way for men to the entertaining of him: And
so has the Scripture expressed it in terms not much different: Every valley
shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth: Esaias
40. 4. Luke 4. 5.

There were two maine things that lay betwixt the Jews and Christ at his
appearing, that were most likely to keep them asunder, and to hinder the
access of each to other, and so they did. And those were their corruption in
manners, and in behavior, and their corruption in doctrine, and in religion;
the former like rough ways that must be smoothed, and the latter like crooked,
that must be straightened; and both being such as must be helped, or little
hopes they can come to Christ.

First. As for their corruption in manners, had we not evidence enough thereof
in the Scripture, that lays it open, we have sufficient in their own writers.
They were a generation of vipers; so John calls them, Mat. 3. 7. Jews corruption
in manner.
They were a wicked and adulterous generation; so our Savior calls them, Mat.
16. 4. seeming to allude to the Phrase of Hosea, the children of fornications,
Hos. 1. 2. They were a people stiffenecked and of uncircumcised hearts and
ears: so Stephen calls them Act. 7. 51. And to spare more, our Savior makes
them as it were the common shore of all vengeance, and consequently the sincke
of all iniquity, Mat. 23. 35. That upon you may come all the righteous blood
shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous Abell, unto the blood of
Zacharias.

To these Characters of their manners given by Scripture, we may add the
confession of their own Authors in their writings. The Talmud in Sanhedrim,
in the eleventh chapter has these words. Talm. Sanh. page 97.
R: Juda says, In the generation in which the son of David shall come, The
house of the Assembly shall be a stews, the wisdom of the Scribes shall
fail, they that fear sin shall be despised, and the face of that generation
shall be like dogs. Saint Paul hits them with their own title, Beware of dogs,
beware of the concision, Phil. 3. 2. and so does John seem also to do, R.
Dav. Kimek on Isay 59.
Without are dogs. Rev. 22. 15. Such another testimony does David Kimchi give
out of the Rabbis on Easy 59. 16. Rabbi Johanan says, says he, The Son of
David comes not, but either in a generation all holy, as it is written, Thy
people shall all be righteous, and inherit the Land for ever: or in a
generation all wicked, as it is written, He saw that there was no man, and
wondered that there was no intercessor. Too pregnant and woeful experience
showed that the latter was only true, and their own behavior at our Saviors
coming, confirms the gloss to prophecy truly, that their manners then
should be most corrupt.

Secondly, and so was also their Doctrine: and that withal in a twofold
relation. 1. In regard of the opinion that they held concerning the legal
rites that were amongst them before: and 2. in regard of the opinion that they
held concerning Christ, who was now in coming.

1. They were so glewed to the Ceremonies of Moses, and so bewitched with the
Traditions of the Fathers, that it was an impossibility in humane reason to
thaw them asunder.

Paul speaking of his own doting upon these, speaks the affection of his
whole Nation in this particular, Jews vehement addiction to their traditions
and legal rites.
I was exceedingly zealous of the Traditions of the Fathers, Gal. 1. 14.
Stephen in Act. 6. 14. for but speaking of the abolishing of the Customs of
Moses, must lose his life, though he spoke but what Moses himself had spoken
before, and what an Angel had spoken after Moses, and though his face when he
was to answer for these things, shone like the face of Moses, and was like the
face of an Angel. But what need I to insist upon particulars? If you look
throughout all the Acts of the Apostles, you shall find that almost in every
place where the Gospel came among the Jews, this was the maine obstacle that
ever lay in the way to hinder the freedom of its passage, the fixednesse of
that people and Nation to their Ceremonies and Traditions. Let one place
suffice for many, Act. 21. 28. The Jews of Asia laid hands on Paul, crying
out; Men of Israel help, this man teaches all men every where against the
people, and the law, and this place.

The preaching of the Gospel goes against their heart, because it goes
against their Customs, and he that speaks against that people, law, and
place, is sure to be spoken against himself, for they were so pinned unto the
rites of those three, that there must be nothinking of their removal. And thus
were they most corrupt in opinion concerning the Ceremonies of the Law which
they had used of old.

2. And so also were they concerning Christ when he should come. They expected
him to appear in the world as an earthly Conqueror, like Naaman the Syrian by
the Prophet Elisha; 2 King. 5. 11.
He thought he will surely come out and stand, Jews misconceit concerning the
Messiah.
and call upon the name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place
and recover the Leper; and he only sent him this plain and simple message, Go
wash in Jordan and be clean: So they by Christ, they conceited, Surely he will
come with great worldly pomp, and make his way with a conquering sword, he
will destroy many people even as earthly Princes do, and seat his people in
Canaan again in more prosperity and pomp then ever: Esaias 53. 2.
and he on the contrary, came in the form of a servant, he had no form nor
comeliness in the eyes of men that they could desire him: he appeared in a
posture of humility and lowliness, riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, Zech.
9 9.
the Fool of an Ass. And how far were they from intertaining such a Christ
as this, when they expected one of a quality so infinitely different? Who could
believe that the title over our Saviors head upon his Cross, should be a
stumbling block unto the Jews feet? And yet was it so at that very time when
they fixed it there, and so it has been ever since, and so it is at this very
day, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. John 7. 42.
They looked for the Messiah to come from Bethlehem, and they knew him but for
Jesus of Nazareth. And they expected a pompous King of the Jews, and how far
was he from such a King. And thus they knew not him, Acts 13. 27.
when he came from Galilee, nor the voices of the Prophets what they meant by
his Kingdom, and thus were they very far unlikely to receive him when he
came.

These three things then being thus considered, and notice taken how far this
people of the Jews were gone away both in life and doctrine, what corruption
they had contracted in their manners, what doting upon their ancient Customs,
and what misprision concerning Christ, it is no wonder if he that came to
reform these things that were so far amiss, had need of a spirited and a
powerful forerunner, to make some way for him against he came.

And as it was at our Saviors coming in the flesh, so also is it at his
coming in the spirit: Whenever Christ is to be brought in among a corrupt
and irregular people, in the power and purity of his Word and Gospel, great
hindrances do ever offer themselves to stop the way, and they had need of
great forerunners to clear them thence. Dan. 9 26.
A Jerusalem is never built street and wall, but those times are troublous: and
a Reformation in a corrupted State is never wrought but with these opposals.
The very same things do make the ways rough and unpassable for Christ's
coming now, in his work and power, that made it then when he came in the
flesh. These three are as the net upon Mispah and the snare upon Tabor, Hos. 5.
1. as the ambushes that the Idolatrous Priests laid upon those Mountains to
catch up all the passengers that should go to Jerusalem to worship the true
God, these catch up men that they come not at Christ. These are the Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, that are ever ready to oppose the Moses and Aaron that
seek to work good in the Congregation; and the Jannes, Jambres and Egyptians,
that affront them in the work of the Lord. And hence is it no wonder, that
that work of the same nature, that you have had so long in hand, has gone so
slowly and so heavily on. For,

1. How truly is the moral of that Story concerning Anomon in 2 Samuel 12. come
to pass in these days of ours? First, he was sick for love of his sister
Tamar, and having used her at his pleasure, he was then as sick for hate. So
has it been with us of this Land: we were sick but a while ago for a
Parliament, and nothing would cure us if we had not that, like David we longed
and longed again for this water of Bethlehem that is beside the gate, and
could not rest till we had got it, and yet when we have obtained it, and that
not without the hazard of your lives, we now cast it upon the ground, and care
not for it: We are now as weary of this Manna which God has sent us, as we
were desirous of it before it came. What should be the reason of men's such
crossenesse and contrariety in their affections, as to will and to loath, to
desire and to detest the same thing, with the same earnestness, in so short a
time? Why, that in the Prophet, Jer. ^1. 9.
You would have healed Babel, and she will not be healed. Men are affrighted I
know not how at the rumor of a Reformation, because they are afraid to be
stripped off their carnalities and corruptions. Like a simple Patient, that in
an eating and corroding sore, if the Surgeon can abate his pain, he likes it
well, but to cut out any proud dangerous and corrupting flesh, that he will not
endure: Just so has it been with us. Whilst you eased us of the pains of
those pressures, that did pinch, and took off the yoke from off our neck that
glad so sore, it pleased us well, and you had our liking; but to be restrained
any whit from our former and beloved sensualities, to be straightened any thing of
the extravagancies of our former ways by the reins of a Reformation, oh this
goes to the quick, and we cannot endure it, Durus sermo, a hard business, who
can abide it? Our Savior has told us long ago, that parting with an old
acquaintance bosom sin is as pinching to flesh and bloods, Matthew. 5. 29. 30.
as to pluck out an eye and to cut off a hand, and we see it true by too woeful
experience, by men's unseparablenesse from their delights, they carrying them,
and they them, and will not be parted, to perdition. The Vine, Olive, Judge. 9.
9.
and Figtree in Jothams Parable, will not leave their wine, fatness, and
sweetness, to gain a Kingdom, Herod his Herodias to save his soul, nor men
of corrupt manners, the corruption of their manners for a blessed Reformation.

This is the first adversary that you have in your way, that seeks to cross
the glorious work that you have in hand. And there is a second which is like to
this, as a twinne of the same womb, and as bad as it, and that is corruption
in opinion concerning ancient Customs, and a fixednesse to what our
forefathers have used before.

2. Custom, as it is commonly said, is a second nature, and men cannot easily
leave that which they have long used themselves, and they will not easily leave
that which they have seen and known to be used by their Predecessors. The
Ephraimites in the book of Judges, that had been brought up to say Judge. 12.
6.
Sibboleth all their life, cannot say Shibboleth to save their life, but they
perish two and forty thousand. Famous and fearful is the story of Rabodus
[some call him by another name] who when he was so far persuaded from his
Heathenisme into Christianity, that he had one foot in the water toward being
baptized, and there asking whither his forefathers were gone that were not
Christians nor baptized, whether to Heaven or Hell, and it being answered to
Hell, he pulls his foot back again out of the water, with words to this
purpose, That he would go whither his ancestors were gone, and so he resolved
to be what his Ancestors had been. This, the more is the pity, is the ultima
Analysis of the Religion of too many thousands in this Land and time; men and
women are too commonly and generally pinned in opinion and in practice of
religious things upon the customs and usage of ancient times, and they are
loath to be parted from them: The woman of Sychar was zealous for the Temple
upon Mount Gerizim, but the best reason she can give for that her zeal, is but
this, because her, Fathers worshipped in that Mountain, Joh. 4. 20. Laban in
the marriage of his daughter Leah, will rather follow custom* then either
conscience, or his own promise and covenant: He had agreed with Jacob for
Rachel, and for Rachel had Jacob served, but when it comes to the point of
performance he suborneth Leah, and deceives him with her, and what is his
reason? Why, it was not the custom of the Country, to give the younger before
the elder, Genesis 29. 26. How the predominancy of this humor in the diseased
body of this Church does cause us to cast up again the wholesome Physic of a
Reformation, it is known too well. The confession of the Prophet may be taken
up concerning us, and with addition, We have sinned with our forefathers, nay
we are resolved so to do still. The errors that the ignorance and dullness of
former times did admit into the worship of God and profession of Religion, we
are resolved to retain because they were the Customs of former times.

3. And thirdly, a maine obstacle in the way of Christ's powerful coming among
a people, and in the way of your work that seeks thus to bring him, is a
corruption of opinion that men have concerning Christ or Religion it self.
Religion to carnal men must be a little gaudy, or else it cannot be a pleasing
Religion: as the Virgin Mary must be a Lady, or she is not thought fit to be a
Saint. The simplicity and plainness of the Gospel, spoils its intertainment
with sensual minds. And Antichrist by putting his Religion in so gorgeous
clothes has gained so much upon them, and stolen men's hearts thorough their
eyes. God did once indeed comply with the gross dullness of the Jews, that he
might win them, and because they could not go further in Religion then they
were led by the eyes, he gave them such a one as suited to them, and because it
was so with them once, carnal men would have it so still.

These are the three sons of Anak with whom you have had so long to wrestle,
and with whom you have to combat still, before you can bring our Israel to the
desired Canaan. I may say again, that it is no wonder that this work in your
hands goes so slowly on, when three such Giants do seek to hinder it. You
have to fight not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers,
with the strong holds of Satan in the hearts of men. Oh that we could find out
some such powerful forerunners to go before you, as might clear the way for
your readier passage! Where might we get so skillful a Mustian as could calm
these evil spirits that thus disturb all? It is far from my skill to advise
you what to do in these respects: But to you others that sit by, and are
spectators how these Worthies labor under these opposals, this may show what
need you have to drive on the great and weighty works that they have in hand
with the earnestness of your prayers. Their hands, like those of Moses, it is
no wonder if they be weary with holding up so long in so great employments,
these must be the Aaron and Hur that must support them that they fall not
quite. Me think we may even see written in the very things that they are in
managing, they are so weighty, what Paul inserts to so many of his Epistles,
Brethren pray for us; And Brethren pray for them. I will conclude all in the
words of the Psalmist, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: nay, let
me change the number, for I know you will join with me in the saying, Let our
tongues cleave to the roofes of our mouths: if we forget the Parliament in our
best devotions. And so have I done with the first part that I named, the Person
and his function that must do the work; now I come to the qualification of
that person for that work and for his function, He shall go before him in the
spirit and power of Elias.

We meet in this part with two several parties, The second part.
Elias and John, men exceedingly renowned in their generations, and exceeding
great reformers in their times. Elias in the middle of the times of the Law,
and John in the beginning of the times of the Gospel. We might deal with them
as the Prophet Ezekiel does with his two sticks with the names written upon
them, Ezekiel. 37. 19.
Judah and Joseph: First, we might take in either hand one, and treat of them
severally, then might we take them both into one hand, and in our handling they
might become one; but we will take up such things concerning them only, as
shall be most material to be considered, and most suitable to the present times.

And first, we may lay this position, and the text will warrant it, Observe.
That Elias shall never come to live and continue upon earth again. The
Prophet Malachi indeed delivers it in such terms as if he should come once
again. Behold, I will send you Eliah the Prophet: And the Septuagint have
driven the nail to the head to make this sense the surer, for they have added,
Behold, I send you Elias the Tishbite: yet the Angel Gabriel in the text does
tell us, that Elias himself is not to come in his own soul, but another in
his spirit, nor he in his own person, but it was John Baptist was to come in
his power. And so our Savior, De Elia praeterito vid. R. Lev. Gersh in 1 Reg.
27. De vent. vid. R. Dav. Kimeh. in Mal. 4.
Matthew. 11. 14. And if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come:
and Matthew. 17. 12. Elias, says he, is already come, which his Disciples do
truly understand of John the Baptist. The Jews, as they do erroniously hold
that the Messiah is not yet come, so do they hold also that Elias shall
personally come before his coming: And it is no wonder that they err that
error mistaking the meaning of Malachi, when so many Christians do err the
same error with them, though they have an exposition by an Angel, and by our
Savior upon that Prophecy. Jansenius, Maldonate, and others of the same nest,
Jesuits and Papists, explaining these words that we have in hand, do resolve,
that they are more fitly to be applied to Elias his second coming which is yet
to be, then to his coming in the days of Ahab: and they gloss them thus, He
shall go before Christ at his first coming, Sic etiam Bed^ in l^o and Amb.
Epiph. etc. Haeres 70.
in the spirit and power that Elias shall go before him in at his second. A
gloss much like that senseless one of the Sect in Epiphanius, upon these
words in Genesis 1. 27. God created man in his own image, whereon they seemed to
hold, that the body of man was made after the Image of God, and that Christ's
humane shape was the copy for the shape of Adam, whereas Adam was not made a
man after the likeness of Christ, but Christ was made man after the likeness
of Adam. Even so is it with these expositors. They either make John Baptist his
going before Christ, a pattern of Elias his doing the like, whereas Elias in
the Prophet and in the text is a pattern of John: or else they make Elias who
is to come (no one can tell when) the copy or pattern of the Baptist already
come, which is more then ridiculous. Nor is it so much to be wondered, that
these men of corrupt judgments and minds, should err this same error with
the Jews, Vid. Cornel. a Lapide in Apoc. 11. 3. Aleazer, ibid.
when we find so many of the Fathers to have erred in the same opinion also,
and to Elias they have added Enoch, and both these, they say, must come before
the coming of Christ, for these they hold to be the two witnesses in the 11.
of the Revelation.

It is true indeed that some ones shall come in the spirit of Elias toward the
end of the world, The two witnesses, Rev. 11*
according to that description in the Revelation, but no expectation of Elias
himself, nor no description of Enoch at all. The two witnesses in that place
are plainly charactered and decyphered forth by the emblems of Moses and
Elias. They have power to shut up Heaven that there be no rain, verse. 6. Here
is apregnant intimation of Elias: and, They have power over the waters to turn
them into blood, there is as pregnant a one of Moses. These two men do meet
more then once mentioned together in the Scriptures. They are named together in
the conclusion of the Prophets, Mal. 4. 4. Remember the Law of Moses my
servant, and in v. 5. Behold I send you Elias the Prophet. They appeared
together and attended our Savior at his transfiguration, Matthew. 17. 3. They
are thought on together in that description of the two witnesses, as they also
agreed together in this, that the one was the giver of the Law at the first,
and the other the restorer of it when it was decaying: the one was the great
Prophet of the Jews, the other the great Prophet of the Gentiles, A ministry
in the spirit and power of Moses and Elias at the Jews conversion.
as shall be touched anon. When therefore the Jews and the Gentiles shall be
knit together into one Church upon the fullness of the one and the conversion
of the other, then shall God raise up a powerful Ministry to them both
united, as in the spirit of Moses and Elias, (the time of their preaching is
alluded to the time of our Saviors, three years and a half) and Antichrist
shall rise up against them, Tropicall phrases.
and persecute some of them to the death.

By the way as we go, it is not immateriall to be observed, how things
signifying and things signified do often in Scripture bear one and the same
name: sometime the thing signifying is called by the same name of the thing
signified. As at the making of the first Covenant Exodus 24. 8. Moses sprinkled
the blood of the Covenant upon all the people, Heb. 9. 19. That is, upon the
twelve Pillars, which he had set up to represent the people, verse. 4. as he had
set up an Altar also to represent God: For to besprinkle so many hundred
thousands severally, it was impossible in so short a time as he employed in
that work. And so in the second Covenant in the blood of Christ, the Bread and
Wine that represent his body and blood, are called by the very names of his
body and blood.

Sometimes the thing signified is called by the name of the thing signifying,
as Hos. 3. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the
Lord their God and David their King, that is, Christ their King, which was
signified by David: And so in the matter that we have in hand, the Prophet
Malachi calls the Baptist Elias, because he was so nearly represented and
typified by Elias. To them that hold that Elias shall personally come again
indeed, we may justly propose these two or three queres. First, how shall a
glorified body converse with bodies laden with corruption and mortality?
Observe at the transfiguration of our Savior, when the glorified bodies of
Moses and Elias appeared to him, the Disciples were so incapable and unfit for
conversing with them, that some of them spoke they knew not what. Luke 9. 33.
Consider the disproportion that is between Angels and men, if I may so call
it, in regard of converse, the one spirits, the other bodies, how can these two
be familiar together, if an Angel take not on him a visible shape? There is not
so much distance indeed betwixt bodies glorified and bodies mortal, yet is
there so much as is sufficient to spoil the converse of each with other.

Secondly, What should Elias do in his person here? If to preach: our Savior
has told us, that if men would not hearken to Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.
12.
they will not be persuaded though one rose from the dead: And may we not
infer? If men will not hearken to Moses, the Prophets, the Evangelists, and
the Apostles; they will not believe though Elias came from heaven, Gal. 1. 8.
To Preach the Gospel? If another then what was preached by Christ and his
Apostles, 2 Cor. 4. 7.
then is he accursed though he be Elias. If the same: why, that treasure is
carried in earthen vessels, and not in vessels already glorified. To destroy
Antichrist? This indeed is the common opinion: 2 These. 2. 8. vid. Chald. Paron
Esaias. 11. 4. in edit. Buxtorf.
but Paul has told us that the Lord shall do it with the Spirit of his mouth,
and the brightness of his coming. Such questions as these might be proposed
to that opinion, that is indeed of much like nature with this, but of far
more strangeness, namely that that would bring Christ from heaven again, to
live personally on earth a thousand years. First, what should Christ that is
in heaven, blessed for ever, do a thousand years upon earth that is cursed?
The very first lesson that God taught Adam after he had taught him the lesson
of Christ, was this, that he should not expect Christ's kingdom upon earth, for
that he cursed, Genesis 3. 17. Secondly, how strange and improbable is it to
conceive, that Christ who in his humane frailty had a kingdom, which was
called and was the Kingdom of Heaven, should now in his immortal glory come
and possess a kingdom on earth? An opinion according to the censure of
Eusebius, raised upon the misconstruction of a place in the last book of the
New Testament, as this about Elias was of a place in the last book of the old.
Easeb. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 39.
For thus speaks he concerning Papias, the first father of this conceit: The
same Author also, says he, shows that other things came to him by unwritten
tradition which contain certain strange Parables of our Savior and new
doctrines of his, and some other things stuffed with legendary fables. Among
which he averreth that the kingdom of Christ, after the resurrection of all
flesh from the dead, shall continue and endure upon this earth, after a humane
and bodily manner, for a thousand years: Which opinions I believe that he did
entertain, because he misunderstood the Apostolical interpretations, which
were delivered by them under hidden figures, and obscure Parables. For he was a
man, as may be guessed by his writings of a very shallow wit. Yet was he the
Author of the like error to most Ecclesiastical men, who cited this man's
antiquity for the defense of their part: as Irenaeus, and whosoever else is of
the same opinion with him.

I will not censure nor condemn the opinion, but refer it to superior
examination, only this I cannot but say of it, that I do not remember that
ever I heard or read of an opinion of so extreme and monstrous strangeness,
that in so short a time, has gotten so great a belief and so large an
entertainment, and neither tongue or pen has stirred against it. It is our
hope and prayer, that once you may have liberty and leisure from the great rent
in the whole piece of the State to look upon the rippings in the seames of the
Church, that such opinions as this and others may be taken either by you or by
your authority into examination, before, like Joab and Abishai the sons of
Zerviah, they grow too strong, and defy a trial.

The Spirit and power of Elias is held by some to mean but one and the same
thing, his powerful Spirit. So indeed sometime runs the sense of the Hebrew
style. As in that answer of our Savior, Joh. 14. 6. I am the way, the truth,
and the life, the scope of the question that occasioned it seems to call it
to such a sense, I am the true and the living way.

Others distinguish the meaning with the words, and by the Spirit of Elias
understand patience and tolerancy of persecution, and by the power, the
prevalent and efficacious virtue of his ministration. But we need not to go
far for interpretations, when either the words are of no great difficulty, or
what they be of, will easily be explained by the Scripture it self.

By Elias his Spirit then are we to understand, not his own within him, Joh.
10. 41.
but the Spirit of the Lord or of Prophecy upon him: 2 King. 2. 15.
And so his spirit is said to be upon John, as Moses his spirit was upon the
Elders, and the spirit of the same Elias upon Elisha.

By the power of Elias upon the Baptist, is not meant the power of miracles,
Number. 11. 25.
for John wrought none, whereas Elias did many, but his power of preaching for
the conversion of many unto God. So that whereas the ancient Prophets of the
Law, and among them Elias, had a double power of the Spirit upon them, To
foretell things to come, and to work miracles; so had John the first Prophet
of the Gospel, a double power, but of another nature and a better. He foretold
not things to come, but he explained those that had him foretold; and he
wrought not miracles upon bodies, but he was miraculously powerful upon souls.

Now, should we come to compare Elias and the Baptist there we should find them
agree in many parallels: as that they both came in very corrupt times, that
they both restored religion very much in that corruption, that they were both
persecuted exceedingly for that restoring, Elias by Ahab and Jezabell, and John
by Herod and Herodias; and diverse other agreements, upon which not to insist,
because they be obvious to every eye, Observe.
this collection may we take up from the words in hand, That Elias is a proper
and pregnant pattern for Reformers.

As when Moses was making the Sanctuary and the appurtenances, Exodus 26. 40.
and 26. 30. and 27. 8. Heb. 8. 4. 5.
God often calls upon him to make all things according to the pattern which was
showed him in the mount: So in this like work of yours which you have in hand
can you platform out a reformation by a better pattern then by Elias, since
you will not do it but by some pattern from the Mount? A man that in the text
is a copy to John the Baptist in his reforming: And a man that in his own time
restored all things, as our Savior says of him, Mat. 17. 11. And fitly then
may he be a pattern for these times of ours.

He restored perishing religion, and the decaying law: he restored forgotten
Prophecy, and as the Jews hold, forsaken Circumcision: for of Circumcision do
they understand those words of Elias himself, They have forsaken thy Covenant,
1 King. 19. 14. And of Elias the restorer of Circumcision they misunderstand
those words of the Prophet, Vid. R. D. Rimchi in Reg. and in Molach.
The Angel or Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1.

But I stand not here as a Surgeon over his Anatomy, to read unto you a
Lecture of reforming, upon the Sceleton of Elias, it were beyond good manners,
as it is beyond my skill: Let me address my self to you that sit by and are
spectators of these Worthies as they labor in their work, in a word or two of
application, and that according to the two words that are before us, the Spirit
of Elias and his power.

1. By the Spirit of Elias, I told you, is understood the Spirit of God that
was upon him: Now as the Apostle says, x Cor. 12. 4. the Spirit was but one,
but the gifts were diverse. For look in the fourth of the Acts, and the thirty
first, it is said of the Apostles there, that when they had prayed the place
was shaken and they were filled with the Holy Ghost. And so they had been some
days before, namely on Pentecost day, Act. 2. 4. Now they having been filled
then, how can they be said to be filled again? Why* then with the gift of
tongues, and now with the gift of holy boldness, for, for that it was they
prayed, ver. 29.

Among the diverse gifts then of the holy Spirit, Elias his zeal.
that Elias had, this is not the last nor the least that made him renowned, His
extraordinary zeal for the Lord of Hosts. So much expresses he concerning
himself, 1 King. 19. 10. 14. And so much seems our Savior to aim at, in
his answer to his two disciples that would have fire fetched from heaven, as
Elias had done, Ye know not, says he, what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9.
55. of a zeal beyond your warrant, and you would be forward you know not how.
The thing that you may take notice of from hence is this, That no true
reformation can be expected which is not carried on with a spirit of zeal. The
works of God must be wrought with his Spirit, and they that desire to forward
his glory, must do it with a holy forwardness. It is the honor of Levi, Deuteronomy.
33. 9. that when he was about the employment of the Lord, he was so zealous in
it, that he forgot all civil relations, and said unto his father, and to his
mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew
his own children. And so our Savior in the third of Mark, when his mother
and kindred would have taken him off from preaching, for they said he will
faint, (...), he is besides himself, in the Syriack. Arab. vulg. Lat. Ital. of
Deodate, the Spanish has it, he goes out of his calling and estate, in marg.
(...) in the Lxx. Genesis 45. 26.
or he is beside himself, be it whether it will, for the original word will
bear both, he was so zealous in the work in hand, that he would not own them
that came to hinder it. For he answered, saying, Who is my mother, and who are
my brethren? Mark 3. 33.

2. The power of Elias in Reformation was exceeding much, and he did wondrous
things in what he did, but yet he left exceeding much undone, which he could
not help, and abundance of corruption, which he could not remove. He took
away Baalim, but he could not take away the golden Calves, he destroyed the
Prophets of the one, but he could not destroy the Prophets of the other. 1
King. 18. 19 40.
Four hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal perished by his means at Carmel, and
yet are there four hundred false Prophets left that seduce Ahab to go to
Ramoth. 1 King. 22. 6.
Thus impossible is an utter extipation of all corruption out of a State and
Church that is corrupt.

Lay these two now together in the two scales of an unprejudicate judgment,
and they will help very well to balance and to poize a right your thoughts
and censures concerning these Worthies that are toyling in our work. Some
think they have been too forward, others think they have been too slow;
some, that they have done too much, others that they have done too little; some
complain of too much zeal, and some of too little reformation. To the former
may be answered, that Elias must be zealous if he will reform; to the latter,
that Elias cannot utterly purge out all corruption though he be Elias; and to
both together, that in stead of murmuring against them, it were far fitter to
be thankful to God for them, for that he has put so much zeal into their
hearts, and so much reformation already into their hands, as that we see more
already then we expected ever to have seen: The same Lord continue the same
Spirit unto them, and increase the Power, that their hearts and their hands may
hold up and grow strong, that we may see the salvation of the Lord exerted by
them; for the reconciling of the disaffected, and the reducing of the
disobedient. And so I pass to the third part of the text, the work of the
Baptist, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc. The case was
woeful when father and son had need of a reconciler to make them friends, yet
was it theirs then, and so is it ours now.

It was a very hard task surely to John the Baptist, to turn the hearts of
the fathers to the children, or to do this work, for I find it a very hard
task and trouble to expositors to find out and to resolve, who these fathers
and children were.

Some by the fathers understand the Jews, Vid. Carthis.
and by the children, Christ and his Apostles, as Luke 11. 19. and that John
turned the hearts of the fathers to the children, when he brought the Jews to
embrace their Doctrine; but how can the other part be made good with this
gloss, that he turned the heart of Christ and his Apostles to the Jews?

Some render it thus, He shall turn the heart of the fathers to the Children
by the right understanding of the Scriptures, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the righteous by the obedience of faith. An exposition that leaves
us as far to seek who were the fathers and who the children, as we were
before.

Others therefore come nearer the letter, Maldon. in Lec.
and expound it from the difference that was at that time in opinions among the
Jews, the father it may be a Pharisee, and one son a Sadducee, and another
an Essaean, and John by bringing them all to the entertainment of the Gospel,
extinguished that division which opinions had set between them. It is true
indeed that these three Sects were among the Jews at the Baptists coming,
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2.
the three Shepherds which were to be destroyed in one month, Zach. 11. 8.
but for any such division in Sect betwixt father and sons, it is but a
conjecture, and it cannot be so certainly averred.

But furthest off of all other glosses, and the most improper, is that of
Jansenius and others of his feather, which yet they hold to be the nearest and
the properest of all, and that is this. That John turned the hearts of the
children to the fathers, when he brought the Jews to whom he preached, or
those of his own time, to embrace the faith and doctrine of the Patriarchs
that had been before: and the hearts of the fathers to the children, when by
reducing them thus to that faith, he occasioned that those holy men in Limbo
did begin to affect them, and take them to heart, which they had not done
before. I will not stand to examine or convince this exposition, for it is not
worth the labor, you your selves have confuted it in thought I know as soon
as heard it. Fathers and Children, Jews and Gentiles.
The most genuine and real meaning of the words that we have in hand I
conceive to be this. That by the Fathers are to be understood the Jews, and by
the Children the Gentiles; and by John's turning each others heart unto others,
his winning them both jointly and unanimously, to the knowledge and profession
of Christ and of the Gospel, and by the tie of that to the joint communion one
with another. And I am made confident and imboldened to entertain this
exposition as the very meaning of the place upon these reasons.

1. Because the Church of the Gentiles is styled by the name of the children of
the Jews, commonly and constantly in the Prophets: as Esaias 54. 13. All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, and 60. 4. Thy sons shall come from
far, and thy daughters shall be turned at thy sight, and 62. 5. As a young
man marries a Virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee. And in very many other
places.

2. Because it was a special and peculiar work and office of the Gospel to
unite and tie the Jew and Gentile into one: so says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 14.
Christ is our peace, who has made both one, and the Gospel the means. And
then must it be the work and office of the Baptist who began the Gospel.

3. Experience and the History it self confirms this our exposition; for as
the Gospel in its own nature and promulgation belonged to the Gentiles as well
as the Jews, John 1. 7.
and as John came for a witness that all through him might believe, the one
Nation as well as the other, so did he baptize and convert some of the one as
well as the other, Joseph Ant. lib. 18. cap. 7.
Roman Soldiers, as well as Jewish Pharisees, and make them both according to
the phrase which Josephus uses of him, (...), to convent or knit together in
his Baptism.

4. This exposition makes John the more fully to resemble Elias, who was a
Preacher and a Prophet to the Gentiles as well as to Israel, nay the first
Prophet of the Gentiles. This our Savior touches, Luke 4. 25. Many widows
were in Israel, in the days of Elias, but to none was he sent, saving to one
in Sarepta a City of Zidon: and the men of Nazareth though but plain and
rusticke simple men, yet did they quickly understand it of preaching to the
Gentiles, which put them into an anger, and our Savior into a danger. Nor can
we think that the holy and zealous Prophet, residing in that Heathen City two
or three years together, as appears by the text, would live there idly and
doing nothing, but that he preached there as well as he had done to Israel
whilst he was among them, for he was every where jealous for the Lord of
Hosts. I would this were but seriously thought on, in men's expounding the
prophecy about the two witnesses in the Revelation, which we touched before.
For if they would but see Elias there which is so plainly emblemed and
pictured out, and withal but consider that Elias was the first Prophet of the
Gentiles, it would help to settle an interpretation to that place, which now
hangs exceeding loose in diversity of opinions.

This being then the proper and only meaning of the words in hand, that John
by his preaching should turn the hearts of the Jews to the Gentiles, and of
the Gentiles to the Jews; and by his Baptism should as it were tie them up
together; the observation or collection that we may take up from hence is this,
That true Religion is the truest reconciler: There is no peacemaker like the
Gospel, but it is among them that are true professors of the Gospel.

Nor is there any breed-bate like the Gospel neither: And so says our Savioar,
Suppose you that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell ye nay, but rather
division, Luke 12. 51. which he speaks out more plainly by another
Evangelist: I came not to send peace, but a sword, Matthew. 10. 34. Genesis 3. 15.
But this is between the two seeds, betwixt whom God has set enmity, and
there can be no reconciliation, the seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Serpent: but to the children of the same father, God, and of the same mother,
the Church, the Gospel is the sweet messenger of peace, and the sweet peace
maker.

A deadlier hate could not be betwixt man and man, then was of the Jew toward
the Gentile. They reputed them as Dogs, and so our Savior uses their common
phrase, Matthew. 15. 26.
It is not good to take the childrens bread and give it to Dogs: they reputed
them as swine, and accordingly they render that verse of the eighteenth Psalm,
the Boar out of the Wood does waste it, and the wild beast of field does
devour it: they abhorred their society, nay they abhorred the very mention of
their conversion, Luke 4. 28. Act. 22. 22. And yet when true Religion comes
in, and seiseth both the Jew and Gentile, the hate is forgotten, Acts 11. 18.
the feud is gone, and the deadly enemies are the nearest friends. Much like as
it is reported concerning Cairo in Egypt, that if the Plague rage never so much
over night, that they die by thousands, yet if the River Nilus come flowing in
the next day, the mortality is ceased, and there dies not one: Even so is it
with Religion: Be there never so much bitterness and heartburning betwixt man
and man, never so much contention and contestation betwixt neighbor and
neighbor, if the power of Religion do but once flow in and seize them both,
the Plague is ceased, the malignity gone.

This is that that cries down the partition walls of all divisions: this is the
great tie of men's affections, yea, it is the greatest; this is the matrimony of
souls, making two men to be of one spirit, as the other does a man and a woman
to be one flesh. It is Christ which is the truest cause of making men offended,
to be reconciled in a good sense, as he was the occasion of Herod's and Pilates
being so in a bad. With what spleen and rancour did Saul set for Damascus
against the professors there? yet when Christ comes into him by the way, no
greater friend then Paul to them when he comes near them. For,

1. Religion is a special and sovereign means to calm, Reas. 1.
tame, and cicurate those exorbitant affections and extravagant humors that
breed division and maintain it. Esaias 11. 6, 7.
The Prophet Esaias describing the power of the Gospel in the Christian Church
says, that it shall bring the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard to
lie down with the Kid, the Calfe and the young Lion to feed together, and the
Cow and the Bear to go in company. His allusion is to the carriage of the
beasts in the Arc of Noah: before they came in thither, the Lion was ravenous,
and the Lamb his prey, the Leopard and the Bear devouring, and the Kid and
the Calfe afraid to come near them: but when they were come within the Arc,
there was no such thing, all bloodinesse and rapine was laid aside, and the
Lamb and Lion couch together, and the Lion now as harmless as the Lamb. So
is it in the Church, and so is it by the power of Religion: those humors and
passions of men which before have been bloody, cruel, proud, selfewilled,
dissentious, and rebellious, if once the powerful operation of Religion get in
among them, it quels these Rebels, quenches these firebrands, reduces these
extravagants, and like the dispossessed in the Gospel, makes him to sit calmely
and quietly, and in his right mind, whom none might come within the compass of
before without a danger.

2. Religion does center men's affections in the center of unity God himself,
Reas. 2.
and those things that concern God, that they cannot separate: It is an old
saying, Quae convenient in uno tertio convenient inter se; Those things that
agree in a third thing agree among themselves: Then how many third things are
there in which true Christians meet as lines in a Center, that must needs hold
them together and make them agree? S. Paul has reckoned them to our hands in
the fourth to the Ephesians, the fourth, fifth, and sixth verses. They meet in
one body, in one spirit, in one hope of their calling, in one Lord, one faith,
one Baptism, in one God and Father of all.

3. Religion makes conscience of living in division and giving offense; Reas.
3.
It dares not offer its gift at the Altar, till it and the offended be
reconciled. It dares not suffer the Sun to go down upon its wrath, nor will
eat that meat that shall offend a weak brother: And as the Father in another
sense, accounts it as desperate to sleep in malice, as to go to bed in a den
of lions. The use that we may make of this may be double, and briefly thus,
because I know not your hours and occasions and I fear to offend.

First, Use 1.
this may direct us very well in the choosing of a friend. Would we have one
that shall be true to us? let us look out such a one as is true to God: Would
we have one that shall be faithful in our little things, in our affairs? let
us seek out such a one as is faithful in the great thing, in Religion. As his
Counsel was, to agree to Gregory's Austen if he were humble, Acts and Mon. old
edit. page 10^.
so be it our holy policy to tie to that man in friendship that is religious:
and as Jehu to Jonadab, 2 King. 10. 15. If we light on a man whose heart is
right toward the Lord as we desire a friends heart should be to us, let us
fix on that friend, and give him the hand.

Secondly, this also may show us who cannot be our friend: and with whom it is
impossible to have unity and amity, namely with the Church of Rome, which is
clean Antipodes to us in Religion.

Is there peace, Use 2.
Jehu? says Joram to him. No, there is no peace, where whoredoms and
witchcrafts are so many. 2 King. 9. 22.
No communion can be betwixt Christ and Belial, or betwixt Religion and
Idolatry: Belial, i. e. an Idol.
for so I conceive the word Belial signifies throughout the Scripture. The
children of Belial, i. e. Idolaters.
The enmity that God himself fixed at the very beginning betwixt the seed of
the Serpent and the seed of the Woman, must continue unreconciled to the very
end: and as quos Deus conjunxit, whom God has joined together, no man
whatsoever must put asunder; so what God has parted and put asunder, no man
must offer to join together: Who are the seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Serpent, so plain to be seen, as Christ and Antichrist? and he that will
seek to make conjunction of Rome and us, will marry light and darkness, God
and the Devil, Christ and Antichrist together, and make a friendship betwixt
those, betwixt whom God himself has doomed an enmity while the world endures.

We bless God that has brought us out of her familiarity and friendship to be
now her haters and hated of her: and we bless the time when we first fell from
the society and converse of Egypt, to be her enemies and at distance with her:
And we bless you and your endeavors, that strive so much and so constantly to
keep us clear of re-ingagements. And may the work prosper in your hands, and
you in the work, to hold us still at our proper distance to the feed of the
Serpent, and to keep us at enmity where God has set it* but for turning the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the reducing of the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just, it is our prayer still and still, as it was before,
that you may have the power of Elias, or the Baptist, as you have the spirit:
and so I come to the last part of the text, and the second part of John's work
in his Ministration, To turn the disobedient to the wisdom of the just.

These words as they lie in our English Translation do show no great
difficulties, but being examined in the Original, they are not so very easy.
A man scruple that appears in both, is this; That the Angel undertaking to
quote the Prophet should so far now decline from his text: Difference of
allegation.
In the former part that we have newly handled, he follows him punctually and
verbatim, He shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, so says
the Prophet, and so the Angel; but now that he should have taken up the other
part in these words, And the hearts of the children to the fathers, he changes
them into this clause, Reason of it*
And the disobedient to the wisdom of the just. But to this may be answered.
1. That the Angel is not so punctual to cite the very letter of the Prophet as
to give the sense. And so we may observe it to be usual in the new Testament,
in its allegations from the old. And that he gives the same sense, or a true
interpretation of the Prophet, we shall see as we go. 2. It was not very long
after the Baptizing and Preaching of John, that the Jews ceased to be a Church
and Nation, nay even in the time of him himself, they showed themselves
enemies to the Gospel, and to the Professors of the same, for the general or
greatest part of them; therefore he says not that the hearts of the children
the Gentiles, should be turned to their fathers the Jews, which should cease
to be fathers and to be a people, but to the wisdom of the just. And thus in
the first part of his speech about turning the hearts of the fathers to the
children, he intimates the Jews that should be reconciled and united to the
Gentiles in embracing the Gospel: and in this latter, by omitting to call them
Fathers, he gives a touch of the hostility and evil mind that the others of
the Jews should bear both to it, and to the Gentiles that embraced it. And
now that we see the reason and difference in the allegation, let us take up the
words that thus differ, every one single, and one after another as they lie in
order; and would the time permit, every word would afford us matter profitably
to insist upon, but I will only hint it as we go along, for I fear to offend
in transgressing the time.

1. As in this clause he refuses to use the term of fathers, Disobedient.
for the reason mentioned, so does he also of the correlative children, because
of his refusing of that. And yet he coucheth the sense of that title under the
word disobedient, which in its most proper and natural signification
reflecteth upon untowardly children disobedient to their parents. For though
there be a disobedience to any Superior whatsoever, as to Kings, Magistrates,
Masters, and the like, yet is the obedience of children to Parents the
Original from whence it receives denomination, and that appears in that
those Superiors are called Fathers. As therefore the Angel omitting to call
the Jews Fathers, insinuates their opposition against the Gospel, so by
terming the Gentiles Disobedient in stead of Children, he shows what they
were before they embraced it.

The vulgar Latin in stead of Disobedient reads Incredulous or unbeleeving:
(...), Disobedient or unbeleeving.
which though the Greek word does sometime signify, as might be evidenced in
diverse instances, yet that it does not so in this place may be collected from
these considerations. First, that the speech is concerning children and
fathers, as is apparent in the clause preceding, and between them disobedience
is a more proper term and notion then Inoredulity. Secondly, that he says
not, He shall turn them to the faith, which were the most proper if he spoke
of the unbeleeving, but to the wisdom of the righteous. And thirdly, Matthew. 1.
4.
that the preaching of the Baptist, was more especially the doctrine of
repentance as his Baptism was the Baptism of repentance, but the preaching of
Christ was the doctrine of faith. Therefore John says only, Repent, Matthew. 3.
2. but our Savior, Repent and believe, Mar. 1. 15.

Now from this double signification of the Original word, and indeed also from
the proper cause of the Heathens disobedience, Observe.
we might observe, that a chief and maine cause of disobedience is unbelief.

It is a saying of the Jews in their Talmud in the Treatise Maccoth, Rab.
Abhuhabh in Ner. 1.
that all those six hundred and thirteen Commandments that God gave to Moses
in Mount Sinai, are reduced to this one in the Prophet Habakkuk, The just by
his faith shall live: Hab. 2, 4.
we may say something the like concerning sins; that those hundreds and
thousands of transgressions that are committed in the world, and all those
various and numerous causes and occasions from whence they proceed, they may
all in fine be traced and reduced to this one Original, from unbelief. From
whence is it that men do violate the commands of the Law? because they will
not believe the threatenings upon the violation. And whence is it, that men
refuse the promises of the Gospel? because they will not believe the certainty
and excellency of those promises.

2. The word Wisdom in this place does signify Religion, as it does in
diverse other places of the Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep therefore and do
the Statutes and commandments of the Lord, for this is your wisdom: that is,
your Religion. And so likewise, Psalm. 111. 10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom: that is, the fear of the Lord is the entry into
Religion. And so may we find the word to signisie in diverse passages in the
Proverbs. And to this sense me thinks Eliphaz scoffeth religious Job in the
fourth of that book and the sixth verse if it be looked into in the Original.
(...): Folly* Psalm. 85. 9.
Halo jireatheca chislatheca, Is not thy fear or thy Religion become thy folly?

Religion is the only wisdom, Observe.
and to be truly wise, is to be truly religious: (which is the observation that
we might take up upon this word) But, where or what, says this miserable
comforter, is this religious wisdom of thine become now? Thou have been thus
and thus precise and devout, thus and thus pious and religious, and what is now
become of all this great devotion, but a fearful affliction? Is not now thy
Religion become thy folly?

But there is yet a double scruple, and those no small ones neither, in this
small clause or parcel of (...), To the wisdom.

First, it is something harsh to translate the Greek word (...), in this place
to signify To: for though it do sometimes signify so, as Commentaries quote
certain other places, to justify that translation of it in this, yet 1. That
is but rarely and but somewhat improperly wheresoever it is so used; and 2. It
cannot be imagined that if the Angel intended that very sense of To in this
place, as to say, To the wisdom, but that he would have used the word (...),
which he used immediately before in the other clause, and say, (...), as he had
said, (...), and not have betaken himself to a construction of the preposition
(...), harsh, scrupulous, and unusual. I conceive therefore that that little
particle is to be taken here, in its most proper, genuine and general sense,
and as it is used millions of times in Greek, Authors to signify In: (...).
In the wisdom
and to be interpreted in the wisdom. And the wisdom of the righteous is not
here to be held the terminus ad quem, or the ultimate end to which these
disobedient Gentiles were to be converted; but the medium per quod, the means
or way through which they were to be converted to God. For let the two clauses
of this speech of the Angel, or the parts of the work of the Baptist be laid
in Antithesis or opposition against another, as naturally indeed they lie, the
one aiming at the Jews as the proper subject, and the other at the Gentiles,
the subject as proper, and then will it appear very plainly, that two
several acts were to be performed by the Baptist as concerning the Jews and
their conversion. First, that he should turn their hearts or affections to
God, as it is laid down in the verse preceding; He shall turn many of the
children of Israel to the Lord their God. And secondly, that he should turn
their hearts and affections also to the Gentiles, as it is in this, He shall
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children. According therefore to this
double work of John upon the Jews in that part of the Angels speech, must the
like duplicity be looked for in this that concerns the Gentiles, and to be
understood though it be not expressed. For the Angel in this part purposely
changes his style, and neither calls the Gentiles children, but disobedient,
because they generally were so before the coming of Christ, nor the Jews
fathers, because they ceased to be so shortly after, as was touched before, nor
mentions he the Gentiles turning to God, but includes it, partly he had set
that as the chiefest bent and work of the Baptist, to turn men to God, and
partly he involveth it in this phrase, in the wisdom of the righteous. So
that this being the meaning of the Angel, as I doubt not but it is, it may
afford us this Observation, Observe.
That there can be no true conversion unto God, but in the true Religion, or in
the wisdom of the just.

Secondly, the word (...), which comes next unto our handling, will afford a
twofold consideration. 1. That it is not without divine reason, that the hearts
of the Gentiles are not said to be turned to the Jews, as on the contrary it
was said of the Jews to the Gentiles, but that they should be turned in the
wisdom of the righteous. For the enmity and feud, detestation and averseness
that was betwixt Jew and Gentile, and Gentile and Jew, The cause of a Jews
hatred of a Gentile.
proceeded not from the same cause and Original. The Jew abhorred the Gentile
not of ignorance, but of scorn and and jealousy, partly because they stood
upon their own privilege of being the people of God, which the other were
not, and partly because they were provoked with suspicion, that the other might
be the people of God when they should not be. And therefore when the
reconciliation is to be wrought between them, it is said, that their hearts or
affections should be turned to them, for they were pointblanke and
diametrically against them before. But the Gentile abhorred a Jew out of
ignorance, because of his Religion, hating him as a man separate from, and
contrary to all the men in the world, accounting that to be but singular and
senseless superstition, which was indeed the divine command and wisdom,
whereby he sequestered that people for his own from all other people on the
earth. So that a Gentile did not so much detest the person of a Jew for
himself, as for his Religion and profession, which, ignorant as the Heathen
were, they understood not what it meant. Therefore when the Gentiles must be
brought to knit and to unite to the Jews, it must be in the wisdom of the
righteous, or in the embracing of that Religion, which the righteous ones among
the Jews professed, and which the Gentiles, till they knew and understood what
it meant, accounted but vanity, singularity and folly.

2. It is remarkable that the Angel does forsake the proper and common word
used to signify wisdom, which is (...). and takes up (...), which is of a
something stricter and stranger use. And so does the Syriack relinquish
Hhechmetho its ordinary word that it uses for wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 2. 4, 5, 6
Rev. 13. 16. etc.
and fixes upon Jedhangro a word more singular, and of more peculiar
importance. The Original word then that we have in hand, does not only import
the wisdom or Religion of the Jews, but also the Gentiles attaining to the
knowledge, and apprehension of that Religion and wisdom with them. Not only
the theory and practice of the Jewish Nation in their religious profession, but
the Heathens reaching to the understanding of those mysteries in that Religion
and profession, which they had accounted such vanity and senselessness before.
So that this word considerately looked into will afford us this collection:
Observe.
That it is not enough to embrace the true Religion in outward profession, but
we are to have understanding, and to be acquainted with the doctrine and
principles of that Religion. For the Heathen to turn to the wisdom of the
righteous Jews in an outside profession, and an ignorant religiousnesse, was a
poor conversion, as good as none, a work unfit the pains of the Baptist; but
their true turning, and his powerful work is when they are brought to embrace
that Religion in the knowledge and understanding of the mysteries of it.
Ignorance was never the mother of any devotion but of a Romish devotion, which
is as good or as bad as none.

And lastly, there is some doubtfulnesse also in the last word (...), for it
may be indifferently translated of righteous things, or of righteous men: But
it is the more undoubted that persons and persons are rather here compared
together then persons and things: in the former part of this work of the
Baptist, there are fathers and children, and in this part it is most like that
they are answered with persons again, disobedient children and righteous
fathers, and the meaning of the Angel to be this, that as the Jews the fathers
in the embracing of the Gospel, shall be turned to God, and reconciled to the
Gentiles, so the Gentiles the children, in the wisdom of the righteous, or in
the embracing and understanding of the Religion professed by the righteous ones
that had bin and were among the Jews, should be turned to God and in affection
to the Jews. And hereupon might we take up this observation, Observe.
that the faith of the holy Jews under the Law, and of the holy Gentiles under
the Gospel, was one and the same: They that went before Christ in the one, and
they that followed Christ in the other, did both cry Hosanna to the Son of
David, did both obtain salvation, by the same Savior and by the same way.

And so have I gone with the words as far as I dare be bold upon the time,
your patience and occasions: I will but put this last clause together which I
have thus taken peece-meale, and laid asunder, and so have I done. The
disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous* the Heathen to the knowledge of
the true Religion: Me thinks in these words we may behold the condition of
this Land as it has been in ancient times, and as it is in these of ours. We
were once Loammi, no people of the Lords, and utter aliens from his
congregation: we sat, and that not very long ago, in darkness and in the
shadow of death, and it is no wonder if we might be called Disobedient: But God
who is good to all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm.
145. 9.
has come in unto us and shone upon us. He has discharged us of the name of
Heathens, oh that we could discharge ourselves of the title of Disobedient! he
has brought us into the wisdom of the righteous, unto the knowledge of the
Gospel, and of salvation, oh that we could drive on through that to God! He
has made us more Israel then Israel it self, and whereas we were once the
furthest off of any Nation from this wisdom, he has brought this wisdom to
us, to no Nation nearer. Now what thankfulness does so great a mercy call for,
for its bestowing? and what prayers for its continuance? Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel which thus has visited his people with his Gospel, and redeemed
them out of the darkness of superstition. And the blessing of the God of
Israel be still upon his own gift, that it may continue and still flourish
among us: Let not the Candle which he himself has lighted be ever put out:
Nor let the Candlestick which he himself has placed, be ever moved out of
its place: Let scattered Popery never cloud us again, nor superstition
overwhelme us. Let Religion and the Gospel be in all our borders, and peace and
truth in all our times. And to these our praises, and to these our prayers let
all the people say Amen.

Amen and Amen.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 29. Martii. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that Sir Edward
Littleton, a Member of the said House, do return thanks to Mr. Lightfoote,
for the great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at Saint
Margarets in the City of Westminster, at the entreaty of the said House, it
being the day of public Humiliation; and that he entreat him to Print his
Sermon: And it is Ordered that no man shall Print the said Sermon but who shall
be authorized under the handwriting of the said Mr. Lightfoote.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Andrew Crook to Print my Sermon.

John Lightfoote.


