A DECLARATION Of Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILBURN To the Freeborn People of
ENGLAND.

AND His Speech to the Parliament, on Tuesday last; in Answer to the Sentence
denounced against him by Mr. Speaker, by special Order and Command Together
with his Resolution (come life come death) not personally to yield active
submission to the said Sentence. And diverse other remarkable things, worth the
knowledge of all the Freemen, not only of London, but of all England.

Subscribed, JOHN LILBURN.

London, Prlnted for C. HORTON, 1651.

THE REMONSTRANCE OF Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, to the Freeborn people of
England; and His Declaration and Speech to the Parliament on Tuesday last, in
answer to the Sentence denounced against him at the Bar.
ON Tuesday last (being the 20 of this instant January) Lieut. Col. John
Lilburn was brought before the Parliament (being attended by the Sergeant at
Arms) and being come to the Bar, Mr. Speaker (in the Name of the whole House)
made a learned and excellent Oration to him, Wherein he minded him of the
Parliaments former favor and clemency, and of their gracious and free
remittance of his bypast errors and transgressions; but now falling into a
further Relapse, whose fact and crime, were of so sad and dangerous
consequence, that it extended to a high breach of the privileges of
Parliament; in order whereunto Mr. Speaker declared, that he was commanded by
the Parliament to denounce the Judgment of the House against him; whicd was,
That he should pay the fine of 7000 l. and be banished out of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof, within the space of 30 days;
and in case he shall ever return, or be found in any of the aforesaid Dominions,
then to be tried as a Felon, and to suffer the pangs of death.

A dreadful sentence, replied Mr. Lilburn, but not in the least terrifying to a
good conscience; And Mr. Speaker, give me leave, I beseech you, and the rest of
the members here present; to declare, That as bondage and liberty are two
contraries, so you cannot consider the one, but you must reflect your eyes upon
the other: For though one be so destructive to the being of the other, that
where the one is, the other cannot be; yet, each by other is more eminently
distinguished: and look how the one is exceeding the other, by so much the
other is deficient, and loses of its property; and therefore if you will cast
your eyes upon the glory and beauty of the one, your ears must be open to the
cries and complaints of the other. As for my part, I am resolved, that as in
heart I defy all injustice, cruelty, tyranny, and oppression, all arbytrary
Usurpation and Usurpers whatsoever, so in person (come life, come death) I will
not be so treacherous to my self, to my wife and children, and especially to
this Nation (the Land of my Nativity) in general, as personally to yield my
active submission for exilement. But being remanded from the Bar, a period was
put to his allegations; and a place of Confinement provided, under the power
and command of the Sergeant at Arms.

Lieut. Col. John Lilburn's Remonstrance to the Freemen of England.
Beloved Brethren, and Contrymen,
IT was the lot and portion of our only Lord and Master Jesus Christ, to be
persecuted, reviled, reproached, and counted a Troubler of the World, and one
not fit to breath therein: And this even by his own Contrymen and friends;
And if we his servants meet with the same measure, he has commanded Us not to
be dismayed or troubled; and the reason is, because the servant is not above
the master: And withal, that we might go on cheerfully in bearing the yoke of
our master, he has engaged himself to bear part of it with us, and takes all
that is done to us for adhering to him, as done unto himself, Act. 9.4. And
therefore, says the spirit of God, in all their afflictions, he was afflicted,
and the Angel of his presence saved him, Esaias 63.9. Paul, Peter, and John,
found these sayings of their Master true, and had their portions in afflictions
in an extraordinaay manner, but yet tasted largely of the faithfulness of
their Masters promise, which was to be with them, and in them; which made Paul
glory in his tribulations, and to say, That as his afflictions did abound, so
much more his consolations; and Paul's portion in these expressions and
enjoyments, I my self have been made partaker of, in my great and pressing
tribulations, which I under-went in the Bishops days, and have had a large
portion of sorrows all along both before and since, throughout my pilgrimage
in this present Vail of tears. And having had my spirit mightily refreshed and
carried above the world, and the lash of my bitter adversaries, by calling to
mind my bypast experience and refreshings, that I have enjoyed from that
Fountain of fullness, that has for many years together been my sensible
enjoyed portion: And amongst all the Writings and Declarations of Gods Love and
Kindness manifested to me in my sorrows, this has most affected, and taken
my spirit with greatest content, That it is the work of the Saints, to
encounter with difficulties in the Cause and Quarrel of their Lord and Master,
and not to be afraid of bonds nor imprisonments. A good Conscience had rather
run the hazard of cruelty, then to abate an hairs breadth of contestation
against illegality. This was the saying of Mr. Overton, in his late Case,
depending in the House of Peers; for, says he, As their Lordships in their
arbytrary capacity found Warrants; so should they find Legs to obey them; for I
was resolved mine should not be inslaved to that their Usurpation to do their
Arbytrary Drudgery; I would rather lose my life, then in that kind to do them
that vassalage: My Legs were born as free as the rest of my Body, and therefore
I scorn that Legs, or arms, or hands, should do them any servicer; for as I am
a freeman by Birth, so am I resolved to live and die, both in heart, word and
deed, in substance and in show.

In a word, my earnest desire is, That all those that love their just interest,
may have cause to say, Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but deceitful are
the kisses of an Enemy; which task shall be one earnest and cordial endeavors
of him that is a true lover of Englands happiness and prosperity.

JOHN LILBURN.

FINIS.

