A Battle with a VVaspes Nest; OR, A REPLY to an Angry and Railing PAMPHLET,
WRITTEN By Master JOSEPH HEMING, CALLED JVDAS EXCOMMVNICATED, OR, A Vindication
of the Communion of Saints, etc.

Wherein his Arguments are Answered, his Abuses whipped and stripped: The Question
whether Judas received the Sacrament Debated, and the Affirmative proved.

By Peter Lightfoot.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the READER.
IN a Pamphlet lately published by Mr Joseph Heming, [which he has titled
JUDAS EXCOMMUNICATED, or, A vindication of the Communion of Saints etc.] there
is so much dirt and venom vomited by him, upon my name and repute, that by his
casting, you may easily guess the fullness of his stomach; and get out of his
way Reader; for he cares not where he lets fly, if the disgorging fit do but
once come upon him, which comes not seldom: He made this promise in an Epistle
which he intended to prefix unto this clamorous Volumn, but spared it, upon
courtesy to me, as he pretends, I am resolved now God willing, if he retract
not what he has spoken, and that speedily, to give his Reputation such a
wound, that all godly men, who love the truth, and speak the truth in
sincerity, abominating lies, and such as speak them in hypocrisy; yea, those
very ungodly ones whose cause he pleads shall loath it, as men do a rotton
stinking Carcass, by the ways side: Neither shall all the friends he has, or
can possibly make, be ever able to salve it up. A very charitable and Saint
like resolution I can assure you; and how he has endeavored to make his word
good, by bad words, all along his Libell, I need not to go about to show, the
thing it self speaks it self: You see the man's spirit and temper by his own
Confession: He pretends to Argue and Reason, but intends to bark and bite; he
takes on him tenderness to the truth, which it seems, if he stood not up for
it, were utterly undone, whereas the bottom of his heart and resolution is, to
fall upon my person and wound my repute, and to serve his spleen upon me, under
such a pretense. A man that begins to assume a Papal Prerogative, and in time
may prove as excellent a Saint-maker, or Devill-maker, as his Pontifical
Holiness of Rome himself: For please him, be his white boys, and do as he
does, and say as he says, you shall presently be a Saint, and not an Egyptian
dog must dare to open his mouth against it. But, do but cross him never so
little in his Opinion, or in his humor, and he will instantly make you a
profane person, and a castaway, and all the friends you have can do you no
good.

The occasion of all this his heat and breaking out against me, was only this,
He oftentimes in the Pulpit [though I must tell you that I believe he is no
more a lawful Minister then my selfe] declaimed against the Sacrament calling
it a Communion of dogs and Devils, and a rotten two penny Communion, [so he
calls the Lords prayer a carnal fleshly Ordinance] bragging to prove against
all men That Judas did not receive the Sacrament, and telling the Congregation,
That if they did believe that Judas did receive the Sacrament, they might do
as Judas did, that is, go and receive, and then go and hang themselves etc.
You cannot blame me, if such passages as these seemed bitter to me, who as yet
cannot be convinced by all that ever he has spoken about it, but that Judas
did receive the Sacrament as well as any other of the Disciples. Hereupon I
drew up short Notes upon this point, for mine own settlement, and for some
others satisfaction: Which Notes I did neither send to him, nor intend for him;
but he getting them into his hands by some means or other, and disdaining that
his Oracularity, and ipse dixit should be crossed, he falls to Shimei's manner of
Dispute with railing and flinging dirt and stones, as a man transported with
fury, passion, and scorn to be contradicted.

I am not solitious to stand upon the Vindication of mine own repute, which to
wound, he has by his own confession, set himself to work, and made it his
task: [if this be to be a servant to all men in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as
he styles himself to be, he that carries D^
An Accuser in his name may do as much.] I refer my cause to God, who knows
my heart and actions, and who will once judge between us: and besides the
witness of mine own conscience, I dare appeal to all that know me, to give in
testimony of my conversation: And to those that know me not, I do but refer it,
to weigh with what scorn, spleen, pride, and virulency Mr Heming has spoken
against me what he has spoken, and then let them judge whether so high boiling
passions be not ready to foam out scum and scandal.

Whosoever has bestowed the time and pains to read his Discourse through, he
does easily perceive it to consist of these four parts, Reasoning, Railing,
Boasting, and Impertinencies: The three last are his own proper invention, and
let him have the honor of them: but the first, that is, Reasoning, or
Arguments, or Answers, or call them what you will, about the matter in dispute
between us, there is hardly one of them, but he has shamelessely stolen it;
Come hither all ye Proselytes and Disciples of Mr Heming, and see how he uses
you: He makes you believe that this his great elaborate volumn is his own
study, and pains, and Learning; and I hope you do not a little admire him for
it; he feeds you with these Arguments to prove that Judas received not the
Sacament, as if they were out of his own store; whereas, they are almost every
bit of them stolen goods, and you poor souls are fed with such plundered
provision; I suppose you will not take it well at his hands to be so served as
he has served you, when I tell you whence he had it: You would little think
that Mr Heming should feed you with the invention of a Iure-Divino-Presbyterian
Scot, and make you believe it is the dainty food of his own providing: Spit out
for shame; for these Arguments, that you have so eagerly swallowed, digested
and been delighted with, came out of a Iure-Divino-Presbyterian Cup-boord, were
cookt and disht up by a Iure-Divino-Presbyterian hand, and Mr Heming got them
away by the virtue of Hocas Pocas, and has served them up for your diet, as
his own Cookery: Read but Mr Gillespy in his Book called Aarons rod blossoming,
from page 442 to page 469 and there you will see how this Gentleman ruffles in
clothes that are none of his own, and makes you believe that he feeds you with
Venison, when it is but kids flesh purloined, and that from a Scot. Now fie
upon that ever Mr Heming should serve us thus.

The two sentences of Greek with which he has flourished the front of his
Volumn, he has taken out of that Book, page 452. and 453. word for word. The
second thing in his ninth page, the third thing in his tenth page, the first,
second, third and fourth things in his eleveth page, the third thing in his
thirteenth page beginning thus, The Original etc. And the first in the same
page, beginning with Perhaps etc. In the fifteenth page, the first Answer
beginning It Is true etc. the second beginning It Is as true etc. and the second
below beginning If it had been said etc. The third beginning, Whereas he
affirms etc. And from thence all whole till you come to the first thing in
the sixteenth page: The fourth thing in the sixteenth page, and the first thing
in the last page: These are all taken out of that Book of Mr Gillespies, as any
one may see that will read that portion of it between those pages. 442, and
469. Read it ye Saints, in and about Vttoxater, and see how your great Oracle
serves you, and trust him another time. It is his own motion in his Epistle to
you, page 4. Let me see my Errata's and I shall endeavor to correct and amend
them: Show him this his dealing, and tell him it is not fair to serve either
you or Mr Gillespy thus. For all the little affection that he bears either to
a Scot, or the Presbyterian judgment, and for all the great sincerity that he
pretends to bear to you, yet you see how he can make use of those; and make
bold with you to serve his own turn.

It is certainly either a great itch that he has to appear in public, or a
great desire to scratch a Public revenge out of me that has put him on to
play such poor game as this, rather then to sit out, namely that he will dish
up other men's arguments sippeted with his own boasting and railing, rather then
not to be seen a man in Print [and so he must needs Print; and he must needs
print Queries about Christmas day that he might be some body, though the most
part of them were fiilched out of Mr. Prynns Histriomastix and the Scripture
Almanack] but if there be such an itch in him, I would he would claw himself,
and not make other men smart for his scrubbing: It is not any smart in my
reputation that troubles me though he thought to have lashed that to the
fleying and salting [I have innocence is vipers proof] but it is a smart to me
that I must be troubled to spend time and labor in answering stolen
arguments, idle vapors, snarlings and barkings, and fond impertinencies of a
man that cares not much what he says, so it be in Print, that it may be talked
of, and whose very element is mud and troubled waters. Were I such an one for
senselessness and for impiety as he would make me, I I were fitter to live
among brute beasts then amongst men, or rather I were not fit to live upon the
earth at all. But my witness is in heaven, and within me, what is my heart;
and my testimony is in the Country where I have lived, where is and has been
my conversation; and let the few lines ensuing be the evidence whether I am mad
and raging as he would represent me. I see if Master Heming were the doomer of
my final estate that it would go but hardly with me, but I am to stand or fall
to mine own master, into whose hands let me fall, for with him is mercy.
However, I am traduced by the most uncharitable censure of this man, to have
contra. conscientiously upon a malignant design and for the advancement of my
masters kingdom [you can easily read what master his charity meaneth] taken up
and maintained that opinion that I hold: yet the Lord God of Gods he knows
and I desire that Israel may know, that never any such thing entered or got the
least footing in my thoughts: but what I hold and maintain, I do it according
to the best light I can receive from Scripture, according to the best dictates
of my conscience upon that information, and as in the sight of God, and as in
dread and reverence of his divine word. Therefore it does fret me as little as
it does please him much in all the reproaches he does cast upon me: and if he
can count it the part of a Saint to use such language, I can very well account
it the part of a Christian to undergo it. And I go not alone neither under that
burden; for all that are not directly of his mind and practice, have share in
the same reviling and censure with me.

I shall for all his scorns, calumnies, uncharitableness, and virulency,
leave him these places for an answer, Prove. 30.12.13.14. Mat. 5.22. and 7.1.
Luke 18.9. Ephesians. 4.31. etc. And as for the cause that is between us, I shall
most heartily lay the umpirage of it before any impartial and indifferent
readers, when they shall have had the patience to hear what I can say for the
things I hold, as they have seen what he has spoken for himself.

Vttoxeter. August 14. 1649. Peter Lightfoot.

A Battle with a VVaspes Nest; OR, A REPLY to an Angry and Railing Pamphlet
Written by Mr Joseph Heming, called JUDAS EXCOMMUNICATED or, A Vindication of
the Communion of Saints, etc.
His Epistle dedicated to the Saints of the most High God in and about
Vttoxater, he begins thus,
Precious Hearts,
I Confess, I am engaged in low and fruitless Controversies, against which I
find a reluctance in my spirit, because they tend not to edification so much
as could be wished.

Answer. I would gladly know, what necessity has engaged him in such
Controversies: I am sure it is as free and more necessary for him, to teach the
sound and saving doctrines of salvation (if he had a calling thereto and were
able) and would be more acceptable and profitable to those that hear them,
then to trouble men's minds with empty and windy Controversies, which only swell
and puff up, but edify not. I am past doubting, and I dare say that all men
that do seriously mind salvation will be of the same mind with me, that
teaching the Doctrines of Faith, repentance, self-denial, charity,
mortification, and the like, is a thousand t^mes a readier way, either to beget
a Saint, or to build him up, then puzzling men's thoughts with low Disputes and
fruitless Controversies, in which Mr Heming spends so much time and is so
deeply engaged. I dare say those points never brought men to heaven. I question
whether ever they forwarded any men so much as one step thitherward: Admit I
were come up to Mr Hemings opinion in these points as far as he would have me,
that I would speak as bitterly against Judas his receiving of the Sacrament and
mixed Communion as he does, that I abhorred baptizing of Infants, that I would
be rebaptized, that I would cry out against singing of Psalms in the public
Congregation, that I would hold or practice in these or such like things as
these as punctually and completely a^ he could desire; I pray you what were I
nearer heaven for all this? what one hairs breath had this stepped me forward
toward God or toward salvation? Might not Publicans, Harlots, Ahabs, Cains,
and incarnate Devils do as much as all this, and be Devils still? Why should
Mr. Heming engage himself and insist so much upon such fruitless things as
these, as he has done, when it is as free and as open before him to deal only
with sound and saving doctrines? and it would be more comfortable for him so to
do, upon his final account, and it would be more graceful to the hearers, in
case Mr Heming were able or idoneous thereunto.

I will appeal to all standers by, of unbiassed and impartial judgment; yea,
I durst appeal to Mr Hemings own conscience if unmuffled or not altogether
ignorant, whether the insisting upon such doctrines as these, upon which he
spends the most of his public discourses among us, tends not more to gain a
party, then to save a soul. I would ask of him, what comfortable account does
he think to give, when he comes to give up his reckoning betwixt God and
himself? first, for taking upon him the profession of a Minister, and then for
neglecting to prosecute the wholesome doctrines that should save souls so much
as he does, and declaming almost only upon such windy and needless points as
these, which only breed ill humors, and disturbance in the minds of men, and
divisions and heart-burnings in Congregations, and tend not one jot or tittle
to edification: And I would desire the Saints in and about Vttoxater, that he
means, in the bowels of Christ and in the melting tendering of their own
salvation, to think seriously with themselves upon their reckoning with God,
upon these points: whether they think the zeal against, Infants baptism, mixed
Communion, and such like punctilio's, the best upon which must needs cool zeal
in better things, can redound to their comfort, in the day of their account?
Let me by way of parable lay before them two men upon their deathbeds, and
reckoning with God upon their course and carriage in Religion: One of them of
the old light as it is reputed, that is in the old and good way in Religion, in
which all the holy men in England have walked since England knew the Gospel: He
has this to say, from the bottom of his heart to God; Lord, then know, that
I have ever desired to lie low in mine own thoughts, and have reputed my self
the chiefest of sinners, that I have loved and longed after the sincere
doctrines of salvation, that tended to the saving of my soul, and to the union
in thy Church, that I have prayed, heard, sung, received the Sacrament with the
Congregation with a good heart: And that thy Word has been most welcome to me,
though it has crossed me in my dearest humor and opinion. The other of them,
of the New Light, and strange doctrines that are now afoot, that were never
heard of before, He has this to say upon his reckoning for his comfort; Lord,
thou know that I have accounted my self a Saint and despised others, that I
have loved and been zealous for matters of question and dispute, that I have
refrained the Sacrament, and singing of Psalms with the Congregation, because
of the profane in it; I have been an enemy to Infants baptism, and I have not
cared for any Minister, that was not directly of mine opinion and judgment:
let any one judge whether of these two is liker to come off with the greater
comfort; and let any that know the way of Mr Hemings teaching, judge, whether
the greatest bent of his endeavor in it, do tend to any higher comfort then
the latter. Reader, however he talks of reluctance in his spirit against such
low Controversies, it is his own free choice, and for ought we can see, his
delight to be versed and zealous in them, and there is no necessity or force
upon him to urge him to it, that any of us can possibly conceive, unless it be
because he is not skilled in more material points, or because he would make
and maintain a party. And that he delights in these low Controversies, for all
his saying, it is enough to be collected out of his own words, who though he
call them fruitless, yet within five lines after, he professes that he
finds daily that low things are most beneficial for believers of lowest
seize; God help those Believers that find no greater benefit by any
doctrine then by these low points. I can hardly believe that such are Believers
of S. Peter's old edition, that desire the sincere milk of the Word and grow by
it, but of the new edition under some New Light, that think to go to heaven
somenew-found way. Then he proceeds thus,

What I have done in this is for their souls, who came out of Babylon, out of
Egypt the other day.

Answer. Let Mr Heming remember that passage, Woe unto him that calls light
darkness; what he means by Babylon and Egypt, is easy to pick out, namely,
whosoever is not of his opinion and practice: And hence come those charitable
and innocent expressions of his [as he calls them] Mr Lightfoot and his unholy
Communicants, page 4. Mr Lightfoot and his unholy crew, page 20. His profane
fellow members. p. 5. etc.

The Reader, if he were of Mr Heming's charity and no higher, might be induced
to think that poor Vttoxater is the veriest Sodom and Gomorrha upon the earth,
and that till he came thither, it had bin led and lived in the deepest
Superstition and darkness that ever Babylon and Egypt did: It is not for me to
speak, what a Ministry this Town has had, ever since before Mr Heming was
born [the relation I stand in to him that has been their Minister so long,
does stop my mouth:] But let all the Counteys hereabout, Cheshire, Shropshire,
Staffordshire, Darbishire etc. let any in England that ever heard of old Mr
Lightfoot Minister of Vttoxater, and what he has been, and what his Ministry
and Conversation has been, nay let Mr Hemings own Saints, be witnesses what
his pains, doctrine, life, and Ministry has been among them for above this
thirty years: If they have not dissembled, the day has been when some of them
have acknowledged, and taken on them to think, that this Town in a happy
Ministry has gone in equal pace and degree with the most Towns of England.
And now the case is so altered, that till Mr Heming came amongst them, poor
Vitoxater is said to have been in darkness, and in Babylon and Egypt; and he
proved a Moses and a Zorebabel to bring it out.

I would argue with Mr Heming about these precious hearts that are come out of
Babylon and Egypt but the other day: Some of them have pretented to holiness
and precisnesse in Religion above other men, many years before Mr Heming ever
came here, or his name was known; and it may be they were then more really
taken for Saints then they are now: They were either Saints then, or they were
not; If they were not, then they were hypocrites, for they took religiousnesse
and sanctity upon them: If they were Saints, then there may be Saints in
Babylon and Egypt, and in my Communion: And I hope these ancient Professors
have not changed their charity though they have changed their light, so, but
that they think there are some that communicate with me, that have always
demeaned themselves in the evidence and demonstration of holiness, zeal,
piety, charity, and of all other Christian accomplishments, in as full and
constant a measure and course, as any of those that Mr Heming has brought out
of Egypt and Babylon, and that have ever carried as visible works of Saints
upon them, as any of these: But would you know what it is to come out of
Babylon and Egypt in Mr Hemings sense? It is indeed to come out of your wits
and your Religion, it is to deny your Baptism, your mother Church of England,
and the way of Religion in which all the holy men of England have walked till
now. It is to cast off Parliament, Assembly, Directory, order and all
Government in matters of Religion. It is to withdraw from the Communion,
refrain from singing of Psalms, vilify the Lords Prayer, and Infants
Baptism. It is in a word, to walk by a new light, newly lighted, and newly
come forth; to say and do as Mr Heming would have you, and he that does these
things, is as surely come out of Egypt, as ever did Gypsies, and is as
certainly a Saint as it is certain the moon is made of green cheese.

Mr. Heming. I never intended this answer of mine should have come to a public
censure, had not Mr Lightfoot and his unholy Communicants, etc. dealt
deceitfully.

Answer. The Friar desired a Pigs heart, and a Capons liver, but good man he
would have neither Pig nor Capon die for him. Mr Heming loves in his heart to
be in Print, for that makes him seem some body, but he would not come to
public censure, for that may hap to speak contrary to his self-conceit and
humor, and that is to him as the pangs of death. I will not question whether
he intended his answer for the Press or no, it may be it had been as good for
him to have let it alone; but let me thank him for publishing his good word,
which I and my fellow Communicants have from him all along. Mr. Lightfoot and
his unholy Communicants dealt deceitfully: Nay, if I take you talking of
dealing deceitfully, I Will talk with you, for I have my tale to tell to that
purpose too. You may observe throughout his Pamphlet that still he holds it out
as if I pleaded for mixed Communion, which I meddled not withal, but only kept
me to the question, whether Judas received the Sacrament or no: but enter
Matchiavell: His subtilty thought that he could not pick enough out of my
assertion, That Judas received the Sacrament, to make me so sufficiently odious
as he would have me: therefore he juggles this business into the dispute about
mixed Communion, and there he thought he should find railing stuff enough
against me, and how excellently he has husbanded it is abundantly visible: To
do him a courtesy, I will avouch for mixed Communion: and since he has
promised some elaborate piece in page 20, which will be about such a subject, I
suppose I shall leave him a few quaeries to find him work.

1. Whether may not a man with as much saftety to his soul receive the
Sacrament with a scandalous person as with a hypocrite? Affirm 2. Whether is
not a man rather to communicate with scandalous, persons, if such company at
the Sacrament cannot be avoided, then to refrain or withdraw from the Sacrament
altogether? Affirm. 3. Whether is there any such end, or any such thing in the
nature of the Sacrament as to distinguish one Christian from another. Negat 4.
Whether the Communion of Saints in Scripture sense be not in the profession of
the Christian faith, as well as in the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper? Affirm. 5. Whether the main ends of the Sacraments of both Testaments
be not the same? Affirm. 6. Whether the Sacraments, howsoever they be
received, be not Seals? Affirm.
This half dozen of points I would put out to Mr Heming to tagging; but let us
have no boasting nor railing in the bargain: I would have my points tagged
without tufts: If he can from clear Scripture or reason contradict what I hold,
he will discover more skill, then he has showed himself guilty of in all this
dispute: but if he cannot [but his Logic can prove any thing] I could deduce
such conclusions from these premises that would make his opinion against mixed
Communion run so on snicksnarles, that with fingers and teeth and all he would
find enough to do to unknot it again, and make it run glib.

The greatest part of his Epistle he spends in railing and reviling me, in as
taunting and bitter terms as he can invent upon this score of mixed Communion,
which though I meddled not withal, yet he will needs persuade you that I hold
it, or else he were undone for railing matter. Will you hear some of his
innocent expressions, as he calls them? I should superabundantly wrong him If I
should not rank him with the vilest in the Kingdom, for with them he will have
Communion as a member of the same external visible body, by virtue of which
relation they are all his brethren and sisters; so that he has his brother
Drunkard, brother Thi^f, brother Murderer, brother Liar, etc. Sister Whore,
sister Witch, etc. Yea all that have been hanged at Tyburn and all other
gallows in England ever since he was born and baptized into that fellowship he
pleads for, have been his brethren and sisters, page 5. and 20. And this I dare
say I can prove against all the Devils in hell. Page 5.

Angelus in penna -- voce Gehenna. Nay take in Pede latro too, at Mr.
Gillespies request who has been so basely plundered.

Now a Kingdom for a mouse-hole to run into from the fury of this dreadful
Champion, that is ready to challenge even all, even all the Devils in hell into
disputation. And certainly all the Devils in hell if they should dispute with
him, could not give him worse language then he gives me.

What 2 jolly kindred has he adopted me into? It is well he lived not in the
days of Samuel, or David or Esaias, or Jeremy, or any of the holy men upon
record in Scripture: for it is ods they might have heard as much from him, as I
do, seeing they were admitted by the same Circumcision into the same Church, by
which and into which every Israelite beside was admitted, were he good or bad:
if it were any disgrace to them to have drunkards, murderers, liars, thieves,
etc. circumcised as well as they, and of the same Church that they were of, I
shall very willingly bear the same disgrace with them. Take heed Mr. Heming,
that by your self united select Communion that you talk of, you make not your
self holier then these holy men.

After he has raged and rambled a great while in his puff and passion, he
comes at the last a little to himself, and begins as he thinks to talk reason,
and he faith thus,

Here is one thing that I would have you and all men to take special notice
of, namely that Mr Lightfoots Communion diametrically opposes

1. The Soriptures, the plain letter. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16,
17, 18. 2. His Creed, or at least this Article of it, the Communion of Saints.
3. The Covenant, by which we are bound to endeavor a Reformation according to
the word of God, and the best Reformed Churches, who abhor such Communions. 4.
The Directory which says, the ignorant and scandalous are not fit to receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: yea the Common Prayer book it self which
shuts the door against, and keeps out open and notorious evil livers. 5. And
lastly, the Principles, hopes, expectations, and joint endea-of all godly
ministers.
Answer. Mr Heming loves Creed and Covenant, and Directory when they will serve
his turn, but all the year after, he loves them as he loves me, But let us
examine how my Communion is contrary to all these, and to the Scripture, and to
the other things that he has named. My Communion is to this purpose: 1. I
desire the purity and due administration, and receiving of the Sacrament, as
well as Mr Heming or any of his Disciples. 2. But I find no Text in Scripture
that either warrants me to refrain the Sacrament, because scandalous persons do
receive it, or that does condemn me for receiving with such, all the while I
endeavor to fit and approve mine own heart as becomes that ordinance. 3. Nor
do I use when I come about that work, to be so scrupulous in looking what
others are, as I do desire to examine my self, and so I take the Apostles
meaning to be 1 Cor. 11.29. Now how this Communion of mine should be so
opposite to all that is called good or holy, as he censures it, it is far
sooner said then prooved; He says it Diametrically opposes.


1. The Scriptures, the plaint Letter, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15,
16.17.

Answ. The plain Letter in the former place is this: I wrote unto you in an
Epistle not to company with fornicators: yet not altogether with the
fornicators of this world, or with the Covetous, or Extortioners, or with
Idolators; for then ye must needs go out of the world: But now I have written
unto you, not to keep company if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolator, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such a one, no not to eat.

Now in this plain Letter, I would desire Mr Heming to tell me whether the
holiest man in the Church of Corinth, migth not have his brother fornicator,
his brother covetous, his brother Idolator etc. Let him construe me those
words, If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator etc. 2 Let him show
me in all these words the least syllable that speaks against my Communion:
Yes, that he will do presently with a wet finger, Not to company, not to eat
with such a one. But I will deny that not companying means in that sense, and
that not cating with, means in that sense, but in a civil sense, and I will
give him till this day month to prove the contrary: So little is the Letter
plain against me, unless you will take his gloss with it.

The plain Letter in the second place is this, Be ye not unequally yoaked
together with unbelievers; for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what Communion has light with darkness? or what concord
has Christ with Belial, or what part has he that believes with an Infidel?
And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? etc. wherefore come out
from among them and be ye separate, etc. Now let me make his Argument for him
out of these words.

If you may not marry with Heathen Idolaters, you may not receive the Sacrament
with some Christians. But etc. Ergo. Never doubt the truth of this Syllogism;
for it is in the Mood and Figure called A baculo ad Angulum: Who sees not
plainly that the Apostle speaks here of open and professed Idolatrous
Heathens? and from them to argue to Christians that profess the name of
Christ, is such a kind of Logic that when Mr Heming has made it good, I will
give him an Answer: So little plain is the Letter of either of these Texts
against me, that if you plow not with his heifer, yea find not the riddle.

2. He says my Communion opposes my Creed, or at least this Article of it,
The Communion of Saints: he is decieved; It opposes not my Creed, not the
Communion of Saints as it means in my Creed, but it opposes his Creed, and
the Communion of Saints that his new Creed holds out. If this were the
question before us, I could easily show him how he straitens the word Communion
more, and applies the word Saints otherwise then the Scripture does, when it
speaks to that point, of the Saints Communion. There may be Saints sound in
Scripture sense, that are neither of Mr Hemings opinion, practice nor
Canonizing, and there may be found a Communion of Saints in other things
besides receiving of the Sacrament. He makes a great business of it in page
16. 17. as if I spoke blasphemy when I utterd these words, For the fancy is to
make a noise of only the Saints receiving; meaning the Saints of his Calendar
and Canonizing; But he calls heaven and earth to witness, and is ready to rent
his clothes, and his hair, as if I called the Communion of Saints a fancy. No
Mr Heming I do not, it is one of the Articles of my Creed, and I believe it;
but you must let me suppose withal that you fancy such a Communion of Saints
and such a Saintship, as when you have done all you can you will never be able
to prove it. And therefore, never make such a do as if I blasphemed, or knew
not what I said, or it dropped from my pen before I was aware and I know not
what; I am ready to say it again and again, that you fancy a Communion of
Saints, you can never make good: And if this were the question between us, I
could show you, that I rave not, but understand what I say, and that I am not
utterly ignorant what the Scripture and my Creed means by the Communion of
Saints. If you should declaime, and rail, and rage as you do, seven years by
Vtoxater clock I must yet still hold, that there may be a Devil in you
Communion and a Saint in mine; and that all are not Saints and Devils that you
hold so: and therefore you may save your labor, and spare your breath about
this matter. I could tell you of some, that have carried as fair a show as any
Saint in your Calendar, and yet have been but painted sepulchers, and I could
name some that have been called as bad as you call me; [and that by those that
took on them as much Saintship as you do] which yet have been real Israelites
without guile.

3. He says, my Communion diametrically opposes the Covenant and the
platform of the best Reformed Churches; if his do not more, I will lose my
stake. These are against separation, gathering of Churches, withdrawing from
the Communion of the public Congregation, and so am I: they are against
Preaching without Orders, and so am I: They are against all pernicious and
damnable doctrines and opinions, and so am I: And these would have the
Sacrament kept as pure as possible, and so would I. If Mr Heming's new lighted
way be nearer the Covenant, and the pattern of the best Reformed Churches, let
him take all.

4. What he says of my Communion, being against whatsoever is called good and
holy, and against the Principles, hopes, expectations and endeavors of all
godly Ministers, all is but to lay ink enough upon my opinion, that it may
seem black to purpose; and when he has all done, it is but an opinion that he
himself puts upon me, and will make me to hold it whether I will or no: For I
never meddled with him about mixed Communion [as I said before] nor pleaded for
it, but kept me to the question about Judas his receiving of the Sacrament, and
yet will he needs foist in this for the question, for without this, he
thought he could not so handsomely abuse me. He confesses it was his
resolution to wound my reputation that it should never be healed, and he has
taken up this rusty weapon which he thinks will do it: I must fence for my
self as well as I can. Have at him then with some of the language of the beast
to begin with: Rumpatur quisquit rumpitur invidia.

And so let us to it, upon the proper quarrel and quession that is between us.

My First Assertion is this:
That the sop which Judas received, and Satan with it, he received it not on
the Passover night, but two nights before: and that he received it not at the
Passover supper at Jerusalem, but at a common supper at Bethany.

Mr Heming stateth the Question first to be discussed in this Assertion, Thus,
Now here arises a great question between Mr Lightfoot and my self, namely,
which was the Supper at Bethany, That mentioned, Ioh. 12.1, 2, 3. etc. or that
Ioh. 13.1, 2, 3?

He says, That in Ioh. 13. and upon that mistaken place, has built his wood,
hay and stubble. Boys and Girls if ye can but read English, come forth and
shame this great master in Israel; read both the Chapters and then tell him
which speaks of the Supper at Bethany. But I Answer.

That in John 12. was the Supper at Bethany, and not that in Ioh. 13.

Reply.
Conclamatum est, I have lost the day already and never a stroke struck, and
Boys and Girls must hoot me out of the field. But hark ye, my honest Boys
and Girls of Vttoxater, before ye fall a shounting, let me tell you a story:
There was once a poor woman fool [if my memory fail not, Seneca's wife kept
her for her pastime at Rome] and she was suddenly struck blind and lost her
seeing: Now all the world could not persuade her that she was blind, but cried
out that the house was dark, and thought rather that the day and the Sun had
lost their light, then she her sight. My lads, if you must shame any body for
blind beetlednesse, it must be Mr Heming that calls you out, for he sees not
what he should see in Ioh. 13. and yet he cries out, the blindness is mine at
Ioh. 12. The fault is in his eyes, but you cannot persuade him so, but that I
have lost my sight.

How miserably low and lost am I in his esteem? when for my Moralls he holds
me worse then any man, and for mine intellectualls less then any reading boy.
Though I know he thinks of me as bad as bad can be, I thank him for it; yet
truly, I did not think he had reputed me so very silly and senseless, as
either not to see at all, that the Supper in Ioh. 12. was at Bethany, or so
little to observe it as to commit so gross a mistake as he would put upon me.
Sir, Certainly either you are mightily mistaken in me, or you would put a
mighty fallacy upon the Reader: Assure your self I can spell and read the word
Bethany in Ioh. 12.1. as well as any Boy or Girl in all Vtoxater Parish, and I
saw it as plain when I entered upon this Dispute, as ever your eyes say it in
all your life: But you did not see Bethany in Ioh. 13.1.2.3. which I did, and
that is the reason of all this vapouring. And hereupon, you either sillily or
willingly, falsify our Question, and so the poor Boys and Girls that are
called out to shame me, will either shame themselves for shouting at they know
not what, or rather shame you for vapouring at you know not what. Our Question
is not whether the Supper in Ioh. 12. or the Supper in Ioh. 13. were the Supper
at Bethany, but our Question is Whether that Supper in Ioh. 13. were not at
Bethany, as well as that Supper in Ioh. 12. I assert it was; but Master Heming
denies it.

Mr Heming. That in John 12. was the Supper at Bethany, and not that in John
13. For in John 13. Bethany is not so much as once named: but in Chap. 12. it
is, As also in Matthew. 26. Mark 14.

Reply.
I see the man cannot see one inch further into a millstone then there is a hole
peckt in it before him; boys and girls might have given such a reason as
this. Children, was the Supper in John 13. at Bethany? No forsooth master, for
Bethany is not once named there: But such a master in Israel as Mr Heming
should have looked a little further about him, before he had given his
determination: Children, was the Supper in John 13. at Jerusalem? No forsooth
master, for Jerusalem is not once named there: Yet Master Heming holds it was:
and here he has given me an argument against his own tenet. He says that that
Supper in John 13. was at Jerusalem, and that it was on the Passover night,
and proves by that Chapter that Judas went out before the Sacrament, and yet is
there not the least mention of Jerusalem or the Passover night, nor of the
Sacrament in all that Chapter. He alleges this Chapter of John as his chief
ground to prove that Judas did not receive the Sacrament, when there is not one
word of the Sacrament in all John's Gospel. He produces this Evangelist to
judge of a matter [and that to gainsay the other three that aver it] who
speaks not one word fo the thing to be judged of. And yet when I say the Supper
in John 13. was at Bethany, he thinks this a good reason, to say no, because
Bethany is not there named.

Before I come to show that Bethany was the place of that Supper,

I shall first show that that Supper was before the Passover day, and
Secondly, that it was two days before the Passover and at Bethany, although
indeed the circumstance of the place be not so material to our dispute, as the
circumstance of the time.

I say therefore, that the Supper in John 13. was before the Passover day
came. And that I prove from the plain words of John himself in the first verse
of that Chapter. Now before the feast of the Passover, etc. whereupon I argue
thus.

Argum. 1. That Supper that was before the feast of the Passover was not on
the Passover day, but before it.

But that Supper in John 13. was before the feast of the Passover. verse 1.
Ergo it was not on the Passover day, but before it.

To this M. Heming gives this answer Page 10.

In John 13.1. Now before the feast, etc. (...) not meant two days before, as
he would have it: the words are (...) meaning immediately before, etc, as Luke
11.38. (...), The Pharisee woudred that he washed not before dinner, that is
immediately before dinner.

Reply.
Rarely Critical! But I doubt, Animus est in patinis: by the Feast of the
Passover Mr Heming understandethth the very Passover meal, and so he shows
his meaning in page 11. the sop was given (says he) at an Ordinary or Common
Supper which Christ had the same night before he ate the Passover.

1. Let him but show me from one end of the Bible to another, where the word
(...) signifies barely a meal, and I will lose my supper to morrow night: when
there is mention of the feast of Tabernacles, the feast of Dedication, the
feast of Pentecost, the feast of Passover, etc, Mr Heming it seems, thinks of
victuals stirring, and looks after his Commons; but any man that is not a
child in Scripture, knows that the expression means the whole space and
solemnity of these times. He would make but a hungry exposition of the feast of
expiation, which was a most strict fasting day. 2. If he had consulted Latin
translators upon John 23.1. he would have found that they render it. Ante diem
festum Paschae, applying it to the day, and not to the meal. 3. Was not the
feast of the Passover begun, before any supper that day was stirring? I
believe wiser men then either you or I will tell you; that the feast of the
Passover began as soon as ever the Paschal lamb began to be slain. And 4.
Whereas he talks of a common supper which they had the same night before they
are the Passover, I deny it; for it was a holy suppe^ of their Peace
offerings, as I have learned by some better acquainted with Jewish customs,
then I doubt either you or I shall be these two days. And if it were so, Judas
communicated in this Supper by your own confession, and that is something
toward a cheese.
Mr Heming. At that Supper Ioh. 13. Christ's hour was come: v. 1. so that he was
betrayed the very same night, as it is evident, comparing Ioh. 13.37, 38. with
John 18.1, 2, 3. and Mat. 26.34. Mark 14.30. This discourse passed betwixt
Christ and Peter, the very night in which he was betrayed.

Reply.
Is it most true that Christ's hour was then come; for the design of his
betraying was set a foot that night, but that he was betrayed that night, I
deny, as evident as it is in his looking glass that he would show you. There
is indeed in John 13.37, 38. a passage about the Cocks crowing, that makes Mr
Heming think the matter is Cock sure on his side, whereas it may be but the
crowing of his own brains, that tunes it into a construction to serve his turn,
and not the sense and meaning of the place it self. The words of the Evangelist
are these, Peter said unto him Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay
down my life for thy sake. Jesus answered, will thou lay down thy life for my
sake? verily, verily, I say unto thee, the Cock shall not crow till thou have
denied me thrice.

For the understanding of these words I would desire the Reader to observe
these two things.

1. That Christ in Mat. 26.34. says verily I say unto thee, that this night
before the Cock crow, etc. and Mar. 14.30. That this day even in this night
before the Cock crow twice, etc. for that was indeed the very night in which
Peter did deny him: but here in John 13.38. he does not so determine the time,
but says only the Cock shall not crow, etc. 2. That by these words, The Cock
shall not crow till thou have denied me thrice, he means not, thou shall deny
me thrice before any Cock crow, for he denied him but once before a Cock crew,
as is. plain Mar. 14.68, 69, 70, but he means thou shall deny me thrice in
the space of Cocks crowing, which space was the third part of the night, Mat.
13.35. And so Mark helps to understand it, when in him it is explained,
before the Cock crow twice, etc. Mar. 14.30. This therefore helps Mr Hemings
cause never a jot, nor proves it that that night Ioh. 13. was the night that
Peter denied Christ: for Christ might have said as much as he says there a
twelve month before Peter denied him, and yet the sense very sound and
current, Peter, art thou so confident and resolute? I tell thee that the time
will come when in the time of cocks crowing thou shall deny me three times
over.
Now whereas Mr Heming would have you compare John 13.37.38. with John 18.1, 2,
3. his meaning is to this purpose, that Christ having given Peter notice of his
denial, and spoken these words in Chap. 14. and 15, and 16. and 17. he
presently goes over the brook Kidron, and there is apprehended: but he would
make you leap over a style by the way, and take no notice of it, and so you may
chance break your shins. What makes he of that clause, John 14.3^. Arise, let
us go hence, let him tell me whether Christ went now. I know he will say, he
rose from the Table after the Sacrament, and went out of doors toward Kidron,
and spoke the passages in Chapter 15. and 16. and 17. as he walked along: In
very good time, and a very likely business: but John 18.1* says when he had
spoken these words, he went forth: construe me that.

Argum. 2. A second Argument that I use to prove that the Supper in John 13.
was before the Passover day, is from verse 27, 28, 29 of that Chapter, where
when Judas had received the sop and Satan: and Jesus said to him, What thou
do do quickly, Some of the Disciples thought because Judas had the bag,
that Jesus had said unto him, buy those things that we have need of against the
feast. Now if they had things to buy against the feast, the feast was not yet
come.

The answer that Master Heming returns to this Argument is first thus, Perhaps
Christ did not eat the Paschall Lamb upon the same day the Jews did, etc. And
then the feast the Disciples dreamed of might very well be the Jews Passover,
kept a day after: I could speak more for proof of this from John. 18.21. and
19.14. then ever Mr. Lightfoot will be able to answer.

Reply.
Perhaps the Evangelists are not to be believed, because they speak contrary to
Master Hemings humor; for they tell you as plain as plain can be that Christ
did eat the Paschall Lamb upon the same day that the Jews did. See Matthew.
26.17. Mark 14.12. Luke 27.7.8. And yet he puts a perhaps upon it, to squeeze
out something to his purpose. Sure the man did not know that the Paschall
Lambs were slain by the Priests at the Altar, and the blood sprinkled there,
and they slain, and the blood sprinkled in the name of a Paschall: and sure he
did not know how high a transgression it was reputed by the Jews to eat the
Passover on a wrong day: had he known and weighed these things, perhaps he
would find it a harder business for Christ to eat the Passover a day before
the Jews, then he dreamed of. But why do I talk of such things as these to
him, when he puts a perhaps upon so plain Texts of the Evangelists.

As for that tiring work that he would set me upon out of John 18.28. and
19.14. I will tell him this before hand, that if I can make nothing of those
places, I will deny mine own skill, judgment, and opinion before I will deny
the plain text of the Evangelists as he does: But I need not to eat mine
assertion for any thing that those places hold out against it.

He is it but little acquainted with Scripture, or with the Jews customs
about the Passover that knows not that there were Passover Bullocks and
other Peace Offerings to be eaten in the week of the Feast, as well as the Lamb
was upon its day. 2. Chron. 30.21.24. and 35 7, 8. And that these are called
the Passover as well as the Lamb. Deuteronomy. 16.2. compared with Exodus 12.5.

And to take up these Texts, which in Master Hemings conception will be
everlasting tiring irons to me. in John 18.28. The Jews went not into Pilates
judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the
Pass^over: that is, but that they might eat the solemn Peace Offerings that
were to be eaten at the Passover, and which are called the Passover; and that
in Chapter 19.14. it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth
hour: that is, it was the day in which they prepared these Paschall bullocks
and Peace offerings for their holy diet being the days of the feast. What so
great difficulty is there in these Texts, and what incongruity is there in this
exposition of them?

A second Answer that Mr Heming gives to my Argument is this, [but I must tell
you beforehand it is somewhat homely.]

Observe says he] how he would daub over his own mistake with the untempered
mortar of the Disciples ignorance; what some of them thought proceeded of
ignorance. John 13. 28.29. etc. and a little after: For the Disciples
ignorance, and Mr Lightfoots grounded upon theirs, Christ had no more Feasts.

Reply.
Now come out good manners: he that uses the Disciples so uncivilly, I may put
off my Hat and thank him, that he uses me no worse then he does. I must tell
the Apostles and Evangelists, that let them take heed what they say, and how
they place their words; for if they speak but one syllable awry from Mr.
Hemings humor, he will tell them what they are before all the Parish. And I
pray you Sir what were the Apostles ignorant of, that one may dawbe walls with
their ignorance? Could they not tell whether the feast were come or no? That Is
the question that you and I are upon, out of the words in John 13.28, 29. and
if you say they were ignorant of that, you speak like Mr. Heming in state and
majesty: and if they were ignorant of that, they were ignorant to the purpose.
Come on my boys and girls, when Holidayes were in fashion, could you tell
when a Holiday came? If you could, you were wiser then Mr. Heming holds the
Disciples were.

But it may be he will say, that he does not mean they were ignorant of this
but of something else, as he says, They knew not that he was to be betrayed
that night; why, what is this to our question? The Evangelist says, They
thought Jesus had bidden Judas buy something against the feast; hereupon I say,
if it were against the feast, the feast was not yet come. To this he gives this
answer, what some of them thought proceeded of ignorance, for, they knew not
that he was to be betrayed. Is not this an answer as profound and direct in it
self as it is well mannered toward the Disciples? I say still, the Disciples
thought Judas had been bidden to buy something against the feast, ergo, the
Disciples knew that the feast was not yet come. Let him answer me this
directly, and like a man that desires to find out the truth.

Joh. 13. was before the Passover day, and not on it, proves a pitfall to Mr.
Heming, beyond my expectation, for I did not think he had been so blind, as to
have been so caught: My words were these, We know that the Lords Supper was
given the Passoever day at night, viz. the first Sabbath of the Feast; the
meaning of my argument I shall give by and by.

Now Mr. Heming thinks that I speak the savourest and bravest nonsense that
ever did man: I shall give his censure in his words at length, and not in
figures, for it is pity any of it should be lost.

Whereas he says (says he) That we know the Lords Supper was given on the
Passover day at night; viz the first Sabbath of the Feast, whereon the Jews
are the Paschall Lamb; I am afraid he understands neither what he says, nor
whereof be affirms; But be it so, and then

1. How was Christ upon the Cross on the preparation day, the day before the
Sabbath, according to those Scriptures, Mat. 27.62. Mark 15.42. Luke 23.54.
Ioh. 18.28. and 19.14, 31, and 42 verses. 2. How could he rise the day after
the Sabbath, namely the first day of the week, Mar. 16.2. Mat. 28.1. since he
lay-three days in the grave? Does the man believe (think ye) that Christ ate
the Passover a day or two after he was dead? or that be did rise the next day
after he had eaten it? Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? What day thinks
be Christ was betrayed and taken? or how long-was it between his taking and
crucifying? I wish the man be not found tardy here.
Repl. You have your wish into your own bosom and that with a witness: It is
not I that am found tardy here, but yourself, so as that you will be ashamed of
it, when you see it. I warrant you Mr. Heming and his Disciples have had many a
pleasant laughing, and triumphing fit over this poor sentence of mine, and have
hugged one another in this advantage of nonsense, as he has set it out, no doubt
most learnedly to them. Me thinks I see him scratch the elbow, and hear him
laugh hither. But I must put him in mind of Seneca's wifes fool again; he
cries out I am blind, when the blindness is his own.

This great Master of Israel never dreamed in all his life, of any Sabbath, but
only the ordinary weekly Sabbath, and from this ignorance comes all this
laughter; but it seems I must be his teacher now, and inform him, that the
first and last day in the Passover week was a Sabbaticall day, or a Sabbath,
and so was also the first and last day of the Feast of Tabernacles, etc. Had he
but well weighted Exodus 12.16. Levit. 23.7. and seriously consulted how the
word Sabbath is to be understood in Levit. 23.15. I am sure he would have gone
a mile on my errand, before he would have given this censure upon those words
of mine, for his own credits sake. Why do you not laugh now Mr. Heming? I hope
I have you here at a full check mate; and I suppose by this time you see, that
the more you have triumphed over me here, the more shamefully you have
discovered your own ignorance. Would you not give a gray groat now with all
your heart, that these words of yours had never been born? Be wiser another
time, you know not what an art I have of setting mousetraps.

I say therefore again, that on the Passover day at night the first Sabbath or
first Sabbaticall day of the feast was entered: and hereupon I argue thus. The
Disciples when Judas had received the sop, and Jesus bad him, Quod facis fac
cito, thought that he bad him buy something: But if that were the Passover
night, the Sabbath was now entered, and buying any thing was neither lawful nor
possible. Therefore that was not on the Passover night, but some night before:
For it is senseless and groundless to think, that the Disciples should think
of Christ's bidding him buy something, when nothing was possibly to be bought.

Upon that text therefore, John 13.29. Some thought that Jesus had said unto
him, Buy those things that we have need of against the feast. I conclude,

1. That that was not at the Passover supper, because then nothing could be
bought, a Sabbaticall day being entered. And 2. That that was before the feast
of the Passover, because the Disciples thought of buying something against the
feast: If this my arguing be not direct, let him correct me, if it be, let
him give me direct answers, if he can.

Logic that he venteth upon my arguing from it? If from this Scripture (says
he) be will conclude that there was another feast, why may not I conclude that
Judas gave something to the poor?

Reply. Brains and stairs are not better Ryme, then this is Reason; I know
not what Your Logic may conclude, but another to conclude so, I must tell him,
it is to take up more then comes to his share. If I had concluded from this
Scripture, that Judas bought something against the feast, you might have
concluded in equity, that Judas gave something to the poor; but when I
conclude no more but this, that there was a feast, your share of concluding
comes to no more but this, that there were some poor. And as properly as one
may conclude, that there were some poor, to whom something was to be given,
from this, because they thought he bad give something to the poor: so as
properly may it be concluded, that the feast was to come, against which
something was to be bought, from this, because they thought he bade him, buy
something against the feast.

Joh. 13. at which the sop was given to Judas, was not on the Passover day,
but before, is this.

The Devil entered into Judas before the feast of the Passover came.

But the Devil entered into Judas at the Supper, in Joh. 13.

Ergo, That Supper, Joh. 13. was before the feast of the Passover came. The
major is proved, Luke 22.3. Satan entered into Judas, etc. ver. 7. Then came the
day of unleavened bread, etc. By which it is apparent, that Satan was entered
into Judas before the day of unleavened bread, or the Passover day came:
unless Mr. Heming will except at the Evangelists Order, which if he do, let
him give a good reason why, lest he show himself too bold with the text, for
his own turn.

To the force of this Argument he answers nothing, but only because I said, The
Devil entered into Judas at Bethany, he catches up the word Bethany, and keeps
a coil with that, but to the pith of the Argument he says nothing. Only in
what answer he gives to this Argument, which indeed is to no purpose, let me
challenge him upon one passage which is The conspiracy is as clearly placed
before the sop, as before the Passover; but, Dic quibus in terris, and
Phyllida solus habeto; Let him but show me where, and then I Will say he speaks
like a Scripture man; but if he cannot, I must say it is extreme impudence and
impiety to assert any such thing; for he makes his fancy equal with the sacred
text. There is not one syllable, letter, or tittle in all the Gospel, that
Judas conspiracy was before the sop, but there is as plain an evidence that
his conspiracy was before the Passover, as there is of any thing in the
Gospel; and yet because this Gentleman has fancied that the sop was given on
the Passover night, he dares to equal his fancy with the divine writ, and
say; The conspiracy is as clearly placed before the sop as before the
Passover: That is, in his brains, but no where else; well fare a bold face in
time of need.

Joh. 13. at which Judas received the sop, was before the Passover day, is
this, That it is not probable, nor can be conceived, that Judas should receive
the sop, and so the Devil with it, and go to the High Priests, and bargain
with them, receive a Band of men, Joh. 18.3. and betray his Master and all upon
one night: for besides the unlikelinesse of it, the text is plain, that from
the time of the receiving of the sop, he sought opportunity to betray him, Mat.
26.16. or how he might conveniently, etc. Mar. 14.11. Luke 22.6. And how
improper it is to say a man seeks convenience or opportunity, when be runs upon
a thing and does it on a sudden; I refer to any one of common capacity.

Heming gives this argument a threefold answer.

First he says, It Is probable all this might be done in one night: for Judas
was not so far from the High Priest: the band of men not so far to seek: the
Devil, Judas and the Jews not so backward in driving on this damnable design,
as he would insinuate. I my self have known in this betraying age, five
times more then this amounts to, brought about in as short a night.

Reply. I cannot imagine with all the skill I have, what that should be, that
was five times more then the betraying of the Son of God: And I wonder how
Mr. Heming came to know that Judas was so near the High priest, and that the
Band of men was so ready at hand. There was an old wandering Jew talked and
ballated of, twixt twenty and thirty years ago, if one had had the luck to
have met with him, he would have told the whole business: It seems Mr. Heming
has had the hap to meet with some of his intelligence, and that makes him so
exact in this relation: but poor we that go by the old light of the four
Evangelists can see no such matter. Mr. Heming grants that Judas sat down with
Christ on the Passover night, and ate the common supper with him, and he
sticks not much to grant that he ate the Paschall Lamb with him; well, Christ
after that, did but deliver the Sacrament, sing a hymn, speak a few words to
his Disciples, go into the mount of Olives, and there Judas was presently at
hand to apprehend him: Now how Judas in so short a time as this should do all
his business; get together the chief Priests and Captains, Luke 22.4. (it may
be the wandering Jew said they supt all together this night) bargain with them,
raise a band of men, get Lanthorns and Torches all ready, etc. he must be of a
quick belief, that beleves such quickness.

A second Answer that he gives is this.
He (following the old trade) most shamefully abuses Mat. 26.16. Mar. 14.11.
when he says, It Is plain from those Texts, That from the time of the receiving
of the sop, Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ. Read the verses before
and after, and then tell me, if you can see but the print or footsteps of any
such thing. Is it not plain in those places, that from that time Christ
reproved Judas for his covetous indignation, at the spending of the ointment,
he sought opportunity, and from that reproof took occasion to betray him?
It Is evident, he sought how he might conveniently betray Christ before he
received the sop.

Reply. It Is policy to cry thief first: Be sure to tell me of abusing
Scripture, loud enough, that no body may hear me tell tales of you; but before
I have done, I hope I shall have my tale heard too. Now how much abuse Mat.
26.16. Mar. 14.11. to the purpose mentioned, will appear in the discussion of
our next question, about the Supper at Bethany, upon which I shall instantly
enter, when I have first challenged him upon two assertions which he will never
be able to make good whilst his name is Mr. Heming unless it be by some
Gospel of his own making. The first is this, That Judas took occasion to
betray Christ from his reproving of him for his covetous indignation at the
spending of the ointment. If M. H. have any other ground for this, but that he
judges of another impatience to be crossed in his humor, by his own, let him
show it; and if he show any solid ground for it, I Will venture the burning of
my cap.

The other is this, That it is evident that he sought how be might conveniently
betray Christ before be received the sop; where is it so evident? why, in his
fancy and by his new light, but not by any one letter in all the Gospels. If it
were true that Judas received the sop on the Passover night as he fancieth,
then he said something, but that I deny, and have alleged my arguments and
reasons why I deny it, the which I refer to any impartial and indifferent
judgment.

Those that hold that Judas did not receive the Sacrament, do lay this as the
corner stone of their opinion; That Judas upon the receiving of the sop went
out before the Sacrament was administered: will you hear the words of Zanchius in
stead of many? Etsi multi and magni viri hoc docuerint and scripserint, ego
tamen nullo modo concedo aut concedere possum; although many men of great
esteem have taught and written (that Judas received the Sacrament)
nevertheless I cannot nor at all do yield unto it. And what is his reason,
Quia aperte pugnat cum Historia Iohannis Evangelistae. Because it plainly
thwarteth the History of the Evangelist John. And how does it so? Johannes cap.
13. ver. 30. aperte scribit Iudam postquam accepisset offulam a Christo
(injuscubo nimirum agni assi) intinctam, statim(...) exivisse. Because John in
chap. 13. verse. 30. writes expressly that Judas after he had received the sop
dipped (namely in the sauce of the roasted Lamb) went straight way forth, Zanch.
in quartum praecep.

Mr. Heming is of the very same opinion, and urge him with the authority of the
other Evangelists that say that Judas sat down to the Passover with the rest
of the Disciples: yes that is true, says he, but before the Sacrament, Christ
gave him the sop and he was gone. It seems exceeding strange to me, that this
use should be made of this Chapter of John 13. who speaks not one fillable of
the Sacrament, and which tells plainly that that supper at which the sop was
given, was ante diem festum Paschae, as the best translaters have rendered it,
and that most truly.

It were enough therefore for the overthrowing of Mr. Hemings opinion, to prove
only that that supper in John 13. was before the Passover day, and we needed
not look any further how many days or nights it was before, yet that I may do
him justice and my self right in the maintaining of this my assertion, I yet
go further, and aver, that That Supper in John 13. was in Bethany.

For the proof of which I thus argue; Judas his conspiracy began from the
Devils entering into him, which was when he received the sop at the Supper in
John 13. But Judas his conspiracy began from Bethany; Therefore the Devils
entering into him, when he received the sop at the supper in John 13. was at
Bethany.


The major proposition, that Judas conspiracy began from the Devils entering
into him is as clear in Luke 22.3, 4. as the Sun at noon, Then entered Satan
into Judas Iscariot being one of the number of the twelve: And he went his way
and communed with the chief Priests and Captains how he might betray him unto
them and they were glad, etc. and then in verse: 7. Then came the day of
unleavened bread, etc. Now let all the world, nay his very boys and girls
judge upon this matter: Children, when did Judas begin his treason? Why, Satan
entered into him, and then he went his way and communed with the Highpriests
etc. what: was this before the Passover day or no? yes, it was before, for
Satan entered into him and he communed with the chief Priests etc. and then
the day of unleavened bread came afterward. Would not any boy or girl that
has any capacity, and would not any man or woman that reads the Scripture
consci^ntiously, and is led by the Scriptu^e, and leads it not to his own
opinion that he has taken up, understand these words of Luke in this manner?
Let M. H. give a satisfactory and convincing reason why they are not to be thus
understood, and he may then crow and triumph, but if he cannot, then does he
wrest the Scripture, and having set down his own opinion, he will bring the
Scripture to it, to speak for his purpose by hook or by crook: I urge the
Evangelists words again, Then Satan entered into Judas, and he went his way
and communed with the chief Priests etc. and let Mr. Hemings own Disciples be
judges, whether this prove not, That Judas his conspiracy began from the Devils
entering into him: and that the Devil entered into him upon his receiving of
the sop at the Supper in John 13. they will not deny.

Now I need not to prove the minor, That Judas his conspiracy began from
Bethany; for Mr. Heming does grant it, when he says, Is it not plain from
these places Mat: 26.16. Mark: 14.11. that from the time Christ reproved Judas
for his covetous indignation at the spending of the ointment, he sought
opportunity, and from that reproof took occasion to betray him, p. 12. and in
p. 13. he says again, Nothing else passed at the Supper at Bethany concerning
Judas but Christ's rebuking him for his indignation at the spending of the
alabaster box of ointment.

My conclusion therefore is good, till M. H. can give a clear and satisfactory
answer to the proof of my major, which I believe he will hardly do this
week: That the Devils entering into Judas when he received the sop at the
Supper in John 13. was at Bethany.

All that M. H. says about this business, is this;
Luke 22.3. Speaks nothing at all of the Supper at Bethany, nor of any thing
done there. 2. Though all the Evangelists place the conspiracy before the
Passover, yet they place not the giving of the sop at Bethany. Read Mat. 26.
Mark. 14. John 12. and see if you can find any such thing there.
Reply. So may I answer him again: John 13. speaks nothing of any supper at
Jerusalem; read the chapter through and see if you can find any such word, or
any mention (...) the Sacrament there: And I may as well argue, read Mat. 26.
Mark ^^* ^ohn 12. and see if you can find any such thing as any sop given at
all: ergo, there was no sop given: The man is at bo-peepe, and where it will
serve his turn you must believe such a thing is there, though it be not
written there, and where it will not serve his turn you must not believe it
because it is not written there, nay, sometime you must not believe it though
it be written there. I shall take the places he refers you to, into handling by
and by.

I yet go further in my assertion, because I desire to deal in all plainness,
and I say

That supper at Bethany from which Judas began his conspiracy upon Satan's
entering into him, was two days before the Passover. And for the proof of
this I produce Mat. 26.2. Mark 14.1. where there is mention of two days
before the Passover, and presently after, of Christ's being at meat in
Bethany, and then of Judas his going to the Highpriests etc.

Now here Mr. Heming shows all his learning, and his sincere dealing with the
Scripture on a cluster: will you here a new lighted Commentary upon these
Texts, such a one as you do not hear every day unless it be from him, and
learn but this kind of way of expounding Scripture, and you may hold what you
will and bring the Scripture to maintain it. His words are these,

The following Scriptures, viz. Mat. 26.2. Mark. 14.1. do not at all prove the
Supper at Bethany to have been just two days before the Passover, but that
two days before the Passover, the chief Priests and Scribes sought how they
might take Christ by craft and subtilty etc. and at last concluded it must be
on the feast day (viz. the feast of the Passover) lest there should be an
uprore, etc. Math. 14.1, 2.

The Supper at Bethany is as likely to have been six days before the Passover
as two, Then Jesus six days before the Passover came to Bethany, etc. There
they made him a supper, John 12.1, 2.

Reply. You know what kind of reading of the Bible he made, that found a green
bay horse or mule there, and truly this way of expounding is much like it, he
that will go such a way may find any thing he has a mind to; but God help
them that are led by such an Expositor. Mr. Heming reads Mark 14.1, 2, 3.
thus, Two days before the feast of the Passover, the chief Priests sought to
take Christ by craft, but they said not on the feast day lest there be any
uproare. And six days before the Passover, Jesus being in Bethany as he sat
at meat, etc. Now I pray you is this according to the Gospel of Mark, or
according to the Gospel of Mr. Heming? If this be not shameless wresting of
Scripture, I know not what is.

Here are two things that he would foist upon the Evangelists that I durst
swear were never in their meanings: The first is, that he would persuade you
that Matthew and Mark do change the proper order and time of their story;
telling a story of two days before the Passover first, and then telling a
story of six days before the Passover after it. And the second is, that he
would persuade you that the supper at Bethany in John 12.1. and the Supper at
Bethany in Mat: 26.6. and Mark 14.3. was one and the same; and for this
purpose he has linked Mat. 26. Mark 14. and John 12. together four or five
times in his discourse, as if the matter were past all doubting.

Let me talk with him a little about both these, particularly,

And first, about his persuading that Matthewes and Marks order is here
inverted, and the story of the supper at Bethany dislocated in them, I shall
propose two or three things to him, which if he had considered of, or known
before, it may be he would have been more cautelous for his credits sake, then
thus blind Biard like to venture he knows not, nor cares not on what.

1. Let him show me but one dislocation, I say but one from the beginning of
Marks Gospel to this very place, and then I will grant that there might be
some color of dislocation here. If this grandee had studied the order of the
Evangelists, as well and seriously as some others have done, he durst not for
shame have said thus much, especially of Mark who is so exact and direct for
his method, that I say it again, from the beginning of his Gospel to this
very place, Mr. H. cannot show, not one story, I say not one, which he can
prove by any sound evidence, or reason to be dislocated; no, nor from this
place to the end of his Gospel: It was luck in a bag then, that he that is so
direct in all his Gospel from end to end as never to change one story out of
its proper time and place, should do it here to serve Mr. Hemings turn so pat.

2. Mr. Heming makes no bones of making two Evangelists to change the order of
one and the same story; the like to which let him show me again through all
the Gospels, and I will lay down the cudgels: I say it again, let him show
through all the Gospels such another dislocation in two Evangelists of one and
the same story, as he would make this to be in Matthew and Mark, and I will
confess mine own ignorance, and applaud his skill. I believe there is but one
example in all the Evangelists, that two or more of them do misplace the same
story, and that is not such a dislocation as this neither, as I shall show him
the difference if he have ever the luck and skill to find it out.

3. Sure he never observed how direct Matthew and Mark are in reckoning the
days of Christ's last week before the Passover, from his riding in triumph to
Jerusalem till the Passover day came. As John tells, that six days before the
Passover he supt at Bethany John 12.1. So they go on and tell that on the
next day or five days before the Passover he rides in Triumph into
Jerusalem, Mat. 21.1, 2, etc. Mark 11.1, 2. and at Even goes to Bethany,
Matthew. 21.17. Mark 11.11.

On the morrow, which was four days before the Passover he goes again from
Bethany into Jerusalem, Mar. 11.11, 15, etc. and at night goes the same way
again, Mar. 11.19.

In the morning, which was three days before the Passover, he goes again
into Jerusalem, Mark 11.20, 27, etc. and at Even departs into the Mount of
Olives, Mark 24.1, 3. Mark 13.1, 3. Luke 21.37.

And thus are we come to the night that we are upon, namely two nights before
the Passover, where did Christ lodge this night? why, the Evangelists tell you
in the Mount of Olives: where, there? why, Matthew and Mark say, After two
days was the Passover, and the Scribes sought to take him, etc. And he being
at Bethany at meat, etc.

Why should not any rational man rather take the method of both the
Evangelists here to be direct, since it is so direct all along hitherto, then
to make a jumpe back again, no man alive can imagine to what purpose but only
to serve Mr. Hemings turn? It is apparent that Christ lodged two nights before
the Passover in the Mount of Olives.

I suppose Mr. H. will not say he lay all night in the open fields, and I
presume he cannot tell where else to lodge him in the Mount of Olives, but at
Bethany; and the Evangelists say, after two days was the Passover, etc. And
Jesus being at meat in Bethany, etc. And yet Mr. H. will not suffer you to
think that Christ supped this night at Bethany, but that the two Evangelists
speak of six nights before the Passover. How senseless is it to think, that
when they have told you directly what Christ did the fifth, fourth, third day
before the Passover, and when they say moreover it was two days before the
Passover, they then should jump back again to six days before, and no man
can imagine for what?

4. It is presumption to displace the Evangelists method without good and sound
reason given for it: Let Mr. H. give but such a one and I shall be silent.

As gross or more gross (put what substantive to it you think good) is his
second asseveration, if he could persuade you to it, and that is, that that
supper at Bethany John 12, and that supper at Bethany Mat. 26. Mark. 14. were
but one and the same, and at the same time: which you must believe upon the
word of this great Oracle though there be these maine and visible differences
between them.

1 That Supper in John 12. was six days before the Passover.

That Supper in Mat. 26. Mark 14. was but two: if you will believe the
Evangelists as they speak, and not make them speak as Mr. H. would have them.

2. The Supper in John 12. was in the house of Lazarus.

The Supper in Matthew. 26. Mark 14. was in the house of Simon the Leper.

3. At the Supper in John 12. Mary a woman named, anointeth Christ's feet.

At the Supper Mat. 26. Mark 14. a woman not named anoints his head.

4. At the Supper in John 12. Judas alone has indignation at the expense of
the ointment. verse. 4.

At the Supper in Mat. 26. Mark 14. the Disciples had indignation at it, Mat.
26.8.

Now all these differences which to such a dull pate as mine, cannot choose but
make these appear different suppers; Mr. Heming can reconcile as fast as a
Hen can crack nuts: For do but hear him crack.

And lastly (says he) though much more shall be added if there be occasion, If
any man of common capacity will but compare John 12. from verse. 1. to 8. with
Matthew. 26.6. to verse. 13. and Mark 14.3 -- 9. he shall find they all speak
of the same Supper at Bethany. And for what John differs from the other two
Evangelists in naming Martha and Lazarus and in saying she anointed his feet,
whereas the others say she poured it on his head: that shall be easily
reconciled whenever Mr. Lightfoot please.

It seems Mr. Heming has a singular faculty of reconciling dead men, and I
wish he have not a better, in setting living men together by the ears. I would
he would let the Evangelists alone who are at a sacred peace among themselves,
and that he would reconcile poor Vttoxeter which is torn in pieces with
dissentions since he came amongst us. I know not whether Tenterton Steeple was
the cause of the stopping up of the Haven two or three miles off it: this I
know, that till Vttoxeter knew Mr. Heming peace, amity, and charity dwelt
amongst us, in few Towns more, but now nothing but diss^ntion, biting, and
backbiting, in no town the like. If you be so good a reconciler, I pray begin
at home; the Evangelists need none of your daiesmanship.

You would think it were silk or satin that this great reconciler makes all
this ruffle in, when it is but poor buckram ignorance of the style of the
Gospels, that I may name nothing else. His skill in the Gospels is so great,
that if any two passages in them do but look one like another, they must of
necessity be one and the same, and he can find one trick or other in his
budget to make them so. I warrant you he would make a gallant stitching
together of these differences if I were pleased to desire it of him: He can
tell you as directly how the house of Lazarus became the house of Simon the
Leper, as if he had drawn the conveyance; and how anointing of Christ's head
came to be anointing of his feet, as ever men brought head and heels
together. This sure he learned from the wandering Jew too.

His Squib is not out yet, but it cracks thus further,
Mr. H. I conclude against all he has said or can say, yea against whatsoever
all the friends he shall make in this controversy can say for him.

1. That there was no sop given in the Supper at Bethany, let him find it me
in Mat. 26. Mark 14. John 12. 2. That the discourse between Christ and his
Disciples about the Traitor passed that very night he are the Passover at
Jerusalem, Mat. 26.19, 20, 21, 22, -- 26. Mark 14.16. -- 22. and not at
Bethany two days before. For had Judas been discovered at Bethany, how could
the Disciples (John as well as the rest) begin to be sorrowful ( wondering to
hear Christ say one of you shall betray me, John 13.21, 22.) and inquire who
it was, saying, Is it I, Is it I, two days after? Mat. 26.22. Mark 14.19.
Luke 22.23. 3. That Christ washed not his Disciples feet at Bethany, but at the
Supper at Jerusalem, the same night he was betrayed, John 13. 4. That the sop
was given at an ordinary or common supper, which Christ had the same night
before he ate the Passover, etc.
Reply. I conclude against all he has said or can say, yea against all the
friends he can make in this controversy can say.

That very word would make one start; What luck had I, that I was not
acquainted with Don Quixot? he were the only fellow in the world, to take up
this challenge, for he was old dog at fighting with Windmils; and I know no
friend I have that has any heart upon such incounters. You have heard of
little Jefferey the dwarf that challenged the great Porter to fight with him,
but it must be in the furnace hole, or in an Ovens; you may make the application.

Let you and me alone with this business like a couple of wise men as we are,
I have no friends that have any mind to be miscalled or to fight with shadows.

1. You conclude that there was no sop given in the Supper at Bethany, but I
conclude there was.

You derive your conclusion, from Mat. 26. Mar. 14. and Ioh. 12. and your
argument lies thus, if I can see it.

If Mat. 26. Mar. 14. and John 12. that speak of the supper at Bethany, speak
not of giving of the sop, then there was no sop given at the supper at Bethany.
But. Ergo.

Make good the consequence, and the day is yours; but you will not make that
good to day.

My conclusion I derive from Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22. Ioh. 13. and I frame my
argument thus.

The time and place whence Judas began his treason, was the time and place of
Satan's entering into him with the sop; this is proved by the authority of Luke
22.3, 4. Then entered Satan into Judas, and he went and communed with the chief
Priests, etc. And of Ioh. 13.27.

But the Supper at Bethany, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. was the time and place whence
Judas began his treason; This M. H. grants. Therefore the supper at Bethany
was the time and place where Satan entered into Judas with the sop.

2. You conclude, That the discourse between Christ and his Discipels
concerning the traitor passed that very night that he ate the Passover: that
is most true; but whereas you conclude withal that the like discourse passed
not at Bethany two days before, that is most false. And as for your reason,
had Judas been discovered at Bethany, how could the Disciples, John as well as
the rest, begin to be sorrowful, etc. I will tell you how.

First, if the discovery of Judas at Bethany was privately to John only, then
your question or reason is answered, and I must put you to prove the contrary.

Secondly, though John knew it before, yet he loved not his Master so little,
but he would be sorrowful too to hear of his Masters betraying again, as well
as they.

Thirdly, though the discovery at Bethany were openly to all, yet might they
two nights after begin to be sorrowful to hear of it against* He has written
that word begin in a different letter, as if he would have you to observe the
emphasis of that word, as if they had never been sorrowful about that
business before. But though they had heard of it two days before, might they
not begin to be sorrowful about it again, when the discourse of it was
renewed? The Passover supper was a meal of rejoicing, and in the midst of that
meal for Christ to speak of his betraying, might it not dampe their rejoicing
and make them begin to be sorrowful? And besides, I could tell of a propriety
that To begin has in the Gospel language, that if he had observed, it may be
he would not have pointed out the word for so emphaticall. To begin to do a
thing, in Gospel language does often mean no more but To do a thing. They began
to be sorrowful in Mark. 14.19. is no more in Mat. 26.22. then They were
sorrowful.

Fourthly, At the Passover supper they ask not who is it? but they every one
say, Is it I? the former question had been of doubting, as Joh. 13.22. the
latter of every one vindicating themselves, and asserting their integrity by
that question.

Fifthly, Does he make no difference between John's asking Christ alone, and all
the Disciples speaking to him? and no difference between Christ's saying, He to
whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it, and He that dippeth with me in
the dish?

If all the three Evangelists had spoken in Lukes language; The hand of him
that betraies me is with me on the table, and not mentioned dipping in the
dish; I wonder where Mr. Hemings Passover night sop would have been found
then? but when Matthew and Mark speak of dipping in the dish, here is enough
for him to make quidlibet e quolibet, as he can do it most excellently.

3. He concludes, that Christ washed not his Disciples feet at Bethany, but at
the supper at Jerusalem the same night he was betrayed, Joh. 13.

This is written in a Gospel of his own making (for it is not written in Joh.
13) and so is his next conclusion, That the sop was given at an ordinary common
Supper; which Christ had the same night before he ate the Passover; Let him
find fair evidence for either of these in any of the four Evangelists that we
read, and I will say I never read them. Sure this man would make an excellent
new Gospel.

And now let me use his own style, and conclude too.

I conclude against all he has said, or can say (but bear witness I
challenge none of his friends.)

1. That the supper in Joh. 13. at which Judas received the sop, was before the
Passover festival. ver. 1. and 29. 2. That every night for five or six nights
together before the Passover, Christ lodged in the mount of Olives (and if Mr.
Heming can tell where, but at Bethany, let him show it.) Mat. 21.17. Mat.
11.19. and 13.1, 2. Luke 21.37. 3. That two nights before the Passover he
supped at Bethany, Mat. 26.2, 6. 4. That from that supper Judas began his
treason, Mat. 26.14. 5. That he began his treason upon Satan's entering into
him, Luke 22.3, 4. 6. That Satan entered into him upon his receiving of the sop,
John 13.27.
Ergo. 7. That Judas received the sop at Bethany, two days before the
Passover.

Now because Mr. Heming, according to his common charity, does charge me for
contra-conscientiously and wickedly wresting the Scripture, for the maintaining
of this my conclusion, I shall desire the Reader equally and impartially to
judge between us, whether of us wrest these texts, that we have had to deal
with about, he or I.

1. I say the supper, Ioh. 13. was before the Passover day, because the text
says, It was before the feast of the Passover, ver. 1. He says, That
supper, John 13. was on the Passover night, though the text does say, It was
before the feast of the Passover; Whether of us do more wrest this Scripture?

2 I say, that when some of the Disciples thought that Jesus bade Judas buy
something against the feast; the Disciples knew that the feast was coming, and
it was not yet come: He says, what the Disciples thought proceeded from their
ignorance: whether of us do more wrest and wrong this text, and the Disciples?

3. I say that that supper at Bethany, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. was two days before
the Passover, because the Evangelists do presently before speak of two days
before the Passover: He says, that supper at Bethany, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. was
six days before the Passover, though the Evangelists do presently before
speak of two days before the Passover: Whether of us do more wrest the
Scripture here?

4. I say the method and order in that place of Mat. 26. Mar. 14. is direct,
and I take the stories without misplacing them; He says, the method and order
there is not direct, and he does misplace the stories: Whether of us do offer
the more violence to the Evangelists?

5. I say the supper in Ioh. 12. and the supper in Mat. 26. Mar. 14. were two
different suppers, because one is dated six days before the Passover, and the
other two; the one was in the house of Lazarus; the other in the house of Simon
the leper; at the one Christ's head is anointed, at the other his feet. He
says the supper in John 12. and the supper in Mat. 26. Mar. 14. is one and the
same supper, though one be dated six days before the Passover, and the other
two; though the one were in the house of Lazarus, and the other in the house of
Simon the Leper, and though at the one Christ's head were anointed, and at the
other his feet. Let all the world judge whether he or I do more wrest the
Scripture.

My second Assertion is this.
That Judas received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

For the proof of which I produce Mat. 26.20. Mar. 14.17. where it is said,
That Jesus sat down with the twelve; and he taxes Judas for treason, Mar.
14.13. Luke 22.21.

To this Mr. Heming says, but what he had said before. 1. It Is true (says he)
he sat down at Jerusalem with the twelve, of whom Judas was one, in the common
or ordinary supper. 2. It Is as true that there ( as Mr. Light-foote does most
righteously affirm for the truth, to the deeper wounding of his cause) he taxed
Judas for treason, gave him the sop and discovered him, and not at Bethany two
days before.


Repl. I thank you that you will once grant I speak truth, but you think it is
for your own turn: But I pray you, how does that that I affirm wound my cause?
I say Jesus taxed Judas of treason at the Passover supper; and I say he taxed
him of treason at the supper at Bethany, two nights before: what wound do I
give to my cause by this? If you find any advantage by it, make use of it.

Well: He grants Judas was at the common supper; but how missed he of the
Sacrament? why Mr. H. will tell you as directly as if he had been there, that
he was taxed for treason, and the sop given him and so he discovered and packt
away before the Sacrament was in hand. And thus he makes a story of his own
head of the sop given at the Passover supper, which he will never be able to
prove, while his name is Mr. H. but the story of the Evangelist that determines
the case, he slippeth over and speaks not one word to it. I cite Luke 22.21. to
prove Judas present at the Sacrament, and this M. H. saw was like enough to
wound his cause, and therefore (I shall commend his wit another time) he
answers it with grave silence, not speaking one word to it.

It is apparent by Luke that Judas was at Table after the giving of the
Sacrament. Consider his words, Luke 22. ver. 19. And he took bread and gave
thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body, etc. ver.
20. likewise the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new Testament in my
blood which is shed for you. ver. 21. But behold the hand of him that betrayeth
me is with me on the table. What say you to this Mr. Heming? where was Judas
now I pray you, when his hand was on the table? Give me a direct and clear
answer to evidence that he was not at table at the delivering of the
Sacramental cup, and I shall say you are an oracle indeed. But let me have
your answer out of the Gospel of Matthew, Mark Luk or John, and not out of a
Gospel of your own making: Can any thing be plainer for my assertion then this?
But behold; spel me those two words, and let me see what you can make of them.
I have heard him say, but it seems he had more wit then to speak it in print,
that this is a (...), or that here is a dislocation of story, or a change of
the right order: Now gramercy daring at a dead lift. This was it that I
suspected, that he would make a Gospel of his own head, for what does he other
that makes the Evangelists speak what, and as his own list?

By taking this course to change the method and order of Scripture, when mine
own list, and when it will serve my turn, I will prove to you any thing: That
Cain killed Abel before Adam was created, that Christ was crucified after he
rose again from the dead, that he was baptized before he was born, and any
thing in the world whatsoever: I would eat my opinion, and bite my tongue,
before I would make the Evangelists my slaves to serve my opinion; Let all the
world judge whether this is to be lead by the Scripture, or to lead the
Scripture whither you please.

1. Let M. H. begin at the beginning of Lukes Gospel, and let him tell me how
many dislocations he can find that Luke makes of his own story, from one end
of his Gospel to another. I believe he will find but very few that he can say
upon good ground, these passages are displaced; and that this should be one of
those very few, where there is so great probability of its direct order, as But
Behold, he must use a great many of words to make any reasonable man believe it.

2. Let him consider the conditions of the word (...); and take it in all, or
any of the senses it can be taken in, and see whether it will stretch to prove
a (...), or to be divided from what went before it. Sometimes it makes a
conclusion, as (...), Veruntamen neque vir sine muliere, 1 Cor. 11.11. It is
sometimes praeterquam, as (...), Praeterquam navis, Acts 27.22. Sometimes
Praeter, as (...), Praeter Apostolos, Acts 8.1. Sometimes sed or verum, as
(...), Sed vae vobis, Luke 6.14. Sometimes Tamen, as (...) Tamen hoc scitote,
Luke 10.11. And sometimes Quinetiam, as (...). Now in all these acceptations or
in any of them, is it not ever made an inseparable companion, or in conjunction
to some time that went immediately before? And I am confident Mr. H. would
plead hard it does so here, if it made but half so much to his purpose as it
makes against him.

I say again, Christ delivered the Sacrament, Mat. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. Luke
22.19. and they all drank of it, Mark. 14.23.

To this Mr. Hemings answer is this.
The Text does not say he delivered it to the twelve, but to all, namely to all
present, for Judas had gotten the sop and was gone forth.

Reply. Readers, The Evangelists alleged tell you, that Jesus sat down with
the twelve, and they did eat, and as they were eating, he ordained the
Sacrament; and not a syllable of Judas his getting the sop, or going forth, but
M. H. tells you so, it is a story of his putting in amongst those Evangelists:
now whether it be fitter to believe them or him, judge ye.

I would ask Mr. Heming this question: Before the Gospel of John was written
(as he is held to have written the last) if Mr. Heming had read any of, or all
the three other relating the story of the Passover, how would he have
construed them then? where would his sop, and Judas going forth have been found
then? Does not he think that all that read them then, understood them as I do,
and never dreamed of Judas receiving the sop and going out? and yet they
thought that they had the full story of the Passover supper too. I dare allow
Mr. Heming 7 years study to prove that John speaks one syllable, of story of
the Passoever supper: But because he has spoken of a supper and a sop, and
Judas going forth, etc. therefore he will have that the Passover supper,
though the Evangelists do most plainly say it was before the Passeover-feast.

if it had been said, he gave it to the twelve, yet that would prove nothing,
for in 1 Cor. 15.5. it is said He (Christ) was seen of Cephas, and then of the
twelve, though he was seen only of the eleven, Mat. 28.16, 17. Mar. 16.14.

Reply. Readers, I must tell you again, That whatsoever the Evangelists say,
Mr. Heming must set their sense: though all the three had said, He gave the
Sacrament to the twelve, yet you must say it was but to eleven, and though they
speak not a word of Judas absence, yet Mr. Heming has told you he was gone, and
that is enough for you to believe against 3 Evangelists. The allegation out of 1
Cor. 15.5. is profoundly applied: Paul says Christ was seen of the twelve, and
yet you are to understand it but of Eleven: true: for the story had abundantly
and abundantly again told before what was become of the twelfth; and how they
were become but eleven, and the Corinthians knew the story well enough: But
here though the Evangelists had said, He gave it to the twelve, Mr. Heming will
have you to understand it only of eleven, though none of the three speak a
word before of the abating of the number, or what was become of the twelfth.

If Mr. Lightfoote shall be so vain as to say Matthias was then chosen in the
room of Judas, etc. He does but fight with his own shadow, and I will let them
alone to deal it out, fight man, fight shadow, and part your selves when you
think good.

Whereas he affirms that Christ gave the Sacrament to Judas, I sear he does
him more injury then ever he will be able to count for, at his tribunal.

Reply. Let Mr. Heming fear to make that so heinous a sin, which he has no
warrant to prove but his own fancy, that it is any finne at all.

I shall propose to him these two or three Questions.
1. Is it any injury to Christ to say that he gave Judas the Word, as well as
to the other Apostles, that is, made him a Minister of it as well as they? or
to say that Christ gave him the Spirit, that is, the power of miracles and
gifts of healing as well as to them? I believe M. H. will hardly deny that he
gave him the Word and Spirit in this sense, I pray you then, Why is it so great
an injury to Christ, to say, He gave the Sacrament to Judas, more then to say,
He gave the Word and Spirit to Judas? I would gladly see wherein the
difference lies; that to say, the one should be no sin, and to say the other
should be so heinous: show me some reason why it should be a higher
business for Christ to give the Sacrament to Judas, then to make him a
Minister of the word and Sacrament?

2. Did not Judas eat the Passover with Christ? if not at this last supper,
yet at some other time? I presume M. H. will not deny it; why then tell me,
Why it should not be injury to Christ to say this as well as the other? Was not
the Passover a Sacrament, as well as the Lords Supper? Was not the Paschall
Lamb the body of Christ in the same sense, that the bread in the Sacrament
was? Show me wherein lies the vast difference; that to say, That Judas received
the one Sacrament with Christ, is an innocent truth, and to say, That Judas
received the other Sacrament from Christ, is damnable impiety? M. H. in p. 20.
can and does grant, that Judas received both Passover and Sacrament; does he
injury to Christ in this concession, or no?

Did he not usually except Judas? Have not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a
Devil? John 6.70. Ye are chane, but not all, Joh. 13.10, 11. And again, ver.
18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen, etc.

Reply. No, he did not usually except Judas; in a few places indeed he does it,
but usually he does it not. Let that be proved; you shall see more places then
these by and by where he does not.

But to those be gave the Sacrament, be says without exception.

1. This is my body which is given for you. This is the cup of the New
Testament in my blood which is shed for you, Luke 22.19, 20. Surely Christ
could not safely say so to Judas, whom be knew to be a Devil eternally ^^st.

Reply. I, but Christ might safely say so to the whole society, though Indas
was there. As what say you to these speeches?

Mat. 10.20. It is the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you: Judas was
in the company of them to whom this was spoken, ver. 4. yet was not God his
father.

Mat. 10.46. He stretched forth his hand toward his Disciples and said, Behold
my Mother and my Brethren: Where was Indas think you now?

Mat. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they
hear: Was Judas under this blessing, or was he absent at this time too?

Mat. 23.^. All ye are brethren. ver. 9. One is your father which is in heaven:
Had Judas the luck to be absent now also?

Luke 12.4. I say unto you my friends, ver. 32. Little flock, it is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: Ho Indas where art thou now?

Mat. 5.13. Ye are the salt of the earth. Ye are the light of the world.

Mat. 5.48. Your Father which is in heaven. chapter 6.1.14. your heavenly Father.
ver. 15. Your Father. ver. 32. Your heavenly Father, etc.

In these and very many such speeches which were generally spoken to the whole
Company of the Disciples, Mr. Hemings logic will make this construction, that
either Judas was not there (sure it was his luck always to be with his bag at
the market) or Christ did not safely speak those words: No doubt he would make
an exceeding brave comment upon such places as these, if he were put to it.

Heming. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit, until that day I drink it
new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 26.29. Had Christ meant Judas as well
as the rest (as he must, had he been there, since he excepts him not) he had
been foully mistaken, for he was never like to come there, understand the
Fathers Kingdom how ye will.

Reply. Here Mr. Heming very gravely will teach Christ how to speak, and if he
speaks not as his mind is, he will tell hin he is foully mistaken. It was our
Saviors common way of oratory, to frame his words in his instructions,
admonitions, exhortations, etc. as speaking to all present: when the proper
application of what was spoken did did not suite with every one that heard it,
but only with such as stood in capacity of such a thing, as Mat. 23.1, 8, 9* He
says to all the multitude present, All ye are brethren: and one is your
Father in Heaven: and yet every singular person in that multitude cannot be
thought capable of the proper sense of these words.

But M. H. says, in this speech in hand Christ must mean Judas if he were
present; though he used not such strictness in other speeches, yet here he
must do it, or Mr. Heming will tell him his own.

Heming. Luke 22.28, 29, 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations, and I appoint to you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to
me: That ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on twelve
Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. But 1. Judas had not continued
with him in his temptations; Neither 2. Could Christ appoint to him any other
kingdom but that of wrath and darkness; Nor 3. Was he ever like to sit at
Christ's Table in his Kingdom: much less sit on a Throne in judgment of the
twelve Tribes, who is himself to be judged as a Devil.


Reply. 1 These very words are spoken by Christ in Mat. 19.28. before ever sop
or Satan came into Judas: Mr. Heming must prove that Judas was absent then
also, or else this his argument is not worth a straw.

2. Observe what a proper exposition he makes: You eleven shall on twelve
Thrones: an acute Gloss I promise you. Eleven men lain twelve beds.

Heming. Mat. 26.31. All ye shall be offended because of me this night: This is
the same All to whom the Sacrament was delivered: Let Mr. Lightfoot take heed
how he traduce Christ himself by affirming that Judas was one of the All, he
administered the Seal and spoke these words to. And let him not think to evade
any of these Scriptures by saying Judas had received the Sacrament and was gone
forth, unless he be able to prove it.

Reply. Truly that is no hard task to do, to prove that Judas having received
the Sacrament was gone forth, for all that had received the Sacrament were gone
forth: what can be plainer then the Text is for this, Mat. 26.30, 31. And when
they had sung an hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. Then says Jesus
unto them, All ye shall be offended etc. And so Mark 14.26, 27. Mr. Heming
winked at this Text and would not see what he might have done, and would not
have others to see what is to be seen in it: but would persuade you these words
were spoken by Christ while he was still in the house, and at the Table, the
better to delude you with his argument: But the Evangelists tell you plainly
that they were all gone forth, Christ, Disciples and all: and then was Judas
gone about his villainy, to get together his men to surprise his Master.

It is apparent in Luke 22 that Judas was as Table after the delivering of the
cup; let Mr. Heming clear it that he did not receive the bread and the cup;
and let him show that Judas did not stay the singing of the Psalm, as nice as
he and his precious hearts make it to sing Psalms in the Congregation, because
they will not sing with the profane; with all the skill all of them have, they
will not evade it, but that Christ and the Disciples sung the hymn while Judas
was with them. I say therefore according to the plain Text of the Evangelists,
that Judas received the sop and Satan with it before the Feast day of the
Passover came: that before that day came he had contrived with the chief
Priests for his Masters betraying; that on the Passover night he was one of
the twelve that sat down to supper; that he was there at the common supper,
as Mr. H. calls it, that he was there at the Paschall Lamb eating, at the
Sacrament delivering, at the singing of the hymn, and till all the Table rose
and went out; and then he slipped aside, and gathered his cutthroats for the
apprehending of his Master.

If I have not showed this clearer from the Text, and more free without
wresting of the Text, then Mr. H. shows the contrary, let me in the eyes of
all judicious and impartial men, bear the brand of so silly a fool as he
would stamp upon me.

Let Mr. Lightfoot take heed how he traduce Christ himself, by affirming Judas
was one of that All he administered the seal and spoke these words to.

1. He might have done well to have given the Evangelists this caution, for I
speak but what they tell me. One of them tells me that when Christ gave the
cup, Judas was at Table; and another tells that he bad them drink all of it,
and what can I say less then I do? If I have forged one tittle of mine own
head, let me hear of it.

And 2. I pray you what injury is it to Christ to say he administered the seal
to Judas? show me a reason why the seal might not be administered to him: I say
it might; I say it may to a person that is not a Saint: Cry not out here, Hear
Oh heavens etc. but show me a solid reason why it might not. I say again, It is
no more traducing of Christ to say he administered the seal to Judas, then it is
traducing of Christ to say he administered the Word to Judas. And if Mr. Heming
can prove the Sacrament to be greater then the Word, he may then say something
against this my assertion; but till he can do that, he must give me leave to
hold what I do.

And here has Mr. Heming spent all his shot he had to spend about the
controversy between us, namely concerning the time of Judas receiving the sop,
and concerning his receiving of the Sacrament. All the rest of his book, he
shoots powder and he cares not how: one while he talks of the communion of
Saints, another while of gathering of Churches, then of liberty of conscience,
etc. which as they are besides our question, so shall not I trouble my self with
them.

But before we part, let me again thank him for that favorable and Christian
like conclusion that he makes with me, as he made it his beginning, when he
faith thus, I should abundantly wrong him if I should not rank him among the
vilest in the Kingdom: for with them he will have communion, as a member of
the same external visible body, by virtue whereof they are all his brethren
and sisters, so that he has his brother drunkard, brother theif, brother
murderer, brother liar etc. sister whore, sister witch, etc. yea all that have
been hanged at Tyburne and all other gallows in England ever since he was
borne and baptized into that fellowship he pleads for, have been his brethren
and sisters, let him or any one else upon good ground deny it if he can.

Reply. Here is excellent language I promise you and full of Christian
meekness and charity, I could not but repeat it again. This Gentleman calls
God to record upon his soul, that he has spoken nothing in bitterness and
passion, page 7. and if this be his calm language, what do you think he
speaks when he speaks in thunder? sure his women Saints dictated this language
to him, for this is plain scolding and not arguing. Whatsoever he disclaimeth
of bitteresse and passion, look his whole discourse through and see what it
breaths of thorough out?

He begins it with the Title, Precious Hearts: A precious tongue would have
done well in the bargain too. But you see how impatient the man is to be
crossed: whosoever cannot hold, and speak, and practice pointblank according to
his humor, must be ranked with all the whores, thieves, witches, murderers,
and Tyburnians in England.

If you be so free from bitterness and passion, take heed I pray you M. H. of
pride, blinde-zeale, and selfe-prizing. You must needs think (if these blind
you not) that others have studied the Scriptures as well as your self, and
understand reason, and know the concernment of their souls, and would gladly
be saved as well as you: and that hold their Tenants in Religion from a good
conscience, and would be as loath to deceive themselves in things of such weight
as well as your self: what reason or warrant have you to think that no man
thinks right but he that thinks as you do; and none practices right but
according as you practice? and that none can walk to heaven but just in your
steps? and when a man from the bottom of his soul thinks that Judas received
the Sacrament, and holds, that it is better to receive the Sacrament with the
Congregation, though profane persons be there, then either to refrain from the
Sacrament, or separate from the Congregation, what reason or warrant have you
in the world thus to vilify him, and to rank him with so vile persons? I
cannot hold The communion of Saints to mean in your sense, I cannot think the
Sacrament was ordained only for visible and real Saints, I cannot hold that
it is to distinguish betwixt Christian and Christian, I cannot either
relinquish the Sacrament or the Congregation, must I therefore be matched with
all the thieves, whores, witches, and villains of the gallows? If this be
meekness, charity, and christianity, it is so by some newfound or new-made
bible, for in that that I have always studied, this is held to be pride,
rashness, passion, and uncharitableness. ^^e man has fancied a communion of
Saints, and a reservednesse of the Sacrament, which he will never be able to
prove, and because I and others cannot be of the same groundless judgment,
this is the charitable man's doom upon me.

Doubtless he would make a brave Judge, but let not me nor any friend of mine
come under his fingers: No more ado with him but sirrah, do you think Judas
received the Sacrament? and do you think mixed communion is lawful? yes and't
please you. Then take him Jailor, for this is a companion, nay a brother of all
the rogues and thieves that ever were hanged at Tyburne etc. A smart Judge I
promise you; bless you out of his clutches.

I may not forget neither before we part to thank him for his good word in
page 11. where he says Mr. Lightfoot has gone against manifest light of
truth, the whole current or stream of Orthodox, godly and learned Expositors,
common sense etc. And to serve a Malignant design, he wickedly and it is to be
feared contraconscientiously wrests and wrings in John 13. etc.

Reply. Here is charity by lumps: I wonder in what school he learned it.

1. I pray you what malignity is it to believe and to maintain that Judas
received the Sacrament? Yes, there is this malignity in it, Ye cross the
imperial mind and opinion of Mr. Heming; for else there is nothing in it
contrary either to Scripture, Piety, Charity, Peace, Honesty or good manners.

2 I would feign know how this opinion is contrary to common sense: I would go
a mile to hear him show this: He says in page 1. Many weake-ones have
stumbled at what Mr. Lightfoot has spoken and written, though there be neither
Divinity nor Reason in it. Excellent well grounded Disciples I assure you that
stumble when there is neither stone nor straw in the way: He does them but
little credit in telling they are so easily shaken by that is neither Divinity
nor sense: He should show how it wants or contrarieth common sense. Come
let us hear it.

3 It were worth hearing, whom he ownes for Orthodox Expositors: Beza, Calvin,
Pareuc, Fulke, etc? why, these were of the old light, I hope you scorn to call
these men Orthodox: No says he but I do not, I will call any man Orthodox as
far as I think they will serve my turn: but if I find them different in the
least tittle from mine opinion, I shall tell them what they are.

4. Does Mr. Lightfoots opinion go against the whole current ^^Orthodox, godly,
and learned Expositors? Zanchy says, Multi and magni viri, have taught and
written agreeable to mine opinion. And if Mr. Gillespy were alive (whom you
have so unworthily used as to steal his arguments by whole-steale and never to
own him) he could name you a man of my opinion, whom he would confess a man
Orthodox, godly, and learned, and even a walking Library of Orthodox, godly,
and learned Expositors, and that is Mr. Prynne, A gentleman of that learning
that you would have but little pleasure to combat with in this controversy. If
you were as well versed in what he has written about this subject, as you are
in Mr. Gillespy, you would find, that you either wilfully speak you care not
what, or sillily speak you know not what, when you say mine opinion is contrary
to the whole current of Orthodox, godly, and learned Expositors.

5 Whether I have gone against the manifest light of truth, and whether I have
wrested the Scriptures, I appeal from your censure (for I am sure you will be
partial in your own case) to the impartial Judge of your heart and mine; and
to the impartial Reader who has seen what has past between us.

6 And as for that unchristian and injurious censure, That I had a Malignant
design, and that I have wickedly and contraconscientiously wrested the
Scriptures: I will say no more to it, but I pray God give you a better tongue
and heart: And I will leave you that Text in Romans 2.1. to study on, as far as
passion and self-conceit will give you leave.

And now let us shake hands and part: I thank you for your kindness and good
words, as much as it comes to. I wish you more charity, humility, wisdom, and
moderation: I would advise you to study more and Print less; your stock is
not so great as to be trusting too much abroad: You see what pains I have been
at with you, I hope I shall have thanks from you for it.

A wispe or a Cuck-stoole the reward of Scolds had been a fitter return for
your railing, then patience and reason, but you see how I have waited on you
with Salt and Spoones: I hope you will excuse me, if I find my self
something to do another time: for this I will promise you and here is my hand
on it; That rail, rage, rave, call, miscall, print sense or nonsense, vent our
own Arguments, or Arguments that you have stolen, vapor in what subject or
after what manner you will, I am resolved to answer you with deep silence, and
with Hezekiahs lesson, answer him not. You love not to appear in public so
much, but I love it as little: You have forced me to this trouble, and to be
thus troublesome to the Reader; say what you will, you shall bring me upon the
stage in this manner no more.

FJNJS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epist: p: 1: l. 6: for fullness of his stomach, r; foulness of, etc.
p: 3: l: 6: for k^ew me not, r: know me not, p: 4: l: 4: for 44: r: 442* l: 8:
r: fie upon it, p: 5: l: 14: r: viper-proofe for vipers proof, p: 6: l: 7: r:
Therefore it does fret me as little, l: 6: r: Mat: 5:22 Page: 2: l: 34: for the
best upon which, r: the bent upon which, p: 3. l: 8: for clearest humor, r:
dearest humor, p: 4. last line but two, for visible works, r: visible marks,
p: 6: for Affirm, r: Affirmo, and l: 4: for Nega r: Nego, p: 7: l: 10: for
selfe-united r: self-minted: p: 11: l: 7: for but cried out, r: but she cried
out, p: 15: l: 3: for Is it r: It is: p: 16: l: 11: for He is it, r: He is, l:
26: for diet being the days of the feast, r: diet along the days, etc; p: 21:
l: 21: for how much abuse, r: how much I abuse, p: 31: l: 20: for to deal with
about, r: to deal with about it, p: 34: l: 8: for some time r: something.


