A Plea, or Protest, MADE By WILLIAM PRYNNE, Esquire, AND By him sent unto J.
M. Knight, one of the eleven impeached Members.

Wherein he declares the injustice and illegality of the Lords, Commons; and
Grandees of the Armies Proceedings against him.

Whereunto is annexed the Case of A. B. (a Citizen of London, and a free
Commoner of England) truly stated, in reference to a pretended impeachment of
Treason depending in the House of Peers against him: With an Answer to certain
Queres framed thereupon: Unto which is annexed the Answer of the said A. B.
unto the Lords assembled in Parliament in point of Law, in reference to the
said pretended Impeachment; in which it is fully proved, that the House of
Lords (by the known and declared Law of England) has not the least
Jurisdiction in the world over any Commoner whatsoever in any case whatsoever:
With a full Answer to all their Presidents in such cases; And that it is not
safe for the said A. B. to kneel at the Lords Bar, because it is a stooping
and submitting to their Jurisdiction.

Published for the common good of all honest Englishmen, By Lionel Hurbin
Gentleman, March 17. 1647.

Printed for Iah. Hornish. 1648.

The Protestation of J. M. Knight of the Bath, to the Articles of high Treason,
dr^wn up by M. William Prynne of Lincolnes Inn Esquire, and sent by him unto
the foresaid J. M. for his legal Plea, Protest and Answer to his Impeachment
at the Lords Bar.
ALl advantages of exception to the incertainty and illegality of the Articles
exhibited against this Defendent in the name of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, in maintenance of their accusation and impeachment of high Treason
against him, to this Defendent now and at all times hereafter saved, when he
shall be legally charged and proceeded against in a full and free Parliament:
He this Defendent, not by way of Answer, Plea, or Demurrer, but of Protestation
only, says, that as he cannot acknowledge all or any of the said Articles to
be true in any part thereof in manner and form as they are exhibited, being no
ways conscious to himself of any crime of High Treason, much less of levying
any new or actual War against the King and Parliament, in whose faithful
service and defense he has during these late unhappy troubles, spent most of
his time, and engaged a great part of his estate, without any recompense or
salary; so in discharge of his duty to the Parliament and Kingdom, and
performance of his solemn League and Covenant in point of conscience toward
God, he is now further necessitated most solemnly to protest, that both Houses
of Parliament for the space of seven months last past, and at the time when the
Articles of his present Impeachment were Voted in the House of Commons,
transmitted to the Lords House, and he this Defendent ordered to put in his
Answer thereunto, were and ever since have been and still are under the open
actual horrid force, power, menaces, Guards and Garrisons of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the Army under his Command, who refused to disband, according to
the Houses Votes and Ordinances, marched up in a body against them to
Westminster, contrary to their express Orders and Commands, impeached,
suspended diverse, and forced away the major part of their Members, constrained
them by menacing Declarations, and their approaches toward the Houses to
retract many Votes and Ordinances pass^d in both Houses when free and full, and
to make diverse new Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, against their wills and
judgments, quite contrary thereunto, and have since got the Command of the
Tower of London into their hands, and erected new Garrisons of horse and foot
at White Hall, and the Mues, and placed armed Guards upon both Houses, to
intimidate and force them to carry on their projects and designs, and Vote
what they and their Confederates shall prescribe: In which regard he this
Defendent humbly conceives, that the House of Commons are utterly disabled and
made incapable to exhibit, Vote, and transmit, and the House of Peers (diverse
of whose Members have been lately since the said force impeached, suspended,
imprisoned, and kept out of the House upon the selfsame pretended false
Articles which are charged against this Defendent, of purpose to deprive them
of their Votes, as is conceived) put into an absolute incapacity for the
present to receive and prosecute these Articles of Impeachment of High Treason
against this Defendent, the rather for that the respective Parliaments of 15.
E. 3. 21. R. 2. 11. H. 4. 31. H. 6. and 39. H. 6. and both Houses in this
present Parliament assembled in their Ordinance of the 20. of August last, have
solemnly adjudged and resolved, that all Acts of Parliaments, Attainders,
Impeachments, Votes, Orders and Ordinances of one or both Houses of Parliament,
made and passed whiles the Parliament and Houses were under any actual force
and menaees, (especially of an whole mutinous Army marching up against them,
and quartering and erecting new Garrisons round about them) are merely void in
Law, and ought to be so reputed and declared; and that more especially in this
Defendents case, who was originally impeached and prosecuted in the Commons
House with ten other eminent Members, in the name of Sir Thomas Fairfax and the
Army under his Command, and by their menaces, force, and violence, suspended,
and ejected out of the Commons House, whereof he was lately an actual and
still is a rightful Member, without any legal Trial, or any witnesses or
proof legally examined against him, or being once admitted to his lawful
defense by the Army and their Confederates mere arbitrary power and party in
the House, who have no lawful Authority to suspend or eject their
Fellow Members, who have every way the selfsame and as good right to sit and
continue in the House as themselves; and therefore whiles both Houses continue
under this force and power of the Army, and whiles above half their Members
are forcibly suspended, ejected, restrained or forced to absent themselves,
this Defendent can neither in honor, justice, nor conscience acknowledge them,
nor either of them to be in any legal capacy to exhibit, receive or prosecute
any Charge or Impeachment against him, until they be totally freed from the
Armies Wardship and overruling power, and all their unjustly impeached,
suspended, ejected and absent Members restored to their ancient Freedom of
voting and sitting in the Houses, without any Guards or over-awing Forces to
terrify or daunt them. And moreover, this Defendent by Protestation only
averreth, that the Speaker of the House of Commons and trust of those Members
in it who were chief compilers and contrivers of these Articles against him,
and the Speaker of the House of Peers, with nine other Peers who now pretend
and are most likely to be his Judges, did in or about the 4. day of August now
last past, contrary to their trust and duty, not only desert their service and
attendance in the Houses and fly to the Army without just cause, whiles diverse
other Members of both Houses continued sitting, but likewise enter into and
subscribe a solemn Engagement to live and die with the Army in this cause, and
to prosecute your Petitioner and others who then continued sitting in the
Houses, who in pursuit of that Engagement, have exhibited these Articles
against this Defendent, and thereby absolutely disabled themselves being
pre-engaged parties to give any Vote at all, or prosecute this Impeachment in
the Commons House, or to be indifferent competent Judges thereof in the House
of Peers, who have no proper conusance of express Treasons triable by Verdict
and Indictment at the Common Law, and not in Parliament, it being against Magna
Charta, chapter 29. 25. E. 3. c. 2. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3. 37. E. 3. c. 8. 42. E. 3. c.
3. The Petition of Right, 3. Caroli, and sundry other Statutes. Upon which just
grounds and considerations, he this Defendent by this his Protestation
absolutely protests against all and every of the said Articles as null and void
in Law, to which he is bound to give no present Answer in Parliament, and to
except against all those Members of either House who have subscribed the
Engagement to the Army, as being incompetent prosectors and Judges in his
public cause; and therefore he this Defendent humbly appeals from an empty,
forced, and overawed, to a full and free Parliament, where he shall be always
ready to answer all such crimes properly triable in and by Parliament, as shall
be objected against him in a due and legal way, not triable elsewhere by
Indictment, Jury and the ordinary course of the Common Law in other Courts of
Justice, as this pretended levying of War is, both by Common and Statute Law;
and therefore this Defendent for the reasons aforesaid, humbly prays to be
excused from giving any further or other answer to this void impeachment, till
this his solemn Protestation shall be debated and overruled in a full and
free Parliament exempted from the Armies Jurisdiction, Wardship and over-awing
force.

Courteous Reader, Thou art desired to take notice, that the reason wherefore
the forementioned Plea and Protest of Mr William Prynne is now printed, is
because since he sent it to the foresaid Knight (which will be punctually and
fully proved he did, if he shall deny it) he has since published a large Plea,
to justify the Lords Jurisdiction over Commoners in Criminal Cases, and
thereby done as much as in him lies to the height, to animate and encourage the
House of Lords to proceed to adjudge, condemn and execute the foresaid Knight,
and the four Aldermen of London, now Prisoners in the Tower, and who now stand
impeached before the Lords Bar by the House of Commons (being forced
thereunto by the over-awing power of the Grandees of the Army) of high Treason;
But I desire any rational man in England (but especially all those that wish
well to the foresaid Prisoners) seriously to consider, whether a more
mischievous malicious and destroying action could be done, to destroy the
Lives, Liberties and Estates of the foresaid Prisoners by the most malicious
adversary they have in England, then that illegal and desperate Plea made by
their much pretended friend Mr. Prynne, who thereby has (if I have any
judgment) stabbed them and there Liberties (as much as in him lies) to the very
heart, but what should be the reason of his so unseasonable publishing of the
foresaid desperate Plea at this very nick of time when they are all upon their
trialls, and their lives and Estates thereby at stake, and absolutely in danger
to be destroyed, if they stoop and submit to their Jurisdiction (as is
undeniably evinced in the following case of A. B.) I am not able to render,
unless it be because the foresaid Knight would not follow his advise in
delivering the foresaid Protest, which he of purpose sent unto him for that
end, the which if any rational man please to compare with his foresaid Plea,
he shall find it an absolute answer to the chief things in it, and a
contradiction of it, and which in the following lines so much, as concerns the
Lords Jurisdiction over Commoners is fully answered.

The Case of A. B. truly stated, etc.
THe two Houses of Parliament the 26. of July 1647. were petitioned by the City
for the Militia as the Houses had established to them for one year in May
before; and notwithstanding had been the 23. of July (at the desire of the
Army) altered and put into such hands as they desired. This Petition was
seconded (though not with the knowledge of the City) by another from the
Apprentices and others who came tumultuously upon the Houses, and prevailed for
re-establishment of the Committee of Militia as in May before.

The day following, being the 27. of July the Houses sat, and adjourned till
Friday following: upon Friday, after long waiting, and much inquiry made for
the Speakers, it appeared they were gone to the Army, and deserted the Houses,
whereupon both Houses chose new Speakers, and proceeded as before, and
endeavored to provide for the safety of the Parliament, City and Kingdom; and
in order thereunto gave order to Committees formerly named to that purpose:
whereupon the Army, with the former Speakers, and diverse others, viz. 9. of the
House of Lords that now sit, and 58 or thereabouts of the House of Commons,
marched up toward the Parliament and City in a hostile manner, notwithstanding
the Houses then sitting ordered the Army not to march toward the City, nor
nearer it then 40 miles; which Orders were sent and delivered to the General
and Commissioners of Parliament resident in the Army, to which they yielded no
obedience, but contrarily marched nearer the City; and upon the third of August
last the Army published their Declaration against the City and Parliament then
sitting, pretending the Houses were no Houses of Parliament, but a company of
Lords and Gentlemen assembled together, assuming to themselves a Parliamentary
power, and all they that acted therein, or upon their Orders, they acted
without any authority of Parliament; the Army avowing those that had left the
Houses as invested with the Parliaments Authority; and that the Army would
only act upon, and according to their Council: and this the Army engaged to
make good with their lives and fortunes.

This Declaration the said Speakers and Members upon the 4. of August entered an
Engagement under their hands, to make good with their lives and fortunes: And
upon these grounds the Army and they join and march upon the Parliament and
City, and accordingly the 6. of August, the said Speaker and Members in an
hostile manner came up with a part of the Army to the Houses, and there the
Speaker and Members took their seats as before, and have ever since with that
force, or some other part of the Army attending them, continued sitting.

Upon the said 6. of August they appoint a Committee (another Committee then
the Houses had appointed in the absence of Speaker and Members) to examine the
force upon the Houses, the 26. of July, 1647. and that day or immediately
after, endeavored to pass a Vote for the owning of the Engagement entered into
by the Speaker and Members as aforesaid with the Army, which would not then
pass, as also a Vote for the nulling of all Ordinances, etc. betwixt the 26.
of July, the day of the force, and the 6. of August, the day the Army put the
Speaker into their Chaires as aforesaid, which many several days passed in
the Negative; both these Votes and many more to this purpose which first passed
in the House of Lords, consisting then of the engaged Lords, and from day to
day renewed by those Lords, and sent down to the House of Commons for their
concurrence.

And at length by means of more force, and a Remonstrance from the Army of the
17. of August, the Vote was passed, and being obtained, diverse of both Houses
of Parliament, and of the City of London were examined upon, questioned,
impeached and imprisoned, and for their very obedience to and acting upon the
Order and Ordinances of the House of Parliament, (who sat in the absence of
the rest and are allowed to be Houses of Parliament by that Order, wherein all
they did in that time is declared to be null) are ordered to be brought to
their Trial upon pretended treason and misdemeanour, amongst which A. B. is
one, and is to be tried by those very Lords (if he submit thereto) who entered
this Engagement, and who if they condemn not A. B. and the rest upon the said
treason and misdemeanors, make themselves guilty for their thus acting and
engaging with the Army against the Houses as aforesaid, and so will bring a
condemnation upon their own heads.

All which premised and considered, I frame three Quaeres.

1. Query. Whether it be safe for A. B. questioned by the House of Commons, and
the Army, to submit to any trial by the engaged Lords, who by their engagement
have passed judgment upon him already, which they are to make good with their
lives and fortunes, and must as the case lies condemn themselves or him. To
which I answer negatively for these ensuing reasons.

1. Ans. Its not to be supposed, that the Lords will declare themselves
Traitors; and war being Levied by A. B. and them, each against other, the
fact of one or the other, must necessarily be included in the Stat. of 25. Ed.
3. where levying war against the King is declared treason.

2. A. The quality of A. B. his supposed fact is so prejudged treason by the
Commons already, and who have so transmitted it to the Lords, as that the
Lords, dare not dissent, least the House of Commons and the Army should fall
furiously upon them and incline to abolish their usurped jurisdiction over
Commoners or any other ways to be revenged of them, and therefore in case A. B.
submit to a trial by those Lords the hopes of his life solely depends upon the
defect of evidence as to the matter of fact.

3. A. The Interest of those Lords, and of the Army Grandees whom they are
obliged to serve, is to excute exmpelary punishment upon some that resisted the
Army, otherwise their reputation with the people will be utterly lost; and
therefore if A. B. put himself upon a trial by the Lords, assuredly they must
and will lay Load upon him to the purpose.

2. Query. If the first be not safe, then secondly what is A. B. his safest
Plea, whether to the Lords none Jurisdiction of his cause, being against Magna
Charta the Petition of Right, etc. by the authority of, which the Commoners of
England are only to be tried by their equals. Or to the incompetencie of
judging in this case being both judges and parties.

A. Its not safe for A. B. to plead that the Lords are incompetent Judges
because they are parties, and the reasons are.

First, Because that Plea, is not only an implicit acknowledgment of their
jurisdiction over Commoners, but also a tacit confession of the matter of fact,
for the very Plea implies a mutual Levying war, else they could not be
parties.

Second, Because that Plea, is not valid in Law, for the King sits by his
Deputies in all Courts of justice, and yet he is in Law a party.

Third, Because that Plea lies only, as to the equity of the Laws, nd
therefore admitts of the exercise of the judicial power about it, and so the
Commons which transmitted A. B. unto the Lords, and the Lords themselves must
be judges of the validity of the Plea, and it cannot be supposed that either
the Commons or the Lords, will take that dishonor to themselves to reverse
their former judgment: and so consequently the House of Commons acknowledge
the Injury they have offered to A. B. by imprisoning him, etc. And the House of
Lords also acknowledge the wrong they have done to the Lord Willoughby and the
rest of the seven impeached Lords by restraining them, etc.

There remains therefore no secure Plea to A. B. but to the non-jurisdiction
of the Lords over Commons.

3. Query. If the first or second, be judged the safest Plea, then in the third
place when is the proper time of pleading.

A. 1. The only proper time is to begin, when the Lords send their first
warrant to bring A. B. up to their Bar, before them to answer to the
impeachment, and this to be done by a salvo to his Liberty put into the Liev.
of the Tower, in the nature of that which Sir John Maynard sent to Col.
Tichhurne the 17 Feb. 1647. which you may read in Print it the 36 and 37 Pages
of his case truly stated.

2. But secondly, at the least A. B. must refuse to kneel at the Lords Bar,
because it is a clear acknowledgment of their jurisdiction over him; and this
appears by these ensuing reasons.

First, Because kneeling at their Bar, is the only distinguishing note
between those who come to their Bar; only by a bare Summons, or for witnesses,
etc. and those which comes to their Bar as Deliquents, the first of which they
never require to kneel, but only the second, viz. Those which they look upon
as Delinquents; therefore whosoever kneeles at their Bar, acknowledges the
Lords power and jurisdiction over him, to Summon him to their Bar as a
Delinquent, and there to judge and condemn him.

Second, The Lords claim to that adoration by kneeling, extends to no other
then those Delinquents which are under their jurisdiction, and that only as
they are Delinquents.

Third, Its evident by the constant practice, of all such as are not looked
upon as Delinquents, coming to their Bar; that kneeling is no note of Civil
respect, it being never required of them, nor performed by them; and therefore
by consequence must be a symptom of delinquency performed only by those that
stoop to their jurisdiction over them to try them therefore.

Fourth, Its very observable that in the ordinary Courts of justice, no man
holds up his hand at the Bar but a Delinquent, that is a person adjudged a
Delinquent (and under their jurisdiction) by a Jury of twelve men, commonly
called the Grand Jury; and though some pretend kneeling in Law to be only an
act of reverence, that implies honor and power, yet it is evident that all
persons, appearing before the ordinary Courts of justice, in civil causes,
from whom equal honor is due to them, and over whom they have power of
jurisdiction, yet I say all such as appear before them in civil causes, are
not required to hold up their hands at the Bar, but only those that are as
before esteemed and judged Delinquents; so in the like manner no more are any
required to kneel at the Lords Bar, but only those they judge Delinquents,
by virtue of which kneeling they do ipso facto acknowledge and grant them a
jurisdiction over them.

Fifth, Now considering that kneeling is a stooping to the Lords jurisdiction,
and also an acknowledgment of Delinquency, therefore whosoever kneels at the
Lords Bar, does acknowledge himself a Delinquent, and also before his legal
Judges, therefore it is undeniable, that after kneeling no plea against their
jurisdiction can be legally admitted after such an undeniable submission to it;
for in ordinary Courts though any privilege of being an officer, etc. in
another Court might legally exempt the party, to be tried from the jurisdiction
of an other Court that will try him, if he claim and challenge his privilege,
before he sloop unto their jurisdiction, yet in case he shall first do any act
that acknowledge their jurisdiction over him, before he claim and challenge
his privilege; no Plea by him against their jurisdiction will be admitted
afterward.

The answer of the foresaid A. B. a Citizen of London, and a free Commoner of
England, to the Lords in Parliament Assembled, upon the commands of the said
Lords, that A. B. should return an answer to a scroule or paper called by them
Articles of Impeachment, etc. against the said A. B.
THe said A. B. saving and reserving to himself entire, his native liberty as
a commoner of England, not to answer unto any Charge, Impeachment, or
Indictment, by whomsoever exhibtied against him, before any persons unto whom
the cognizance of the crimes of Commoners, and their trialls does not legally,
and properly pertain: yet protesting against all indeavoures and desires of
avoiding, or escaping a just and legal trial for any crime, or offense
whatsoever, whereof he now pretendedly stands suspected and charged, and
declaring his willingness, and readiness now, or any time hereafter, to
answer to any crime that either is, or shall be, legally objected against him
before any Count, that by virtue of an established law, has jurisdiction over
him, he the said A. B: says. That in case he were to be suspected for Treason
Felony, or any other crime, there could be no legal just proceedings to bring
him to answer, but by presenement, or indictment of good and lawful men of the
neighborhood where such Treasonable, Felonous, or other criminal deeds are
done; which is undeniably evident by the petition of Right made in the third of
the present King, and the act for the abolishing of ship money and the other
act for the abolishing the Starr-Chamber made this present Parliament anno 17.
Which five acts you may read in L. C. Ioh. Lilburns book called peoples
prerogative. p. 1. 2. 3. 4. and 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.
of the King.

The very express words of the last, of which are, that, Whereas by the Great
Charter many times confirmed in Parliament, It is enacted that no freeman shall
be taken or imprisonned, or diffeised of his free hold, or Liberties, or free
customs, or be out lawed or exiled, or otherwise destroyed, and that the King
will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law of the Land; And by another stature made in the fifth year
of the Reign of King Edward the third, It is inacted, that no man shall be
attached by any accusation nor fore-judged of life or li^^, nor his Lands,
Tenements, goods nor Cattells seized into the Kings hands, against the form of
the Great Charter, and the Law of the Land; And by a statute made in the twenty
five year of the reign of the same King Edward the third, It is accorded,
assented, and established, that none shall be taken hy Petition, or suggestion
made to the King, or to his counsel, unless it be by indictment, or
presentment of good and lawful people of the same neighborhood where such
deeds be done, in due manner, or by process where such deeds be done, in due
manner, or by process made by writ original at the common law; and that none
be put out of his franchise or freehold, unless he duly brought to answer, and
fore-judged of the same by the course of the Law, and if any thing be done
against the same, it shall be redressed and holden for none. And by an other
statute made in the twenty eight year of the same King Edward the third. It is
amongst other things inacted, That no man of what estate or condition soever he
be, shall be put out of his Lands o^ Tenements, nor taken nor imprisoned, nor
disinherited nor put to death, So that in time of peace, for a general or any
other, that has commission of Marshall au^hority, to hang, or otherwise
execute any man by color of Marshall Law, this says Sir Edward Cook 3 part
inslit. fo 52 is absolute murdes: yeas there he fur^her says Th. Earl of
Lancaster being taken in an open infurrection (or rebellion) was by judgment
of Marshall law put to death the 14 Ed. 4. this [saith he] was adjudged to be
unlawful, and he gives this reason for it, because he was not tried by the
declared law of the Land [which is every Englishmans birthright] the Courts of
Justice being all open, where-according to the aocustomed manner it was
dispensed, see fo. ibid. 86 87. and 2 part fo. 529. see the petition of Right
and William Thomsons plea a free commoner of England now condemned by Marshall
Law, by the General, etc. to be [shot to death] printed in the 45. 46. 47. 48.
49 50 pages of the forementioned book, called the peoples prerogative
without being brought to answer by due process of Law. And by another statute
made in the forty two years of the reign of the said King Edward the third.
It is inacted that no man be put to answer without presentment before Justices,
or matter of record, or by due process or write original according to the old
law of the Land, and if any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in
Law, and holden for error.

And the said A. B. further says. That for the better securing of the subjects
lives, Liberty, names and estates, the Law has provided that in the legal
proceedings aforesaid, to bring any person accused to answer, the informer or
accuser shall not only be known, but also bound by the justices to prosecute
his suggestion, that thereby the party accused may have due reparations in case
of scandal: and to that intent was it inacted by the statutes of the 37 Ed. 3,
18. and 38. Ed. 3. 9.

That ^f any shall make suggestion to the King, of any crime committed by any
other, the same person shall be sent with the suggestion to the Chanceller,
etc. and there to find surety to pursue his suggestion, which if he cannot
prove, he shall be imprisoned, and there remain until he has satisfied the
party accused of his damages and slander; And the statutes of the 1. Ed. 6. 12
and 5 and 6. Ed. 6. 11. has provided, that no man shall be indicted of
treason, unless he be accused by two lawful and sufficient witnesses, or
shall without violence confess the same.

And the statute of the 1. and 2. of Phillip and Mary chap. 10. enacts, that no
man for any crime that is called Treason should be tried, but at the Common
Law. And he the said A. B. further says that both your Lordships, and the
House of Commons in the whole stream of all your Declarations, declare unto the
whole Kingdom, that you will preserve the subjects Liberties and freedoms,
and the just and fundamental Laws of the Land, and in particular in your late
printed Votes of 27. Jan. last, although you declare to lay the King aside, and
make no more addresses to him, yet you there declare; to maintain and preserve
the Laws of the Land, and to Govern the people thereby.

And he the said A. B. further says, that the not finding any indictment or
presentment of him, for any real or supposed crime, by good and lawful men of
any neighborhood, where such supposed crime was committed, he ought not to be
put to answer at all, neither can he with safety to himself, or to the Commons
of England, or to the Laws and Liberties thereof, answer your Lordships any
further then merely to point of jurisdiction, viz. That your Lordships by the
knowue and declared Law of this Land has not the least jurisdiction in the
world over him, or any Commoner of England whatsoever in any case whatsoever.

And therefore he the said A. B. positively says, that in case he were legally
indicted for Treason, or any other crime whatsoever, the case comes not under
the cognizance of this honorable House; for the said A. B. being a Commoner of
England; ought expressly by the established Laws of the Land, to be tried in
some ordinary Court of Justice, before a Judge or Judges, sworn, impartially
to execute the Law, notwithstanding the commands of any power in England to the
contrary, and the sworn jury of Commoners his Peers or equals (viz. a Grand
jury and petty jury As appreares by the 22 Ed. 3. fol. 20 and. 32 H. 6. fol.
26. and 14 H. 7. fol. 19.
and no otherwise. These are the express words of the 29 chap. of Magna
Charta, Nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi per legale judicium
parium suorum, etc. That is, neither the King in his own person, nor any of his
Justices, Judges or Courts, shall try or condemn any man but by due course and
process of Law, by the Sea Sir Edward Cooks exposition of the words prepares,
in his exposition of the 14 and 29. chap. of Magna Charta. 2 part. insti. fol.
28, 29, 46. 48. 50. where he positively says, that Peers signify equals, or
men of his own condition, and not freemen in opposition to Villains, as Mr.
Will. Prin would simply and ignorantly, expound it, in the 62 page of his late
Erroneous and illegal plea for the Lords jurisdiction over Commoners, and so
make the Lords by Magna Charta Peers to Commoners, because they are both
freemen and not Villains; although that learned Lawyer, Sir Ed. Cook in the
first part insti. fo. 156. ecxpresly says, a Peer of the Realm shall not be
impanelled in any case upon the jury of a Commoner, because he is not his
equal.
lawful judgment of a jury of twelve men of his Peers or equals (viz men of
his own condition) according to the Law of the Land; and the same is further
inacted and confirmed by the 24 Ed. 3. 1 and 2 chap. where it is expressly
inacted. That if any statute, judgment or decree be made or given contrary to
this good law of Magna Charta, it shall (ipso facto) be holden for none, and so
not in the least valid or binding, but merely void, and null in Law, which just
and good law of the Great Charter has been at least forty times confirmed in
full and free Parliament; And the said 29 chap. of Magna Charta, and the other
statutes made in exposition of it before recited, were and now stand strongly
confirmed by this present Parliament, in the two forementioned Acts for
abolishing Ship Money and the Court of Star chamber.

And the said A. B. further says, that as the intent of the Law was, that all
trials might be equal and impartial, and as free from will, pleasure and
arbitrarinesse as possible could be, so it is founded upon these impregnable
grounds of reason, justice and equity.

First, the Jury are to be of the neighborhood where any such crime is
committed, and some ought to be of the same Hundred, See 1 part insti. lib. 2.
chap. 11. Sect. 193. fol. 125. and chap. 12. Sect. 234 fo. 155. and 157. and
the 13 Ed. 138. and 28. E. 1 cha 9.
for the Law presumes that such may have some cognizance of the fact, or of
some circumstances thereof or of the party accused, whose condition and manner
of conversation is much to be regarded, for the discovering his intention in
any fact supposed to be Treason or Felony, etc. and the rule of the law is,
Actus non facit reum, nisi men's fit rea.

Secondly, The Jury that passes upon any Commoner one day, may themselves be in
a condition, to be tried by him another day as one of their jury: and hereby
they are bound to indifferency, and impartiality, considering it may be their
own case.

Thirdly, The party accused may challenge of except against the Iurers: either
against the Array, if the Sheriff or Bailiffe impannelling the jury, be wholly
disingaged, and indifferent as to the cause, and the parties prosecuring: See
ut surpra and fol. 156. 158.
or against the Polls, And in case of Treason he may challenge 35. peremptorily
upon his dislike, without rendering the least cause, See 1 part insti. lib. 2
chap: 12. Sect. 234. fo. 156. and 3 part fo. 27. 32. 33. 227.
and as many more as he can render any reason for his just challenge; As in
case he can challenge any for a Baron or Lord of Parliament, who as Sir Ed.
Cook says shall not be impannelled in any case, 1 part inst. to. 156. or for
defect in^^state, or other abilit^es or for disaffection, or partiallity, or
for any infamous crime, And hereby the Judges of the party accused, may
certainly be indifferent equal and impartial

Fourthly, The matter of fact is only entrusted in the Jury, and the matter of
Law to the Judge for the preventing of all errors, confederacies, or
partiallity.

The Judge is sworn to do justice to all according to law, without respect of
persons, Read his Oath at large made in the 18 Ed. 3. an 1344. and printed in
Pultons col. of statute fol. 144 and L. C. John Lilburnes book called the
peoples prerogative page 10.
and the Jury are sworn to find according to their evidence.

Now the said A. B. further says, That from these reasons whereupon the Law
recited was made and inacted, it is clear and evident, that the trial of any
commoner pertaines not to this House, In the least; who the Law of England were
never appointed to be the executors thereof in any case whatsoever.

The Members of this House cannot be of the neighborhood where the crimes of
all Commeners are committed, and cannot be presumed to have any cognizance of
the facts, or parties offending, neither do they allow themselves to be tried
by commoners, so as to be bound to indifferency and impartiallity, from the
knowledge that the Commoners whom they try, may possible be of a Jury And hear
it is worth observation, that if a difference or controversy for land, or
money, etc. happen between a Peer of Parliament and a Commoner the jury who is
to end the controveresi may by law be ordinary freeholders so one single Knight
be returned amongst them 1 part inst. lib. 3 chap 12. Sect. 134. to. 156. and
the same holds in attainder of treason or Felony 17 Ed 2 attaint 69 and 3 part
insti. fol. 26. there must be an indictment of Peers for reason by twelve men
of the neighborhood where the offense was committed and ofter they are to
receive a trial or judgment by twelve Peers at least. H. 4. fol. 19, ct 13 H
8 fol. 12, 10. E. 3. fol, 46, ^ 3 a part insti. fol. 28. and the one must not
be changed no more the than other and in confirmation thereof, that which was
done after the condemnation of Sir Simon de Berisford, is famous, it is to be
found Rot. Parl. 4. Ed. 3. Number. 2. And in the Rolls of Chancery it was enacted
(or at least adjudged) That albeit the Lords and Peers of the Realm, as Judges
of the Parliament, in the presence of the King had taken upon them to give
judgment in case of Treason and Felony, of such as were not Peers of the
Realm, that after that time no Peers should give Judgment upon others then
upon themselves, according to Law. And A. B. further says, that though this
Record should be granted to be no Act, yet it is a solemn Judgment of the
House of Lords, and therefore binding to themselves, who ingeniously confess,
They can not, nor shall not hereafter judge Commoners, because it is against
the Law of the land for them so to do.
for their trial in a short time, neither can the said A. B. nor any other
Commoner whom this House would try, challenge in the case of treason thirty
five of the Members thereof, for the whole house a mounts very seldom to that
number, neither will this House allow him the said A. B. to challenge any one
Lord or Member thereof, though he should allege disaffection, partiallity, or
that he is an engaged party, an examiner or prosecuter secretly, or openly,
neither is any Member of this House, sworn to judge according to Law, or in
matter of fact according to evidence.

And the said A. B. further says, that Magna Charta before recited, being not
only a Statute, but also a Declaration of the Common Law, ^o Custom or
presidents can be of any force in Law against it; for if your House can make
presidents against both common and Statute Law, to condemn one Commoner of
England either in his life, liberty or estate, by the same right you may
condemn a hundred, a thousand, yea the whole House of Commons it self, who by
this account are but mere ciphers, and all the Judges in Westminster Hall etc.
are but ciphers, yea and all the Laws in England stand but for mere ciphers;
and the said A. B. and all the rest of the Commons of England are thereby the
perfectest slaves this day upon the face of the earth, and the end of all
Government in clearly overthrown, viz. the weal and safety of the people; and
no law left in England but your Lordships will and pleasures for any man in the
Kingdom to hold or preserve any thing he possesses by, whether it be life,
liberty or estate, and so the absolutest subversion of liberty and property is
brought in amongst us that can be in the world. And therefore the said A. B.
resolvedly says, that if your Lordships shall show him as many presidents as
will fill your House, that you have in all ages adjudged and condemned
Commonors at your Bar, yet he values them to more in comparison to the
several Acts of Parliament, and the common Law of the Land, (which is right
reason, which is above Acts, and the Law and rule to make Acts by) that he has
before cited [which are point blank against your Lordships Jurisdiction ever
Commoners] then he values the wind that blows: And the said A. B. further
says, that if your Lordships can make and create presidents to destroy so many
scores of Acts of Parliament, which have for many hundred years confirmed the
29 Chapter of Magna Charta, [when they have been the fullest and freest] and
which legally are in force, and unrepealed to this hour, [yea and pluck up the
fundamental common Law of England by the very roots] then why do your
Lordships cozen, blind, deceive, and delude the people of England, in
suffering the King and the House of Commons nominally to bear the name of
coadjutors with you in making Laws?

And the said A. B. further says, that seeing both the Statute and Common Law
is so expressly against your Lordships exercising Jurisdiction over Commoners,
that though some by force, fear or ignorance, have stooped or submitted to
your Lordships Jurisdiction, yet in Law submission is to no effect, nor no
strength to the judgment, where the matter is coram non Judice, and though in
former time there was no demurrer or exception to your Lordships Jurisdiction
over Commoners, yet now there is, and therefore the forecited Laws and
Judgment are exception in law sufficient of themselves, to me or any other
Commoner whatsoever, that shall make use of them; and for your Lordships to
claim a jurisdiction over me a Commoner, from no legaller a ground then
because your predecessors have granted it before you, is to set up an argument
to justify all the wickedness in the world: and as sound an argument it is,
both in Law and reason, for the present Judges in Westminster Hal to say, that
it is legal and just for them to adjudge, that the King has a true and legal
all right in all the peoples proprieties, because there predecessors adjudged
it so in the late Case of Ship Money, or that the present King may at his will
and pleasure chop off all your Lordships heads, because his predecessor Richard
the third did serve some of your Lordships predecessors so in the Tower of
London.

And therefore the said A. B. conclusively says, that the ignorance, fear or
neglect of some Commoners to challenge at your Lordships hands their
fundamental and native rights and freedoms, to be tried only by their Peers
or equals according to the forementioned Laws, does not nor cannot prejudice
any other Commoner whatsoever, which shall challenge as I now do; his right
and freedom according to the express and declared Law of the Land, and
whatsoever presidents Judgments or Dcrees have been, wherein this honorable
House have exercised a Judgment or jurisdiction over Commoners, they are all
expressly declared errors, and to be holden for naught, by this present
Parliament in its purity, virginity, and freedom, in that forementioned Act,
for abolishing the Starchamber Court, wherein the forementioned 29. chap. of
Magna Charta and 28. Ed. 3. 3. and 42. Ed. 3. 3. etc. confirmed, which Statutes
enact, that all free men shall have trial for their lives liberties and
estates by their Peers equals according to the common or old Law of the Land,
and have also these words, That whatsoever shall be done contrary shall be void
in Law and holden for error. And the same does the Petition of Right made in
the 3. of the King, which is every branch, article, and Prayer of it, confirmed
this present Parliament the 17 of the King in that excellent forementioned Act,
for the abolishing of Ship Money.

And the said A. B. says, inasmuch as the Statutes above recited have
reference to the punishment of offenders, they are not to be taken by
construction, but only in and according to the letter thereof: and therefore
are as binding to your Lordships House, and the House of Commons both, till
they be legally abrogated, as they are to the meanest man in England. And
forasmuch as it is plain and without scruple, that the Laws and Statutes
before recited, do absolntely restrain this honorable House from exercising
over him the said A. B. or any other Commoner of England, any the least
jurisdiction in any case whatsoever Which is unanswerably proved, as well by
reason and argument, as positive Law, in that strong and singular. Discourse
called the Laws Subversion, or Sir John Maynard Case truly stated, page 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
, for the fore-recited Laws expressly again and again say, that no Commoner
shall be passed upon, adjudged or condemned, but by the lawful judgment of
his Peers, or equals, according to the due course of the Law of the Land; and
the said A. B. is very confident, that there is not, nor never was, since the
the great Charter was made one established Law, or Act of Parliament ever made
in England, that ever gave the House of Peers (in Writs of Error, or any other
case whatsoever) any Jurisdiction or power of passing Judgment upon Commoners,
and therefore all and every the Judgments and Decrees, that your Lordships
have made and given (especially since the late Act for abolishing of the
Star Chamber) are thereby declared to be ipso facto, erroneous, and null, and
void in Law, and your Lordships liable (if not at the Common Law, yet
undoubtedly in the next free Parliament) to make legal satisfaction to all
those persons, that by any of your Judgments, Decrees, Sentences, or Orders of
Imprisonments, you have most illegally and without the least shadow or color
of Law wronged.

And therefore he the said A. B. being a Commoner, does hereby protest against
submission to any trial before your Lordships, as not being his legal Judges:
And he the said A. B. does also claim the benefit of all the known and
declared Laws of the Land, which is his undoubted Birthright, and appeal to
his proper Judges, according to the said Laws, viz. two Juries of 24. legal
men The reason wherefore the Jury is put in before the Judge, is to erect a
common error amongst the people of England, viz. that the Judge has more
power in him, then the Jury; when as indeed and in truth (if a man without
offense may so say) the Jury is as it were the God Almighty, and the Judge is
but as the Minister or Priest to pronounce and declare the sentence and
judgment of God Almighty.
of England, his peers or equals, and the Judges appointed for to be the
executors of the Law in the Kings Bench, or elsewhere in the County where his
pretended crime was committed, and the said A. B. out of love and respect to
your Lordships and his native Liberties earnestly entreats your Lordships
seriously to consider, that in the foresaid Act for abolishing the
Star Chamber, the Judges thereof are accused, That they have not kept themselves
to the points limited by the Statute that gave them their power, and
Jurisdiction, but have undertaken to punish where no Law does warrant, and to
make Decrees for things having no such Authority, and to inflict heavier
punishments then by any Law is warranted, and therefore says the Act, the
Proceedings, Censures and Decrees of that Court, have by experience been found
to be an intolerable burden to the Subject, and a means to introduce an
arbitrary power and Government, (for which it was totally abolished,) all which
with much more the said A. B. confidently averres, may be justly and truly said
of your Lordships, in that you have fined, imprisoned, and murdered those that
by Law you have not the least Jurisdiction in the world over, and therefore in
common reason, equity and justice, better deserve to be totally abolished,
Which is undeniably proved by Lievt. Col. John Lilburnes printed Speech, that
he made at the open Bar of the House of Commons against the Lords, Ian. 19.
1647. p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
then the said Court of Star Chamber.

FINIS.

