Regal Tyranny discovered: OR, A DISCOURSE, showing that all lawful
(approbational) instituted power by GOD amongst men, is by common agreement,
and mutual consent. Which power (in the hands of whomsoever) ought always to
be exercised for the good, benefit, and welfare of the Trusters, and never
ought other wise to be administered: Which, whenever it is, it is justly
resistable and revokeable; It being against the light of Nature and Reason, and
the end wherefore God endowed Man with understanding, for any sort or
generation of men to give so much power into the hands of any man or men
whatsoever, as to enable them to destroy them, or to suffer such a kind of
power to be exercised over them, by any man or men, that shall assume it unto
himself, either by the sword, or any other kind of way. In which is also
punctually declared, The Tyranny of the Kings of England, from the days of
William the Invader and Robber, and Tyrant, alias the Conqueror, to this
present King Charles, Who is plainly proved to be worse, and more tyrannical
then any of his Predecessors, and deserves a more severe punishment from the
hands of this present Parliament, then either of the dethroned Kings, Edw. 2.
01 Rich. 2. had from former Parliaments; which they are bound by duty and oath,
without equivocation or colusion to inflict upon him, He being the greatest
Delinquent in the three Kingdoms, and the head of all the rest. Out of which is
drawn a Discourse, occasioned by the Tyranny and Injustice inflicted by the
Lords, upon that stout-faithful-lover of his Country, and constant Sufferer for
the Liberties thereof, Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, now prisoner in the Tower. In
which these 4. following Positions are punctually handled. 1. That if it were
granted that the Lords were a legal Jurisdiction, and had a judicative power
over the Commons; yet the manner of their dealing with Mr. Lilburn, was, and is
illegal and unjust. 2. That the Lords by right are no Judicature at all. 3.
That by Law and Right they are no Lawmakers. 4. That by Law and Right it is
not in the power of the King, nor in the power of the House of Commons it
self, to delegate the legislative power, either to the Lords divided, or
conjoined; no, nor to any other person or persons whatsoever. Unto which is
annexed a little touch, upon some palbable miscarriages, of some rotten Members
of the House of Commons: which House, is the absolute sole lawmaking, and
law-binding Interest of England.

Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me: They have made them Princes,
and I know it not.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

The Printer to the Reader.
IF thou be courteous, Reader, contribute but thy Clemency in favorable
correctiting the Errata's (notwithstanding much due care had in so public a
work as this is) as we must acknowledge lie dispersed therein. Page 1. line 2.
for 32. read 33. p. 4. l. 11. for fifthly r. sixthly. p. 7. 59. r. in the
world; see Hos. 8. 4 p. 8. l. 17. for they r. he knowing that when he. p. 10.
l. 20. for Romans r. revelation. l. 29. r. Dan. 43. p. 11. l. 6. for against, r.
but by. l. 38. for name, r. hand, p. 12. l. 2. r. and as he. l. 16. sor 23. r.
33. l. 38. for his, r. their. p. 13. l. 24 sor ver. 11, r chap. 8. ver. 11. p.
15. l. 30. for trivial, r cruel, p. 16. l. 2. for rule r. cover. p. 18. l. 16
for and his, r. and her. p. 19. l. 34. for rerforme, r. perform. p. 21. l. 1.
blot out, years of his. l. 27. for this, r. of this King. l. 31. for most and,
r. most base and. p. 23. l. 4. for 16. r. 6. p. 24. l. 10. for them, r. him. l.
25. for Realm granted him the ninth penny, r Realm dear, besides the 9. penny
they granted formerly at one time for them to his Predecessor. p. 26. l. 20. r
have had. l. 31. r. unusual. l. 35* r. after this. p. 27. l. 2. r.
uncounselable. l. 26 r late King. p. 34. l. 3. 457, r 655. l. 6, 264 r 462, p.
39, l. 26, after Charles, r but all his Predecessors received their Crown and
Kingdom, conditionally by contract and agreement, I doubt not but the present
K. Ch, his etc. p. 40, l. 10. r. by, but a, l, after Kingdom, r and that there
should not much more be an account of his Office due to this Kingdom it self.
p. 45, l. 23 after people, r and comes lineally from no purer a fountain, and
wellspring, then from their Predecessors, l 25 blot out Dukes. p, 48. l. 29.
that, put in if after. p. 56. l. 8, 404, 406, r. 504, 506, p. 59, l. 34 1641,
r. 1646. p. 60, l. 10, 2 Samuel: 7: 13, r. 1 King 12: 1. p. 61, l. 17, at the end
of justly, r. come by, and. l. 18* at the end of Prophet, r. to K. Rehoboam*
(who had assembled 18000. chosen men, which were Warriers to go fight against
the house of Ifrael) p. 72, l. 2, in the margent for 254 r, 264, l. last of the
marg, for 4, r. 467, p. 73, l. 15. 16 marg. after 29, insert 46. after Rot. 2,
insert 4, p. 75, l. 1, in marg. for 5, r. 9, 4, for 8. r. 18, in marg. for 27.
r. 2 part, l. 9. for 58, r. 38. p. 76, l, 19, for own r. other, p. 77, l. 9. in
marg, 22, r. 102. p. 79, l. 1. abeas r. Habeas, p. 81, l. 24, r. to deliver to,
l. 35, r. at which, p. 84. l. 2, after his honesty, r. his judges carriage, l.
7, for Lordships r. Lobby, p. 86, l. 26 blot out Dukes, p: 87: l: 1: practices
r. prises, p. 88, l. 9. King r. Duke, p 91, l. 13. r. and afterward in England
made Odo, p. 92. l. 2. and 3. r. of whose estate l. 36. for unindivalid, r.
unvalid, p. 94 l. 21. r. conquirendum, and tenendem sibi and heredibus, adeo
libere per gladium sicut ipse rex ten^it Anglia. p. 95. l. 36. r. Comissioners,
p. 96. l: 27. for incursion, r. innovation. p. 97. l. 23. r. But in the
Knights, p. 97. l. 3. in the marg. for 84, r. 8, 4, 7. p. 98. l. 8. for nor r.
for, p. 101, l. 12. for 1646. r. 1645.

A Table of the principal Matters contained in this ensuing Discourse.
A ANger of God against Israel for their choice of a King, page 14. Abuses
checked. page 25. Acts of the Parliament, page 33. Appeal of Lient. Col. Lilburn
to the House of Commons, how approved on there, page 64. Arlet the Whore,
William the Conquerors Dam, page 87. Arlet the Whore married to a Norman
Gentleman of mean substance, page 91,
B. Bastardly Fountain of Englands Kings, page 15. Bellamy page 1. his
baseness, page 2, 3. Books of L. C. John Lilburn before, page 3. and since
the Parliament, page 3, 4, 8,. Books against L, C. Lilburn, p. 1. 4. Barons
Wars, p. 30, 31. Behavior of L. C. Lilburn in the House of Lords, p. 64., 65,
69. Barons in Parliament represent but, their own persons, p. 97.
C Challenges against the Lords, p. 5. page 70. Clergy base inslavers of this
land of old, p. 89, 90, 93, 94. Contents of this Discourse, p. 6, 62.
Common Counsel, p. 27. Charles-Stewarts juggling* page 50, 51. Charles Stewart,
not GOD, but a mere man, and must not rule by his will, nor other Kings, but by
a Law, page 9, 10, 11. Charles Stewart received his Crown and Kingdom by
contract, p. 33. and has broken his contract, page 9, 14, 41, 42, 43, 50, 51,
52, 57. Charles Stewart confuted in His vain proud words, p. 32, 33. Charles
Stewarts Confession and Speeches against himself. p. 40, 41, 56, 57. Charles
Stewart as Charles Stewart, different from the King as King, p. 35. Charles
Stewart guilty of Treason, p. 52, 53, 54, 55, 57. C. R. ought to be executed,
p. 57.
D Dukes of Normandy, first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh,
p. 87. Dukes, Marquesses, and Viscounts not in England, when the great Charter
was made, p. 98. Davies Sir I. Clotworthies friend his baseness, page 102,
103, 104, 105, 106.
E Edwardus R^x Segnier, page 15, 16, 88. His gallant Law, p. 16. Edward the
second, p. 26, 27, 57, 58. deposed, and his eldest Son chosen, p. 27, 58, 59.
Edward the third, page 27, 28, 29, 30. Excommunication for infringing Magna
Charta, p. 28. Edward 4. and 5. p. 30, 31. Earl of Manchesters, and Colonel
Kings baseness, p. 49, 10^. Englishmen made slaves by the Normans, p. 90.
F False imprisonment it is, to detain the prisoner longer then he ought, p.
81. First Dake, p. 9^. First Marquess, First Viscount. First Parliament, in
the 1^. of H. 1. see page 17.
G Government by Kings, the worst government of any lawful Magistracy, p. 14.
Greenland Company oppressors, page 101.
H Heathens more reasonable then the Lords, p. 2. House of Peers illegality, p.
43, 45, 86. and baseness to the people, page 44. Henry the 1. p. 17. Henry,
Mauds eldest son, King after Stephen, p. 19. Henry the 3. crowned, and his
baseness, p. 22, 23. Henry the 4, 5, 7, and 8. p. 30, 31. Hunscot the Prelates
Catchpole, now the Lords Darling, p. 83.
I John brother to R. the 1. chosen King, p. 19. His baseness to the
Commonwealth, p. 20, 21, 39. His end, p. 22. Judges corrupt, p. 23.
Imprisonment of L. C. Lilburn. p. 63, 66. Ireland in her distressed condition
cheated and couzened by Sir John Clotworthy, and his friend Davies, p. 102. to
p. 106
K King is entrusted, p. 34. Kings tyrannical usurpation, none of Gods
institution, page 7. 8. Kings subordinate to Laws, by God, p. 8. and men, p.
9, 18, 19, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,
52, 53, 85, 86. Kings must not be imposed, but by the peoples consents, p. 7.
20, 32, 41, 60, 61. Kings deposed, p. 27, 58, 59, 98. Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses represent the Laws, p. 97. King, no propriety in his Kingdom, p.
34. or Cities thereof, or Jewels of the Crown; and as King, not so much as the
Subjects in the Kingdoms, page 32, 38. Kings illegal Commands obeyed punished,
page 35, 52, 53, 54. Kings are liable to be punished. page 41, 59. K. Harrold,
p. 84, 94.
L Laws made this Parliament, page 33, 34. Lieutenant of the Towers baseness
against L. C. Lilburn, page 5. 48. Lords cause of loosing the Kingdom at
first, p. 93. Lords no legislative power by consent of the people, p. 45, 46.
Lords may not lawfully sit in the house of Commons, page 98, 99. Lords
contradict themselves, p. 63. Lords power wholly cashiered, p. 40, 47, 92.
Lords overthrown by the Law, see p: 72. to p. 78. Lords illegality and
baseness against L. C. Lilbarn, page 47, 48. 65 66, 67, 84. proved so to be,
p. 62. 81. Lords no Judges according to Law, p, 69. Laws included, though not
expressed, Kings must not violate, page 62. Lords no Judicature at all, p. 84,
85, 86.
M Maud p. 17, 18. the Empress takes K. Stephen in bat- tell, p. 18. Massacre
of the Jews in England when page 19. Magna Charta, what it is, p. 26. Magna
Charta's Liberties confirmed by Hen. the 3. p. 24. And by Edw. the 2. p. 27.
And by Edw. the 3. p. 28, 29. Members of the House of Commons taxed, p. 100,
101, 102. Merchant-Adventurers p. 99. overthrown, p. 42.
N Normans whence they came, page 86, 87. Ninety seven thonsand, one hundred
ninety and five pounds, which was for Ireland, pursed by 4 or 5 privare men;
see p. 103
O Orders Arbytrary and illegal against L. C. Lilburn, p. 2, 47, 48. 63, 64,
66. Odo the Bishop, and a Bastard seeks to be Pope, pilleth the Kingdom page
91 92. Oaths of Kings at their Coronation, p. 19, 26, 28, 31, 32, 33. Oath of
K. Stephen p. 18. Oath of Justices, p. 29. Objection about H. 8. alteration of
the Oath of Coronation, answered by the Parliament, p. 32. Order of the house
of Commons for L. C. Lilburn, p. 84. Original of the House of Peers pretended
power, p 94.
P Petition of Right confirmed, p. 33. the Lords break it, p. 2. Petition of L.
C. Lilburns wife p. 72. to p. 78. Postscript of L. C. Lilburns, p. 6. People
must give Laws to the King, not the King to the people, p. 85. Popes judgment
refused by the people, to be undergone by the King as insufferable, p. 26.
Power of Lords both of judicative and legislative thrown down, p. 92 93.
Parliament, what it is, p. 34. their institution, p. 95. The manner of holding
them, p. 95. how kept, p. 97. Parliaments greatness p. 34, 36, 37. Prerogative
Peerage flowed from rogues, p. 86, 87. Proceedings of the Lords against L. C.
Lilburn, condemned by the Commons, p. 64. Parliaments kept in old time withou t
Bishops, Earls, or Barons, Page 96, 97.
Q Questions of great consequence, page 101, 102.
R Rehoboams folly, page 60, 61. Richard the 1. page 19. Remedy against fraud,
p. 26. Richard the 2. p. 30. Deposed p. 30. Richard the 3. p. 30, 31. Rebellion
of the King. 90, 51. Rewards conferred by William the Conqueror, upon his
assistants, p. 90, 91.
S Sir John Clatworthies baseness, p. 102. to 106. Stephen Earl of Bollaigne
chosen King by free election, p. 18. When he was imprisoned by Maud, p. 18,
19. the people restituted him out, and he was set up again, p. 18. Sheriffs of
London, Foot and Kendrick their illegality, page 68. Sentence of the Lords
against L. C. Lilburn. p. 70, 71.
T Ten Commandments explained, p. 9, 10. Tyrants (Kings) plagued by Gods
justice, p. 11, 12, 13, 17. Tyranny of Kings, p. 13, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Towers chargeablenesse of Fees, p. 49. Trials ought to be public, and examples
for it, page 81, 82, 83, 84. Turkey Merchants, page 99.
W William the Conquerors History of him, p. 14, 15, 16, 45, 87, 88, 89, 90,
91, 92, 93, 94, 95, a Bastard, p. 87. His end, p. 17. Westminster Halls
inslaving Laws, Judges, Practices, from William the Tyrants will, page 15, 16.
William the 2. p. 17. Ways for purchasing liberty and annihilating of the
Norman Innovations, p. 25, 29. Wollastons Letter from L. C. Lilburn, p. 67, 68.
Writs, Warrants, and Mittimusses, how they ought to be made in their forms in
the several Courts, p. 78, 79, 80, 81.

IT is the saying of the God of Truth by the Prophet, Isa: 32. 15, 16. That he
that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of
oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil; He
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the Munition of Rocks, etc.
But on the contrary, he says; Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees,
and that write grievousnesse which they have prescribed, to turn aside the
needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the Fatherless, Chap.
10. 1, 2 Now I, having read over A BOOK INTITVLED, The FREEMANS FREEDOM
VINDICATID, being Lieutenant-Colonell John Lilborns Narative of the Lords late
dealing with him, in commit^ing him to Newgate; and seriously considering of
his condition, and of the many base asp^rsions cast upon him, and bitter
invectives uttered against him in some late printed Books, but especially that
of Colonel John Bellamies, called, A Vindication of the City Remonstrance;
which came out, when he was a close prisoner in Newgate, by virtue of as
cruel, unjust, and illegal a Warrant as ever was made by those that profess
themselves to be conservators of the peoples liberties; yea, and I dare say,
that search all the Records of Parliament, since ^h^ first day that ever there
was any in England, and you shall not find the fellow of that which is against
him; The Co^^ of which (as I find i^ in that of the JUST MAN IN BONDS) thu,
follows:

Die Martiis, 23. Junii, 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament ass^mbl^d, That John Lilburn shall stand
committed cl^^e p^i^^er in the P^ison of Newg^^; and that he be not permitted
to have Pen, Ink, or Paper, and no^^ shall have access unto him in any kin^,
but only his Keeper, until this Court does tak^ further order.

JOHN BROWN, Cler. Parliamentorum.

To the Keeper of Newgate, his Deputy, or Deputies,
Exam. per Rad. Brisco, Cler. de Newgate.

What can be more fuller of arbytrary Tyranny, and illegality then this Order
expressing no cause, wh^, nor wherefore; and so not only absolutely against the
exp^ess^ tenor of the Petition of Right, but contrary to the very practice of
the H^a^hen Romans, who it seems had more morallity, reason, and just^ce in
them, then these (pretended Christian) Lords: see Acts 25 27. For says Festus
to King Agrippa etc. when he was to s^nd Paul a prisoner to Rome, It seems to
me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal, to signifi^ the Crimes
laid against him.

And although that this Arbitrary and illegal Order was extraordinary harshly
executed upon Mr. Lilburn, and thereby he was as it were tied hand and foot;
yet then did Mr. Bellamie watch his opportunity to insult over him, when he
knew that he was not able to answer for himself. O the height of baseness! for
a Colonel to be so void of manhood, and to find no time to beat or insult
over a man, but when he is down, and also tied hand and foot!

One thing in Mr. Bellamies Book I cannot but take notice of especially, and
that i^ this; He there cites some things in a Book called ENGLANDS BIRTHRIGHT;
and because it has very high language in it, against diverse great, and corrupt
Members of Parliament, which is sufficient to destroy and crush the Au^hor of
it in pieces, if he were known. And therefore that he might load Mr. Lilburn to
the purpose, he takes it for granted, tha^ B^^k is his, although his name be
not to it, nor one argumen^, or circumstance mentioned to prove it his; but the
absence of his name, is a sufficient g^ou^d to all that knows him and his
resolution, to judge Mr. Bellamy a malicious Liar in that particular; I^ being
Mr. Lilburns common practic^ (for any thing I can perc^^v^) to set his name to
his Books, b^th in the BBs. days, and since; which Books contain the highest
language, against the st^^am^ of ^he Times, that I have read, of any man's in
England that a^^uc^e^h what he w^^t^s. As for instance, Hi^ Book, called THE
CHRIST^AN MAN'S TRY ALL, being a Narra^^v^ of the ill^gality of the
S^ar-Chambers dealing with him, and the barbarous infl^cting of their bloody
sentence upon him.

Secondly, His B^ok called, COME OVT OF HER MY PEOPLE, written (it seems) when
he was in Chains, the fullest of re^^lution that I have read.

Thirdl^, THE AFFLICTED MAN'S COMPLAINT, written, when he was sick in his close
imprisonm^n^, by reason of his long lyi^g in Irons.

Fourthly, his Epistle to S^^ MAVRICE ABBOT, then Lord Major of London, called,
A CRY FOR JUSTICE.

Fi^^hly, ^is Epistle to the PRENTICES OF LONDON; I^ both of which, he ac^us^th
the Bishop of Canterbury, of^^g. (...), nd ^ffered, upon the loss of his li^e,
to p^ove it, wh^^ Canterbury was in the height of his glory.

Sixthly, his Home E^^stle to the Wa^d^ns of the Fleet, when he was i^ their
own custody, and forced to d^fend his li^^, and chamber for div^rs w^^k^s
t^g^ther with a couple of Rapiers, against the W^rd^^ and a^^ his men, who had
like, several times, to have murder^d M^. Lilburn.

Seventhly, his Answer to the nine Arguments of T. B. which la^es l^ad enoug^
upon the old and new Clergy, the rooters up of Kingdoms and States.

And since the Parliament.

First, His Epistle to Mr. Pryn, which both gauls him, and the Assembly, the
thunderbolt of England.

Secondly, His Reasons against Mr. Pryn, delivered at the Committee of
Examinations.

Thirdly, His Epistle wrote when he was in the custody of the Sergeant at
Arms, of the House of Commons, which touches not a little the corruptnesse
acted in that House.

Fourthly, His Answer to Mr. Pryn, in ten sheets of Paper, called INNOCENCE
AND TRVTH JVSTIFIED, a notable and unanswerable piece.

Fifthly, His Epistle to Judge Reeves, called, THE JUST MAN'S JUSTIFICATION.

Fifthly, His PROTESTATION AGAINST THE LORDS, AND APPEAL TO THE HOUSE OF
COMMONS.

Seventhly, His EPISTLE to the Keeper of Newgate, dated from his Cock-loft in
the Presse-yard of Newgate, the 23. of June, 1646.

The next Books that I have lately seen against L. C. Lilburn, are two railing
ones, made by one S. Shepherd, a fellow as full of simplicity ^s malice; In
both whose Books, there is not on^ Argument, or one sound reason, to disprove,
what he pretends to confure. The first of his Books, is called, The Famers
famed, or an answer to three things written (it seems) by some of Mr. Lilburns
friends, called, First, THE JUST MAN IN BONDS. The second, A PEARL IN A
DVNGHILL. The third, A REMONSTRANCE OF MANY THOUSAND CITIZENS, and other
Freeborn People of England, to their own House of Commons, etc. The second of
Shepherds, is called, The false Alarm; or, an Answer to an Alarm, To the
House of Lords. The fourth Pamplet I find against L. C. Lilburn, is called
Plain ^nglish, which last, only gives him two wipes, in his 4. and 12. pages.

Therefore, in regard that the Author of the City Remonstrance Remonstrated,
has put P^n to Paper, to answer part of Mr. Bellamies Book, but has not
meddled with any thing of that which does concern Lieut. Col. Lilburn.

And secondly, Forasmuch, as none that is yet visible have meddled with any of
the other.

And thirdly, In regard that the man is full of Heroicalnesse, and a zealous
lover of his Country, to whom all the honest freemen of England, are
extraordinarily obliged, for his constant, courageous, and faithful standing,
for their just liberties, that both God, Nature and the Law of the Land gives
them.

And ^astly, inregard that by a la^e published Book, called, LIBERTY VINDICATED
AGAINST SLAVERY, I understand of the Lieutenant of the Towers base, unworthy,
illegal, and strict dealing with him, as in many other things, so in keepi^g
him from Pen and Ink; by means of which, he is unabl^ to speak pub^ikely for
himself, which is a sad, barbarous, base, and inhumane case. That a man should
be so illegally dealt with, as he is, and abused in print, and his good name
endeavored Cum privi^egio, to be taken away by every Rascal, and yet the poor
man not suffered to speak a word for himself. Oh! horrible and monstrous age,
that dare without remorse main^am such horribl^ impiety, and injustice: Surel^,
I may well say of them, with the Prop^^ Isa. Isa 5. 20, 23 24, Woe unto them
that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light
for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, which justify
the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous foom
him. Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the
chafe; so their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as
dust; because they have cast away the Law of Jehovah of Hosts, and despised the
Word of the holy One of Israel: For he that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just; even they both are an abomination to Jehovah, Prove. 17. 15.

In consideration of all which, together with many more things I shall
endeavor (according to that insight I have) in Mr. Lilburnes behalf, to make a
little more work, for his enemies, the Lords, and their Associates; But this
(as a fair adversary) I shall advise them, either to get stouter Champions
that can handle their weapons better then those that have yet appeared, or else
their cause will utterly be lost.

I shall not now undertake to answer the particulars in the forementioned
Books, but leave that to another Pen, and shall give a home provocation, to
the best and ablest Lord in England, or the choicest Champion they have, to
produce some sound arguments to maintain their jurisdiction, or else their two
stools (called Usurpation and custom) upon which they sit, will let them fall
to the ground.

And the method that I shall observe, shall be this:

First, I will prove, that if it were granted, that the Lords were a (...), and
had a judicatiue power over the Commons, yet (...) of the Lords dealing with
him is illegal and unjust.

S^co^^ly* I will prove that (...) the Lords were a Jvdicature, yet they (...).

T^^^^* I will give some reasons to manifest, that they are no Judica^^ (...).

^^u^^^ly, That they by Law and Right, are no Lawmakers.

Fifthly, That by Law and Right, it lies not in the power of tho King ^^r the
H^use of (...), to deligate the legislative power, eith^r to the Lords (...),
or ^^^^^yned, nor to any other persons (...).

Now for the proof of these; (...) au^h^ri^y I shall make use o^, sh^l^, ^^st,
be d^r^v^d ^r^m Scripture.

S^co^dly, from the (...) and streng^h of sound reason.

T^irdly, from he declared St^t^te-Law of the Kingdom.

Fourthly, from t^is (...) (...) Declarations.

Fifthly, a^^ ^astly, (...) Histories of England, licenced by public Authority.

And that I may not raise a P^b^i^k, with ^ut laying a good Foundation, I (...)
set down (...) strong and undeniable position, which I fi^^ a^ a P^st-scrip^
(...) latter end of (...) ^ilburns princed Protestation against the Lords;
which is ^^us:

GOD, the abs^lu^e S^v^raig^e Lord and King, of all things in heaven and (...),
(...) and (...) all cause^, who is (...), g^v^r^ed, and l^m^itted by no rules,
but does all things (...) w^ll and unlimitted good (...) world, and all things
therein, for his ow^ gl^ry, and (...) by (...) own will and ple^su^e, (...) man
(his mere (...)) the (...)* (under himself) over ^l. the rest^^ his ^reatur^^,
G 1. 1. 26, 28. 29. and en^ued (...) with a^ation^ll ^oul^, or (...), a (...)
creat^d him after his ow^ image, Ge^. 1. 26. 7 ^^ 9 ^^ the first of which was
Adam, a mal^, or man (...) of the ^ust or ^lay, out of whese side was taken a
^^b, w^^ch (...) S^veraig^e (...) mighty erea^^^g power of God, was (...), or
w^m^^, called ^ue, which two are the earthly, original ^ou^atin, as begetter*
and bringer^ forth o^ all and every particular and individual man, and woman,
that ever breathed in the world since, who ar^, and were, b^ nature a^l alike
in power, dignity, authority, and majesty, none of them ^aving any ^uthority,
dominion, or magist r^al power, one over, or above another, but by insti^ution,
or ^oration, that is to say, by (...) u^^il agreement or consent given,
deriv^d, or assu^^d by mutual (...), and agreement, for the goo^, b^nefit, and
c^mfort each o^ other, and not for the mis^hie^e hurt, or iamage of a^y, it
being (...) irration^ll, si^^ull, wicked and unjust for (...) man, o^ men
whatsoever, to part^^t^^ so much of their power, a shall ^nable any of their
Parliament men, Comm^ssioners, T^ust^es, D^puties, Viceroyes, Ministers,
Officers, and serv^nts, to destroy and u^doe them therewith: And un^^turall,
i^ration (...), wicked, u^just, divillish and tyra^nicall it is for any man
wh^^soever, pi^i^uell o^ temp^r^ll, C^ergy-men or L^y-men, to ^p^ropria^e an
^assume unto himself, a power, ^uthority (...), govern, or reign over any
sort o^ men (...) wo^ld, without their f^^e consent, and whosoever does it,
whether Clergy-m^n, or ^^y other whatsoever, do thereby as much as in them
lies, in leav^ur to appropriate and assume unto themselves the Office and
Sovereignty of GOD, (who alone does, and is to rule by his ^ill and pleasure)
and to b^like their Creator (...) was (...) of the d^vel^, who not being
content with their first st^tion, but would be like GOD; ^or which si^ they
were thrown down into H^ll, reserved in everl^sting c^atnes, under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day, Jude -- verse. 6. And Adams fin
it was w^^ch brought the curse upon him and all his Poster^cy; that he was not
content with the st^tion and condition that God crea^ed him in; but did aso^re
unto a b^tter, and more excellent (namely to belike his Creator) which proved
his ruin, yea, and indeed h^d been the eve^l^sting rain^ and destruction of
him and all his, had not GOD been the more merci^ull unto him in the promised
Messiah. Genesis Chap. 3.

Now for the government of England; It has been by custom principally and for
the most part by the tyrannical usurpation of a King, and therefore it will be
requisi^e to search in^o the Scripture, and see, whether ever GOD
approbationally inst^tuted it, or only permissively suffered it to be, as he
does all the other evils and wickedness in the world, and for the better
understanding of this, It is requisite, to remember that we find in Scripture,
That GOD was not only Isreal's husband, and did perform all the offices of a
loving husband in his sweet and cordial embracements of her, and loving
dispensations to her, but also he was her KING himself, to ^aign and rule over
her, and to protect and defend her, and being the Lord Almighty, and knowing
all things past, present and to come, knew well that Israel would be forgetful
of all his kindness; and though he had chosen them out of all the world in a
special manner to be his peculiar ones; yet they would forsake him, and desire
to be like the World; And Moses declares thus much of them after they had
enjoyed the good things of God in abundance: But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked:
Thou art waxed fat, t^ou ar^ grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then
he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation,
Deuteronomy. 32. 15.

And therefore they knowing that when he possessed the Land of Canaan, they
would reject him, and desire a King (like all the rest of ^he Heathens, and
Pagans) to reign over them: Yet they being dear unto him, he would not wholly
reject them, but gave them a Law for the choosing of a King, and his behavior,
which we find in Deu^. 17. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, in these words: When
thou art ^ome into the Lan^, w^^ch Jehovah thy God gives thee, and shall
possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall say, I will set a King over me,
like as all the Nations that a^e about me. Thou sh^lt in any wise set him King
over thee, whom Jehovah thy God shall choose, one from among thy Brethren shall
thou set King over thee: Thou may not set a stranger over thee, which is not
thy brother: But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people
to retu^n to Egypt, (that is to bondage or slavery;) to the end, that he should
multiply horses: Fo^asmuch, as Jehovah has said unt^ y^u, Ye shall henceforth
return no more that way, (that is to say, ^ shall be no m^re slaves.) Neither
shall he multiply ^iv^s to himself, that his heart turn not away; neither shall
^^ g^e^tly multiply to himself silver and Gold. And it shall be when he sits
upon the ^^hrone of his King^om, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in
a Book, on: of that which is before the Priests, the Levites. And it shall be
with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his lif^, that he may
learn to fear Jehovah his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and th^se
Statutes, and do them; That his heart be not listed up above his Brethren, and
that he turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right hand, or to the
left; to the end, that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his
children in the midst of Israel. So that to me it is very clear, that all
Government whatsoever ought to be by mutual consent and agreement; and that no
Governor, Officer, King, or Magistrate, ought to be betrusted with such a
Power, ^s inables him when he pleases, to destroy those that trust him; And
wickedness [in the highest] it is for any King, etc. to reign and govern by ^is
Prerogative; that is to say, by his will and pleasure, and as great wickedness
it is for any sort of men, to suf^^r him so to do. For the proof of this, I
lay down my Argumen^ thus, and we will apply it to the King of England in
particular.

He that is not GOD but a mere man, cannot make his will, a rule, and law, unto
himself and others.

But Charles Stewart, (alias Charles Rex.) is not God but a mere man.

Ergo, he cannot make his Will a rule and Law unto himself or to the people,
of England:

Secondly, He that by contract and agreement receives a Crown or Kingdom; is
bound to that contract and agreement the violating of which, absolves and
d^singages those, (that made it) from him,

But King Charles received His Crown and Kingdom by a contract, and
agreement, and has broken His contract and agreement.

Ergo. etc.

Now for the clearing of the first proposition, it is confessed by all that are
not mere Athists, That GOD alone rules, and governs by his Will, and that
therefore things are legal, just, and good: Because GOD wills them to be so.
And therefore all men whatsoever must, and ought to be ruled by the Law of GOD,
which in a great part is engraven in Nature, and demonstrated by Reason: As for
instance, It is an instinct in Nature, that there is a GOD, Romans 1. or a mighty
incomprehensible power. (And therefore it is rational, that we should not make
Gods unto our selves,) and this is the pith of the first Commandment. Nature
telling me, There is a God. And therefore secondly, its rational he only
should be worshipped, served, and odored, and that is the marrow of the second
Commandment. And in the third place, seeing nature tells me there is a GOD,
reason d^ct^^^s unto me, that I should speak reverently and honorably of him;
And this is the sum^e of the third Commandment. Fou^thly Nature dictating to
me, there is a GOD. It is rationa^l I should ^et some time apart to do him
homage and service;

And seeing the in^^^^ct of Nature causes me to look upon him as a Sovereign
over me, ^s but rational ha^ he should appoint a Law unto me, for the matter
manner, and time of his worship and service; and this is the substance of the
fourth Commandment.

Again, seeing nature teaches me to def^^d my self, and preserve my life;
Reason tells me in the (...), (...) it is but just that I should not do that
unto another, which I would not have another do to me; but that in the
affirmative, I should do as I would be done unto; And this is the marrow of the
whole second Table of Gods Law, from whence, all Laws amongst men ought to
have their derivation: And therefore, because by nature no man is GOD, or
Sovereign, one over another; Reason tells me, I ought not to have a law imposed
upon me, without my con^^nt; the doing of which is merely tyrannical,
Antichristian, and Di^bolicall, Romans 13. Yea Reason tells me in this that no
Sovereignty can justly be exercised, nor no Law rightfully imposed, but what is
given by common consent, in which, every individual is included; So this
proves the latter part of the Argument.

As for the minor Proposition, I think it will not be denied; for I conceive,
none that confess Christ to be come in the flesh, will be so Atheistical, as
to affirm the King to be any more then a mere man, subject to the like
infirmities with other men; See Acts 12. 22, 23. Dan. 14. 22, 25, 33. and 5.
18, 20, 23.

As touching the second Argument, the whole Current of the Scripture proves
i^, In all the Contracts betwixt GOD and his Creatures. As io^ instance:

First, with Adam, who by Gods contract (being his Sovereign) was to enjoy
Paradise, etc. upon such, and such a condition; but as soon as Adam broke the
agreement, GOD took the for^^iture, see Genesis 3. 16, 17, 24. So likewise GOD
made a contract with (...), when he gave the Law in Mount Syna (as their LORD
and KING) by the hand of Moses: But when they broke their Covenant, GOD took
the forfeiture, though he being a Sovereign LORD, and governed by nothing bu^
his own WILL, forbore long the final execution of the forfeiture: So in the
same case amongst the Sons of Men, that live in mutual society one amongst
another in nature and reason, there is none above, or over another, against
mutual consent and agreement, and all the particulars or individuals knit and
joined together by mu^u^ll consent and agreement, becomes a Sovereign Lord and
King, and may create or set apart, for the execution of their Laws (flowing
from their will and mind founded upon the Law of God, engraven in nature, and
demonstrated by reason) O^^icers, which we call Magistrates, and limit them by
what rules they judge convenient; always provided, they be consonant to the
Law of God, Nature, and Reason; by the ^orce of which, it is not lawful for
any man to subject himself, to be a slave. For that which is against Nature,
and the glory of the Image of GOD that he created man in, Genesis 9. 6. and so a
dishonor to himself, and to his Maker, his absolute and alone Sovereign,
cannot justly be done. But to subject to slavery, or to be a slave, is to
degenerate from his Original, and Primitive institution of a Man into the
habit of a Beast, upon whom GOD never bestowed that style of honor of being
creatures created in the Image of their Creator.

And therefore, I am absolutely of Catoes mind, to think, that no man can be an
honest man, but he that is a free man, And no man is a free man, but he that is
a just man. And for any man in the world, whatsoever he be, that shall by his
sword, or any other means thus assume unto himself, and exercise a power over
any sorts of men, after this kind against their wills and minds, is an
absolute Tyrant and Monster, not of God, or man's making, but of the Devils
lineage and offspring, (who is said to go up and down the world, seeking whom
he may devour) who ought to be abhorred of GOD, and all good men, seeing that
such Monsters, commonly called Kings (...) Monarks, assume unto themselves, the
very Sovereignty, Style, Office, and name of GOD himself, whose Sovereign
Prerogative it is, only, and alone, to rule and govern by his will. Therefore
when the Sons of men took upon them to execute in this kind, GOD raised up
Moses his Servant, to deliver those whom he took delight in, from their
tyranny, and to be an Instrument in his Name to ruin and destroy that grand
Tyrant Pharo^h, and all his Country, Exodus 3. 9, 10. and 5. 5. and 14. 5, 14,
25, 28.

As he journied toward Canaan, God by his Agents destroyed five (Usurpers or
Kings) more, at one bou^, Number. 31. 8. and more at the next bout, Number: 32. 33.
Deu: 3. 2 3. And after him, the Lord raised up Joshua, whom he filled full of
the Spirit of wisdom, Deuteronomy: 34. 9 to be his executioner upon such his
pretending Competitors, Kings (alias Tyrants.) And the first that I read of was
the King of Jericho, whom he destroyed Josh 6. 21. and 10. 28. And the next was
the King of Are, whose City and Inhabitants he utterly destroyed, and hanged
their King on a tr^e, Josh 8. 26, 28, 29 The next after them wa^ five Kings,
with whom he waged battle altogether, And when he had slain their people, he
took the five Kings, and caused his Captains and men of war to tread upon their
nec^^s. and afterward he s^ote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five
trees, Josh 10. 26. The next he destroyed was the King of Makkedah, verse. 28.
and verse. 29. he destroyed the King of Libnah, verse. 23. he destroyed the King
of Gezer; and the next he destroyed was the King of Hebron, verse. 37. And then
he utterly destroy^d the King of Debir, and his City, verse. 39. and in chap.
11. Hazer sent to abundance of his neighboring Kings, who assembled much
people together, even as the sand that is upon the Seashore, (verse. 4) to
fight against Joshua, who utterly destroyed them all verse. 12. -- 23. which in
the next C^apter he enumerates; And after Joshua, the Lord chose Judah, to be
his Executioner, ^^ his Deputy, or Viceroy, that being a name and title high
enough for any man, and the first piece of justice that Judah does, is upon
Adonibezek, who was a great and cruel King and Tyrant, and his thumbs and his
great toes he cut off, who himself confessed it, a just hand of God upon him,
himself having serv^d threescore and ten Kings in the same manner, and made
them gather their meat under his Table, Judge. 1. 6, 7. But the children of
Israel (h^ Subjects of GOD not only by Creation, but also by Contract and
Covenant) v^o^ating their Covenant with their Sovereign LORD and KING, I^ no^
driving out, and utterly destroying the people of Gods indignation (who had
robbed him of his Honor, as their Sovereign by creation in yielding subjection
to the wills and lusts of Tyrants, called their Kings, who had thereby usurped
upon the peculiar Prerogative Royal of GOD himself, and so put both Tyrants
(Kings) and Slaves (his Subjects) out of the protection of their Creato^)
wherefore they became unto them as thorns in their sides, Judge. 2. 2, 3. and
in a little time they began to rebel against their LORD, and his Laws, which
incensed his anger against them, and caused him to deliver them into the hands
of Spoylers, and to sell them into the hands of their Enemies round about,
Judge. 2. 14. And in the 9 chapter Abemilech sought the Sovereignty over the
people, and got it with the blood and slaughter of threescore and ten of his
Brethren, but GOD requit^d^^, with a wi^nesse, both on him, and all that had a
finger in furthering of his usurpation, verse. 23 24, 45, 53, 54 for afterward
the Tyrant tha^ they had set up destroyed them all for their pains, and in the
end had his scull broke to pieces with a piece of a millstone thrown from the
hand of a woman, And after many miseries sustained by the people of Israel, for
their revolt from their loyalty to GOD, their LORD and KING: Yet in their
distress, he took compassion of them, and sen^ them Samuel, a just and
righteous Judge, who judged them justly all his days.

But the people of Israel like foolish men, not being content with the
Government of their Sovereign by Judges (who ou^ of doubt took such a care of
them, that he provided the best in the world for them) would reject their Liege
Lord, and choose one of their own; nam^y, a King, that so they might be like the
Pagans and Heathens, who ive without God in the world, which Act af theirs, God
plainly declares was a rejection of him, that he should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 87. and chap. 10. 19. Bu^ withal, he desc^^beth unto them the behavior of
the King, verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 16. which 1 Samuel 8. 7. and 10. 9.
is, that he will rule and govern them by his own will [just Tyrant like] for
says Samuel, he will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself for his
Chariots, and to be his hor^em^n, and ome shall run before his Chari ts, and he
will take (by his Prerogative) your Fi^lds, and your Vineyards, and you^
Oliveyards, eve^ the hest of them, and give them to his Servants, and he will
take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men,
and your Asses, and put them to his work, etc. And says Samuel, you shall cry
out in that day, because of your King, which ye shall have chosen unto you: but
the Lord will not hear you in that day: And Samuel (in the 12. C^ap^er,) gives
them positively the reason ofi^, which was, that although GOD in all their
straights had taken compassion on them, and sent them deliveries, and at the
last, had by himself, set them free on every side; so that they dwelt sately:
Yet all this would not content them, but they would have a King to reign over
them, when (s^^h Samu^l) the lord your God was your King: therefore chap. 1^*
19. says Samuel, ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out
of all your adversities, etc. yea, and (in the 19. ver. of the 12. chap.) the
People acknowledged that they had added unto all their sins, this evil, even
to ask a King; Whereb, we may evidently p^rceive, that this office of a King,
is not in the least of Gods institution; neither is it to b^ given to any man
upon earth: Because none must rule by his will but God alone; And therefore the
Scripture says, He gave them a King in his anger, and took him away in his
wrath, Hosa 13. 11.

In the second place for the proof of the minor Proposition, which is, That
Charles R. received his Crown and Kingdom by contract and agreement, and has
broken his contract and agreement, I thus prove.

And first, for the first part of the position, History makes it clear, that
WILLIAM THE CONQVEROVR, OR TYRANT, being a Bastard, subdued this Kingdom by
force of Arms Read Speeds Chronicle, folio 413. There being slain in the
first Battle, betwixt him and the English about sixty thousand men, on the
English party, As Daniel records in his History, fol. 25. And having gained the
Country, he ruled it by his sword, as an absolute Conqueror, professing that he
was beholding to none for his Kingdom, but God and his sword, making his power
as wide as his will (just Tyrant like) giving away the Lands of their Nobles to
his Normans, laying unwonted taxes, and heavy subsidies upon the Commons,
insomuch, that many of them; to enjoy a barren liberty, forsook their fruitful
inheritance, and with their w^ves and children as out-lawes, lived in woods,
preferring that naked name of freedom, before a sufficient
maintenance possessed under the thraldom of a Conquerar, who subvert^ed their
Laws, disweaponed the Commons, prevented their night meetings, with a h^avi^
penalty, that every man at the day closing should cover his fi^e, and depart to
his rest, there by depriving them of all opportunity to consult together, how
to recover their liberties; collating Office^s all both of command and
judicature, on those who were his, (...) made, says Daniel, page 46. his
domination such as he^ would have it; For whereas the causes of the Kingdom
were before determined in every Shire, And by a Law of King Edward Seg^ier, all
matters in question should, upon special penalty, without further deferment,
be finally decid^d in the Gemote, or Conv^^^ions held monthly in every
Hundred: Now he ordained* That four times in the year for certain days, the
same business should be determ^ned, in such place as he would appoint, where
he constituted Judges, to (...) to that purpose, and others from whom as from
the bosom^ of ^he Prince all litig^tors should have justice. And to make them
^s miserable, as slav^s could be made, He ordered that the Laws should be
practiced in French, A^ P^itions, and businesses of C^urt ^n French, that so
the poor miserable people might be gulled, and cheated, undone and destroyed;
not only at his will and pleasure, but also at the will and pleasure of his
under Tyrants and Officers; For to speak in the words of Martin, in his
History, page 4 He enacted and established strict and severe Laws, and
published them in his own language; by means whereof, many (who were of great
estate, and of much worth) through ignorance did transgress^ and their sm^llest
offenses were great enough to entitle the CONQVEROR to their lands, to the
lands and riches which they did possess; All which ke seized on, and took from
them without remorse. And in page 5. he declares, hat he erected sundry Courts,
for the administra^i^n^ his ^ew Laws, and of Justice, and least his Judges
should bear to^ great a sway by reason of his absence; he caused them all to
follow his Court, upon all removes, Whereby he not only curbed their
disp^si^ions, which i^cited them to be great, but also tired out the English
N^tion with extraordinary troubles, and excessive charges, in the prosecution
of Suites in Law.

From all which relations we may observe;

First, from how wicked, bloody, trivial, base, and tyrannical a Fountain our
gracious Sovereigns, and most excellent Majesty's of England have sprung;
namely, from the Spring of a Bastard, of poor condition, by the Mothers side,
and from the p^rnitious springs of Robbery, Pyracie, violence, and Murder, etc.
Howsoever, fabulous Writers, striv^ (as Daniel says) to abuse the credulity of
after Ages, with Heroical, or mircaulous beginnings, that surely if it be
rightly considered, there will none dote upon those kind of Monsters, Kings;
bu^ Knaves, Fools, Tyrants, or Monopolizers, or unjust wretched persons, that
must of necessity have their Prerogative to rule over all their wickednesses.

Secondly, Observe from hence, from what a pure Fountain our inslaving Laws,
Judges, and Practices in Westminster Hall, had their original; namely, from
the will of a Conqueror and Tyrant, for I find no mention in History of such
Judges, Westminster Hall Courts, and such French u^godly proceedings as these,
until his days, the burden of which, in many particulars to this day, lies
upon us.

But in the 21. of this Tyrants reign, After that the captivated Natives had
made many struglings for their liberties. and he having always suppressed
them, and made himself absolute, He began (says Daniel, fol. 43.) to govern
all by the customs of Normandy; whereupon the agrieved Lords, and sad People
of England tender their humble Petition, beseeching him in regard of his Oath
made at his Coronation; and by the soul of St. Edward, from whom he had the
Crown and Kingdom, under whose Laws they were born and bred, that he would
not add that misery, to deliver them up to be judged by a strange Law wh^^h
they underst^^d no^. And (says he) so earnestly they w^ought, that he was
pleased to confirm that by his Charter, which he had twice ^ore-prom^^d by ^is
Oath. And gave commandment unto his I^stitiaries to see those Laws of St.
Edward to be invi^lably observed through u^ the Kingdom. And yet
notwithstanding this co^firmatio^, (...) the C^^r^ers afterward granted by
Henry the secon^, and King John, to the same effect; There followed a great
Innovation b^th in Laws and Government in England; so that this seems rather
to h^ve been done to acquit the people, with a show of the confi^mation of
their ancient Customs and liberties, then that they enjoyed them inessect: For
whereas before, those Laws they had, were written in their tongue i^telligible
unto all; Now they are translated into Latin and French. And whereas the
Causes of the Kingdom were before determined in every Shire, And by a Law of
King Edward s^nior, all matters in question should upon special penalty,
w^tk^ut ^urther deferment, be finally decided in their Gemote or Conventions
held monthly in every Hundred (A MOST GALLAN^ LAW.) But he ^et up his ^udges
four times a year, where he thought good to he^^ their Causes; Again, before
his Conquest, the inheritances descended not alone, but (after the Germane
manner, equally divided to all the children which he also altered; And after
this King (alias, Tyrant) had a cruel and troublesome reign, his own Son
Robert rebelling against him (yea, says Speed, fol. 430.) all things
degenerated so (in his cruel days) that t^me and domestick^ fowls, as Hens,
Geese, Peacocks, and the like, fled into the Forests and Woods, and became
very wild in imitation of men. But when he was dead, his Favorites would not
spend their pains to bury him, and scarce could there be a grave procured to
lay him in; See Speed, fol. 434. and Daniel, fol. 50. and Martin, fol. 8.

WILLIAM THE SECOND, to cheat and cosen his eldest brother Robert, of the
Crown, granted relaxation of tribute with other releevements of their
dolencies, and restored them to the former freedom of hunting in all his Woods
and Forests, Daniel fol. 53. And this was all worth the mentioning, which they
got in his days.

And then comes his brother, Henry the first, to the Crown, and he also
stepping in before Robert the eldest brother, and the first actions of his
government tended all to bate the people, and sugar their subjection, as his
Predecessor upon the like imposition had done, but with more moderation and
advisednesse; for he not only pleases them in their releevement, but in their
passion, by punishing the chief Ministers of their exactions, and expelling
from his Courtall dissolute persons, and eased the people of their Impositions,
and restored them to their lights in in the night, etc. but having got his ends
effected, just tyrantlike, he stands upon his Prerogative, that is, his will
and lust; but being full of turmoiles, as all such men are, his Son the young
Prince, the only hope of all the Norman race was at Sea, (with many more great
ones) drowned, after which, he is said never to have been seen to laugh, and
having (besides this great loss) many troubles abroad, and being desirous to
settle the Kingdom upon his daughter Maud the Empress, then the wife of
Coffery Plantaginet, in the 15. year of his reign he begins to call a
Parliament, being the first after the Conquest: for that (says Dan. fol. 66.)
he would not wrest any thing by an imperial power from the Kingdom (which
might breed Ulcers of dangerous nature) he took a course to obtain their free
consents, to observe his occasion in their general Assemblies of the three
Estates of the Land, which he convocated at Salisbury, and yet notwithstanding
by his prerogative, resumed the liberty of hunting in his Forests, which took
up much fair ground in England, and he laid great penalties upon those that
should kill his Dear. But in this Henry the first, ended the Norman race, till
Henry the second: For although Henry the first had in Parliament caused the
Lords of this Land, to swear to his Daughter Maud and her Heirs, to
acknowledge them as the right Inheritors of the Crown: Yet the State elected,
and invested in the Crown of England (within 30. days aftter the death of
Henry) Stephen Earl of Bolloign, and Montague Son of Stephen, Earl of Blois,
having no title at all to the Crown, but by mere election was advanced to it,
The Choosers being induced to make choice of him, having an opinion, that by
preferring one, whose title was least, it would make his obligation the more to
them, and so, they might stand better secured of their liberties, then under
such a one as might presume of a hereditary succession.

And being crowned, and in possession of his Kingdom, he assembleth a
Parliament at Oxford, wherein he restored to the Clergy all their former
liberties, and freed the Laity from their tributes, exactions, or whatsoever
grievances oppressed them, confirming the same by his Charter, which faithfully
to observe, he took a public Oath before all the Assembly, where likewise the
BBs. swore fealty to him, but with this condition (says Daniel, folio 69.) SO
LONG AS HE OBSERVED THE TENOVR OF THIS CHARTER, And Speed in his Chronicle,
fol. 468. says, that the Lay-Barons made use also of this polici^, (which I
say is justice and honesty) as appears by Robert Earl of Gloucester, who swore
to be true Liege-man to the King, AS LONG AS THE KING WOULD PRESERVE TO HIM HIS
DIGNITIES, AND KEEP ALL COVENANTS: But little quiet the Kingdom had; for
rebellions and troubles daily arose by the friends of Maud the Empress, who
came into England, and his Associates pitching a field with him, where he
fought most stoutly, but being there taken, he was sent prisoner to Bristell.
And after this Victory thus obtained, (says Martin, fol. 29.) The Empress,
with many honorable tryumphs and solemnities was received into the Cities of
Circester, Oxford, Winchester, and London; but the Londoners desiring the
restitution of King Edwards Laws, which she refused, which proved her ruin,
and the restitution of King Stephen out of prison, and to the Crown again; and
after some fresh bouts, betwixt King Stephen, and Duke Henry (Mauds eldest Son)
a Peace was concluded betwixt them in a Parliament at Westminster, and that
Duke Henry should enjoy the Crown after King Stephen. At the receiving of
which, he took the usual oath, and being like to have much work in France,
etc. being held in thereby from all exorbitant courses, he was therefore Wary
to observe at first, all means to get, and retain the love and good opinion of
this Kingdom, by a regular and easy government, and at Waldingford, in
Parliament (says Daniel, fol. 80.) made an act, that both served his own turn,
and much eased the stomachs of his people, which was the expulsion of
strangers, wherewith the Land was much pestered, but afterward was more with
Becket the traytorly Archbishop of Canterbury, And after him succeeds his Son
Richard the first. (At the beginning of this man's Reign, a miserable massacre
was of the Jews in this Kingdom,) who went to the holy wars, and was taken
prisone, by the Emperor. as he came home, of whom (Daniel says, fol. 126.)
that) he reigned 9 years, and 9 months, Wherein he exacted, and consumed more
of this Kingdom, then all his Predecessors from the Norman had done before
him, and yet less deserved then any. His brother Duke John being then beyond
Seas with his Army, was by the then Archbishop of Canterburies means
endeavored to be made King, Who undertook for him that he should restore unto
them their Rights, and govern the Kingdom as he ought with moderation, and was
thereupon, (after taking three oaths, which were to love holy Church, and
preserve it from all Oppressors, The Kings Oath.
to govern the State in justice, and abolish bad Laws, not to assume this
Royal honor, but with full purpose to rerform: that he had sworn. Speed 534.)
crowned King; And because the title was doubtful, in regard of Arthur the
Posthumus Son of Geffery. Duke of Britain, King John's eldest brother (Speed
fol. 532) he receives the Crown and Kingdom by way of election, Daniel fol.
127. the Archbishop that crowned him, in his Oration professing, before the
whole Assembly of the State, That by all reason, Divine and Humane, none ought
to succeed in the Kingdom, but who should be for the worthiness of his
virtues, universally chosen by the State, as was this man. And yet
notwithstanding all this, he assumed power by his will and prerogative, to
impose three shillings upon every ploughland, and also exacted great Fines of
Offenders in his Forests. And afterward summons the Farles and Barons of
England to be presently ready with Horse and Arms to pass the Seas with him.
But they holding a conference together at Lecester, by a general consent send
him word, That unless he would render them their rights and liberties, they
would not attend him out of the Kingdom. Which put him into a mighty rage; but
yet he went into France, and there took his Nephew Arthur prisoner, and put him
to death, by reason of which the Nobility of Britaigne, Anjou and Poictou, took
Arms against him, and summon him to answer at the Court of Justice of the King
of France, to whom they appeal. Which he refusing, is condemn^d to lose the
Duchy of Normandy, (which his Ancestors had held 300. years) and all other
his Provinces in France, which he was accordingly the next year deposed of.

And in this disastrous estate (^aith Daniel fol. 130.) he returns into
England, and charges the Earls and Barons with the reproaches of his l^sses in
France; and fines them (by his Prerogative) to pay the seventh part of all
their goods for refusing his aid. And after this going over into France to
wras^le another fall, was forced to a peace for two years, and returns into
England for more supplies; where, by his will, just, and prerogative, he lays
an imposition of the thirteenth part of all movables, and other goods, both of
the Clergy and Laity; who now (says Daniel) seeing their substances consume,
and likely ever to be made liabl^ to the Kings desperate courses, began to cast
about for the recovery of their ancient immunities, which upon their former
sufferance had been usurped by their late Kings. And hence grew the beginning
of a miserable breach between the King and his people, Which (says he) folio
131.) cost more ado, and more Noble blood, then all the wars for reign had
done since the Conquest: For this contention ceased not, though it often had
fair intermissions, till the GREAT CHARTER, made to keep the Beam right
betwixt SOVEREIGNTY and SVBJECTION, first obtained of this King JOHN, in his
15. and 16. years of his years of his reign; and after of his son Henry
the 3. in the 3. 8. 21. 36. 42. years of his reign (though observed truly of
neither) was in the maturity of a judicial Prince, Edward the first, freely
ratified, Anno regni 27. 28. But I am confident, that whosoever seriously and
impartially reads over the lives of King John, and his son Henry the third,
will judge them Monsters rather then men, Roaring Lions, Ravening Wolves, and
salvadge Boares (studying how to destroy and ruin the people) rather then
Magistrates to govern the people with justice and equity: For, as for King
John; he made nothing to take his Oath, and immediately to break it (the common
practice of Kings) to grant Charters and Freedoms, and when his turn was
Consider, compare, and conclude.
served, to annihilate them again; and thereby, and by his tyrannical
oppressions, to embroyle the Kingdom in Wars, Blood, and all kind of
miseries. In selling and basely delivering up the Kingdom (that was none of
his own, but the peoples) as was decreed in the next Parliament (Speed fol.
565. by laying down his CROWN, Scepter, Mantle, Sword and Ring, the Ensigns of
his Royalty, at the feet of Randulphus the Popes Agent, delivering up
therewithal the Kingdom of England to the Pope. And hearing of the death of
Geffery Fitz Peter, one of the Patrons of the people, rejoiced much, and swore
by the Feet of God, That now at length he was King and Lord of England, having
a fre^r power to untie himself of those knots which his Oath had made to this
great man against his will, and to break all the Bonds of the late concluded
peace with the people; unto which he repented to have ever condescended. And
(as Daniel folio 140. says) to show the desperate malice this King (and
Tyrant) (who rather then not to have an absolute domination over his people to
do what he listed, would be any thing himself under any other, that would but
support him in his violences.) There is recorded an Embassage (the most and
impious that ^ver was sent by any Christian Prince) unto Maramumalim the Mo^^^,
entitled, The great King of Africa, etc. Wherein he offered to render unto him
his Kingdom, and to hold the same by tribu^^ from him, as his Sovereign Lord:
to forgo the Christian faith (which he held va^^) and receive that of Mahomet.
But leaving him and his people together by the cares (striving with him for
their ^^^r^es and freedoms (a^ justly they might) which at last brought in the
French amongst them to the almost utter ruin and destruction of the whole
Kingdom, and at last he was poisoned by a Monk.

It was this King (or Tyrant) that enabled the Citizens of London to make their
Annual choice of a Mayor and two Seriffes.

Martaine 59. The Kingdom being all in broils by the French, who were called
in to the aid of the Barons against him; and having got footing; plot and
endeavor utterly to extinguish the English Nation. The States at Gl^cester in a
great Assembly, caused Henry the third his son, to be Crowned, who walked in
his Fathers steps in subverting the peoples Liberties and Freedoms, who had so
freely chosen him, and expelled the French: yet was he so led and swayed by
evil Counselors, putting out the Natives out of all the chief places of the
Kingdom, and preferred strangers only in their places. Which doings made many
of the Nobility (says Daniel folio 154.) combine themselves for the defense of
the public according to the law of Nature and Reason) and boldly do show the
King his error, and ill-advised course in suffering strangers about him, to the
disgrace and oppression of his natural liege people, contrary to their Laws
and Liberties; and that unless he would reform this excess whereby his Crown
and Kingdom was in imminent danger, they would withdraw themselves from his
Council. Hereupon the King suddenly sends over for whole Legions of
Poictonions, and withal summons a Parliament at Oxford, whither the Lords
refuse to come. And after this, the Lords were summonedto a Parliament at
Westminster, whither likewise they refused to come, unless the King would
remove the Bishop of Winchester, and the Poictonians from the Court: otherwise
by the common Counsel of the Kingdom, they send him express word, They would
expel him and his evil Counselors out of the land, and deal for the
creation of a new King. Fifty and six years this King reigned in a manner in
his Fathers steps: for many a bloody battle was fought betwixt him and his
people for their Liberties and Freedoms, and his son Prince Edward traveled
to the wars in Africa: The State after his Fathers death in his absence
assembles at the New Temple, and Proclaim him, King. And having been six years
absent, in the the third year of his reign comes home, and being full of
action in wars, occasioned many and great Levies of money from his people;
yet the most of them was given by common consent in Parliament; and having been
three years out absent of the Kingdom, he comes home in the 16. year of his
reign. And general complaints being made unto him of ill administration of
justice in his absence, And that his Judges like so many Jews, had eaten his
people to the bones, and ruinated them with delays in their suits, and enriched
themselves with wicked corruption (too common a practice amongst that
generation) he put all those from their Offices who were found guilty (and
those were almost all) and punished them otherwise in a grievous manner, being
first in open Parliament convicted. See Speed folio 635. And, says Daniel,
folio 189. The fines which these wicked corrupt Judges brought into the Kings
Coffers, were above one hundred thousand marks; which at the rate (as money
goes now) amounts to above three hundred thousand Marks; by means of which he
filled his empty coffers, which was no small cause that made him fall upon
them. In the mean time these were true branches of so corrupt a root as they
flowed from, namely the Norman Tyrant. And in the 25. year of his reign he
calls a Parliament, without admission of any Churchman: he requires certain
of the great Lords to go into the wars of Gascoyne; but they all making
their excuses every man for himself: The King in great anger threatened that
they should either go, or he would give their Lands to those that should.

Whereupon Humphry Bohun, Earl of Hereford, High Constable, and Roger Bigod,
Earl of Norfolk, Marshall of England, made their Declaration, That if the King
went in person, they would attend him, otherwise not. Which answer more
offends. And being urged again, the Earl Marshall protested, He would
willingly go thither with the King, and march before him, in the Vantguard, as
by his right of inheritance he ought to do. But the King told him plainly, he
should go with any other, although himself went not in person. I am not so
bound (said the Earl) neither will I take that journey without you. The King
swore by God, Sir Earl you shall go or hang. And I swear by the same oath, I
will neither go nor hang (said the Earl). And so without leave departed.

Shortly after the two Earls assembled many Noblemen, and others their
friends, to the number of thirty Baronets; so that they were fifteen hundred
men at Arms, well appointed, and stood upon their own guard: The King having at
that time many Irons in the fire of very great consequence, judged it not fit
to meddle with them, but prepares to go beyond the Seas, and oppose the King of
France; and being ready to take ship, the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and
Barons, and the Commons send him in a Roll of the general grievances of his
Subjects, concerning his Taxes, Subsidies, and other Impositions, with his
seeking to force their services by unlawful courses, etc. The King sends
answer, that he could not alter any thing without the advice of his Council,
which were not now with them; and therefore required them, seeing they would
not attend him in this journey (which they absolutely refused to do, though he
went in person, unless he had gone into Fra^c^ or Scotland) that they would
yet do nothing in his absence prejudici^^l to the peace of the Kingdom. And
that upon his return, he would set all things in good order as should be fit.

And although he sailed away with 500. sail of ships, and 18000. men at Arms,
yet he was crossed in his undertakings, which forced him (as Daniel says) to
send over for^more supply of treasure, and gave order for a Parliament to be
held at York by the Prince, and such as had the managing of the State in his
absence; wherein, for that he would not be disappointed, he condescends to all
such Articles as were demanded concerning the Great Charter, promising from
thence-forth never to charge his Subjects, otherwise then by their consents in
Parliament, etc. which at large you may read in the Book of Statutes, for
which, the Commons of the Realm granted him the ninth penny: A^ so deer a rate
were they forced to buy their own Rights, at the hands of him that was their
servant, and had received his Crown and Dignity from them, and for them: But
the People of England not being content with the confirmation of their
Liberties, by his Deputies, press him (at a Pa^l. at Westminster) the next
year to the confirmation of their Charters, he pressing hard to have the
Clause, Salvo Jure Coroae nostrae put in, but the People would not endure it
should be so: Yet with much ado he confirms them, according to their mind,
and that neither he, nor his heirs, shall procure, or do any thing whereby the
Liberties of the Great Charter contained, shall be infringed or broken; and if
any thing be procured, by any person, contrary to the premises, i^ shall be
held of no force, nor effect, And this c^st them dear, as I said before.

So that here you have a true relation, of the begetting, the conception, and
birth of Magna Charta, The English-Mans Inheritance, And how much blood and
money it cost our forefathers before they could wring it out of the hands of
their tyrannical Kings; and yet alas, in my judgment, it falls far short of
Edward the Confessors Laws, (for the ease, good, and quiet of the people) which
the Conqueror robbed England of, for the Norman practices yet in
Westminster Hall, by reason of their tediousness, ambiguities, uncertainties,
the entries in Latin, which is not our own Tongue, their forcing men to plead
by Lawyers, and no^ permitting themselves to plead their own causes, their
compelling of persons to come from all places of the Kingdom, to seek for
Justice at Westminster, is such an Iron Norman yoke with fangs and teeth in it
(as Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn in his late printed Epistle to Judge Reeves
calls it,) That if we werefree in every particular else, that our hearts can
think of; yet (as the same Author says) were we slaves, by this alone, the
burden of which singly will pie^ce, and gaul our shoulders, and make us bow,
and stoop even down to the ground, ready to be made a prey, not only by great
men, but even by every cunning sharking knave.

Oh, therefore that our Honorable Parliament, according to their late
Declaration, would for ever annihilate this Norman innovation, and reduce us
back to that part of the ancient frame of government in this Kingdom before
the Conquerors days, That we may have all cases and differences decided in the
County or Hundred where they are committed, or do arise, without any appeal
but to a Parliament, And that they may monthly be judged by twelve men, of
free, and honest condition, chosen by themselves, with their grave (or chief)
Officer amongst them, and that they may swear to judge every man's cause aright,
without fear, favor, or affection, upon a severe and strict penalty of those
that shall do unjustly: And then farewell jangling Lawyers, the
wildfire-destroyers, and bane of all just, rational, and right-governed
Commonwealths, And for the facilitating of this work, and the prevention of
frauds, I shall only make use of Mr. John Cooks words (a Lawyer in
Grays-Inne) in the 66. page of his late published Book, called, A Vindication
of the Professors, and Profession of the Law, where he prescribes, A ready
remedy against Frauds, which is, That there might be a public office in every
County to register all Leases made for any Land in that County, and also all
conveyances whatsoever, and all charges upon the Lands, and all Bonds and
Contracts of any value; for (says he) It is a hard matter to find out
Recognizances, Judgments, Extents, and other Charges, (and too chargable for
the Subject) that so for 12. d. or some such small matter every man might know
in whom the Interest of Land remains, and what incu^brances lie upon it, and
every estate, or charge not entered there, to be void in Law. And that the
Country have the choosing of the Registers in their respective Counties onc^ a
year, upon a fixed day, and that they have plain rules and limitations made
by authority of Parliament, and severe penalties enacted for transgressing them.

But after this digression, let us return to Mag. Charta, whosoever reads i^
(which eve^^ man may at large, at the beginning of the book of Statu^es) shall
fi^d it an absolute Contract betwixt the Kings of England, and the People
thereof, which, at their Coronations ever since, they take an Oath inviolable
to observe; And we shall find in the days of ^his P^inc^, who is noted for one
of the best that we have, that Englishmen understood themselves so well, that
when the Pope endeavored to meddle in a business betwixt the Scots and the
Crown of England, there was letters sent from Lincoln at a Parliament, which
did absolutely tell the Pope, that the King their Lord should i^ no sort
undergo his Holiness judgment therein: Neither send his P^ocurators (as was
required) about that business, whereby it may seem that doub^s were made of
their Kings title, to the prej^dice of the Crown, the Royal Dignity, the
Liberties, Custom^s, and Laws of England, which by their oath and duty they
were bound to observe, and would defend with their lives. Neither would they
permit, (nor could) any usual, unlawful, and detrimental proceeding (but that
which is most observable, is in the next clause, viz.) nor suffer their King,
if he would, to do, or any way to attempt the same, Daniel fol. 199.

After the warlike King, succeeded his Son Edward the second* who was
continually at variance with his people, although never any before him was
received with greater love of the people then he (as says Daniel fol. 204.)
nor ever any that sooner le^t it. His very first actions discovered a
headstrong wilfulness that was unconcealable, regarding no other company but
the base Parasites of of the times, the head of which was Gaveston, which made
his Nobles at Westminster, when he, and his Queen was to be crowned, to
assemble together, and require him that Gaveston his darling might be removed
from out of the Court and Kingdom, otherwise they purposed to hinder his
Coronation at that time. Whereupon the King to avoid so great a disgrace,
promises on his says, to yield to what they desired in the next Parliament.
And at the next Parliament the whole Assembly humbly besought the King, to
advise and treat with his Nobles, (who then (it seems) were abundantly
honester then these are now) concerning the state of the Kingdom, for the
avoiding of iminent mischiese, likely to ensue through the neglect of
Government, and so far urged the matter, as the King consents thereunto, and
not only grants them liberty to draw into Articles what was requisite for the
King^ome, but takes his Oath to ratify whatsoever they should c^nclude.
Whereupon they elect certain choice men both of the Clergy, Nobility, and
Commons, to compose those Articles: which done, the Archbishop of Canterbury
(lately recalled from exile with the rest of his Suffragans,) solemnly
pronounced the Sentence of Excommunication (which then was a fe^ full
thunderbolt) against all such who should contradict those Articles, which were
there publicly read before the Barons, and Commons of the Realm, in the
presence of the King; Amongst which, the observation, and execution of Magnae
Charta is required, with all other ordinances necessary for the Church and
Kingdom, and that as the said King had done, all st^angers should be banished
the Court, and Kingdom, and all ill Counselors removed. That the business of
the State should be treated on, by the Council of the Clergy and the Nobles.
That the King should not begin any war, or go any way out os the Kingdom,
without the common Council of the same, Daniel fol. 205. Speed fol. 652. But
this King, for his evil government breaking his Oaths and Contracts with his
People, was therefore, by common consent in full Parliament, deposed. Which we
shall have occasion b^ and by more fully to speak of, and the Bishop of
Hereford as the mouth of those Messengers that were sent by the Parliament, the
Body of the State, told him, that the Commonwealth had in Parliament elected
his eldest Son, the Lord Edward, for King, and that he must resign his Diadem
to him, or after the refusal, suffer them to elect such a person as themselves
should judge to be most fit, and able to defend the Kingdom.

This Prince being crowned, reigned above 50. years, and has the best
commendation for Manhood and Justice of any Prince that went before him, or
that followed after him; who yet notwithstanding, though he came in by
election, and took the Oath at his Coronation, which his Father took before
him, yet he failed often in the performance of it; Of which the BBp. of
Canterbury in an Epistle written to him when he was in France, tells him home
of it, in these words, That it was the safety of Kings, and their Kingdoms, to
use grave and wise Counselors, alleging many examples, out of holy Writ, of
the slourishing happiness of such as took that course, and their infelicity
who followed the contrary. Then wills him to remember how his Father (led by
evil Council) vexed the Kingdom, putting to death, contrary to the Law of
the Land, diverse of the Nobility, and wished him to consider what happened
thereby unto him. (...), to call to mind, how himself at first, through evil
Council about (...) almost lost the hearts of his people. But afterward by
the great (...), and care of his Prelates and Nobles, his affairs were (...)
into so good order, as he recovered them, and is reputed the noblest Prince in
Christendom; But now again, at present, through the (...) Council of such as
effect their own prosit, more then his honor, o^ the welf^re of his People; he
had caused Clergymen, and others, to be ar^ested, and held in prison by undue
proceeding, without being indicted or convilled contrary to the Laws of England
(which (he says) he was ^^^nd by his Oath at his Coronation to observe, and
against Magna Charta, which whosoever shall presume to infringe, are to be by
the Prelates excommunicate, so that hereby he incurred no small detriment to
his Soul, and to the State, and his Honor, which he doubted (if he proceeded
in it) would loose both the hearts of the people, and their aid, and help,
Daniel Foli* 229. 230. For which the King sharply according to his prerogative
power reproves him; But shortly after, the King found much to do^ in the
Parliament held at London, being earnestly petitioned by the whole Assembly,
that the great Charter of Liberties, and the Charter of Forests might be duly
observed, and that whosoever of the Kings Officers in^ringed the same should
loose their place: That the high Officers of the Kingdom should as in former
times, Read Daniel, fol. 149.
be elected by Parliament; But the King stood stiff upon his prerogative, but
yet yielded that these Officers should receive an Oath in Parliament to do
justice unto all men in their Offic^s, and thereupon a Statute was made and
confirmed with the Kings Seal; both for that and many other Grants of his, to
the Subjects, which notwithstanding were, for the most part, presently after
revoked, Daniel fol. 231. (But forasmuch as) About this time (in the
Statute-Bookes at large, fol. 144. l find) was an excellent Oath made in the
18. of Edw. 3. Anno 1344. entitled, The Oath of the Justices.

I conceive it may be worth the reading, and therefore it is not unnecessary
here to ins^rt it, which thus follows:

YE shall swear that well and lawfully, ye shall serve our Lord the King, and
his People in the Office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall counsel the
King in his business, And that ye shall not counsel nor assent to any thing,
which may turn him in damage, or disherison by any manner, way, or color; And
that ye shall not know the damage, or disherison of him, whereof ye shall not
cause him to be warned by your self, or by others and that ye shall do equal
Law, and execution of right to all his Subjects rich and poor, without having
regard to any person. And that you take not, by your self, or by other,
privately nor apertly, gift nor regard of gold nor silver, nor of any other
thing, which may turn to your profit, unless it be meat or drink, and that of
small value of any man that shall have any plea, or process hanging before
you, as long as the same process shall be so hanging, nor after for the same
cause, And that ye take no Fee, as long as ye shall be Justice, nor Robes of
any man great or small, but of the King himself: And that ye give none advice
nor counsel to no man great nor small, in no case where the King is party. And
in case that any of what estate or condition they be, come before you in your
Sessions, with force and arms, or otherwise against the peace, or against the
form of the Statute thereof, made (Stat 2. E. 3. 3.) to disturb execution of
the Common Law, or to ^^^ace the people, that they may not pursue the Law; that
ye shall cause their bopies to be arrested, and put in prison: And in case they
be such, that ye cannot arrest them, that ye certify the King of their names,
and of their misprision hastily, so that he may thereof ordain a conveniable
remedy. And that ye by your self, nor by others, privily nor apertly maintain
any plea or quarrel hanging in the Kings Court, or elsewhere in the Country.
And that ye deny to no man common right, by the Kings Lett^rs, nor none other
man's, nor for none other cause: and in case any Letters come to you, contrary
to the Law, that ye do nothing by such Letters, but certify the King thereof,
and proceed to execute the Law, notwithstanding the same Letters. And that ye
shall do and procure the profit of the King and his Crown, with all things
where you may reasonably do the sam^. And in case ye be from henceforth found
in default, in any of the points aforesaid; ye shall be at the Kings will, of
Body, Lands, and Goods, thereof to be done, as shall please him; As God you
help^* and all Saints.

But now in regard we shall for brevities sake, but only touch at Richard the
s^c^nd, who for his evil government was Artic^ed against in Parliament,
Martine fol. 156, 157, 158, 159, 160. Speed fol. 742. The substance of which,
in Speeds words were: First, in the front was placed his abuse of the public
treasure, and unworthy waste of the Crown-Land, whereby he grew intolerable
grievous to the Subjects, The particular causes of the Dukes of Gloucester and
Lancaster, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Arundel, filled sundry
Articles: They charged ^im in the rest with dissimu^ation, fa^shood, ^osse of
honor abroad in the world, extortio^s, rapine, denial of Justice* rasu^es and
e^b^zelling of records, dishonorable shifts, wicked Axi^mes of S^at^, cruelty,
covetousness, subordinations, lasciviousness^, reason to the rights of the
Crown, perjuries, and bri^fly, wi^h all sorts of unkingly vices, and with
absolute tyranni^. Upon which it was concluded, That he had broken his Cont^act
made with the Kingdom, or the Oath of Empire, taken at his Coronation, and
adjudged by all the States in Parliament, That it was sufficient cause to
depose him, and then the diffinitive sentence was passed upon him. And we
shall wholly pass over Henry the 4. 5. and 6. Edward 4. and 5. Richard 3. Hen.
7. and 8. and shall come down to King Charles, and not mention the particular
miseries, blood-sheds, cruelties, treason, tyrannies, and all manner of
miseries that the freeborn people of this Kingdom underwent, in all or most
of their wicked raigns, especially in the Barons wars; In which time, the
Inhabitants of England had neither life, liberty, nor estates, that they could
call their own, there having been ten Batte^s of note fought in the Bowels of
this Kingdom, in two of their R^igns only, viz. Hen. 6. and Edw. the 4. In one
of which (...) there was 37. thousand English sl^i^, Martine fol 393, 394* ^95.

I say w^ will p^ss^ by all these, and give you the Copy of the Oath, that King
Edward 2. and K^^g Edward h^ 3. (by authority of Parliamen^) took, and which
all the Kings and Queens of England since to this day, at th^i^ Coronation
^ither took, or ought to have taken, never having (b^ au^^ori^y of Parliament)
been altered since that I could hear of, by which it will clearly appear, that
the Kings of England receive their Kingdoms co^di^io^all^; The true Copy of
which, as I find it in this Parliaments Declaration, made in reply to the Kings
Declaration, or answer ^o their Remonstrance, dated 26. May 1642. and set down
in the Book of Declarations, page 713.

SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm unto the People of
England, the Laws and Customs granted to them by ancient Kings of England,
rightful men, and devout to God, and namely the Laws and Customs and
Franch^ses granted to the Clergy, and to the People, by the glorious King
Edward to your power?

Sir, Ye keep to God, and to Holy Church, to the Clergy, and to the People
Peace, and accord wholly after your power?

Sir, Ye do, to be kept in all your Domes and Judgments, true and even
Righteousness, with Mercy and Truth.

The King shall answer. I shall do it.

Sir, Will you grant, defend, fulfill all rightful Laws and Customs, the
which the COMMONS of Your Realm shall choose, and shall strengthen and
maintain them to the Worship of GOD, after Your power.

The King shall answer, I grant, and behight.

And then the Archbishop of Canterbury at the time of the Coronation goes, or
should go, to the four sides of the Scaffold, where the King is crowned, and
declares, and relates to all the People, how that Our Lord the King had taken
the said Oath, enquiring of the same people, If they would consent to have him
their King, and Liege Lord, to obey him as their King and Liege Lord, who with
one accord consen^ed thereunto.

Now, let all the world be judge whether the Kings of England receive their
Kingdom^s by contract, yea, or no. And if they do receive them by contract, as
is already undeniably proved before; Then what becomes of that wicked and
tyrannical Maxim, avowed by King Charles (immediately after his Answer to the
Petition of Right, Book Statutes, fol. 1434.) viz. That he did owe an account
of his actions to none but GOD alone; And of that erroneous Maxim, mentioned
in Book Declaration, page 266. viz. That Kingdoms are Kings own, and that they
may do with them what they will, as if Kingdoms were for them, and not they
for their Kingdoms.

But if any man shall object and say, that King Henry the 8. with his own hands
altered this Oath; and therefore it is not the same Oath which King Charles
has taken.

To which, I a^sw^r and say, The Parliament in their Declaration g^a^^s, that
King Hen. the 8. etc. a^tered it; but they also say page 712. They do conceive
that neither he, nor any other, had power to alter it, without an Act of
Parliament. And in page 708. 709. They say, They well know what Kings have d^ne
in this point: But we know also (say ^^ey) that what they have done is no good
rule always, to interpret what they ^^ght to have done; for, that they are
bound to the observation of Laws by their Oath, is out of question, and yet
the contrary practiced by them, will appear in all ages, as often. But to put
this out of doubt, whosoever reads the Oath taken by this King, which he
himself sets down in his Declaration, (Book Declar. page 290, 291.) will find
no material difference betwixt that which he took, and that which he ought to
have taken, saving in that clause of passing New Laws: But there is enough in
that he took to prove my assertion, viz. That he received his Crown by a
Contract, which further to prove, I allege the Petition of Right, which
whosoever seriously reads with his Answer to it, shall find it to be a large
and absolute Declaration of a contracted duty betwixt him, and his people, viz.
That it was his duty to govern them by Law, and not by his Prerogative Will,
And when his first answer to their Petition did not please the Parliament, they
pressed him again, out of Right, to give a satisfactory one: Which he, out of
Duty does, saying, Let right b^ done, as is desired: So that this is a clear
demonstration, and enough to prove that there is not only a bare Contract
betwixt the King and the People, but also that he is bound by duty to grant
such Laws, as they shall rationally choose, although there were no such
Statute, as the 25. of Edward the 3. which they mention in page 268, nor no
such clauses as they speak of, page 706, 707, 714. In the Records of 1 R. 2.
Number: 44. and R. 2. Number: 34. and 40.

Again, it will clearly appear, that there is a contract betwixt the King and
his People; yea, and such a one, as ties up all his public official actions to
be according unto Law, and not according to the rule of his own Will, if we
seriously weigh but the Laws made, and past this present Parliament; but
especially that for abolishing the Star Chamber, and regulating the
Councell-Table, the Act for abolishing the high Commission Court, two Acts for
the levying and pressing Soldiers and Mariners; and an Act declaring
unlawful and void the late proceedings touching Ship Money, And an Act for
preventing vexatious proceedings, touching the order of Knighthood. And an Act
for the free bringing in, and free making of Gunpowder.

But if all this will not serve, let us a little further consider what the
Parliament says, who are the States representative of all the individuals of
the State universal of England, Book Declar. page 171. 264. 336. 508, 613.
628. 654. 655. 703. 705. 711. 724. 725. 726 728. 729, 730.

And therefore are the highest, supreamest, and greatest Court, Counncel, and
Judge of this Kingdom, page 141, 143, 197, 207, 213, 271, 272, 278, 280, 281,
303, 457, 693, 703, 704, 711, 718, 725.

And who may justly be called the legal Conservators of Englands Liberties,
281, 277, 282, 264, 496, 587, 588, 617, 693, 698.

Yea the legal and public eyes and heart of Englands Politic Body, page 213,
278, 340, 690.

Of whom a dishonorable thing ought not to be conceived of them, page 281, 654.
much lesle to be acted or done by them, page 150.

And they say page 266. That the King has not that right to the Towns and
Forts in England, which the people in general have to their estates, the Towns
being no more the Kings own, then the Kingdom is his own: And his Kingdom is
no more his own, then his people are his own; And if the King had a propriety
in all his Towns, what would become of the Subjects propriety in their houses
therein! And if he had a propriety in his Kingdom, what would become of the
Subjects propriety in their Lands throughout the Kingdom, or of their
Liberties, if his Majesty had the same right in their persons, that every
Subject has in their Lands or Goods, and what should become of all the
Subjects Interests in the Towns and Forts in the Kingdom, and in the Kingdom
it self, if his Majesty might sell them, or give them away, or dispose of them
at pleasure, as a particular man may do with his Lands and his Goods; This
erroneous Maxim being infused in^o Princes, that their Kingdoms are their
own, and that they may do with them what they will (as if their Kingdoms were
for them, and not they for their Kingdoms) is the ^oot of all the Subjects
misery, and of the invading of their just Righ^s and Liberties, whereas indeed
they are only entrusted with their Kingdoms, and with their Towns, and with
their People, and with the public Treasure of the Commonwealth, and
whatsoever is bought therewith; And by the known Law of this Kingdom the very
Jewels of the Crown are not the Kings proper Goods, but are only entrusted to
him for the use and ornament thereof.

As the Towns, Forts, Treasure, Magazine, Offices, and the People of the
Kingdom, and the whole Kingdom it self is entrusted unto him, for the good,
and safety, and best advantage thereof.

And as this Trust is for the use of the Kingdom, so ought it to be managed by
the advice of the Houses of Parliament, whom the Kingdom has trusted for that
purpose, it being their duty to see it discharged, according to the condition
and true intent thereof, and as much as in them lies, by all possible means to
hinder the contrary; and therefore say they, page 276. by the Statute of 25.
Ed. 3. It is a levying of war against the King, when it is against his Laws
and Authority, though it be not immediately against his Person, And the levying
of Force against his Personal Commands, though accompanied with his presence,
if it be not against his Laws and Authority, but in the maintenance thereof,
is no levying of war against the King, but for him; for th^re is a great
difference betwixt the King, as King, and the King, as Charles Stuart, And
therefore say the Parliament, page 279. That Treason which is against the
Kingdom, is more against the King, then that which is against his Person,
because he is King: for that very Treasor, is not Treason as it is against him
as a man, but as a man that is a King, and as he has relation to the Kingdom,
and stands as a Person entrusted with the Kingdom, discharging that Trust.

And therefore page 722. that Alexander Archbishop of York, Rob. Delleer Duke
of Ireland, Trisiilian L. chief Justice, and the rest in the time of Richard
the 2. were guilty of Treason, (and so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament, viz.
11. R. 2. 1. 2. and 1. H. 4. 3. and 4. which to this day are both in force) for
levying Forces against the Authority of Parliament, and to put to death diverse
principal members of both Houses, although they had the Kings express Command
to do it, and the promise of his presence to accompany them; which yet, for all
that, neither would, nor did save their lives, in regard, as they say, page
723. It is a known rule in Law, that the Kings illegal Commands, though
accompanied with his presence, do not excuse these that obey him; and therefore
if the Kingdom be in danger, and the King will not hearken to the Parliament in
those things that are necessary for the preservation of the peace, and safety
of the Kingdom: Shall they stand and look on, whilst the Kingdom runs to
evident ruin and destruction? No (page 726) for safety and preservation is
just in every individual or particular, page 44. 150. 207. 382. 466. 496. 637.
690. 722. much more in the Parliament, who are the great and supreme legal
Council, from whom there is no legal appeal, as is before declared.

Yea, and in their Declaration of the 19. of May, 1642. page ^ 7. they tell us,
that this Law is as old as the Kingdom, viz. That the Kingdom must not be
without a means to preserve it self, which, that it might be done without
confusion (say they) this Nation has entrusted certain hands with a power, to
provide in an orderly and regular way for the good and safety of the whole,
which power by the constitution of this Kingdom, is in his Majesty, and in his
Parliament together.

Yet since the Prince being but one person, is more subject to accidents of
nature and chance, whereby the Commonwealth may be deprived of the fruit of
that Trust which was in part reposed in him, in cases of such necessity, that
the Kingdom may not be enforced presently to return to its first principal,
and every man left to do what is aright in his own eyes, without either guide
or rule, the wisdom of this State has entrusted the Parliament with a power
to supply what shall be wanting on the part of the Prince, as is evident by
the constant custom and practice thereof, in cases of nonage, natural
disability and captivity, and the like reason does and must hold for the
exercise of the same power, in such cases where the Royal Trust cannot be, or
is not discharged, and that the Kingdom runs an evident and eminent danger
thereby; which danger, having been declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, there needs not the authority of any person or Court to affirm,
nor is it in the power of any person or Court to revoke that judgment (for as
they well say in their Declaration of the 26. of May, 1642. page 281.) it is
not agreeable to reason or conscience, that it should be otherwise, seeing men
should be put upon an impossibility of knowing their duty, if the Judgment of
the highest Court should not be a rule and guide to them.

And if the Judgment therefore should be followed, where the question is, who
is King, (as before in that Declaration, they have rpoved it ought) much more,
what is the best service of the King and Kingdom, and therefore those that
shall guide themselves by the judgment of Parliament, ought, what ever happen,
to be secure, and free from all account and penalties upon the grounds, and
equity of this very Statute of 11. Hen. 7. Chap. 1.

And again, page 697. (they say, very rationally,) There must be a Judge of the
question wherein the safety of the Kingdom depends (for it must not lie
undetermined.) And if then there be not an agreement betwixt his Majesty and
the Parliament, either his Majesty must be Judge against his Parliament, or the
Parliament without his Majesty: It is unsound and irrational to give it to his
Majesty, who out of the Courts is not Judge of the least damage, or trespass
done to the least of his Subjects, but the Parliament is the Representative
Body of the whole Kingdom, and therefore the absolute proper and legal Judge.
Besides, If his Majesty (in the difference of Opinions) should be Judge, he
should be Judge in his own case, but the Parliament should be Judges between
his Majesty and the Kingdom: And if his Majesty should be Judge, he should be
Judge out of his Courts; yea, and against his highest Court, which he never is
(nor can be) but the Parliament should only judge, without his Majesty's
personal consent, which as a Court of Judicature it always does, and all
other Courts as well as it.

Therefore if the King be for the Kingdom, and not the Kingdom for the King;
And if the Kingdom best knows what is for its own good and preservation, and
the Parliament be the Representative Body of the Kingdom; It is easy to judge
who in this case should be Judge, And therefore the Parliament are bound in
duty to those that trust them, to see that the king dispose aright of his
trust, being that right that the King has as King, in the things he enjoyes,
is of a different nature, and for different ends, to the right of propriety
which a particular man has in his Goods and Lands, etc. That of propriety is a
right of propriety, which a particular man may dispose of, as he pleases
according to his own discretion for his own advantage, so it be not contrary
to the public good; but the right of the King is only a right of trust, which
he is to manage in such ways, and by such Councels as the Law does direct,
and only for the public good, and not to his private advantages, nor to the
prejudice of any man's particular Interests, much less of the Public, page
700. And therefore (say they) page 687. The King has not the like liberty in
disposing of his own person, or of the persons of his children (in respect of
the Interest the Kingdom has in them) as a private man may have.

But if it shall be objected, that the Parliament, the representative of the
Kingdom, are not to intermeddle in the managing of his Maj^sties trust,
because of the Oaths that they have taken, wherein they swear, that His Majesty
is supreme Head and Governor over all persons, and over all causes within his
Dominions, to which I shall return partly their own answer, p. 703. That
notwithstanding this, they are bound to see it managed, according to the true
intent and condition thereof; (for no man does nor can give a power to destroy
himself) and therefore say they, If we should say the King has in the
Government of his People, Superiors, to wi^, the Law (by which he is made) and
his Courts, etc. It were no new Doctrine: We have an ancient Author for it,
viz. Fleta Book 1. Chap. 17. of substituting of Judges.

If we should say the King is the single greatest, but less then the whole, it
were no new learning (it being an undeniable rule in reason, that they that
make a thing are always greater then the thing made by them) and certainly
this of supreme Head and Governor over all persons in all causes, as it is
meant singular (or single) persons rather then of Courts, or of the Body
collective, of the whole Kingdom, so it is meant (in curia non in camera) in
his Courts, that his Majesty is supreme Head and Governor over all persons,
in all causes, and not in his private capacity, and to speak properly, It is
only in his High Court of Parliament, wherein, and wherewith his Majesty has
absolutely the supreme power, and consequently is absolutely supreme Head and
Governor, from whom there is no Appeal. And if the High Court of Parliamen:
may take an account of what is done, by his Majesty in his inferior Courts,
much more of what is done by him, without the Authority of any Courts; And for
my part, say, that though the King be the Supreme Officer, which is all, and
the most he is; yet he is not the supreme Power: for the absolute Supreme
Power is the People in general, made up of every individual, and the legal
and formal supreme Power is only their Commissioners, their collective or
representative Body, chosen by them, and assembled in Parliament, to whom the
King is and ought to give an account both of his Office and Actions; yea, and
to receive rules, directions, and limitations from them, and by them.

And although King John the 7. from William the Rogue, aiias the chief Robber,
or Conqueror, was so Atheistically, and impiously wicked, as to give away his
kingdom of England unto the Pope (as is before declared page
) which was none of his own to give, or dispose of, either to him or any other
whatsoever, which the people that lived in those days very well knew and
understood, and therefore (as Speed in his Chronicles records, fol. 565. in a
general Parliament held in or about the year, 1214. The Prelates, Lords, and
Commons, severally and jointly enacted, That for so much as neither King John,
nor any other King, could bring his Realm and People to such thraldom, but by
common consent of Parliament (which was never done) and that in so doing, he
did against his Oath at his Coronation; besides many other causes of just
exception; If therefore the Pope thence forwards should attempt any thing
therein, the King with all his Subjects should with all their forces and powers
resist the same, and rather hazard all their lives and livelihood, then endure
his usu^ pation^.

But if any man should so dote upon those Pagean^s, Tyrants, Kings, the
supposed and pretended a^nointed of the Lord, as yet not to think it sufficient
to prove that not only the present King Charles, his own acknowledgment and
confession will be of force sufficient to pull all Scales of blindness from
their eyes, and all hardness and unbelievingnesse of heart, from their hearts;
His own words in his answer to the House of Commons first Remonstrance, Book
Declar. page 25. are these.

We have thought it very suitable to the duty of Our place, and page 29. and We
(^aith he) doubt not it will be the most acceptable Declaration a King can make
to his Subjects, that for Our part We are resolved duly not only to observe the
Laws Our Self, but to maintain them agrinst what opposition soever, though
with the hazard of Our Being: and a little below We; acknowledge it a high
crime (says he) against Almighty God, and inexcusab^^ to Our good Subjects of
Our three Kingdoms, if We did not to the utmost employ all Our power, and
faculties, to the speediest and most effectual assistance and protection of
that distressed people of Ireland.

And in his Message, 28 April, 1642. page 157. speaking of the Militia, he
says, We conceive it prejudicial to Our Self, or inconvenient for Our
Subjects, for whom We are trusted, and page 167. Himself says, That if the
Prerogative of the King over-whelme the Liberty of the People, it will be
turned to tyranny. And he himself (page 284.) defines tyranny to be nothing
else, but to admit no rule to govern by a man's own will.

But above all the rest, remarkable is his own confession, in his answer to the
Parliaments Declaration of the 19. May, 1642. where (in page 152.) He honestly
and plainly acknowledges that He is to give an account of his Office, not only
to God, but also to his other Kingdoms.

But as the Parliament says page 701. This is a strange Paradox, that his
Majesty by his own Confession owes an ^account to his other Kingdoms of his
Office and Dignity of a King in this kingdom itself, where he resides, and
has his being and subsistence.

And in page 311. He acknowledges God has entrusted Him with his regallity
for the good of his People; and if it be for their good, then not for their
mischief and destruction; but God has entrusted him, and how is that? The
truth is, God is no more the Author o^ Regal, then of Aristocratical power,
nor of Supreme, then of Subordinate Command. Nay, that Dominion which is
usurped, and not just, whilst it remains Dominion, and till it be legally
again divested, refers to God as its Author and Donor, as much as that which is
Hereditary (and permissively from God, and not approbationally instituted, or
appointed by him,) And that Law which the King mentions, is not to be
understood to be any special Ordinance, sent from Heaven by the Ministry of
Angels, or Prophets, (as amongst the Jews it sometimes was.) It can be nothing
else amongst Christians, but the actions and agreements of such and such
politic Corporations.

Power is originally inherent in the People, and it is nothing else but that
might and vigor, which such and such a Society of men contains in it self, and
when by such and such a Law of common consent and agreement, it is derived into
such and such hands, God confirms the Law* And so man is the free and
voluntary author, the Law is the instrument, and God is the establisher of both
(as the observator in the first page of the first part of his most excellent
observations, does observe) And though Kings make a huge matter of that saying
of God, by me Kings Reign: as though there were some superlative natural,
inbred, inherent deity, or exellency in Kings above other men; yet we may say,
an^ that tru^y: That by God all mankind lives, moves, and have their being,
yea, and reigns, and gove^ns as much by God (in their inf^rior orbs (of
Cities, hundreds, wa^enta^es, and families) as well as Kings in their Kingdoms,
yea, though God himself in an extraordinary, and immediate manner, chose and
appointed Saul, David, and Solomon, to be Kings of Israel;

Yet so just was the righ^eous God, that ^e w^u^d (...) imp^se them u^o^ the
people of Isra^l against their own ^il^^, and mind^s, (...) he^ did they rule
as K^^g, till by the c^mmo^ c^nsent of the people, they ch^se them, and (...)
^he^ to reign ov^r them. 1 Samuel 10. 20. 24. 2 Samuel 2. 24. and Ch^p. 5. 1. 2.
and 3. and 1 Kings 38* 39 ^0. So that ^h^ir auth^r^ty did originally as
inhere^tl^ flow from the people, as well as their special ^ssig^ation from
God, and they were to rul^ and govern them by the Law of God, (and not by the
rule and Law of their own will) unto which Law ^hey were to be as (...) and
subject, as the meanest of the people: yea, and as ^ya^le to punishment, and to
have their tra^sgr^ssi^ns ^ayd to t^^ir charge: As Lieu^e^a^t Collon^l Lilburne
^ath (...) and fully proved in his late printed Epistle to Judge Reves, p^g.

These things righ^ly considered does co^demn thos^ two maxims, for wicked,
ungodly, and tyrannic^^l, which are ^ayd down so in the book of D^clara^io^s:
page 199. 3. 4. viz. That the King can do no wrong, The second is, that the King
is the fountain of justice.

But to return again to the Kings own word, ^e says page 313. We were
unwo^^hy the trust repo^ed in us by the Law and of our descent from so many
great and famous Ancestors; if w^ could be brought to abondon that power, which
only can enable us to perform what we are sworn to in protecting our people
and the Laws. What can be said more plain then this, to prove him an Officer
of (...) and Trust? But seeing he speaks of his Ancestors; Let me tell him,
that if he had no better title to his Crown, then to claim it his by a kind of
Divine Right from his Progenitors, and because he is the next Heir to King
James; It would be by Scripture a very weak title.

We find in Scripture, that Solomon a younger Son, etc. was made King,
principally because of his fitness to govern, when diverse of his elder
brethren wen^ without the Crown, And if any in the world might have pleaded the
privileges of being next heir, David's Sons, and Sons Sons might, in regard of
that large promise that was made to David that his Sons should sit upon the
Regal Throne for many Generations.

Again, the King page 443. ingages to maintain the Privileges of Parliament,
as far as ever any of his Predecessors did, and as far as may stand with
that Justice which he owes to his Crown, which, what that is, I have before
declared, and is very fully declared in that Oath which he himself has taken,
page 291. although it fail, and is very short of that he ought by law and right
to take; so that now I have fully proved, I am confident of it, without any
starting hole left for contradiction; That the King receives his Crown by
contract and agreement, unto which by Law and Right he is bound and tied. I
thought to have here inserted some excellent passages for the further
illustration of the Position out of the first and second parts of the
Observations, and a late Book, called Maxims unfolded: But in regard I have (I
am afraid) been over-tedious already; I will refer you to the books
themselves, or (in case they be hard to come by) to that abridgment of the
marrow of them, which you shall find in an excellent and rational Discourse
of Mr. Lilburns, against those Vipers and grand Enemies to the Liberties of
England, the monopolizing Merchants, in his Book, called Innocence and Truth
justified, page 57, 58, 59, 60, 61.

I come now to the last branch of the minor Proposition, which is

THAT KING CHARLES HAS BROKEN HIS CONTRACT AND AGREEMENT.

And for the proof of this, I must lay down this assertion.

That the Parliament is the only, proper, competent, legal, supreme Judge of
this, as well as of all other the Great Affairs of the Kingdom, ^s is before
largely proved: And for further illustration, read Book Declar. page 100, 112,
171, 172, 170, 202, 693, 716.

Now in the next place, let us consider what the Parliament in their public
Declaration say of the King, who confesses himself, as well as the Parliament;
asserts and proves it, that his Oath taken at his Coronation ties him, to
reign and govern according to Law. Yet whosoever seriously reads over the
first Petition, and remonstrance of the State representative of England,
commonly called the House of Commons, who only and alone have and ought to
have that title. Page 264. 336. 508. 613. 628. 654. 655. 703. 705. 711. 724.
725. 726. 728. 729. 730.

The House of Peers being mere usurpers and inchroachers, and were never
entrusted by the people, (who under God the fountain, and Wellspring of all
just power) as well legislative as other, with any legislative power, who
merely sit by the Kings prerogative, which is a mere babble, and shadow, and in
truth, in substance is nothing at all, there being no Law-making-power in
himself, but merely, and only at the most, a Law-executing-power, who by his
Coronation Oath, that he has taken, or ought to have taken, is bound to pass
and assent to all such Laws, as his people or Commons shall choose, as is
largely (by the forecited Declarations of the Parliament) proved. Now if he
have not a legislative power in himself, as the Lords themselves (by joining
with the Commons in their Votes and Declarations) do truly confess, and
notably prove; how is it possible for him to give that to them which is not
inherent in himself? Or how can they without palpable usurpation, claim and
exercise a Law-making-power, derivatively from the King alone when he has none
in himself? which they themselves confess, and prove: wherefore, how can the
House of Commons the representative body of England, without wilful perjury,
having so often sworn to maintain the Liberties of England, and without being
notoriously guilty of Treason to themselves and others, and all those that
choose them, and trusted them; suffer the Lords to continue in their execution
of their usurpations? many times to the palpable hazard, y^a, almost utter ruin
of the Kingdom, by their denial, thwar^ing and crossing of those things that
evidently tends to the preservation of the whole Kingdom, and by their
pretended leg slative power, destroy whole families, and fill the Jayles of
Londm at their pleasure, (contrary to Law and right) with COMMONS (with whom
they have nothing to do) without being controled by the Truste^s of the people,
the HOUSE of COMMONS, although they be legally appealed to for that end
(witness Mr. L^lburne) Mr. Staveley prisoner in the Fleet, Mr. Learner for
himself and servants, M^. Overton, etc.) to their everlasting sh^^^, and
disg^ace b^^^ spoken; Oh therefore awake, awake, and (...) with strength and
resolution, ye chosen and betrusted ones of England, the earthly arm and
strength thereof, and free your Masters and betrusters the whole State of
England from those invading, ^^urping, Tyra^^^call Lords, Bondage, and
Thraldoms, lest to your shame they do it themselves, and serve them as they did
the Bishops; for preservation your selves siy is just, Page 44. 150. 207. 496.
637 72^. 226.) and is as ancient a Law as any is in the Ki^gd^m., page 207. And
you have also the 17. April last, declared, that you will suffer no arbitrary
tyrannical power to be exercised over the freemen of England, but the Lords do
it, therefore if ye be true, and just men, such who would be believed and
trusted, do as you say; before the Lords by their plots with the enemies of the
freedoms of England (such as wicked English and Scots Lords, and other
prerogative Courtiers, and corrupt Clergy, and patentee Monopolizers, and
contentious wrangling jang^ing, and pety fogging Lawyers) and by their own
impudent and uncontrouled injustice; imbroyle this Kingdom in a second war,
they and their associates, and confederates having been the cause of the
bypast wars, not for any love to the Liberties of England though that was
their pretense, but merely out of malice to the reigning and ruling party at
Court, whose utmost desire was to unhorse them, that so they might get up into
the saddle, and ride and reign, and rule like Tyrants themselves, they loving
(at this very day) the King-Prerogative Tyranny, and oppression as dearly as
any of these at Court, which they complained of, witness their daily actions,
and the actions of all their forementioned faction, which is lively
haracterised in a late Discourse, called [A Remonstrance of many th^usand
Citizens, and other Freeborn People of England, to their own House of
Commons] and will more fully be laid open shortly in the second part of it.

But if the Lords think they are wronged by this digression, and that their
right to their Legislative power is better then is here declared;

I desire their Lordships, or any other for them, to let the Kingdom know,
what better right they have to sit in Parliament, then the old Popish Abbots
had, that are long since, as Incrochers, abolished; Or then the Bishops, or the
Popish Lords, that are lately defunct, do. Sure I am, the right they had, was
as good as any their Lordships have, flowing from one and the same fountain
with them; namely the Kings will and pleasure, commonly called, The Kings
Prerogative, demonstrated by his Letters Pattents, which in such a case is not
worth a button as is clear by the Law, and the very principles of Reason, and
that the Lordly Prerogative honor it self that they enjoy from the King (which
was never given them by common consent, as all right, and just honor, and
power, ought to be) is a mere boon and gratuity, given them by the King, for
the helping him to inslave and envassalise the People, and from the^r
Predecess^rs whom William the Conqueror, a^ias, the Thief and Tyran^; made
Dukes, Earls, and Barons, for helping him to subdue, and enslave the free
Nation of England, and gave them by the Law of this own will, the estate of the
Inhabit^nts the right owners thereof, to maintain the Grandeur of their
Tyranny, and Prerogative Peerage; And therefore their Creator the King does in
his Dce. p. 324 ingeniously declare, that their title to their legislative
power is only by blood, And if so, then not by common consent or choice of the
People, the only and alone Fountain of all just power on earth, and therefore
void, and null, and at the best but a mere fixion and usurpation, and the
greatest or best style they gave themselves in their joint Declaration with the
House of Commons, page 508 is, That the House of Peers are the Hereditary
Counselors of the Kingdom, and what right they have thereby to make the
People Laws, I know not (neither is it declared there, by what right they came
by their Hereditary Councellorship: Nor yet is it there declared what it is; So
that I understand not what they mean by it, which I desire them to explain;
for sure I am, it is a maxim in Nature and Reason, That no man can be
concluded bu^ by his own consent, and that it is absolute Tyranny, for any what
(or whom)-soever, to impose a Law upon a People, that were never chosen nor
betrusted by them to make them Laws; But in that Declaration in the next line,
The chosen and betrusted House of Commons (the only and alone Lawmakers of
England, the King and Lords consent to their Votes, Laws and Ordinances, being
but in truth a mere Ceremony, and usurped formality, and in the strength of
Law, (which justly is nothing else then pure reason, neither adds strength
unto them, nor detracts power from them) is royally, truly, and majesterially
styled and called, the representaive Body of the whole Commons of the Kingdom,
and so are in abundance of other places, before cited. Yea and whosoever
seriously reads, and considers the third Position, laid down, page 726. and
laid down in the name of the Parliament; shall see indeed, and in truth, the
power of the Lords wholly cashiered: their words are these. That we did, and do
say, that a Parliament may dispose of any thing, wherein the King or any
Subject has a right in such a way as that the Kingdom may not be in danger
thereby, and that if the King being humbly sought unto by his Parliament, shall
refuse to join with; them in such cases, the Representative Body of the
Kingdom (that is to say, the House of Commons alone, the Lords representing no
Body, but themselves, and their Ladies, neither challenge they any such title,
but call themselves merely Hereditary Councillors) is not to sit still, and
see the Kingdom perish before their eyes, and of this danger they are Judges,
and Judges superior to all others (I beseech you mark it well) that legally
have any power of judicature within this Kingdom. Where are you my Lords? And
what say you to this, your own ingenious confession? For yours it is, for any
thing I know to the contrary, unless you were all asleep when you past it.

Nay, further (My Lords) If the Representative Body be the Parliament, as is
here confessed and averred, and that Representative Body be the House of
Commons, and none else, as before is proved, and the House of Commons, or
Representative Body be the Parliament, as here they are called; then (My Lords)
what say you to that inference from hence drawn, and naturally flowing and
arising from the premises, and proved by your first Pofition, laid down in the
forecited page, 726. which is, That the Parliament has a power in declaring
Law, in particular cases in question before them, and that which is so declared
by the High Court of Parliament, being the highest Court of Judicature, ought
not afterward to be questioned by his Majesty, or any of his Subjects, for
that there lies no Appeal from them, to any Person or Court whatsoever; so
that the right and safety both of King and People, shall depend upon the Law,
and the Law for its interpretation upon the Courts of Justice, which are the
competent Judges thereof, and not upon the pleasure and interpretation of
private persons, or of Public, in a private capacity. Goodnight (my Lords)
unless you will make a little more buzling, and so make the stink a little
more hot in the Nostrils of all men that have the use of their senses, before
your snuff go clear out, the which if you do, it will (I am confident) but
cause it to go out with a witness.

And therefore look to it, and remember the Star Chamber, the Councell-I able,
and High Commission: Where are they all? but in the grave of reproach,
contumely, disgrace, and shame. And give me leave to tell you of the common
Proverb now abroad, of Canterbury, and Strafford, That if in the days of their
prosperity (which were as high and great as yours are, or ever were) they had
thought they should have been pulled down by the common People (whom they
strongly labonred to enslave) and by their unwearied cries to the ears of
Englands supreme Judges for Justice, were justly by them condemned to the
block, and lost their wicked Lordly Heads, in the presence of many of those
that they had tyrannized over; they would have been more moderate, just, and
righteous, in their generations then they were.

Apply it (my Lord:s) and remember Mr. Lilburn, etc. and the tyranny you have
exercised upon him, for many weeks together, both in Newgate, and the Tower of
London, in locking him up close prisoner, without the use of Pen, Ink, or
Paper, and not suffering his friends, nor wife (that singular comfort and help
that the wise God provided for poor frail man) to set her foot within his
Chamber door, for about three Weeks together, nor she, nor any of his friends
to deliver to his hands (though in the presence of his Keeper) meat, drink, or
money, and yet you never allowed himm 2. d. to live on, that I could hear of,
and then unjustly sentence him 4000. l. and 7 years Imprisonment in the Tower.
etc. there to be tyrannized over by one ^f your own Creatures, Col. West
Lieutenant thereof, who has diverse weeks divorced him from his wife, and
denied him her society (unless she would be a prisonor with him, and then what
should become of them both, and of their children (having no Lands t^ live
upon) and tossed already from one Iayle to another, for many years together, to
his great charge) although he was but only committed to be kept in safe
custody, and from writing scandalous Books, which the Lieutenant told him, he
could not do, unless he kept his wife and friends from him, but as well he
might have said, I must also l^y you in a Dungeon, where you shall neither see
daylight nor enjoy a candle, It being almost impossible to keep a man so
strictly, but he will write, if he have daylight, and candlelight, and so
accordingly he bath commanded and executed, that neither his wife nor any of
his friends should speak with him, but in the presence of his Keeper, And that
the Warders at the Gate take the names and pla^es of abode of all those that
come to see him, That so the Lords may have them all down in their black and
merciless book, and know where to find them, when the day of their fierce
indignation shall more fu^ly smoke against him and all those that have visited
him. Which some of the Warders have told some of his friends (to terrify them)
as not far of: And this cruelty exercised upon him by the Lieutenant, is more
then legally can be done to a Fellon, Murderer, or Traitor, and yet this is his
portion, although he offe^ed to engage his promise to the Lieutenant, when he
first went in before his brother Major Lilburn, and another Major, that as he
was a Christian, and a Gentleman, that he would suffer his wife and friends,
according to Law and Right to have free access unto him, he would promise him
not to write a line, nor read a line written while he enjoyed that privilege,
which the Lieutenant refused, but executed his pleasure upon him. And then got
their Lordships to make a new illegal Order, that he might be kept, as he had
kept him. Now for the Lords to do this to him, seeing some of them were Actors
in his bloody Sentences in Star Chamber, for which transcendent injustice and
sufferings, he never had a penny recompense (...), though he says in his
forementioned answer to Mr. Pryn, he has spent diverse hundreds of pounds to
procure it, and though he lost not a little that year he ^ay prisoner in
Oxford for the Parliament: see, innocence and truth justified. Page 21. 22. And
although the Earl of Manchester and Colonel King detain his pay from him,
which he earned with the hazard of his life (Page 47. 65. 70.) and besides all
this, while he and others have been fighting for liberty and freedom for the
whole Kingdom; he has been robbed and deprived of his trade, by the
monopolizing Merchant Adventurers, Page 462. Whose knavery and illegal
practices, he notably anatomizeth, and lays open in the aforesaid book from
page 46. to page 63. To the Parliaments credit, and reputation be it spoken, to
suffer such vipers to eat out the bowels of this poor Kingdom, yea, and to
set them in the Custom House, and Excise Office, to receive the treasure of
the Kingdom, whose lives and estates for their illegal and arbitrary
practices, are forfeited to the state, as there he proves it. Now after all
this, for the Lords to commit him for 7. years to so chargeable a place, as
the present Lieutenant of the Tower makes the Tower by his will to be: and
takes no care to allow him one penny of the Kings old allowance (which was, to
find the prisoners their meat, drink, and lodging, and to pay the Lieutenant,
etc. his fees according to the ancient, legal, and just customs of the place.
What is it else in their Lordships intentions, but to starve and destroy the
honest man, and his wife, and children: for according to the information I
have; the fees that have bin demanded there are; Fifty pounds to the
Lieutenant. Five pounds, and a man's upper garment, to the Gentleman-Port^r.
Forty shillings to the Warders. Ten shillings to the Lieutenants Clarke. T^n
shillings to the Minister.


Thirt^ shillings, per week, for suffering the prisoners to dress their own
diet, and about so much a week for Chamber-rent; besides what it costs them for
their diet.

And all this demanded without any coulor of Law, Justice, or righ^* as is
^argely proved by a late book called Liberty vindicated against Slavery.

Oh, ye Commons of England, what need have you to be combined together to
maintain your common interest against these usurping cruel and merciless
Lords, and to take special heed that by their charms and Syren-like songs;
you be not divided about toys, into factions, to your own destruction, and
ruin, that being vifibly the game (to the eyes of rational men) which they
and their agents have now to play, and by the foot you may easily judge what
the bear is.

But now after this necessitated digression; let us return back to the King,
and to his forfeiting his trust, which is to protect his people from violence,
and wrong, and govern them according to law. Let us consider what his, and our
supreme legal, and rightful Judges; The House of Commons, the State
representative of England; in their Petition, and Remonstrance, presented to
him at Hampton Court (15. December 1642. and which begins book declaration,
page 1. and ends page 21.) Say: And we shall clearly find that they evidently
make plain to the King, and the whole Kingdom; That his 17. years reign was
filled up with a constant continnued Act of violating the Laws of the
Kingdom, and the Liberties of his people. Yes, in page 491. They plainly say
that before this Parliament the Laws were no defense nor protection of any
man's right: all was subject to will and power, which imposed what payments they
thought fit, to draine the subjects purses, and they who yielded and complied;
were countenanced, and advanced: and all others, disgraced, and kept under;
that so men's minds made poor and base, and their liberties lost and gone; they
might be ready to let go their religion, And the rest of the regal tyrannical
designs; there most acutely anatomised, to which I referr the reader, as a
piece extraordinary much worth the reading.

And though the King (this Parliament) signed diverse good Laws as though he
intended to turn over a new leaf; Yet the Parliament tell him plainly, that
even in or about the time, of passing those bills; some design or other has
been on foot, which if it had taken effect, would not only have deprived us
of the fruits of those bills, but would have reduced us to a worse condition of
confusion then that wherein the Parliament found us* see page 124. in which the
King himself was a principal acter. And so they charge him to be page 210.
211. 216. 218. 221. 227. 228. 229. 230. 493 494. 496. 563.

Yea, and they plainly declare, that the King had a finger in the Irish
Rebellion: for all his many solemn protestations to the contrary: and that at
the very beginning, by his immediate warrant; licensed Commanders to go over to
them, and hindered supplies from going to suppress them, page 70. 98. 116. 567.
568. 569. 622.

Yea, and though he were so quick against the Scots, as immediately (upon their
declaring themselves to maintain their rights) to proclaim them traitors; yet
notwithstanding (though the King vowed and protested that his soul abhorred
the Irish Rebellion;) it was about three months before the Parliament could
get him to proclaim them traitors: And when he was by them forced to proclaim
them traitors; His Majesty gave special Command, that, but forty of them
should be printed, and not one of them published till farther directions given
by his Majesty, page 567.

Yea, and besides all this; contrary to his Oath; he refuses to pass the bill
for the Militia although it was often pressed upon him by the Parliament, as the
only way and means to settle and preserve the peace of the Kingdom: and also
with-drawes himself from the Parliament; with a defigne to levy war against
them, whereupon for the discharge of their duty and trust, and the preservation
of the Kingdom, the 20. May 1642. book declar. page 259. they past three
votes, viz.

Resolved upon the Question. I.

That it appears, that the King (seduced by wicked Council) intends to, make
war against the Parliament (who in all their consultations and actions) have
proposed no other end unto themselves, but the care of his Kingdom, and
performance of all duty and loyalty to his person.

Resolved upon the Question. II

That whenever the King makes war upon the Parliament; It is a breach of
the trust reposed in him by his people: contrary to his Oath; and tending to
the dissolution of his Government.

Resolved upon the Question. III.

That whosoever shall serve or assist him in these wars; are traitors by the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and ought to suffer as t^aytors 11. Rich.
2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. an^ 6, 1 Hen. 4. 4.

From the two last votes, I will draw some arguments which na^urally flow from
them. And firs;t for the se^o^d Vote, which is, that whenever the King make^h
war against the Parliament; it is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his
people, etc. But the King has set up his S^andard of defiance against tha^
Parliament, (which he summoned to si a Westminster, and had passed an Act of
Parliamen^ that there they should si^ so long as they pleased) yea, and ha^h
actually proclaimed and levied war against them; therefore he has broke the
^rust reposed in him by his people: which was, to protect and defend them: (not
to ruin and destroy them) and has violat^d his public Oath, and so is
wilfully forsworn, and has also strongly endeavored the utter dissolution
of the Government of this Kingdom, Page 248. 503. 508. 509. 576. 580. 584.
617. 665.

For; in fighting against the Parliament, and seekeing the utter destruction
thereof; (as he has done) (...) fought against the whole Kingdom, and people,
whose be ^u^ted, legal, chosen Commissioners, and representation they are: and
who therefore have sufficient cause and ground given them, both in the eyes of
God, and all rational men; ever hereafter to renounce and defy him, etc. as
he has done them.

Now from the 3. Vote which is: That whosoever shall serve or assist him in
these wars; are Traitors: and ought to suffer as Traitors; from whence by way
of inference I draw this argum^nt.

That. If the Minor principal (that is to say the Accessarie or assistant) be
guilty of Treason: Then much more is the Major principal (that is to say the
chief mover, and beginner, or original actor, and setter on) guilty of
treason himself.

But by this vote the Minor or principal (the assister) is declared and proved
guilty of Treason;

Ergo, the Major principal, the King; who sets all his assistants at work; is
much more guilty of Treason.

Now let us consider of those two Statutes which the Parliament allege; for
the proveing of the 3. vote.

That of the 11. R. 2. was the Law by which the five great Traitors (as speed
calls them folio. 732.) were ^impeached, namely, Robert de Vere Du^e of
Ireland, Alexander Nevile Archbishop of York, Michaeld^la-Poole Earl of
Suffolk, Sir Robert Trisillian that false Iustitiar, and Sir Nicholas Br^mbre,
that false Knight o^ Lond^n: whose crime was, for being the heads with many
others; to advise the King, by his regal power to a^ihilate certain things
passed lately by act of Parliament, and to destroy the chie^e men of both
houses, that had been chief S^i^klers for the good of the Common Weal h^and by
the Kings consent, the Du^e of Ir^land, did levye forces for that and, But by
the Lords that were for the Common Weal^h; was soon varquished, and forced to
sly into France where he was s^^in: by a wild Boar, Martine foli. 1^9. But yet
notwithstanding, his ^ssociates, and Judges, viz. Full h^op, B^lknap, Carey,
Hott, Burgh, and Lock^on, were the first ^^y of the Parliament arrested of
treason as they sa^e in Judgment on the Bench, and most of them sent to the
Tower: for giving it under their hands, that it was lawful for the King to
abrogate that which was lately done in the Parliament: (becau^^ as they
wickedly sai^, he was above the law, Speed, folio 731.) Trisillian the chief
Justice prevented by flight, his apprehension when his ^ellowes the Judges were
taken; but afterward was caught and brought to the Parliament in the
fore-noone, where he had sentence to be drawn to Tyburne in the afternoon
and there to have his throat cut, which was done accordingly. Sir Nicholas
Brambres turn was next. And after him, Sir Joan, Earl of Sails bu^y, and Sir
James Barney, Sir John B^ucham^^ of Holt, S^uart of the Kings Household: John
Back Esquire: and Simond Burley, who only, as speed says, folio 733. had the
worship to have his head struck off. The Duke of Ireland, the Arch Bishop of
York, the Earl of Suffolk, and others had their Estates confiscated to the
Kings use by Act of Parliament. And as Martin says, folio 149. The rest of the
Judges had been served as Robert Trisillian was, if (upon the importunate, and
uncessant request of the Queen) their lives had not been red^emed by their
banishment; O gallant and brave Justice. It is true, and so confessed by the
Parliament, that these Statutes of 11 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, and 6. were
abolished by the 21. R. 2. 12; But it is averred by them that they were revived
by 1 H. 4. 3. 4. 5. 9. and still stand in force to this day. which is a real
truth.

And in the 2. place, let us consider well the Parliaments public
Declarations, and we shall see they hold it out full enough: We will begin with
their Declaration to the States of Holland, page 636. where they plainly
affirm, that the King (not his evil Councellers) has now at last resolved to
set up his royal Standard, and draw his sword for the destruction and ruin of
his most faithful and obedient people, whom by the laws and constitutions of
this Kingdom he is bound to preserve and protect. Yea, and in their answer
(sent to his Messenger from Nottingham) August 25. 1642. page 580; They tell
him plainly, that though they have used all means possible to prevent the
distractions of this Kingdom, which have been not only without success, but
there has followed that which no ill Council in former times has produced,
or any age has seen, namely those several Proclamations and Declarations
against both the Houses of Parliament, whereby their actions are declared
Treasonable, and their persons Traitors, and thereupon your Majesty has set up
your Standard against them, whereby you have put the two Houses of Parliament,
and in them this whole Kingdom, out of your protection (and as I may truly
say, have thereupon virtually ceased to be King) so that until your Majesty
shall recall those Proclamations and Declarations, whereby the Earl of Essex
and both Houses of Parliament, and their adherents and assistants, and such as
have obeyed, and execu^ed their commands, and directions, according to their
duties; are declared traitors, or otherwise, delinquents; And un^ill the
Standard, set up in the pursuance of the said Proclamations, be taken down,
your Majesty has put us into such a condition, that whilst we so remain, we
cannot by the fundamental privileges of Parliament, the public trust reposed
in us, or with the general good and safety of this Kingdom; give your Majesty
any other answer to this Message. The same language they speak to him in their
Petition, page 584. And in their Message, page 585. And in their Petition, 587.
And in their Declaration, page 576; They say plainly that the King, seduced by
wicked Council, does make war against his Parliament, and people. And in
their Petition sent by Sir Philip Stapleton, to the Earl of Essex, to be
presented to His Majesty, page 617. They say positively; His Majesty wars
against the Parliament, and subjects of this Kingdom, leading in his own
person an Army against them, as if he intended by conquest to establish an
absolute and unlimitted power over them, and by his power, and the continuance
of his presence, have ransacked, spoiled, imprisoned, and murdered diverse of
his people, yea, and does endeavor to bring over the Rebels of Ireland, and
other forces from beyond the Seas; And in their Declaration, and resolution,
after the King had proclaimed the Parliament, and the Earl of Essex Traitors,
page 508. 509. They call that very Proclamation an attempt so desperate, and so
transcendently wicked, that the Lords and Commons do unanimously publish and
declare, that all they who have advised, contrived, ab^^ted, or countena^ced,
or hereafter shall abett and countenance the said Proclamation; to be Traitors,
and enemies to GOD, the King and Kingdom, and to be guilty of the highest
degree of Treason that can be committed against the King and Kingdom, and that
they will, by the assistance of Almighty God, and of all honest English
Protestants, and lovers of their Country; do their best endeavors (even to the
utmost hazard of their lives, and fortunes) to bring all such unparalleld
traitors to a speedy and exemplary punishment. Be sure you be as good as your
word: for GOD, of all villians; abhors faith-breakers: and take he^d, by your
actions, and treatyes with the unjust and false King Charles, one of the
Monsters of the earth; you do not give a just, and visible cause of ground; not
only to all rational men in England, but in the world (that knows, reads,
and understands your often solemn sworn Oaths, vows, Protestations, and
engagements) to judge you a forsworn, false, and perjured Generation, and fit
to be abhorred of GOD, and all good men; for to speak truth, and right: Has
not Charles Stewart committed treason against King Charles? sure I am he has
done it against the KINGDOM of ENGLAND, and that I prove by your own grounds;
thus.

The Proclamation that you so much cry out of; comes out in his name and style,
page 503. 404. 406. 507. And therefore his:

Ergo. --

For he ownes his own Proclamations, and Declarations, and jeeres you for a
company of simpletons for declaring it otherwise. His words, (page 248.) are;
All our answers and Declarations have been and are owned by us, and have been
attested under our hands: if any other had been published in our name, and
without our authority; It would be easy for both Houses of Parliament to
discover and apprehend the Authors: And we wish that whosoever was trusted with
the drawing, and penning of that Declaration (namely the Parliaments, dated 19*
of May 1642.) had not more authority or cunning to impose upon or deceive a
major part of those votes by which it passed; then any man has to prevail
with us to publish in our name any thing but the since and resolution of our
own heart. And since this new device is found out in stead of answering our
reasons, or satisfying our just demandes, to blast our Declarations, and
answers, as if they were not our own; (a bold senseless imputation) we are
sure that every answer and Declaration published by us, is much more our own,
then any one of those bold threatening and reproachful Petitions, and
remonstrances are the acts of either or both houses. Y^a, and as if all this
were not enough to be done by a trust sufficiently for ever to declare the
forfeiting of his trust and Kingly Office; the King himself has caused the
Jewels of the Crown to be pawned, to buy instruments of war, to butcher and
murder his people; who never gave him any power, and authority, for any other
end, but to protect, defend, and preserve them: neither did he ever in his
life, enjoy any other power, either from God or man, but for that end; yet in
his speech to the people of SALOP, he declares he will melt down all his own
Plate, and expose all his land to sale, or morgage, (though it be none of his,
but the Kingdom^s) that so he may the faster cut the throats, and shed the
innocent blood of those his brethren, that betrusted him with all he had, or
has, for their good and welfare. Yet to fillup the measure of his iniquity;
he, (not his evil counselors) has given Commission to his Commissioners of
Array, Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices, Bailiffes, or any other whatsoever, to
raise Force, and to kill and slay all such as should hinder the EXECVTION of
his Royal command, or put the Ordinance of Militia (though it were for their
own preservation) in Execution, page 581. And the same bloody murdering
Commissions he has given to his Instruments in Scotland and Ireland, to
Butcher, destroy, and ruinate the people there. So that to sum up all, the
Parliament told him plainly in their late letter sent to him at Oxford, That he
was guilty of all the innocent blood shed in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
since these wars, which is the blood of thousands of thousands: For which, if
all the sons of men should be so base and wicked, as not to do their duty, in
executing justice upon him (which Legally may and ought to be done, by those
especially who have Power and Authority in their hands:) Yet undoubtedly, the
righteous God will, and that I am confident in an exemplary manner, in despite
of all his bloody add wicked protectors and defenders. For GOD is a just GOD,
and will revenge innocent blood even upon Kings, Judge. 1 6, 7. 1 Kings 21. 19.
and 22. 38. Isa. 30. 33. Ezekiel. 32. 29. -- and will repay wicked and ungodly
men, Isai. 59. 18. Therefore I desire those that shall think this a harsh
saying; to lay down the definition of a Tyrant in the highest degree, and I am
confident their own Consciences will tell them it is scarce possible to commit
or do that act of Tyranny that Charles Stewart is not guilty of; and
therefore, de jure, has absolved all his people from their Allegiance and
Obedience to him, and which, the Parliament are bound in duty and conscience,
De facto, to declare, and not to be unjuster to the Kingdom, then their
predecessors have been: which, in part, I have already memioned; and shall, to
conclude, only cite some particulars of the Parliaments just dealing with
Edward the second (who was not one quarter so bad as C.R) who being called to
account by the Parliament for his evil government, and being imprisoned at
Kenelworth-Castle; the Parliament sent Commissioners to acquaint him with their
pleasure, the Bishops of Winches^^r, Hereford, and Lincoln, two Earls, two
Abbots, four Barons, two Justices, three Knights for every County; and for
London, and other principal places (chiefly for the five Ports) a certain
number chosen by the Parliament. And when they came to him, they told him, the
Commonwealth had conceived so irreconcilable dislikes of his government, the
particulars whereof had been opened in the general Assembly at London, that it
was resolved never to endure him as King any longer: That, (notwithstanding)
those dislikes had not extended so far, as for his sake to exclude his issue;
but that with universal applause, and joy, the Commonwealth had in Parliament
elected his eldest son, the Lord Edward, for King. They finally told him,
that unless he did of himself renounce his Crown and Scepter; the people
would neither endure him, nor any of his children, as their Sovereign: but
disclaiming all Homage and Fealty, would elect some other for King, not of the
Blood.

The King seeing it would be no better; amongst other things told them, That he
sorrowed much, that the people of the Kingdom were so exasperated against him,
as that they should utterly abhor his (any longer) rule and sovereignty; and
therefore he besought all there present, to forgive him; and gave them thanks
for choosing his eldest son to be their King, which was greatly to his good
liking, that he was so gracious in their sight.

Whereupon they proceeded to the short Ceremony of his Resignation, which
principally consisted in the surrender of his Diadem, and Ensigns of Majesty
to the use of his son the new King. Whereupon Sir William Trussel, on the
behalf of the whole Realm, renounced all homage and allegiance to the Lord
Edward of Carnarvan, late King: The words of the definitive Sentence were these:

I William Trussel, in the name of all men of the Land of England and all the
Parliament, Procurator resign to thee Edward the Damage that was made to thee
sometime: and from this time forward now following, I defy thee, and deprive
she of all Royal power; and I shall never be attendant to thee, as for ^ing,
after this time.

But if any object: It is true, Subjects and people have, de facto, done this
unto their Kings; but they cannot do it, de jure, for that Kings are above
their people, and are not punishable by any, but God; I answer, God is the
fountain, or efficient cause of all punishment; But, as to man, instrumentally;
he inflicts by man: And though he be our supreme Lord and Lawmakers, and has
for bodily and visible transgressions of his Law, appointed a visible and
bodily punishment in this world, for the transgressors thereof, and man for his
isntrumental executioner, and never (ordinarily) does it immediately by
himself, but when his Instrument (Man) fails to do his duty: and being a God
of order; has appointed a Magistrate, or an empowered man, as his and their
executioner, for the doing of justice: and never goes out of this Road, but in
extraordinary cases, (as he does) when the Magistrate is extraordinarily
corrupted in the executing of his duty: and in such cases, God has raised up
particular or extraordinary persons to be his executioners. And therefore God
being no respecter of persons, has by nature created all men alike in power,
and not any, lawless, and none to bind each other against mutual agreement
and common consent: and has expr^sly commanded, Man, his rational creature,
shall not tyrannize one over another, or destroy (by any entrusted power) each
other; but that the entrusted, (Kings as well as others) shall improve the
utmost of their power and strength, for the good and benefit, protection and
preservation of every individual Trustee.

And whosoever he be, that shall improve his entrusted power, to the
destruction of his impowrers; forfeits his power. And GOD the fountain of
Reason and Justice, has endued man with so much reason, mercy, humanity, and
compassion to himself and his own Being, as by the instinct Nature to improve
his utmost power for his own preservation and defense: which is a Law above all
laws and compacts in the world. Declar. April 17. 1641. And whosoever rejects
it, and does not use it; has obliterated the principles of Nature in himself,
and degenerated into a habit worse then a beast, and becomes felonious to
himself, and guilty of h^s own blood. This, Israel of old, (the Lords peculiar
people) understood as well as the people of England, although they had (...)
express posi^ive law, no more then we in England have to rebel, or withdraw
their obedience and subjection from those Magistrates or Kings that exercise
their power and authority contrary to the nature of their trust: which is plain
and clear, without dispute, in the case of Rehoboam, who was the son of
Solomon, who was the son of David, who was assigned King by GOD, and chosen
and made King by the common consent of the people of Juda and Israel, 2 Samuel 7.
13. And who by vertve of Gods promise to him and his seed to be Kings over his
people; had more to say for his Title to his and their Crown, I am confident of
it, then all the Princes in the world have to say for their claim, and
childrens, to their Crown. For Rehoboam was not only the son of Solomon, who
was in a manner intailed by God himself unto the Crown; but he was also made
King at Shechem by all Israel, 1 King. 12. ^. And afterward Jeroboam the son
of Nebat, Solomon's servant, and all the congregation of Israel, went to
Rehoboam to claim the making good of the GREAT CHARTER of Nature, viz. to claim
relaxation of oppression, and protection according to justice, that is to say,
that he should do to them (in governing them justly) as he would have them to
do to him, (in yielding him subjection and obedience:) this being the whole
Law of GOD both Natural and Moral; and therefore they tell Rehoboam, that the
King ^his Father had broke their Charter, and made their Yoke grievous (which
you may read of in Chap. 4.) Now therefore make thou (observe, they do not
say, Most gracious Sovereign; nor, Most excellent Majesty) the grievous
service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we
will serve thee. But the King rejecting the advice and counsel of his old and
g^od Counselors: which, as we may say, was to govern them according to Law,
contained in Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, etc. and not to rule and
govern them according to his Prerogative, or perverse Will: For they tell him,
If thou will be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, (mark
it well) and answer them, and speak good words to them; then they will be thy
servants, for ever. But he forsook the counsel of the old men (which we may
call GOOD COMMONWEALTHS-MEN,) and followed the advice of his youngmen (which we
call the Cavaliers, or men for the Prerogative) And (says the Text) he
answered the people roughly saying, My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will
add to your yoke: My Father also chastised you with whi^s, but I will chastise
you with Scorpions, 1 Kings 12. 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 14. But (says the Text, verse.
15) when all Israel saw that the King hearke^ed not unto them, the people
answered the King, saying, What portion have we in David? Neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse. To your Tents, O Israel. Now see to thine own
house, David. So Israel departed to their tents, and revolted, or rebelled
against the House of David, and called all the congregation of the people
together, and (with an unanimous consent) made Jeroboam King over all Israel,
as Rehoboam was over Juda; (having both an assignation from GOD, 1 King. 11.
11, 12, 13, 26, 29, 30, 31, 35, 37, 38. and a solemn legal public Call and
Election from the people, 1 Kings 12. 2, 3, 20, 21.) and of his Regality and
Kingship, as legally and justly by God himself approved, by sending his
Prophet tobring the kingdom back to Solomon's son) to command him and Juda, etc.
(Observe, he calls them not Rehoboams people) not to go up nor fight against
their brethren the children of Israel. Which command, as most just, they
observed, verse. 21, 22, 23, 24 Yea, and God himself, (in the 14. chapter and
7. verse) bears witness that he himself exalted Jeroboam from among the
people, and made him Prince over his people Israel, and rent the Kingdom from
the house of David, and gave it unto him. And afterward, when God upbraids
him, it was not because he was an usurper, a traitor, or a ^ebe^l against his
masters son King Rehoboam; but because he had not been as his servant David
was, (who followed him with a perfect heart,) but had done evil above all that
was before him in making him other Gods, and molten Images, to provoke me
(says God) to anger, and have cast me behind thy back. So that here is a
clear demonstration, that it is lawful in the sight of God, as well as in the
sight of Man, for a people to withdraw their obedience from that Magistrate,
or King, that refuses to govern them by legal justice; but oppresses them
contrary to the end of the trust reposed in him (which was never for their woe,
but for their weal,) and so breaks that tacit contract, that by virtue of his
Induction into his Office, is Naturally and Rationally employed to be made,
although it never be expressed, It being as the Parliament says, (Book Declar.
Page 150.) irrational to conceive that when the Militi^ of any is com^itted to
a General, although it be not with any express condition; that he shall not
turn the mouths of his Cannons against his own Sou^diers: for, (say they)
that is so naturally and necessarily employed, that its needless to be
expressed, insomuch, as if he did attempt, or co^^^nd any such thing against
the nature of his trust and place, it did, Ipso facto, estate the Army in a
right of disobedience, except we think that obedience binds men to cut their
own throats, or atleast their Companions.

Having laid this foundation, I will come now to speak something of those five
particulars, which is beforementioned and laid down in the sixth page of this
Discourse; which are thus expressed.

First, if it were granted, that the Lords were a legal Jurisdiction, and had
a judicative power over the Commons; yet, the manner of the Lords dealing with
Lieut. Col. Lilburn, is illegal and unjust.

Secondly, That if the Lords were a Judicature, yet they have no jurisdiction
over Commoners.

Thirdly, That they are no Judicature at all.

Fourthly, That they by Law and Right, are no Lawmakers.

Fifthly, That by Law and Right, it lies not in the power of the King, nor in
the House of Commons it self, to delegate the legislative power, either to the
Lords divided or conjoined, nor to any other persons whatsoever: For the first
of these, viz. That the manner of the Lords proceeding with Lieu. Col. Lilburn,
was, and is illegal, is clear; and that I prove thus:

The Law requires; that before the body of a Freeman be attached, or summoned
to a Bar of Justice, to answer a Chage; that there shall be an original
Declaration, or Charge, filed in the Court, before so much as either the Writ,
Attachment, or Warrant go out, to seize upon, or summon the party accused. See
Sir Edw. Cooks 2. part. Institut. f. 46, 50, 51. Read the Statu^e, etc. quoted
in those Margents; but there was no such matter in Mr. Lilburns case: For
although, as he declares in his book, called The Freemans freedom vindicated,
page 3, the Lords (10. June, 1646. sue out a Warrant, to summon him, upon sight
thereof, to answer such things, as he stands charged with before their
Lordships, concerning a Pamphlet, entitled, The just man's justification; or, A
Letter by way of Plea in Bar. And accordingly, the 11 of June, 1646. he
appeared at their Bar, expecting there to have received a written Charge
according to Law and Justice, which they both refused to show him, or let him
know, whether they had any such legal Charge, or no, against him; but press
him (contrary to the Petition of Right, and the Law of the Land) to answer to
Interrogatories concerning himself (a practice condemned by themselves in his
own case, Feb. 12. 1645.) in the annihilating his unjust Sentence in the
Star Chamber. (Read his printed Relation thereof page 1, 2, ^. and the last)
Which forced him to deliver in at their Bar his legal and just Plea and
Protestation, against their usurping jurisdiction over Commoners; which you may
read in The Freemans freedom vindicated, page 5. 6. Upon which they commanded
himto withdraw; and then (page 7.) make an Order to commit him; in these words.

Die Jovis 11. June 1646.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Lieut. Col.
John Lilburn, shall stand committed to the Prison of Newgate, for exhibiting to
this House, a scandalous and contemptnous Paper, it being delivered by himself
at the Bar this day; And that the Keeper of the said Prison, shall keep him
safely, until the pleasure of this House be further signified: and this to be
a sufficient Warrant in that behalf.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

To the Gentleman Usher of this House, or his Deputy, to be delivered to the
Keeper of Newgate.
I cannot hear, that he either at this time, misbehaved himself, either in
word, or gesture toward them; but gave them as much respect at this time, as
if he had been one of their own Creatures.

But away to Newgate he goes, and June 16. 1646. directs his appeal to the
Honurable House of Commons, which you may read in the forementioned book,
page 9, 10, 11.

Which appeal the House of Commons read, approved of, and committed to a
sp^ciall Committee, which Committee met, and examined his business, and as I
am informed from very good hands, made a vote to this effect.

That his proceedings with, and protestations against, the Lords delivered at
their bar, and his appeal to the House of Commons, was just, and legal,
which they in justice ought to bear him out in: which Report; Colonel Henry
Marti^ (that couraragious and faithful Patrio^ of his Country) as Chairman of
that Committee; is to report to the House:

But immediately after the reading of this Appeal to the House, out comes the
forementioned book in prynt, which it seems did something startle the Lords,
who had let him lie quietly in Newgate till then, without so much as sending
him the Copy of any charge; But upon this, they send a Warran^ again for him,
which, as I find it in the 4. page of the Just man in Bonds, thus follows.

Die Lunae 22. Junii. 1646,
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburne now a prisoner in Newgate, shall be brought, before their Lordships
(in the High Court of Parliament) to morrow morning by 10. of the clock, and
this to be a f^ffici^^^ Warrant in that behalf.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

To the Gentleman Usher of this House, or his Deputy, to be delivered to the
Keeper of Newgate or his Deputy.
And accordingly the next day, Lieutenant Colonel Lilbur^^ was brought up to
their bar, and being called into the House, was commanded to kneel; which he
refused to do, for what reasons; he is best able ^^ declare: which I hope he
will not fail to do, as soon as he enjoyes the liberty, and privilege to have
pen, ink, and paper, which by law he cannot be debarred of, neither can it
justly be denied to the greatest Traitor in England. And surely the Lords give
a clear demonstration to the whole Kingdom to judge, that their own
consciences tell them, that he is an honest, and a just man, and their dealing
with him is base, wicked, illegal, and unjust, that they dare not suffer him
to enjoy pen, ink, and paper (to declare the truth of his cause to the world)
which they have most unjustly, and unrighteously kept from him, by special
Order, for above three months together. So that by the paw, a man may judge of
the whole body, that is to say; by their Lordships dealing with him, a wise man
may easily see what they would do to all the Freemen of England; if their power
were answerable to their wills, which would be to make them as great slaves as
the Pesants in France are (who enjoy propriety neither in life, liberty, nor
estate) if they did not make us as absolute vassals as the poor Turks are to
the Grand Seigneour, whose lives, and estates he takes away from the greatest
of them, when he pleases.

Therefore; O all ye Commons of England mark well, and eye, with the eye of
Jealousy, these Lords the sons of pride, and tyranny: And not only them, but
all their associats, or Creatures, especially in the House of Commons: (if any
such be there) for, assure your selves, enemies they are, and will be, to your
liberties, and freedoms, what ever their specious pretenses are to the
contrary, it being a Maxim in nature, that every like, begets its like;
Therefore, trust them not, no more then you would do a Fox with a Goose, or a
devoureing Wolf, with a harmless Lamb, what ever they say or swear, having
so palpably and visibly, in the case of Mr. Lilburne, broken all their Oaths,
Protestations, Vows, and Declarations to maintain the Laws of the Land, and
the Liberties of ^he People.

But let us return to their 2. summoning him to their Bar, who being
commanded to kneel; refused: and without any more discourse, or so much as
showing him any legal charge; they Commanded him to withdraw, and for this
cause alone (he behaving himself this time also respectively enough (saving in
the Ceremony of kneeling) they commit him close prisoner to Newgate.

A true Copy of their Warrant thus follows.

Die Martis 23. Junii. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that John Lilburne shall stand
Committed close prisoner, in the Prison of Newgate, and that he be not
permitted, to have pen, ink, or paper, and none shall have access unto him in
any kind, but only his Keeper, until this Court do take further Order.

To the Keeper of Newgate his Deputy, or Deputies.
John Brown Cler. Parl.
Exam. per Rad. Brisco^ Cler. de Newgate.

And so from this 23. of June, to the 11. of July then ensuing, he was locked
up close, and neither his Wife, Children, Servants, Friends, Lawyers, or
Councellers permitted to have access unto him, nor they never sent him word
what they intended to do; And all this while the Lords are picking matter
against him, having none it seems when they first summ^ned him to their bar,
to grownd the least pretense, or shadow of a Charge against him: and knowing
his resolution to stand to his liberties, they lay provocations upon him, and
commit one act of injustice (with a high hand) upon the neck of another, to
provoke him to let some words fall, or do some actions to en^nare himself,
that so they might have some coulor for their fu^ure proceedings with him. And
diverse books coming out in his behalf, by some (as it seems) who wished him
well, which to the purpose nettles the Lords, for their cruelty toward him;
Serieant Finch, as one of his Majesty's Council, preferrs certain Articles
against him, in the House of those Peers by way of Charge, bu^ sends him no
Copy of it, although it was impossible for him being so close as he was) to get
a Copy of it himself: the greatest part of which is taken out of his book,
called The Freemans Freedom vindicated, and his Epistle to Mr. Wolaston the
Jailer of Newgate, both of them made by him in Newgate, many days after the
Lords had Committed him; which letter of his to Mr. Wollaston, for the
excellent matter therein, we will insert here verbarim.

SIR, I this morning have seen a Warrant from the House of Lords, made
yesterday, to Command you to bring me this day at 10. a clock before them, the
Warrant expresses no cause wherefore I should dance attendance before them;
neither do I know any ground or reason wherefore I should, nor any Law that
compels me thereunto; for their Lordships sitting by virtue of
Prerogative-pa^ents, and not by election or common consent of the People, have,
as Magna Charta (and other good Laws of the Land) tells me, nothing to do to
try me, or any Common^r whatsoever in any criminal case, either for life,
limb, liberty, or estate: but, contrary hereunto, as incrochers, and usurpers
upon m^ freedoms and liberties; they lately, and illegally endeavored to try
m^ a Commoner at their Bar, for which I under my hand, and seal, protested to
their faces against them, as violent, and illegal incrochers upon the rights,
and liberties of me, and all the Commons of England (a copy of which etc. I in
Print herewith, send you) and at their Bar I openly appealed to my competent,
proper, legal Tryers, and Judges, the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament (for which, their Lordships did illegally, arbitarily, and
tyrannically, commit me to prison into your custody) unto whom diverse days
ago I sent my Appeal etc, which now remains in the hands of their Speaker, if
it be not already read in their house, unto which I do, and will stand, and
obey their commands.

Sir. I am a freeman of England, and therefore I am not to be used as a slave
or Vas^all by the Lords, which they have alreday done, and would further do. I
also am a man of peace, and quietness, and desire not to mo^est any, if I be
not forced thereunto: therefore I desire you as you tender my good, and your
own, take this for an answer, that I cannot without turning traitor to my
liberties; dance attendance to their Lordships Bar: being bound in
conscience, duty, to God, my, self, mine, and my Country; to oppose their
encroachments to the death: which by the strength of God, I am resolved to do.
Sir. you may, or cause to be exercised upon me, some force or violence to pull
and drag me out of my chamber, which I am resolved to mantain, as long as I
can, before I will be ^^mpelled to go before them; and therefore I desire you,
in a friendly way, to be wise and considerate before you do that, which it may
be, you can never undo.

Sir. I am your, true and fair conditioned prisoner, if you will be so to me,
JOHN LILBURN.
From my Cock-loft in the Press yard of Newgate this 13. of June 1646.

And the next day aftere Serjente Finch exhibited his Artiicles, being the 11,
July 1646. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne is, by virtue of a warrant to the
Sheriff or Sheriffs of London M. Foot, and Mr. Kendrik (who contrary to Law
refused to give him a Copy of ha^ warrant, although he sent for it by Mr.
Bisco ^he Clerk of Newgate,) brought up to the Lords bar, in a^most base
Contumelious, and reproachful manner, the substance of that Warant, being to
command him to the Lords Bar to hear his charge read. But before he was
called in; he, by his Keeper, sent word to the Lords, That they being not his
Peers, and Equals; were none of his LEGAL JUDGES, and so had no jurisdiction
over him: and therefore he would not stoop unto, or acknowledge, their
authority and jurisdiction over him in this particular: which he desired
a-fore-hand to acquaint them with: And that he must be forced, out of
conscience to that duty he owes to Himself, his Liberties, and the Liberties
of his Country: (seeing their LORDSHIPS would neither be satisfied with his
Protestation, nor Appeal to the COMMONS; nor yet with his refusing to kneel
at their Bar, nor consult with the House of COMMONS about the legality of their
proceedings; but the third time to send for him, who, they knew, could not, in
this case, stoop unto them; as though they were resolved to tread the Liberties
of all the COMMONS of ENGLAND, under their feet. And therefore seeing that they
increased in their illegal an unwarrantable presumption) he said, he must
increase in his just detestation of their actions, and encroachments. In
testimony of which, he was resolved to come in with his HATON, and to STOP his
EARS when his charge was offered to be read, which (as I understand) he
accordingly did.

And having liberty sometimes to speak to them, being commanded to withdraw
three times, and brought in again; he told them to this effect, with a great
deal of resolution, That they were (not only) not his Judges, but the manner
of their proceeding with him, was against all Law and Justice: yea, contrary to
their own judgment lately given by themselves in February last in his own
case, of the Star Chamber, and of the Petition of Right. For (said he) My
Lords, the warrant that commanded me to your Bar; did summon me up to answer
a criminal charge: And being at your Bar, I pressed you, again and again, to
see it, and earnestly entreated you, that if you had any legal charge in
writing against me, that it might be produced: But (contrary to Law and
Justice) you refused to do it, and contrary to all law (just High
Commission-li^e) pressed me to answer Interrogatories concerning myself, w^^ch
fo^^^^ and (...) me to deliver in my; Protestation aga^^^^^ you: And I have
(...) appp^aled to my Legal Judges, the COMMONS of ENGLAND, assembled in
PARLIAMENT; who have received, accepted, read, and committed my appeal, and
promised me justice in it. And, my Lords, I tell you to your ^^ces, These are
the MEN that ONLY and ALONE have THE SUPREME POWER of ENGLAND residing in
them; who, when you have done all, (...) the worst you can, they both must, and
will, be your Judges and mine. But (my Lords) if you will not join issue with
me there, that you may know I neither fear you nor your Charge, nor decline a
legal proceeding about it; prefer your charge against me in any Court of
Justice in Westm^nster-Hall, or any other Court in England, rhat has a legal
jurisdiction over me; and I will answer you: The which if you refuse, and will
still persev^re in your incroachmens upon my Rights and Liberties; know (my
Lords) that here to your faces, I bid defiance to you to do the worst you can
to me, being resolved to spend my heart blood against you in this way. My Lords
(said he) are not you the men that first engaged this kingdom in this present
war? And you pretended and swore, it was for the maintenance of the laws and
liberties of England: But (my Lords) if you dissembled, or were in jest; I am
sure (said he) I was real, and in good earnest. And therefore (my Lords)
before you shall wrest out of my hand, my essential liberties and freedoms,
and that which makes me a man, and to differ from a beast (having already run
the hazards of so many deaths for the preservation of them as I have done); I
tell you plainly and truly, I will by the strength of GOD, v^nture my life and
blood as freely and resolutely against you in this particular, as ever I did in
the field against any of the Cavaliers: (who, you told us, endeavored and
intended to destroy the laws and liberties of England) And some of your selves
know that that was resolutely enough.

And much more, as I understand he told them then, which I leave to the
relation of his own pen and hand, which I believe the world will shortly see.

But they went on, and sentenced him two thousand pounds to the King for his
present contempt at their Bar, and two thousand pounds for his pretended
crimes contained in their Articles, which they took pro confesso, because he
would not hear them read.

But in regard that his wives late petition delivered to the House of COMMONS,
September 23. 1646. does notably and excellently set forth the illegality of
the manner, etc. of the Lords proceedings with him; we judge it very necessary
here to insert it, not only for the proof of the thing in hand, but also for
her exceeding commendations in so close following her husbands business, in
his great captivity, with such resolution, wisdom and courage as she does,
whose practice herein may be a leading, just, and commendable president for all
the wives in England that love their husbands, and are willing to stand by them
in the day of their trial. Her petition thus follows.

To the Chosen and betrusted Knights Citizens and Burgesses, assembled in the
high and supreme Court of PARLIAMENT. The Humble Petition of ELIZABETH
LILBURNE, wife to Lieu. Col JOHN LILBURNE, who has been for above eleven weeks
bypast, most unjustly divorced from him, by the House of Lord, and their
tyran^ic^ll Officers, against the Law of GOD, and (as she conceives) the Law of
the Land.
Shows,
THat you only and alone are chosen by the Commons of England to maintain their
Laws, and Liberties, and to do them justice and right; Coll. of decl page 254.
336. 382. 508. 613. 705. 711 716. 721. 724. 716 7^1. 72^. 73^.
which you have often before God and the World sworn to do: Coll. Decl. page
^61. 663. protestation and covenant.
yea, and in dive^^ of your Declarations declared; it is your duty (in regard
of the trust reposed in you) so to do; Coll. decl. page 81. 1^2 262, 266, 267
340, 459. 462, 471, 4^3, 58^, ^9^,
without any private aims, personal respects, or passions whatsoever; Col.
decl p. 4^4, 490. 750.
And that you think nothing too good to be hazarded in the discharge of your
consciences for the obtaining of these ends: Col^ decl p. ^14.
And that you will give up your selves to the uttermost of your power, and
judgment; to maintain truth, and conform your selves to the will of God; Col.
declar. p. ^66.
which is to ^o^ justice and ler, 22 16. 15. 16. 17.
right, and ^ecure the Persons, Estates, and Liberties of all that joined with
you; Col declar. 6^6. 673.
imprecating the judgments of Heaven to fall upon you when you decli^e from
these ends: Col. Declar 4
you judging. it the greatest scandal that can be laid upon you, that you
either do or intend to subvert the Laws, Liberties, and freedoms of the
people. Col. declar. p. 264. 281. 494. 497. 654. 694. 696.
Which freedoms, etc. you your selves call, The common birthright of
Englishmen, Col. declar. p. 738. 140. ^45.
who are born equally sree^, and to whom the law of the land is an equal
inheritance: and therefore you confess in your Declar. of 23. October. 1643.
Page 660.
It is your duty to use your best endeavors, that the meanest of the Co^monalty
may enjoy their own birthright, freedom and liberty of the laws of the land,
being equally (as you say) entitled thereunto with the greatest subject. The
knowledge of which, as coming from your own mouths, and Pen, imboldned your
Petitioner, with confidence, to make her humble address to you, and to put you
in mind, that her husband above 2 months ago made his formal and legal
appeal to you against the injustice and usurpation of the Lords acted upon
him; which you received, read committed, and promised him justice in: But as
yet no report is made of his business, nor any relief, or actual justice holden
out unto him; although you have since found time to pass the Co^positions and
pardons for the infranchising of those that your selves have declared Traitors
and Enemies to the Kingdom: which is no small cause of sorrow to your
Petitioner, and many others, that her husband, who has adventured his life,
and all that he had in the World, in your lowest condition for you; should be
so slighted and disregarded by you, as though you had forgot the duty you owe
to the kingdom, and your many Oaths, Vows, and Declarations: Decl. 460. 498.
666. 673.
which neglect has hastened the almost utter ruin of your Petitioner, her
husband, and small Children. For the Lords in a most tyrannical and barbarous
manner (being encouraged by your neglect) have since committed her husband, for
about three weeks, close prisoner to Newgate, locked him up in a little room,
without the use of pen, ink, or paper (for no other cause but for refusing to
kneel at the Bar of those, that by law are none of his Judges.) Magna Charta
29. Sir E. Cook. 2 part Instit. fol. 28. 29. Rot. 2. ^. 3.
The cruel Jaylors all that time refusing to let your Petitioner, or any of
his friends to set their feet over the threshold of his chamber door, or to
come into the prison yard to speak with him, or to deliver unto his hands,
either meat, drink, money, or any other necessaries. A most barbarous and
illegal cruelty! so much co^p^ained of by your selves in your Petition and
Remonstrance to the King, 1. December. 1641. Col. declar. 6, 7, 8.
and detested and abhorred there, by you, as actions and cruelties being more
the proper issues of Turks, Pagans, Tyrants, and men without any knowledge of
God, then of those that have the least spark of Christianity, Honor, or
justice in their b^easts. And then while they thus tyrannized over your
Petitioners husband; they command (as your Petitioner is informed) Mr. Sergeant
Finch, Mr. Hearn, Mr. Hale, and Mr. Glover, to draw up a Charge against your
Petitioners husband, without giving him the least notice in the world of it, to
fit himself against the day of his trial: but contrary to all law, justice,
and conscience, dealt worse with him, then ever the Star Chamber did; not only
in keeping his Lawyers from him, but even all manner of Counselors and Friends
whatsoever, even at that time when they were about to try him: and then of a
sudden send a Warrant for him to come to their Bar (who had no legal authrity
over him) to hear his charge read: where he found the Earl of Manchester (his
professed enemy, and the only party (of a Lord) concerned in the business;) to
be his chief Judge, contrary to that just Maxim of law, That no man ought to
be both party and judge; (a practice which the unjust Star Chamber it self in
the days of its tyranny, did blush at, and refuse to practice, as was often
seen in the Lord Coventries case, etc.) And without any regard to the Earl of
Manchesters impeachment (in your House) of treachery to his country, by L.
Genesis Cromwell, which is commonly reported to be punctually and fully proved, and
a charge of a higher nature then the Earl of Strafford, for which he lost his
head: And which also renders him, so long as he stands so impeached; incapable,
in any sense, of being a Judge. And a great wrong and injustice it is to the
kingdom; to permit him; and to himself, if innocent; not to have had a legal
trial ere this, to his justificat^on or condemnation. And besides all this,
because your Petitioners husband stood to his appeal to your Honors, and would
not betray Englands liberties; which you have, all of you, sworn to preserve,
maintain, and defend: they most arbitrarily, illegally, and tyrannically,
sentenced your Petitioners said husband to pay 4000. l. to the King (not to the
State) and for ever to be incapable to bear any Office in Church or
Commonwealth, either Martial or Civil, and to lie 7. years a prisoner in the
extraordinary chargeable prison of the Tower; where he is in many particulars
illegally dealt withal, as he was when he was in Newgate.

Now forasmuch as the Lords, as they claim themselves to be a House of Peers,
have no legal judgment about Commoners, that your Petitioner can hear of,
but what is expressed in the Statute of the 14. Ed. 35. which are delays of
justice, or error in judgment in inferior Courts only; and that with such
limitations and qualifications as are there expressed; which are that there
shall be one Bishop at least in the judgment, and an express Commission from
the King, for their meddling with it. All which was wanting in the case of your
Petitioners husband, being begun and ended by themselves alone. And also seeing
that by the 29 of Magna Charta, your Petitioners husband, or any other Commoner
whatsoever; in criminal cases, are not to be tried otherwise then by their
Peers: which Sir Ed: Co^k in his exposition of Magna Charta, (which book is
printed by your own special authority) says, is meant [equals] fol. 28. In
which (says he, fol. 29.) are comprised Knights, Esqu^res, Gentlemen Citizens,
Y^ome^, and Burgesses of several degrees; but no Lords of Parliament. And in
p. 46. he says: No man shall be disseised [that is, put out of seison, or
dispossessed of his freehold; that is. says he lands or livelihood, or of his
liberties or free customs,] that is, of such franchises and freedoms, and free
customs as belong to him by his fre^ Birthright, unless it be by the lawful
judgment, (that is, verdict of his Equa^s; that is, says he, of men of his
own condion:] or by the law of the land; ^h^t is (to speak it once for all) By
the due course and process of law. Au, says he (...) man shall be in any sort
destroyed unless it be by the ve dict and judgment of his Peers, that is,
eq^als, ^r by the law of the land. And the Lords themselves in old time, did
truly confess: That for them to give judgment of a Commoner in a criminal
case is contrary to law; as is clear by the Parliaments record in the case of
Sir Simon d' Bereford. 4. Ed. 3. Rot. 2. (the true copy of which is in the
hands of M. H. Mart^n) and they there record it, That his case who was
condemned by them for murdering King Edw. 2. shall not be drawn, in future time,
into president, because it was contrary to law, they being not his Peers, that
is, his Equals. And forasmuch as the manner of their proceedings was contrary to
all the former ways of the law publicly established by Parliament in this
kingdom, as appears by several Statutes 5. Ed. 3. 5. 25. Ed. 3. 4. 28. E. 3.
3. 37. Ed. 3. 8. 38 Ed. 3. 9. 42 Ed. 3. 3. 17 Ri 2. 6. Rot. Parl. 43. E. 3. Sir
lo. Alces case, number: 21, 22, 23, etc. lib. 20. fol. 74. In case declar.
Marshalses, ^ee Cook, 2. part. Instit. fol. 464
which expressly say, That none shall be imprisoned, no^ put out of his
freehold, nor of his franchises, nor free customs, unless it be by the law of
the land, and that none shall be taken by Petition, or suggestion made to the
King, or to his Council, unless it be by indictment, or presentment of good
and lawful people of the same neighborhood, where such deeds be done, in due
manner, or by process made, or by Writ original at the common law. Which
Statutes are nominally and expressly confirmed by the Petition of Right, by the
Act made this present Parliament for the abolishing the Star Chamber; and
thereby, all acts repealed that formerly were made in derogation of them. But
contrary hereunto, the Lords (like those wicked Justices spoken of by Sir Ed.
Cook Pat. Instit. 51.
in stead of trying her husband by the law of the land; proceed against him by
a partial trial, flowing from their arbitrary will, pleasure, and discretion,
etc. (*) For, though they summoned him up to their Bar, June 10. 1646. Rot.
part 2. 1. H. 4. mem. 2. number. 1. 27. Instit. f. 51. Book declar. 58, 39, 278,
845.
to answer a Charge; yet they refused to show it him, or give him a Copy of it,
but committed him to Newgate June 11. 1646, (although he behaved himself then
with respect toward them both in word and gesture) merely for refusing to
answer to their Spanish Inquisition-like Interrogatories, and for delivering
his legal Protestation, Their Mittimus being as illegal as their summoning of
him, and their own proceedings with him. Their commitment running, To be kept
there: not till he be delivered by due course of Law; but, During their
pleasure: which Sir Edw. Cook says, is illegal 2 part. instit. fol. 52, 53.
and then locked up close, that so he might be in an impossibility to
understand how they intended to proceed against him.

Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays, to grant unto her husband the
benefit of the law, and to admit him to your Bar himself, to plead his own
cause, if you be not satisfied in the manner of his proceedings, or else
according to law, justice, and that duty and obligation that lies upon you;
forthwith to release him from his unjust imprisonment: and to restrain and
prohibit the illegal and arbitrary proceedings of the Lords, according to that
sufficient power instated upon you, for the enabling you faithfully to
discharge the trust reposed in you, and to vacuate this his illegal sentence
and fine, and to give him just and honorable reparations from the Lords, and
all those that have unjustly executed their unjust Commands: It being a Rule in
Law, and a Maxim made use of by your selves in your Declaration 2. November,
1642. (r) That the Kings illegal commands, though accompanied with his
presence, do not excuse those col. declar. 723.
that obey them; much less the Lords: with which the Law accords, and so was
resolved by the Judges; 16. Hen. 6. See Cook 2 part instit. f. 187.
And that you will legally and judicially examine the Crimes of the Earl of
Manchester, and Colonel King, (which the Petitioners husband, and others, have
so often complained to you of,) and do exemplary justice upon them, according
to their deserts: or else, according to Law and Justice, punish those (if any)
that have falsely complained of them. 3. E. 33. 2. R. 2. 5. 37. E. 3. 18 38 E.
3. 9. 12. R. 2. 11. 17. R. 2. 6. 22. p. and M. 3. 1. El. 6.
And that you would, without further delay, give us relief by doing us
justice. 9. H. 3. 29. 2. E. 3. 8. 5. E. 3. 9. 14. E. 3. 14. ^1. E. 2. 10.
All which, she the rather earnestly desires, because his imprisonment in the
Tower is extraordinary chargeable and insupportable: (although by right, and
the custom of that place, his fees, chamber, and diet, ought to be allowed
him, and paid out of the Treasure of the Crown,) he having wasted and spent
himself with almost six years attendance, and expectation upon your Honors for
justice and raparations against his barbarous sentence, etc. of the
Star Chamber, to his extraordinary charge and damage, and yet never received a
penny; and also lost diverse hundred pounds, the year he was a prisoner in
Oxford Castle for you. Neither can he receive his Arrears (the price of his
blood) for his faithful service with the Earl of Manchester, although he spent
with him much of his own money.

And the last year by the unadvised means of some Members of this Honorable
House, was committed prisoner for above 3. Months, to his extraordinary
charges and expenses: And yet in conclusion he was releast, and to this day
knows not wherefore he was imprisoned: For which, according to Law and
Justice, he ought to receive reparations; but yet he never had a penny.

All which particulars considered, do render the condition of your Petitioner,
her husband and children, to be very nigh ruin and destruction, unless your
speedy and long-expected justice, prevent the same. Which your Petitioner does
earnestly entreat at your hands, as her right, and that which in equity,
honor, and conscience, cannot be denied her. col. declar. 127, 174, 244, 253,
282, 284, 285. 312, 313. 321, 322, 467, 490, 514, 516, 520, 521, 532, 533, 534,
535, 537, 539, 541. 543, 555, 560.


And as in duty bound, she shall ever pray, that your hearts may be kept
upright, and thereby enabled timely and faithfully to discharge the duty you
owe to the Kingdom, according to the Great Trust reposed in you: And so free
your selves from giving cause to be judged men that seek your selves more then
the public good.

We will only speak two or three words to one thing, more fully mentioned in
her Petition; and to another thing not mentioned at all in her Petition, very
requisite to be taken notice of, in the manner of his Trial; which is, That by
Law it ought to have been public.

Now for the first of these, which is the illegallity of all their Warrants,
they committed him by; learned and grave Sir Edward Cook, in his most
execllent, worthy, and precious Exposition of the 29. Chapter of Magna Charta,
his 2. Part. Institut. fol. 52. says thus;

Now seeing that no man can be taken, arrested, attached or imprisoned, but by
due process of Law, and according to the Law of the Land, these conclusions
hereupon do follow,

First, that a commitment by lawful Warrant, either in deed, or in law, is
accounted in law, due process, or proceeding of Law; and by the Law of the
Land, as well as by process, by force of the Kings Writ.

Secondly, That he, or they, which do commit them, have lawful authority.

Thirdly, that this Warrant or Mittimus be lawful, and that must be in
writing, under his hand and seal.

Fourthly, the cause must be contained in the Warrant; as for Treason, Felony,
etc. or for suspicion of Treason, o^ Felony, etc. Otherwise, if the Mittimus,
contain no cause at all [it is illegall] And if the prisoner escape, it is no
offense at all; Whereas, if the Mittimus contained the cause; the escape were
Treason or Felony, though he were not guilty of the offense: and therefore,
for the Kings benefit, and that the prisoner may be the more safely kept; the
Mittimus ought to contain the cause.

Fifthly, the Warrant or Mittimus containing a lawful cause, ought to have a
lawful conclusion, viz. and him safely to keep, until he be delivered by Law,
etc. and not until the party committing does further order; And this does
evidently appear by the Writs of abeHas Corpus, both in the King's Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer, and Chancery. See page 52, 53. 2. part. Institut.

REx
Vicecom. London. Salutem.
Praecipimus vobis quod corpus, Out of the Kings Bench,
A. B. in custodia vestra detent. ut dicitur, una cum causa detentionis suae
(quocunque nomine praed. A. B. censeatur in eisdem,) habeatis coram nobis apud
Westminster. Die Jovis prox. post, Octab. St. Martini ad submittend. and recipend.
ea, quae curia nostra de eo, ad tunc, and ibidem ordinari contigerit in hac
part, and hoc nullatenus omittatis periculo in cumbente: and habeatis ibi hoc
breve.

Test Edw. Cook
20. November. Anno Regni nostri 10.
THe King
to the Sheriffs of Lon. greeting.
We command you, that you have the body of A. B. (now detained in your custody
as is said) together with the cause of this detention by what Name soever the
said A. B. be called therein) before Us at Westminster, upon Thursday, Eight
days after the Feast of St. Martins, to submit, and receive what Our Court
shall then and there order concerning him. Fail not hereof, at your peril:
and see that you have there this Writ.

Witness, Edw: Cook,
20. Nov. and the Tenth Year of Our Reign.
This is the usual form of the Writ of Habeas Corpus, in the King's Bench,
vide Mich. 5. Edw. 4. Rot. 143. Coram Rege, Kesars Case, under the Test of Sir
John Markeham.

REX
Vicecom. London. salutem.
Praecipimus vobis quod habeatis Coram Justiciariis nostris, apud Westminster. 'Die
Jovis prox. post In the common pleas for any man privileged in that Court, and
the like in the Exchequer.
quinque Septiman. Pasche, corpus A.B. quocunque nomine censeatur, in prisona
vestra, sub custodia vestra detent. ut dicitur, una cum die* and causa
captionis and detentionis ejusdam, ut iidem Justiciar. nostri, visa causa illa,
ulterius fieri fac. quod de jure, and secundum legem, and cons^etudinem Regni
nostri Angliae for* et faciend* and habeatis ibi ^oc breve.

Test, etc.

THE King
to the Sheriffs of London, greeting.
We command you, that you have before Our Justices at Westminster, upon
Thursday next five weeks after Easter, the Body of A. B. by what Name soever
he be called, being detained in your Prison under your custody, togetherwith
the day and cause of his Caption, to the end, that Our said Justices having
seen the cause, may further do, that which of right, and according to the Law
and Custom of Our Realm of England ought to have done, or have there this Writ:

Witness, etc.

The like Writ is to be granted out of the Chancery, either in the time of the
Term; (as in the Kings* Dench) or in the vacation: for the Court of Chancery is
offici^^ just^^ia, and is ever (...) and never adjourned; so as the subject
being wrongfully imprisoned, may have Justice for the liberty of his person; as
well in the Vacation-time, as in the Term.

By these Writs, it manifestly appears, that no man ought to be imprisoned,
but for some certain cause; and these words, Ad subjiciend and re^ipiend, etc.
prove, that cause must be showed: for otherwise, how can the Court take order
therein, according to Law?

And this is agreeable with that which is said in Holy Histd^y, sine ratione
^ihi videtur, mittere vinctum in carcerim, and cau as ^jus non signifit (...)
But, since we wrote these things, and passed over too many other Acts of
Parliament; see now the Petition of Right, Anno tertio Caroli Regis: resolved
in full Parliament by the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons which has made an end of this question (if any were) Imprisonment does
not only extend to (...) imprisonment, and unjust; but for detaining of the
prisoner longer then he ought, where he was at the first lawfully imprisoned.

If the Kings (...) come to the (...)* deliver to the prisoner; If he detain
him, this detaining is an imprisonment against the law of the land, etc.

But look upon (...) (...) Warrant^* ((...) committed, and (...) committed
(...)) and you (...) not find one legal one amongst them all.

Now, for the second thing before spoken of, in the manner of his trial; which
is, That it ought by Law to have b^ public, in the presence of all that had a
mind to have heard it, (...) any restraint of any.

This I find to be claimed by Mr. Pryn, at the trial of Colonel Not. Fines,
in the 11. page of his relation thereof; which he desired, That they might have
a public hearing, and that the do^e might be set open, and none excluded that
would come in; the which (he says) ^e desired the rather; because, the
Parliament, the representative Body of the Kingdom, had ordered a fair and
equal trial; which he conceived (as he told the Council of War) was to be
a free and open one, agreeable (as he says) to the proceedings of Parliament,
and all other Courts of Justice in the Realm, which stand open to all; and from
whence, no Auditors are, or ought to be excluded.

To which Mr. Dorisla answered, that it was against the style and conrse of a
Court-Marshall to be public and open; and therefore, it might not be admitted
upon any terms.

Unto which Mr. Will. Pryn replied; that he was a common-Lawyer, and by his
profession, his late Protestation, and Covenant, bound to maintain the
fundamental laws of the kingdom, and liberty of the Subject, which he told the
Council of War, they themselves had taken up Arms, etc. to defend and
maintain; And, says he, by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, all Courts of
Justice ever have been, are and ought to be held openly and publicly not
close, like a Cabinet-Councell; Witness, all Courts of Justice at Westminster,
and elsewhere; yea, all our Assizes, Sessions, wherein men, though indicted
but for a private Felony, Murder, or trespass, have always open trials: He
goes on, and in the 12. page thereof, tells him; that not only Courts of
Common Law, but the Admiralty, and all other Courts, proceeding by the Rules of
either of the civil, or Canon Law, the proceedings have ever been public, and
the Courts open, and even in (...) proceedings by Martial Law, before a
Conncell of War, at the G^^^d-Hall of London, at the trial of Mr. Tompkin^,
(...), and others, it was public, and open in (...) of (...) (...) (...) of
Parliament, and the whole City; no come^s (...) (...) (...). And he positively
tells the Council of War, a little further; that it was both against the
laws, and subjects liberty (as he humbly conceived) to deny any prosecutor, o^
subject, an open trial.

And he gives diverse reasons there, for it; he goes on, and in the 13. page
says, That the Parliament when it sits as a Conncell, to consult, debate, or
deliberate of the great and weighty affairs of the Kingdom, is always
private, and none but the Members or Officers of either House admitted to their
consultations and debates. But (says he) as the Parliament is a Court of
Justice, to punish Malefactors; so the proceedings of both, or either House are
always public, as appears by the late Trial of the Earl of Strafford, in
Westminster Hall, and infinite other presidents of ancient and present time;

To which, I may add, the Trial of William Laud, late Archbishop of
Canterbury. And this practice is suitable to what we read in Scripture; that
among the Jews, the Judges sat openly in the City Gates, the most public
place of all. And truly, he or they that will not suffer Justice to be
executed. and administered openly, bewrayes their own guiltiness; and do
thereby acknowledge, that they are ashamed of their cause. For, says Christ,
John 3. 20, 21. Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to
the light, least his deeds should be reproved (or discovered;) but he that does
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God.

But so far were the Lords, from this just way, of permitting Lieutenant Col.
Lilburn, a public trial; that the first time he came before them, June 11.
1646. After he was come into the House, some of his friends, and some strangers
stepped in, as by Law and Justice they might; But the Earl of Manchester (as
Speaker of that House) commanded them all to withdraw, which they were forced
to do.

And this I aver, not by hearsay, but out of knowledge. And the second time
he came before them, which was 23 June 1646. It was little otherwise, his
friends being turned out of doors, though some of his enemies, scoffers, and
deriders, were permitted to stay: And the third time, which was upon the 11.
July, 1646; as I understand, he had much ado with the dore-keepers, to get his
wife to be admitted in; though a great many of the Sheriffs Sharks and
Caterpillars, that accompany the Hangman to Tyburn, the day he does execution,
were freely admitted; and Hounscot the tyrannical Prelates old-cruell
Catchpole, and now the Lords special Darling, and Favorite, a man
transcendent in baseness, and wickedness, and therefore more fit sor their
Lordships, with some others of their own creatures, were admitted in, as
parties fit to bear false witness against him, and make false reports of his,
and his honesty.

And Lieutenant Colonel Lilburns friends were so far from being admitted into
the Lords House, to see and behold the justness of their proceedings; that the
door of the Painted-Chamber was locked, and strongly guarded against them: and
if any of them in the crowd got in there, they had a second bar at their
Lordships door; and if by great chance, they at the opening thereof, crowded
in; the Officers that stood at the inner door, took special care to hinder
them from admittance there.

Oh the height of injustice and baseness! at the doing of which, or hearing of
it, the Lords may justly blush for shame; if they had either any honesty, or
ingenuity left in them: and thus much, for the first Position.

I come now to the second; which is, That if the Lords were a^ Judicature, yet
they have no jurisdiction over Commoners. But this is so fully proved in Mrs
Lilburns Petition, that I shall need to say no more to it; but referred the
judicious Reader thereunto, and to a Printed Letter written by Mr. R. OVERTON,
a prisoner in Newgate (committed thither by the Lords) to Colonel HENRY
MARTIN, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons; which Letter, is a most
notable rational piece, worth the reading.

I pass now to the third, which is to give you some reasons, to manifest, that
the LORDS are no Judicature* t^all,

But ^e^r I shall crave leave to inform the Reader that the foregoing
diseourse, was made and finished above two months ago, and hearing that there
was an Order from the Committee appointed by the House of Commons to consider
of the privileges of the Commons of England, to bring Lieutenant Colonel
Lilburne up before them; I conceived he would then be a^liberty to write
himself, and his discourse I thought might add much to strengthen the things
I drive at, and desire to declare and prove, and therefore I ^av^ sat still
without making any p^^g^^sse, to finish this discourse, till this present
conclusi^n of this present m^neth of November 1646. And my expectation I have
not failed: for he has published two notable discourses of his own, and some
friend of his, a third, and therefore I shall earnestly desire the studious and
inquisitive Reader, for the further illustration and proof of the first and
second positions lavd down in page 6. and already handled in page 63. 64. 65.
78. etc. seriously to read over the 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. pages
of his first book called Londons Liberty in Chains discovered, printed October.
1646, And the 5. 6 7, 8 9. 11. 14. 22. pages of his speech to the aforesaid
Committ^e Nov. 6. 1646. and since by him published in print, and called, An
Anatoamy of the Lords Tyranny. And the 23, 24, 37, 38, 29, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.
46. 47. pages of his friends book called ( Vox P^ebis a most notable
discourse) In the 26, 27, 28 29 31. 32. pages of which, you may read his
Charge and ^entence in the House of Lords.

Now having premised this, I return to the third thing to be handled, which is
to give you some reasons, to manifest that the Lords House are no ^udicatour at
all.

And for the illustration of this, I shall desire it may be considered, that no
j^dica^ure can justly be erected, or set up, unless it legally derive power
from those that have a legal power to erect, constituce, or institute it, and
I think this will be granted of all sides.

And therefore let us make inquisition, who (according to law and right in
England) ^ave an original and true power to erect judicatures, and I say,
only the legal Commissioners of the people, commonly called the Commons of
England Assembled in Parliament, and not the King, who is not to give a law
unto his people, but his people unto him, as is before largely proved, pages
37; 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. And as he confesses in his Corona^^on-Oath, that
he has taken, or ought to have taken, which you may read before, page 31. 32.
and which is declared by the statute of provisoes of benefices made Anno. 25.
Ed. 3. Annodom. 1350. which you may read in the statutes at large, page 157.
about the midst of which you have these words. whereupon the said Commons have
prayed our said Lord the King, that since the right of the Crown of England,
and the law of the said Realm is such, that upon the mischiefs, and damages,
which happen to his Realm, he ought, and is bound by his oath, with the accord
of his people, in his Parliament, thereof to make remedy and law, and in
removing the mischiefs and damages which thereof ensue, that it may please him
thereupon to ordain remedy, (and it follows in these words.)

Our Lord the King seeing the mischiefs and damages before mentioned, and
having regard to the said statute, made in the time of his said Grandfather,
and to the causes contained in the same, which statute holds always his
force, and was never defeated, repealed, nor adnulled in any point, and by so
much he is bounden by his Oath, to cause the same to be kept as the Law of his
Rea^me, though that by sufferance and negligence it has been sithence
attempted to the contrary, etc.

But the House of Peers neither derive nor challenge their Judicature, not in
the least, either from Commons in general: or from their Commissioners,
Deputies, Trustees, or Representors in Parliament Assembled, and therefore are
no legal Judicature at all.

And that they do not derive their power, either from the people (under God the
absolute and alone fountain of all true power) or their Commissioner, read
before page 45. where you shall find, that the King (their groundless
creator) says, they have their power by blood, and themselves claim it, from
no truer fountain, then by virtue of their being the Sons of prerogative,
Lords, Earls, Dukes, or Barrons.

Now if you please to read the Chronicles of this Kingdom, you shall find
that this thing called prerogative flows merely from the wills and pleasures
of Robbers, Rogues, and The^ves, by virtue of which they made Dukes, Earls,
Barrons, and Lords, of their fellow Robbers, Rog^es, and Thieves, the lineall
issue, and progeny of which, the present House of Peers are, having no better
right nor title, to their present pretended judicature, then mere and absolute
usurpation, and the will and pleasures of the potent and enslaving Tyrants,
alias Kings, of this Kingdom: for I read in Speeds Chronicle, page 413. 416.
417. and in Daniel page 27. 28. That the Normans in France, came anciently of a
mixed people from the Norwegians, Swedens and Danes, and practicing practices
upon the Coasts of Belgia, Frizia, England, Ireland, and France, and proceeded
in their hardy and wicked courses even to the Mediterranean Sea^ which drove
the French to such extremity, that King Charles the bald, was forced to give
unto Hasting a Norman Arch-Pirate, the Earldome of Charters to aslwage his fury
exercised upon his people, and also King Charles the Gross, granted unto
Godfrey the Norman part of Newstria, with his Daughter in Marriage: yet all this
sufficed not but that the Normans by force of Arms, seated themselves near
unto the mouth of S^in, taking all for their own, that lay comprised betwixt
that River, and the River Loyre: which Country afterward took the name of
Normandy, from those Northern guests, at which time King Charles the simple,
confirmed it unto Rollo their Captain, and gave unto him his Daughter Gilla in
Marriage: which Rollo with diverse misdoers and outlawed men were forced to fly
out of their own Country: which Rollo of the Danishrace was the first Duke of
Normandy, whose Son William was the second Duke of Normandy, and Richard his
Son was the third Duke of that Country, And his Son Richard the second, was
the fourth Duke thereof, And Richard the third his Son was the fifth Duke of
Normandy; And Robert his brother, and Son to Richard the second, was ^he
sixth Duke of Normandy, who was Father to our William the Conqueror, who was
the seventh Duke of Normandy, whom Duke Robert begat of one Arle^, or Arlet^ce
a whore, and a mean woman of Phalisi^ in Normandy, who was the Daughter of a
Skinner, and being resolved to go visit the holy Sepulcher, having no more
Sons but William his bastard, he calls his Nobility together, and tells
them; In case I die in my journey, (as he did) I have a little Bastard, of whose
worthiness I have great hope, and I doubt not but he is of my begetting: him
will I invest in my Duchy, as mine heir: and from thenceforth I pray you
take him for your Lord; which they did. And this Bastard in his youth having
many sharp bouts and bickerings, with Roger de Tresny, and William Earl of
Arques, brother to Duke Robert, and Son to Richard the second, etc. who lay
claim to the Duchy, as right and true heirs to it, but William the Bastard,
being too hard for them all, and by these wars grew to great experience in
fea^es of Arms which with his marying of Matild, the Daughter of Baldw^n the
fifth, Earl of Flanders, a man of great might and power; provoked the French
King to fall upon him, to abate his greatness, and curb his pride: but,
bastard William twice defeating two powerful Armies of the King^ with great
overthrowes, broke the heart of the King of France, which gave the bastard Duke
of Normondy, joyful peace: in which calm, the King makes a journey over into
England, to visit King Edward the Confessor his kinsman; who had had his
breeding in Normandy, by Duke Richard the second, the bastards Grandfather. And
after his return back again; St. Edward the King of England dies. Whereupon,
William the bastard busieth his thoughts how to obtain the Crown, and Scepter
of England, unto which he makes certain pretended claims, as being granted
unto him by King Edward; which was but a weak pretense, as King Harold in his
answer to him informs him; (Speed. 404.) telling him that Edward himself
coming in by election, and not by any title of inheritance; his promise was of
novalidity, for how could he give that wherein he was not interessed? And
though William the bastard urges to Harol, his Oath given him i^ Normandy; yet
he answered his Ambassador that his Masters demand was unjust, for that an
Oath extorted in time of extremity, cannot bind the maker in Conscience to
perform i^, for that were to join one sin to another: and that this O^th was
taken for ^eare of death, and imprisonment; the Duke himself well knew: but
(said he) admit it was voluntary and without fear: could I then a Subject
without the allowance of the ^ing, and the whole State, give away the Crowns
Success^^ to the prejudice of both? Speed. fol. 403. 404.

But although the bastard Duke had no better claim but this, which was worth
just nothing at all; (Read before page 20. 21. 24. 27. 28 3^* 60. 61.) Yet
notwithstanding William the bastard p^rleveres, in his proud, wicked, and
bloody intentions: and calses an Assembly of the States of Normandy together,
and with importunate solicitations solicits them to supply him with money (the
very sinews of war) to carry on his intended invasion of England; but they
unanimously refuse and decline it. At length seeing this prottaction and
difficulty in general, he deals with his dearest and most trusty friends in
particular, being such as he knew affected the glory of action and would
adventure their whole estates with him; As William Fitz-Auber, Count de
Bretteville, Gualtaer Gifford Earl Longueville, Roger de Beaumont, with
others, especially his own brothers by the mother, whom he had made great; as
Odo Bishop of Baynox, and Robert Earl of Mortaign: and unto these he showed
his pretended right and hope of England, (wherein prefe^ment lay) even to the
meanest amongst them, only money was the want, which they might spare neither
should that be given nor lent without a plentiful increase. With such fair
words he drew them so on, that they strove who should give most. And by this
policy he gathered such a mass of money, as was sufficient to defray the
war. And not only wan he the people of his own Provinces to undertake this
action, but drew by his fair persuasions and large promises, most of the
greatest Princes and Nobles of France to adventure their persons, and much of
their estates with him; as Robert Fitz-Harrays Duke of Orleance, the Earls of
Brittaigne, Ponthieu, Botogne, Poictcu, Maine, Nevers, Hi^fins, Aumal, le
Signieur de Tours, and even his mortal enemy Martel Earl of Anjou, became to
be as forward as any. Besides, to amuze the Court of France, and dazzle a young
Prince then King, he promised faithfully if he conquered this Kingdom, to hold
it of him, as he did the Dutely of Normandy, and do him homage for the same.
And then to make all sure with Pope Alexander (whose thu^der-bolts of
Excommunication were then of extraordinary dread and terror) he promised him to
hold it of the Apostolic See, if he prevailed in his enterprise. Whereupon
the Pope sent him a Banner of the Church, with an Agnus of gold, and one of the
hai^es of St. Peter, which was no small cause of prevailing, the ^ase Clergy
being then at the Popes beck, and more minding their own particular
self-interest, then the welfare of their own native Country, or the lives,
liberties and estates of their brethren according to the slesh; and thereupon
were the principal isntrumental cause, that William the Bastard, commonly
called, William the Conqueror, had so easy an entrance to the possession of
this kingdom. Speed fol. 403 404. 405. 406. 413. 417. Daniel fol. 28, 29, 35,
36. By means of which, the Clergy beeraied their native Country to Robbers and
Pirates, and left the poor Commons to the merciless fury of merciless men.
And I wish they do not now again the same with poor England, now in her great
distraction^: for their interest is visible not, to be the publickes; but their
pride, covetousness, and greatness. Therefore, O ye Commons of England,
beware of them, and take heed you trust them not too much, lest you be so
deluded by them, to your ruin and destruction.

And when William by their means principally, as Daniel says, fo. 36. had got
possession of the Kingdom, as you may partly before read, p. 14, 15, 16, 17)
how extraordinary tyrannically he dealt with the poor natives and inhabitants,
By changing their laws, and robbing them of their goods, and lands, at his will
and pleasure, and gave them away to his Norman Robbers. And the poor Englishmen
having all their livelihoods taken from them, became slaves and vassals unto
those Lords to whom the possessions were given. And if by their diligence
afterward, they could attain any portion of ground; they held it but only so
long as it pleased their Lords, without having any estates for themselves, or
their children, and were oftentimes violently cast out upon any small
displeasure, contrary to all right. Daniel fo. 47. Speed 421, 423, 425.
Insomuch that in those days it was a shame even among Englishmen, to be an
Englishman, Speed. fol. 422. 429. By means of all which, he bestowd great
rewards upon all those great men that came along with him, and made them by h^s
will the great men of England to help him to hold the people in subjection,
bondage and slavery: for he made William Fitz-Auber the Norman (the principal
man under him to help for his design) Earl of Hartford, who singly of
himself took upon him, merely by the power of his own will, to make Laws in
his own Earldome. And unto Allayn, another of his Comrades, or trusty and
well-beloved Consins, he gave all the lands of Earl Edwin, where on he built a
Castle, and whereof he made the Earldome of Richmond. And unto William of
Warren, another of his Norman Robbers and Marder ers, he gave the Earldome of
Surrey. Speed fol. 437. And unto Walter Bishop of Durham, another of his
Comrades, he sold the Earldome of Northumber land, who there by the law of his
own will, maintained Murderers and Rogues, and there was murdered himself.

And unto his Brothers (who came of his mother Arlet the Whore, who after
William the Bastard was borne, was married to Harlain, a Norman, a Gentleman
but of mean substance) Odo and Robert, he gave the Earldome of Ewe, and
Mortaigne. Speed 417. Daniel 32. And afterward Odo Earl of Kent, and after
that in his absence Viceroy of England. And how this Beggar (now set on
Horseback) governed this poor distressed kingdom, let the Conquerors own
speech declare, recorded by Speed, fol. 431. At the time when William came out
of Normandy, and found his brother Odo (a Bishop as well as an Earl) at the
Isle of Wight, with diverse Noble men and Knights his attendants, then going to
Rome with an expectation there to be Pope, being grown extraordinary rich with
his polling of this poor Kingdom. Upon which, the King in presence of his
Nobles, thus spoke:

Excellent Peers, I beseech you hearken to my words, and give me your
counsel. At my sailing into Normandy, I lest England to the government of ODO
MY BROTHER, who (a little further in his speech he says) has greatly
oppressed England, spoiling the Churches of land and rents, has made them
naked of Ornaments, given by our predecessors, and has seduced my Knights,
with purpose to train them over the Alps, who ought to defend the land against
the Nations of Scots, Danes, Irish, and other enemies over-strong for me. And
(a little below that) my brother, says he, to whom I committed the whole
kingdom, violently plucketh away their goods, cruelly grindeth the poor; and,
with a vain hope, steals away my Knights from me, and by oppression has
exasperated the whole land with unjust taxations. Consider therefore, most
NOBLE LORDS, and give me, I pray you, your advice, what is herein to be done:
And in conclusion the King adjudged him to prison, yet not as a Bishop, (who
then, it seems, had large exemptions, but as an Earl, subject to the laws and
censure of his King. Which accordingly (says Speed) was done, upon seizure of
estate, this Prelate was whose found so well lined in purse, that his ^eaps of
yellow mettle did moveadmiration to the beholders.

So that here you have the true story of the subversion of the ancient manner
of Parliaments, and the ancient Laws and Liberties of Government of this
Kingdom, and a Law innovated, and introduced, flowing merely from the will of
a Bastard, Thief, Robber and tirant. You have here also a true Declaration of
the original rise of the pretended legislative power of Earls, Lords, and
Barons, the Peers, Competitors, and trusty and wel-beloved Cousins, and
Hereditary Counselors of our Kings, which was merely and only from the wills
and pleasures of this cruel and bloody Tyrant, and his Successors; And no
better claim have our present house of Peers either for their legislative
power, or judicative power, then this, as is clearly manifest by their own
forementioned Declaration, cited page 45. and therefore say I, are no legal
Judicature at all, nor have no true legislative, or law-making power at all in
them; having never in the least derived it from the people, the true
legislaters and fountain of power; from whom only, and alone, must be fetched
all derivative power, that either will or can be esteemed just: And therefore
the Lords challenging all the power they have by their blood, and deriving it
from no other fountain but the Kings Letters-Pattents, flowing merely from his
will and pleasure; I groundedly conclude, they have thereby no judicative
power; no, nor legislative power at all in them: for the King cannot give more
to them, then he himself has; and he has neither of these powers, (viz. a
judicative power, nor a legislative power) inherent in him; as is strongly,
undeniably, and unanswerably proved before, in page 43* 44, 46, 47, 60, 61.

And therefore away with the pretended power of the Lords; up with it by the
roots, and let them sit no longer as they do, unless they will put themselves
upon the love of their Country, to be freely thereby chosen as their
^o^missioners to sit in Parliament (for I am sure, in right, all their actions
now, are unbinding, and unindivalid) which becomes you.

O all ye Freemen or Commoners of England, out of that duty you ow to your
selves, yours, and your native Country, thoroughly, and home, to set forth, by
Petition to your own HOUSE of COMMONS, and to desire them speedily to remove
them, before the Kingdom be destroyed, by their cross, proud, and
inconsistent interest: for little do you know, what Scotch-ale diverse of them
are now a brewing.

Read the Histories of William the Conqueror, and you shall easily find, that
the pride and contention of those Englishmen that were called Lords amongst
themselves, was no small cause of the losing of this Kingdom to that Tyrant:
for says Speed, fol. 409. After the Normans had slain King Harold, and
overthrown his Army, the two great Earls of Yorkshire, and Cheshire, Morcar
and Edwine coming to London, where the Londoners, etc. would gladly have set up
Edgar Atheling the true Heir to the Crown, to have been their Captain
General, to have defended them from the powerful Norman Invaders, who now was
exceedingly fleshed with his victory, and now likely to overrun the whole
Land: yet such was the pride and baesenesse of these two great Lords, that the
misery, distress, and fearful estate of their native Country, could not
dissuade from their ambition, plotting secretly to get the Crown to themselves,
which hindered that wise and noble design, and totally lost their native
Country.

O COMMONS OF ENGLAND, therefore beware of them, and have a jealous eye over
them; and take heed, that when it comes to the pinch, they serve you not such
another trick again.

For I am sure, their interest is not yours, nor the publikes, neither is it
consistent with their ends, that you should enjoy Justice, or your undeniable
and just rights, liberties, and freedoms.

And well to this purpose, says Daniel (page 36.) That after the Bishops and
the Clergy had showed their averseness, to the erecting of that probable means
that was propounded to hinder the theevish invader) the Nobility, considering
they were so born, and must have a King (and therefore considering of his
power) made them strive, and run headlong, who should be the first to
pre-occupate the grace of servitude, and intrude them into foreign subjection.

So that the poor Commons (like a strong vessel, that says he (might have
been for good use) were hereby left without a stern, and could not move
regularly, trusting and resting it seems too much upon those Lords; which I
call the broken Reeds of Egypt, by whom they were undone.

But for the further clee^ng of the Original of the House of Peers pretended
power, I shall desire the understanding Reader, to read over a little Treatise,
printed in Anno, 1641. called The manner of holding of Parliaments in England,
in the 28. page he says, King Harold being overcome, William the 1. King and
Conqueror, having obtained the Sovereignty, according to his pleasure bestowed
Dignities and Honors upon his companions, and others: Some of them so connext
and conjoined unto the Fees themselves, that yet to this day, the possessors
thereof may seem to be enabled, even with the possession of the places only: as
our Bishops at this day, by reason of the Baronies joined unto their
Bishoprics, enjoy the title and pre-eminence of Barons in highest Assemblies
of the Kingdom in Parliament: he gave and granted to others Dignities, and
Honors, together with the Lands and Fees themselves: he gave to Hugh Lupas
his kinsman (a Norman, and son to Emma, sister to the Conqueror by the
Mother) the Earldome of Choster, Adconquirendum Anglia^-per Coronam (that is in
English, to conquer and hold to himself and his Heirs, as free by the Sword,
as the King of England held it by his Crown) to HANNVSRVFVS (then Earl of
Britain in France) the Earldome of Richmond. It a lib^re and honorifice, ut
e^ndem Edwinus Comes antea tenue^at (that is, in English) as freely and
honorably, as Edwine Earl held it before.) And the Earldome of Arundel (which
Harrold possessed) he granted with a fee unto Roger of Montgomeny.

And in page 33. the same Author declares, That Kings sometimes not regarding
the Solemnities of Ceremonies and Charters have only by their becks suffered
Dignities and Honors to be transferred.

So that by what Iam able to gather out of ancient Histories; William the
Conqueror absolutely subdued the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments held in
England before this time: The manner of holding of which, as the same Author
(in his first page) declares, was by the discreet sort of the Kingdom of
England rehearsed, and showed unto the Conqueror; which (as he says) he
approved of. And the same does John Minshew say in his Dictionary published and
printed at London, July 22. 1625. fol. 526. his words are these: In England the
PARLIAMENT is called for the debating of matters touching the Commonwealth and
especially the making and correcting of Laws: which Assembly, or Court, is of
all other the highest, and of greatest authority, as you may read in Sir Thomas
Smith, de Re. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 1. and 2. Cambd. Brit. and Count. Juris. fol.
1. And see the Institution of this Court, Polydor Virgil, lib, 11. of his
Chronicles, refer^eth after a sort, to Henry 1. yet confessing, that it was
used before, though very seldom. You may find, says he, in the former
Prologue of the grand Customary of Normandy, That the Normans used the same
means in making their laws. In a Monument os Antiquity showing the manner of
holding this Parliament in the time of King Edward, the son of King
Etheldred, which (as the Note says) was delivered by the discreeter sort of
the Realm, to William the Conqueror, and allowed by him. This writing began
thus: Rex est Caput, etc. See more, says he, of the course and order of this
Parliament, in Count. Juris. fol. 1. etc. And VOWEL, alias Hooker, in his Book
purposely written of this matter; Powels book called the Atturneys Academy.
Read Mr. William Prynnes first part of the SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS AND
KINGDOMS, printed by the authority of this present Parliament, page, 42, 43, 44.

William the Conqueror having (as to me is clearly evident) subdued
Parliaments, their power, authority, privileges and jurisdiction; did set up
by the absolute law of his own will for his Compceres, Couzens, and
Connsellors, such men who had most pleased him in vassalizing and enslaving
this kingdom and the people thereof; in whose steps several of his successors
after him did tread, So that the kingdom was ruled and governed by the King,
and his Prerogative Nobles, and by laws flowing from their wills and pleasures,
and not made by common consent, by the peoples commissions assembled in
Parliament, as it is now at this day; but he and his successors giving such
large Charters to their Compeeres and great Lords, as to one to be Lord great
Chamberlain of Englands another Lord Constable of England; to another, Lord
Admiral of England, etc. By means of which they had such vast power in the
kingdom, (having then at their beck all the chief Gentlemen and Freeholders
of England, that used to wait upon them in blew Jackets: so that they were upon
any discontent able to combine against their Kings, their absolute creators,
and hold their noses to the grind-stone, and rather give a Law unto them, then
receive a law from them: in which great streits our former Kings, for curbing
the greatness of these their mere creatures, now grown insolent; were forced
to give new Charters, Commissions and Writs unto the Commons (then generally
absolute vassals,) to choose so many Knights and Burgesles, as they in their
own breasts should think fit to be able, by joining with them, to curb their
potent and insolent Lords, or trusty and well-beloved Cousins, which was all
the end they first called the Commons together for; yet this good came out of
it, that by degrees the Commons came to understand in a greater measure, their
rights, and to know their own power and strength. By means of which, with much
struggling, we in this age come to enjoy what we have, by Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, and the good and just Laws made this present Parliament,
etc. which yet is nothing nigh so much as by right we ought to enjoy: For the
forementioned Author of the book called, The manner of holding Parliaments in
England, as 20, 21. pages declares plainly, that in times bypast, there was
neither Bishop, Earl nor Baron; and yet even then Kings kept Parliaments. And
though since by incursion, Bishops, Earls and Barons, have been by the Kings
prerogative Charters summoned to sit in Parliament; yet notwithstanding the
King may hold a Parliament with the Commonalty or Commons of the Kingdom,
without Bishops, Earls and Barons.

And before the Conquest he positively declares, it was a right, that all
things which are to be affirmed or informed, granted or denied, or to be done
by the Parliament, must be granted by the Commonalty of the Parliament; who (he
affirms) might refuse (though summoned) to come to Parliament, in case the
King did not govern them as he ought, unto whom it was lawful in particular
to point out the Articles in which he misgoverned them.

And suitable to this purpose, is Mr. John Vowels judgment; which Mr. Pryn in
his abovementioned book, page 43. cites out of Holinsh. Chro. of Ireland, fol.
127, 128. His words (as Mr. Pryn cites them) are thus: Yet nevertheless, if
the King in due order have summoned all his Lords and Barons, and they will not
come; or if they come, they will not yet appear; or if they come and appear,
yet will not do or yield to any thing: Then the King with the consent of his
Commons, may ordain and establish any Acts or Laws, which are as good,
sufficient, and effectual, as if the Lords had given their consents; but on
the contrary, if the Commons be summoned, and will not come, or coming, will
not appear; or appearing, will nor consent to do any thing, alleging some
just, weighty, and great cause: The King in these cases Cromptons jurisdictio^
of courts, fo. 84 Hen. 7. 18. H. 7 14. 1. H. 7 27. Parliament 42. 76 33^ H 6.
17. dju-lged accordingly prerogative. 134.
cannot with his Lords devise, make or establish any Law. The reasons are, when
Parliaments were first begun, and ordained, THERE WERE NO PRELATES OR BARONS OF
THE PARLIAMENT, AND THE TEMPORAL LORDS were very few, or none; and then the
King, and his Commons did make a full Parliament; which authority was never
hitherto abridged.

Again, every Baron in Parliament does represent but his own person, and
speaks in he behalf of himself alone.

But the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are represented in the Commons of
the whole Realm; and every of these gives not consent for himself, but for all
those also, for whom he is sent: And the King with the consent of his COMMONS,
had ever a sufficient and full authority, to make, ordain, and establish good
wholesome Laws for the Commonwealth of his Realm.

Wherefore, the Lords being lawfully summoned, and yet refusing to come, sit,
or consent in Parliament, cannot by their folly abridge the King and the
Commons, of their lawful proceedings in Parliament.

Thus, and more, John Vowel, alias Hooker, in his order and usage how to keep a
Parliament (which begins in the foresaid History: page 121. and continues to
page 130. printed Cum Privil^gio.) And Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on
Magna Charta, proves, That the Lords and Peers in many Charters and Acts, are
included under the name of the Commons or Commonalty of England. And in his
Exposition of the second Chapter of Magna Char^a. 2. part Institutes. fol. 5.
He declares, that when the Great Charter was made, there was not in England
either Dukes, Marquess, or Viscounts: So that to be sure, they are all
Innovators and Intruders, and can claim no original or true interest to sit
in Parliament, since they are neither instituted by common consent, nor yet had
any being from the first beginings of Parliaments in England, either before the
Conquest, or since the Conquest; nor the first Duke (says Sir Edward Cook,
Ibidem) that was created since the Conquest, was Edw. the black Prince, In the
11. year of Edw. the third: and Rob. de Vere Earl of Oxford, was (in the 8.
year of Richard the 2.) created Marquess of Dublin in Ireland; And he was the
first Marquess that any of our Kings created.

The first Viscount that I find (says he) of Record, and that sat in
Parliament by that name, was John Beumont, who in the 8. year of Hen. the 6.
was created Viscount Beumont.

And therefore, if Parliaments be the most high and absolute power in the
Realm, as undeniably they are: for (Holinshed in his forementioned Chronicle,
in the D^scription of England, speaking of the high Court of Parliament, and
authority of the same, says page 173. thereby Kings and mighty Princes, have
from time to time, been deposed from their Th^ones, ^awes either enacted or
abrogated, offenders of all sorts punished, etc.)

Then much more may they disthrone or depose, these Lordly prerogative
Innovators and Intruders; and for my part, I shall think that the betrusted
Commissioners of the Commons of England, now assembled in Parliament, have not
faithfully discharged their duty to their Lords and Masters, the people, their
impowerers, till they have effectually and thoroughly done it.

And if the Lords would be willing to come, and sit with them as one house, as
formerly they have done, (Read the forementioned Discourse of John Vowel,
printed in Hollinsheds Chronicles of Ireland, page 123: Sir Edward Cooks 4.
part Institutes, chap. 1. page 2. and the forementioned book, called Vox
Plebis, page 39, 40.) Yea, though conditionally they might sit as Peers; yet
they ought not to do it: for this were for the Peoples Trustees, the House of
Commons, to give away their true and legislative power; which originally is
only inhe^ent in them (THE PEOPLE) which is the next, and the last thing I
should prove.

But in regard the Discourse is swollen so big already, and the present time
being the season for publishing what I have already said, which were impossible
to come out this Month or six Weeks, if I should thoroughly handle this
Proposition, as by Gods assistance. I intend, which will take up a Discourse
almost half as big as the foregoing:

For, first, I must show and prove; That the people in general are the
original sole legislaters, and the true fountain, and earthly will spring of
all just power; And

Secondly, That all the power which the house of Commons has, is mee^ly
derivative and bounded within this tacit Commission, to act only for the good
of thosothat betrusted them, and not for their mischief, in the least.

And here I shall propound some Queries.

Whether or not, they have not done and acted some things prejudicial and
mischievous so the generality of the Kingdom, and destructive to the fund meant
all Laws and Liberties thereof? Which in the affirmative, I shall answer; Yea,
and prove it in diverse particulars, our of their own late published large book,
being the second part of the Collection of Ordinances, Declar. etc. where I
find three Ordinances, viz.

That for the Merchant-Adventurers, page 361. That for the Turkie-Merchants,
page 439. Thirdly, That for the Greenland Merchants, page 646.
Of all three, of which I say as Sir Edward Cook, in the second part of his
Institutes, fol. 51.

And the fourth part Institutes, fol. 41. says, of the Statute of the 11. of
Henry 7. chap. 3. (for executing of which Justice, Dudley, and Empson lost
their lives) that they are made in the fac^ of the ancient and fundamental Law
of the 29. and 30. chapters of Magna Charta, etc.

And that they are unjust and injurious Ordinances, which in duty they are
bound to abrogate, and to punish the procurers of them in regard those very
Ordinances, if continued, will ^ender the Parliament the (Commissioners of the
people, and the great interest of their preservation) odious, abominable, and
(...)ble in their eyes, and do them more mischief, then an Army of twenty
thousand Cavaliers: for such palpable injustice, as in these very Ordinances,
is done to the whole Kingdom, will in time destroy the Parliament; though now
they had never a professed enemy in the world; and true friends to their
professed enemy the King, they are, who put them upon this work: And let them
take warning by those that were formerly the setters up of Pattentees, (and
thereby destroyers of the peoples legal and just liberties) for it was not only
that they were set up by an unbinding authority of the Kings which made them
illegal, but that they were against and destructive to the fundamental Laws
and liberties of the Land.

And therefore the house of Commons in its first purity, before any of them was
corrupted with assessing, treasuring, and disposing of the Commonwealths money
in Clandestine Ways, not in the least allowed by the known and just Law of the
Land, and which to the Commonwealth they are not able to give an account of,
as indeed, and in truth they ought, of all the moneys they have raised.

I say the house of Commons, at the first beginning of their straights, when
they would render themselves amiable and lovely in the eyes of their Impowrers,
the people that trusted them; They tell them in their first and most excellent
Declaration, 1. par. Col. Declar. page 14. That they have suppressed all
Monopolies, whereof some few did prejudice the Subject, above a Million yearly;
the Soap an hundred thousand pounds; the Wine three hundred thousand pounds;
the Le^ther must needs exceed both, and salt could be no less then that;
besides the inferior Monopolies.

Was this an excellency in the peoples Commissioners at the beginning?

And can it be less now, then the greatest of baseness in them, to do the
quite contrary: Yea, and that after so much blood has been shed, and so much
money spent, and so many Oaths and Covenants sworn and taken, to preserve the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom?

And here I must fall extremely foul upon Sr. WALTER EARL, GILES GREEN, JOHN
ROLL, GEORGE TOMPSON, ALEXANDER BENCE, all Parliament men, for their unjust and
illegal Order made at the Committee of the Navy and Customs, November. 12.
1646. which is published in print, on purpose to conjure the Officers of the
Customs, to take care to put the aforesaid patentee M^^op^lizing Ordinance of
the GREENLAND COMPANY in d^e execution according to its true intent and
meaning, and that before they pass any en^ry or other warrant for any F^ns, or
gills, wrought or unwrought, or for any sort of W^^le O^le, or other Oil; to
call to their assistance the Officer or the Officers of the Greenland Company,
if any such be appointed for the place, to view the same, thereby to proc^ed
according to the Ordinance of Parliame^^, (which, Ordinance is dated the 6. of
May 1646.) which AVTHORISETH THEM TO CEISE UPON ALL SVCH COMMODITIES, that are
brought in by any other free Merchants that are not of this Company: by m^anes
of which they ing^osse all the trade into their own hands, and sell their
Commodities for double the rate, that others (if they might be suffered to
bring them in) would sell them;

O brave and gallant slavery and bondage! The dear, but unwelcome purchase of
all our blood and money!

The next querie that will arise will be this. Whether some particular
Parliament men have not outstript the bounds of their Commission?

And here I shall answer affirmatively likewise: or else, as Samuel said to
Saul, what means this bleating of the Sheep in my ears, and the lowing of
the Oxen which I hear? So say I, if all be right, what means MAJOR GEORGE
WITHERS Complaint against Sir Richard Onsley, and Sir Poynings Moore; and Mr.
JOHN MVSGRAVES loud Complaint and impeachment of treason against Mr. Richard
Barwis, which he has largely published in several books to the view of the
world, called A WORD TO THE WISE. ANOTHER WORD TO THE WISE. YET ANOTHER WORD TO
THE WISE? In which he also accuses Mr. Lisle the Chairman of the Committee, of
great injustice for making a false Report to the House. And what means the
grievous Complaint of diverse Gentlemen of the County of Durham against OLD SIR
HENRY VANE, which is printed in ENGLANDS BIRTHRIGHT. page 19. 20. 21? And
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne^ Complaint against him, in his late book called
LONDONS LIBERTIES IN CHAINS DISCOVERED, page 54? And what me^nes Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburnes p^ttifull Complaints in diverse of his books against
several Members of the HOUSE of COMMONS, but especially against Justice
LAVRANCE WHITAKER?

(See Innocence and Truth justified. page 12. 15. 16. 63. 64. And Londons
Liberty in Chains discovered.) And what means his lewd Complaints in his
Epistle to Judge, REEVE, etc. against the Earl of Manchester, and Colonel
Edward King of Lincolnsh^re, whom he accuses for being Traitors to the trust
reposed by the PARLIAMENT in them? And yet is so far from obtaining Justice
against them, that he is clapped by the heels in the exceeding chargeable prison
of the Tower of London by their means.

And what means that extraordinary Complaint of Mr. ANDREWS BVRRELL, in his
printed REMONSTRANCE TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, against the CHIEF MEN that
are mannagers of the NAVY, viz, THE EARL of WARWICK, Mr. GILES GREEN
Chairman of the Committee of the Navy, Mr. SAMVEL VASSAL, and the 2. Mr.
Bencis Members of the same Committee, etc? To whose charge he lays little
less then TREACHERY TO THE WHOLE KINGDOM, and couse^ing and cheating of the
publicks monyes, yea, such is his CHARGE there against them, that if he be able
to make it good; THEY DESERVE NO LESS THEN HANGING. And it seems he is able
sufficiently to do it, for they dare not call him to account, but let him go at
Liberty, which demonstrat^s to all understanding men, They know their own
guiltiness.

And a thing of as high a consequence is the lamentable Complaint made against
Sir John Clotworthy and his friend Mr. Davis, etc. about their cousening and
cheating poor and bleeding Ireland, of much of the moneys that should have
relieved it, which Complaint is called The State of the Irish affairs, for the
Honorable Members of the Houses of Parliament, as they lie represented before
them, from the Committee of Adventurers in London, for lands in Ireland,
sitting at Gr^cers Hall, for that service, and printed at London by G. MILLER
dwelling in the Blackfriars. The abstract of which, with some additions, are
inserted in a written paper, which I had from a good hand which follows thus.

A further discovery of the evil managing of the affairs of Ireland, wherein
it does plainly appear, that above the fourth part of the moneys levied for
Ireland is pursed by 4. or 5. private men to the value of 97195. l.
THat presently after the trouble did break forth in Ireland, there was one
Mr. John Davis of the Irish Nation came for England, who was trusted by the
Parliament with 4000. l. worth of Provisions, and appointed Commissary for the
disposal of those goods for the English and Scottish Armies in Ireland.

The said Mr. Davis using indirect ways, by feasting and bribing the Officers,
having spent 100. l. upon them in a week, as he himself has acknowledged, and
by that means he obtained his desire, for he valued the goods which he
delivered to the Armies at such unreasonable high prizes, that in this
employment for the space of 8. or 9. months, he so manageth the business, that
he makes the parliament indebted unto him 12195. l.

And it will be made manifest by sufficient testimony that before he was put
into this employment, he was not worth 200. l. but with feasting and bribing
the Commanders of the said Armies;

He obtaines such an account in writing, having such friends to assist him,
that he procures General L^sl^yes letter of recommendation for his good
service, setting forth how seasonable the provisions came to the Army: but no
mention made that the Parliament sent the goods.

That after the said Mr. Davis had procured this letter, he comes for England,
the troubles here being great, the Parliament had not time to hear him, so he
continued in, and about London for the space of two years or thereabouts.

In which time he was reduced to a mean and low condition, in so much (as he
has acknowledged) he had much ado to ge^ money to buy food for himself and his
wife: yet in this low Condition he puts in Propositions to the Commi^tee of
Parliament, to deliver 60000. l. in Provisions, Arms, and Cloth, to be paid
out of the Ordinance for Ireland which was for above three times as much, but
he was to have the first money that came in upon the said Ordinance, only
20000. l. was allotted otherwise.

The Committee of Adventurers for Ireland were sent for and treated withal, to
know if they would serve in, and deliver those provisions for Ireland, who at
the first refused to agree by way of bargain, alleging that they would make
use of the said Ordinance to serve it with all expedition, expecting no profit:
but the Committee of Parliament said that there was necessity of making
agreement by way of contract: whereupon the Committee of Adventurers for
Ireland did give in Propositions that they would serve, and deliver those
provisions 7000. l. in 60000. l. under the prises Mr. Davis had given in:
notwithstanding M. Davis delivered the goods and had his prizes for those goods
and provisions, but did fail in all his undertakings both in the time of
delivering the goods: and also the goods he served were generally very bad: as
does appear by the Testimony of one of the Parliaments Commissioners in
Ireland, which Testimony, and the prises Mr. Davis had, is here inserted, The
reasons why M. Davis had this employment before those Citizens, are many I
shall name one: the cessation of Arms in Ireland being ended, diverse
Commanders came over from thence into this Kingdom, who knowing Mr. Davis of
old, in respect of his large bribes given them, did desire the Committee of
Parliament, that Mr. Davies might be the man for the providing and furnishing
of provisions for the service of Ireland, alleging they knew him well; as for
the Citizens, they were more fit to keep shops, then to take care of a Kingdom.

These Commanders abovementioned, are those who were for the Parliament one
year, and the next year sided and joined with the Irish Rebels: these are the
men who gave this good report of Mr. Davies.

That Mr. Davies has made a second bargain with the Commit of Parliament for
45000. l. worth of goods* the which money is fully paid him, and the 60000. l.
also formerly mentioned, and this Committee have allowed him his pretended Debt
of 12195. l. out of the money appointed by Ordinance of Parliament only for
Ireland, and not to pay any debt, although never so real.

Mr. Davies in the month of July, 1646. has made a third agreement for
140000. l. to deliver so much in Arms, Provisions, and other necessaries, the
money part of it, to be paid out of the Excise, and the rest by a new Ordinance
of Parliament, for levying of moneys for the service of Ireland, the Commit
of Adventurers having formerly declared in their book formerly set forth by
the^, which was presented to diverse Members of Parl. in the Month of Jan.
1645. wherein the Committee do allege, that if they might have had the
managing of that service of 60000. l. in a Committee-way, they would have saved
the State 15000. l. in the said sum of 60000. l. of the prises allowed Mr.
Davies, and would have furnished better goods; and Mr. Davies after his first
agreement, had also allowed him 2500. l. to get in the money: if 15000. l could
have been saved in 60000 l. what might have been saved in 245000. l. by that
account there might have been saved above 61000. l. and better commodities
furnished. There is a Parliament man named Sir John Clotworthy, that has been
the said Mr. John Davies his chief friend, to assist him in all his bargains
aforesaid: this is that Sir John Clotworthy against whom the Committee of
Adventurers for Ireland, formerly petitioned the Pariiament, that he might give
account foe 24000. l. received by him of the Adventurers money; for the which,
to this very day he has given no account: and the Committee do verily believe,
he never will give any account for the said money: So what with Mr. Davies
12195. l. which he so falsely got and the 61000. l. formerly mentioned, and the
moneys Sir I. Clotworthy detaines in his hands, being 24000. l. as aforesaid,
amounts in the whole to 97195. l. which is above the fourth part of the money
allotted for the service of Ireland, for these 2 or 3 years past. This-being
considered, it is no marvel that the cry of Ireland is so loud. That in
September. and October, 1644. there was by order of Parliament three meeting^ of
the Adventurers of Ireland, usually sitting at Grocers Hall London, four
Parliament men then present, sent as a Committee from the Parliament; namely,
Sir I. Clatworthy, Mr. Reynalds, Major Jepson, Sir I. Clotworthy moving at all
the several meetings for money, it was desired by the Adventurers, that there
might be a new Committee chosen by the Adventurers. Sir I. Clotworthy showed
his dislike unto that motion; saying, if they would have a Committee, it should
consist of 4 Parliament men, 4 Irish men, and 3 Citizens: the Irishmen were
such, who not above 3 weeks before had sided with the Irish Rebels, and these
four to three Citizens: this savoured not well. The Adventurers much distasting
this, were all going away: at last it was granted the Adventurers to choose the
Committee: whereupon 4 Aldermen and 16 Merchants, very able men, were chosen
newly, Sir I. Clotworthy, as appears, disliking this Comm^ttee, ^he business
was managed by a Committee above, and the Committee of Citizens have been as
ciphers. At the said meeting, there were two Citizens A^venturers did offer
unto sir I. Clotworthy, and the committee then pr^sent, that they would
undertake to serve 1500. l. worth of cheese and butter, good sound cheese at 2.
d. per l. and good bu^ter at 4. d. ob. per l. and to receive the money out of
the Ordinance of Parliament, at six months, or as i^ came in: But sir John in
the audience of all he people then present, made this answer; that cheese and
butter was too saucic for them, and that the soldiers in Ireland would be
c^ntent with bread and water: teis did much discourage the Adven^urers to hear
him speak after this manner. But observ^, sir John Clotworthy did so assist his
friend Mr. Davies, that he had 3. d. ob. per l. for the same commodity which
was offered by the Adventurers for 2. ^. pe l. on may judge what that will come
to in a quantity: you may observe that Mr. Davis and his Partners did buy the
goods aforesaid upon the credit of the said Ordinance of Parliament, the which
might have been done by some of the Adventurers who would have delivered better
Provisions, and have saved the State 61000. l. in the several percels
aforementione^: all the wivele, eaten, and mustie Corn that could be had,
these undertakers did buy up at cheap rates, and so in other Commodities, the
bas^st trumperie that could be had which they delivered for the said service of
Ireland.

The said Mr. Davis had 3. partners which are by their callings Cheesemongers,
viz. Mr. Thomas Radberd, Mr. John Chesson, and Mr. Dennis Gauden: I shall set
forth unto you what these men have been.

First of all in the year 1640. they were undertakers and did deliver
Provisions for the Bishops Army against the Scots, which Provisions being
returned, the said undertakers bought most of the same Provisions under the
fourth part the King paid for them, yet it has been observed that this money
has not thriven with them, for they have had great losses especially one of
them by Sea.

That about 3. years since, Mr. Radberd and his partners having good store of
Butter on their hands, procured one to petition a Committee of Parliament:
setting forth in his Petition that he was a Merchant, and that he did desire
their Order for transportation of 1800. Firkins of Butter for Ireland, which
being granted by virtue of the said Order; Radberd and his partners shipped
1800. Firkins of Butter, and so it passed the River upon the said Order: the
Vessel laden with this Butter put into Dover Peer, and there continued for 3.
or 4. days, as the Mr. has acknowledged: the wind coming fair, the ship put
forth of the Peer at night, and the nex morning the Mr. with his Ship and
goods came safe before Dunkirke upon Order from the said Mr. Radberd and his
partners, the Mr. has also acknowledged that the Order for their transporting
of the Butter for Ireland was only to coullour the business: the Butter was
unladen and sold at Dunkirke, for the account of Mr. Radberd and his partners.

That John Chesson at the beginning of the troubles of this Kingdom, when the
Parliament was low, and the Kings party looked very bigg upon us, then he
cries a King, a King; but of late he faced about, cries a Parliament, a
Parliament: that when the Kingdom was brought to a very low condition, the
Adventurers for Ireland and others wellaffected did disburse in money and goods
for Ireland above 5000000. l. and to this day have not been repaid any part
thereof, at that time Mr. Racb^rd etc his (...) partners aforementioned would
not trust the State with (...) And yet norwithstanding they with their partner
Mr. Davis (...) the men that have the mannaging, and are undertakers for all
the service of Ireland, although to the great damage and loss of this
Kingdom, and likewise to the Kingdom of Ireland, and a very greatch
scouragement to the Adventurers and all other persons we^ effected to the
safety of both Kingdoms.

Thus you may perceive that those who have been most affectionate and helpful
to the Parliament and Kingdom, adventuring their liv^s and Estates for them,
having almost disbursed their whole Estates are now scarce looked upon; and
those who have not at all assisted the Parliament, but stood as N^urers, and
have sought themselves and their own advantages: these are the men who run away
with so many thousand pounds while many aithfull friends to the Parliam^n^, and
true lovers of their Country fare ready to perish for want of Food.

Can it be immagined, that the said undertakers for Ireland, were more able to
provide the goods aforesaid, better and cheaper, or so cheap as the Committee
of Adventurers could have done? And i^divers Citizens did trust the Parliament
upon their bare words in times of distress with above 50c0000d. what would not
these men have trusted the Parliament upon an Ordinance to have their money paid
them within very few months? and it cannot be otherwise immagined.

These things with diverse others, as also the Parliament men's continually
fingering great sums of many out of Goldsmiths-Hall, into their own particular
pockets, for th^^ pr^tinded losses, disbursments, and pay, before any of the
poor necessitaied people of the Kingdom have theirs, abundaice of whom stand
sen^tine^s more in need of it th^n they, yea and better desorve it their diverse
of them, and ought in justice and conseience to go in ^^ ^q^all forvard
preportion with them, and their enjoying their vast and great place, for all
the Cloak, and moske of their self-denial Ordinance, and the iaegrosing the
most of the La^^ pr^c^ise in the kingdom into the hands of their petty fogging
Lawyers, I say the things for the more presevation of the kingdom, deserve
seriously to be looked into, and told plainly and honestly unto them, vvlth an
earnest desire of their reformation, and not of their destruction, that so
they, and all the love their just interest may have canse to say. Faithful are
the wounds (orrepreofes) of a friend, but deceitful are the kisses (or
slatterings) of an enemy, with task shall be the earnest and to dial
endeavors of him that is a true lover of Englands happiness and prosperity.

N. E.

FINIS.

