An excellent letter written by a Prisoner, to a worthy Member of the House of
Commons, to give further evidence to the premises.
Noble Sir,
IN the beginning of these troubles, I suffered a hard imprisonment under the
Commissioners of Array (half a year) for refusing to submit to their usurped
authority, afterward for the same I was driven in Exile, and my means all that
time possessed by them, and so I lived as a banished man from my Country for
two years, until the Reducement thereof to the obedience of Parliament. I was
sent hither to give in a charge against some with us, whom the Parliament had
declared Traitors, yet again put into the highest places of trust and command
in our Country by Mr. B. contrary to his oath and trust, upon the Houses
receiving our charge, I expected that Mr. B. and others complained of, should
have put in their answers, but in stead thereof, I was put to answer
Interrogatories against my self, tending to the betraying the trust reposed in
me. To which interrogatories, I desired time to advise to answer, there^^ on I
was committed by the House of Commons unheard, nor never so much as called to
their bar, (a thing which the Heathen Romans abhorred to do) upon the bare
(though false) report of Mr. L. made to the house, viz. That I contemptiously
refused to answer, it never being my intention to do any thing in contempt of
the House. Here I have lain nine months to my ruin, and the ruin of my wife
and children, whilst the common enemies of the Kingdom (of whom we complain)
are continued in their authorities, contrary to law, you have by the Act made
for the abolishing of the Star Chamber, confirmed Magna Charta and the Petition
of Right, and amonst others the 4. chap. of the Statute of the 34. of Ed. 1. By
which Statute it is granted, That all men of this Kingdom shall have their
Laws, Liberties, and Free customs, as they have used the same, when they had
them at the best. And if any Statutes have been made or custom brought in to
the contrary thereof, the same to be void and frustrats for evermore. And that
this custom of committing men to prison, for refusing to answer
Interrogatories this way, is contrary to Law, and the liberty we have of old
enjoyed, is clear and manifest.

Sir you know that by Magna Charta, chap. the 29. No man is to be imprisoned
but by the judgment of his Peers and Equals, or by the law of the Land,
which is expounded by the Statute of the 25. of Ed. 3. chap. 4. To be by
indictment or grese^^ment of good and lawful men (not of infamous persons) or
by writ original of the Common Law. And no man may be put to answer, without
presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, according to the old Law of
England, See the 28. of Ed. 3. chap. 3. and the 37. of Ed. 3. chap. 18.
Touching long imprisonment, as it is most unjustly and wickedly practiced at
this day. The Law has ever held the same so odious; that it has provided, if
the prisoner be not speedily and timely brought to his trial or freed, he may
have gratis, (without any fee) without delay or denial, the Writ De Odio et
Atia, for bayling him out of prison, though convict of murder, Magna Charta
chap. 26.

But alas we have but the shadow of it, we by the subtilty of Lawyers, are
only free men in name, the English man's freedom is now become worse then the
Turkish slavery, how many of us lie and languish in your murdering prisons^ to
the provoking of the God of Justice unto wrath against you) and our wives and
children thereby exposed to all want and misery; whose loud cries and tears
(doubtless) will draw down vengeance from the just hand of Heaven upon you
(if not speedily prevented by administration of justice.) We have often with
all earnestness, petitioned and solicited for liberty, yet can (...) not since
the first Session of this Parliament get one Ordinance passed for it, whereas
Traitors and Murderers of their brethren can have (since the surrender of
Oxford) many score of Ordinances psssed for their liberty, peace and welfare.

The just God of Heaven and Earth be judge between you and us (that are not
freed) yea many of us are still imprisoned without any legal charge brought
against us yet can we have no benefit of these laws, which are not denied to
these enemies, murderers and destroyers of their native Country. O where
(...) justice^t May not those royal: Plunderers (...) well justify all their
Robberies and Depredations, as either our House of Commons, or the House of
peers these kinds of Imprisonments, and commitments: Nay, is it not the
greatest injustice, when done under the color of Justice? Sir I assure you, it
were less grievious unto us to dye at once, then thus to be inslaved and
famished in your cruel Prison houses, where (...) to all misery, contempt,
obliquie and (...) of the worst of men and thereby the hearts of our wives and
aged Parents are broken with sorrow and grief. Sir, be pleased also to
consider, how by these and the like doings, the affections of many thousands of
the people is estranged from you, who have formerly adventured all to ^^hol
dyon in your autho^ And if this course be continued, we shall not, (...) not
think ^ (...) say less, then that the Parliament (and not the Prerogative)
makes us a bondage and miserable people. And some already do not spare to say
that the Parliament is now become the burden of the Kingdom: If you intend to
inslave us still, deal plainly with us and let us know it. You were entrusted
by the people for their good, and not for the continuation of their Thraldom.
We have not been failing on our parts, and by the blessing of God, have so far
brought the common enemy of the Kingdom under your power, that there is none
that dare to stand up against you, but some few in houlds, so as there is now
no let nor other excuse left, why the course of justice in a free current
should be any longer obstructed and hindered. The recovery whereof was the very
end and cause of all our fightings. Let us then have justice, which without
showing your selves to be most unjust men, you cannot any longer deny unto us.
Let not Manchester, B. and some other Achans amongst you, be denied justice, If
they be wrongfully accused, they ought to be vindicated, if they be guilty of
the accusations against them, you cannot be guiltless in not doing justice
upon them, let neither their wealth, nor honor, nor their eminent places,
serve them for a covering, or be any Sanctuary unto them, God is no respecter
of persons in judgment) and are not you placed here betwixt God and us, to do
justice. But if you have respect of persons, you dishonor God, commit sin, and
stand convinced as transgressors of the Law. James 2.9. The Lord also farther
says, That ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment. Thou shall not
respect the Person of the poor, nor honor the Person of the mighty, but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor, Levit. 19 15. For whosoever they
be that pervert justice and judgment, are accursed of God, see Deuteronomy. 27.19.

If therefore you would be accounted, and numbered amongst the Sons of
wisdom, and not amongst those that are under this course, do justice freely,
speedily and impartially, let it never be said of our highest court of
Judicatory, as was some times of Romes Senate Dat venia^, corvis vexat censura
columbos. Why should your friends perish in your abominable Gaoles, (Hells
Soul destroying houses) whiles that yours, and the kingdoms professed
Enemies, the capital transgressors of the Laws are suffered freely to walk
London streets, to enjoy their liberties with their ill gotten wealth, and to
be so much honored and trusted, as to sit and vote amongst you in you
Council, as Thorp the Lawyer does, who endeavored, councelled, and by
threatenings atrempted to have had Hull delivered up to the King, which when he
could not effect, neither by threats nor by treachery, he then caused Sir John
Hotham to be proclaimed Traitor by two Heralds at arms, for keeping the town
for the Parliament and Kingdoms use Oh the misery of these times!

Behold, the whole Kingdom cries aloud for Justice, the spoiled for
reparations, and we your poor inslaved Prisoners illegally committed, and
uniustly detained in your several prisons, (Groaning under this Egyptian
Servitude do cry out for justice and their just liberty and enlargement,
according to law and justice.

Wherefore noble Sir, if by your means and mediation, we (after so long
expectation and delay) may obtain these our just desires, millions and
multitudes will have cause to bless God for you and eternize your name to all
posterity, as one of the chief means, of restoring our ancient Birthright and
liberty, of which number (though the least and unworthiest) he is and will be
one, neither unthankefull nor forgetful of so noble a favor for the general,
nor of what shall be most freely and nobly accomplished by you for the gaining
of his liberty in particular who is a free man in bonds, etc.

28. of the 17: Month.
FINIS.

