LILLIES APE WHIPPED

By Philastrogus.

Printed for W.I. C.I. G.W.

LILLIES APE WHIPPED.
SIR,
THE occasion of my writing unto you proceeds from the perusal of your
Nonsencicall Almanacke, or Ephemeris, as you and others may style it, by reason
it is a perfect Diary of your folly; Wherein for a Frontispeece you present us
with your Brazen face. The very Effigies speaks you of a Saturnine or
Malicious disposition; surely you had some ferall sign Horoscopating at birth,
which makes you so brutish as not to know what belongs to humane civility,
otherwise you would have spared your revileing breath (wherewith you think to
blast the Clergy) to have cooled your pottage. However, I commend you, that
will let the world understand by your Picture what you are, though but
Emblematically; which least it should be set off with a shadow (and so you not
seem really what you are) my Pencill does thus delineate it.

First here is a Sattin-Cap, that is to keep in your simplicity, which might not
have been taken notice of, had you but so much wit as to have kept your fools
Speculum for your own private Contemplation. Next ( Saturn like) we have many
dangling snakes with their heads reverse, verifying the truth of the old
Proverb, Bush naturally more hair then wit. N^xt, there is face like that of
Titus-Vespasian, a squeezing deglabing Countenance, such a one as
Prognosticates the squirt to be incident unto the purses of such Patients as
come to know of you whether they shall live or dye. We have next the Mole-Skin
exactly tipifying your discerning faculty for matter of Astrology to be more
blind then the Mole; but in stead of this Plush Jacket I think a Whip, and a
jack of Apes his coat were fitter for you: the one would make you more
heedfull to correct your errors, the other would become you far better,
since (at least) you are but Mr. Lillies Ape, whom you would, but cannot
imitate: The Globe is next, representing a Vertigo in your brain, that being
possessed with the giddiness of self conceit has sent your wit a
Wool-gathering, since which contrary to the Maxim in Philosophy, there may be
a vacuity found in your Pericranium. And this is no wonder to me at all, since
I perceive your Rete mirabile to be cracked; for the net being broak, the Bird
is flown, or your Brain indeed is rather over flown with strange Chymera's of
your own hatching, without any existence in that Art you profess.

Next, that we may take notice you are a Gentleman (but sure it is of the
younger House, who are better fed them taught) you give us a badge thereof: But
not to detract any thing from the worth of that ancient Family of the
Culpepers, whose merits transcend the commendation of so weak a Pen, and
therefore not to say and thing of them, least I should rather detract then ad to
their worth; my speech is to you, who knows, or at least should know, that
honor sprung at first either from the Sword or Gown, both which without
question made that family honorable. Sed ole quid hoc at te? Nam Genus and
Proavi and quae nos non fecimus ipst, vix ea nostra vocentur. However, you let
us understand for your Arms, you have the Lyon-Passant, which makes you pass
for such a beast, that is of a ravening disposition, which the Moon crescent
more fully by her light discovers unto us, showing you to be somewhat Lunatic,
and rather the more, because she is toward the full. Had you been a right
Gentleman (as by this Coat you intend the world should take notice) you would
have scorned so much to have vilified the Gown; but by how much the Gown
stands in opposition to your better thoughts, by so much you are degenerated
from a Gentleman, yea from a man to a beast: I wonder not now, you tell us you
were no Academick, if you had, I should have concluded you at the highest
Pitch, to have been but a Sopho-moore, or at least one of the ruder sort of
youth, whom Aristotle himself excludes from his Ethick Lecture; for you have
wit and manners both a like, (...), that is (least you should run to the
Westmisterian Schoole-boyes to english it) in a distinct Proportion, so that
when the Zenith and Nadir may be brought to meet, we may then expect a
conversion of these in you; in the Interim I would have you go to school, and
form As in presenti. But I Will now come to your Errors, which you will say
perhaps were wilfully committed, that we might know you are a man for humanum
est errare; yet such palpable ones show you to be a bungler, rather then an
Artist, for which you need not fear we should deifie you, unless it were to
place you in a fools Paradise.

The Cardinal Error (on which many other hang) concerns the Suns ingresse
into the Vernall Equinoxe, or rather according to Copernicus, the Earths
saluting, the first point of Libra, wherein you present us with such a face of
heaven (with what face you can do it, I know not) in which the first of the
first decanate of Scorpio ascends; I verily believe and am sure, the Scheam is
right acccording to that given time; but you like an unskilful Musician have
made a discord by not keeping true time for the Suns entrance into Aries, by
this spoiling that harmonious consent of the Spheres music: for listen to
Master Lilly, Booker, Wharton and Wing, and you will hear all of them, sounding
an Unisome, their several Scheams like so many well tuned instrument^, make up
a harmony, whereas yours for want of tuning comes basely off, and makes a
jarre; and this because you have scru'd your pegs too high; for whereas they
differ some few scruples (and that is no scruple in point of Art) from each
other for time, you are so singular, that you have marred all in dissenting
from them al by no less then an hour and fourteen minutes: I see now you are
omnium horarum home, and yet I much wonder (since you can temporize so well)
that you should be no better a time observer. I will not tell you, the eighth
day of March is put down for the ninth in the square, that may happen through
the Printers mistake, sure I am the other eight hours fifty eight minutes P.M.
cannot (by reason of your position of the Heavens for that moment) except for
want of true Calculation, and so to pass by your two figures (as truly
erected as this) for the Suns entrance into both the Tropicks, these (I say)
shall be turned over in silence because I would listen to your Judgments.

Page 24. Your judgment (you pretend) to be balanced by the prudent advice
(come falsely) of your Brother Reason. That you two should be Kin I see little
reason for it; you are not I suppose unacquainted with Doctor Simpleton, whose
Plumbiosity out-ballanceth all the reason you have. Sed perdere quos vult
Jupiter dementat. I know now who has made you so mad a Prognosticator, and
that is Jupiter in detriment; but you know your Reputation can recieve no great
detriment by it though you should Pay for your Pleasure with a Pox to you; else
what means that bald Pate of yours, if it were but unperiwig'd. Page 25. Your
Authors you will throw aside, (by what Authority I know not) only you take your
ipse dixit to be a sufficient warrant to command our credence, notwithstanding
which we will believe you when we list. I see you are a Rebel to all Authority,
and would assume a dominion in judgeing unto your self; but before you be judge
in your Art, I would have you first proceed Master of Art, only this; I Am
afraid) is a degree beyond your Capacity, though I am confident you already
take your self to be a man of degree.

Page 28. O Heavens! What have Men no more Wit yet, then to run after a company
of prating Priests and Lawyers. What I pray have you to do with Heaven? I Am
afraid Heaven has but little to do with you, since you have so much to do
with Hell, from whence you fetch your opprobrious and calumniating terms; for
your Master (who sets you on work, and will one day truly pay you your hire)
was a Detractor from the beginning. But you are a Saint forsooth for quoting a
deal of Scripture; and so is the Devil, for he did as much for his own
advantage. Have Men no more Wit? Verily, had they no more then you, they would have
but a little; for what you had is here vented at once, and now your Hogs-head's
empty, we may expect it should sound, though there be nothing in it. Your
vilification (as you think) in terming the Ministers PRIESTS, is more
honorable then you are aware, and therefore they are better company then for
your self. But why prating Priests? I see you will discover your self to be
of the Athenian Sect, which counted PAUL but a babbler. But take heed I advise
you, least what you esteem prating, prove at the last more then an empty sound
against you: if the WORD of GOD be of no better repute with you then Wind, it
shall prove such a Wind as shall scatter such Dust as you are from before the
face of the Almighty.

There are more things wherein by some able Astronomer you stand in need to be
Catechized. Me thinks you should have been better infighted in the speculative
part of your Science, e're you adventured on the Practick, especially since you
intended to make it known to the world how little you know; for would an Artist
commit such absurdities as may be found in you. To instance, whereas in
January, all former Writers begin with the letter A, and end with it in
December at the end of the year; contrary to all Presidents, out of a
Pragmatick humor you begin with G, overthrowing by this all Ancient Method;
but what talk I of this which is a slender one to what follows, and that is
your putting down in this Month C. for the Dominicall letter in stead of D. I
suppose you considered it was Leap-yeare, and that made you skip over the
right. If you had not told us aforehand, we might easily discern that you had
thrown your Authors aside: for had you in composing your Almanac perused
Master Wings Practical Astronomy, you could not have so grossly mistook and
took C. for D. If you are married, I would have your wife acquaint you more
with the horne-booke, for I see you must to your A.B.C. You tell us of a great
Eclips of the Sun (which every novice can do) but I could tell you of what is
greater then that (though less in it self) and that is the smalnesse of the
Suns Eccentricity, it being the least that has been many hundred of years; but
this is eccentricall to your apprehension, and so not taken notice of.

Had I room, I would have gone on and read you over, I Will but conclude as your
self began in the Epistle, that here is too much already, unless it were
better: and so Sir, the reason of my Scurrility proceeds from the defect of
civility in you, not any disaffection to your Noble Art, for I am

Philastrogus.
Cambridge, Feb. 2. 1651/2
FINIS.
(...) run these courses in contemplation of Ticho-Brac the ancient German
Astronomer, or of the French famous Nostradamus; far less of an old
prattling Mother Shipton; but because their influences are perpetually set on
the perpetrating of wickedness; being incapable of any change at all, whereby
their far differ from the constitution of the Celestial Orbs; which are by some
speculatists said, to incline men's minds to such and such actions, though not
to necessitate them thereunto.

So likewise it is worthy of our observation, how artificially the spirit of
delusion does wage his war, when as by his ballacing of the scails he makes
them, sometimes to rise and other times to fall; sometimes by choler, and at
other times by hopes and promises: All which he so dexterously mannages, and
carries on, as that at length, he reduces them to believe, that it is un fair
le faut, a thing which must be done; viz The patching up of a peace between
parties, France and Spain, who to keep their Legions in action, must be
necessitated to display their Banners against the Tribes of Israel; who as it
seems are their main opposites; when as alas! those said Tribes have but too
many opposites amongst themselves. And the which was by woeful experience)
found to be too true. For that when as that Tribe seemed to be even at the
height of its flood, and prosperity; as then, their old Duke of Bouillon
together with twenty five more of the chiefest pillars, fell off from them at a
clap; and as then they cried, Help Lord, for that honest men do perish and
decay, etc.

Now to the end, that the Devil may be fooled indeed, that the Pope may be put
by his wiles (not only by a straight way toward him by France, or by
Sivitauecha, but by a spirit of Peace) and that the Malignant firebrands may be
run off from their byasses and guards:

May such resolves, be taken as are most answerable to Christian pieity and
wisdom; for to study and fix on possibilities; and in the first place, to wave
Impossibilities, on the regard of an Abel-like blood, which was spilt by
murderers hands, and so to show our selves as piously wise as the Devil is
wickedly crafty: For that thereby the spirits of delusion will be intrapt, and
sufficiently fooled, the Papal stratagems will be overthrown, and the Malignant
crew will be banged home to the purpose; notwithstanding their groundless to
the purpose; notwithstanding their groundless fulminations against that King
of Spain, and those Nobles whom they pretend to hold (by their said Sancta
Inquisition) fetered in chains, and linked in Irons, which must needs most
ridiculously retort upon themselves; for that their pretended Sanctuary was not
intended for such as they call Heretics who neither acknowledge them, nor
their Sanctuaries rights; nor do they themselves deem those, (whom they
account off as Heretics) to be worthy of being admitted into their Purgatory.

Secondly, may the wisdom of this Commonwealth pitch upon such Christian-like
resolutions, as might be answerable to the Divine Wisdoms dictates, and to
wave all manner of Impossibilities, in regard of our neighbors the Hollanders;
whereby the spirits of Delusion will be confounded, and made fools off indeed;
so likewise would the Papal Stratagems on that scoare be brought to naught; and
such firebrands will be confounded as may have entertained the like thoughts;
which sundry men have fostered of the great pretended advantages, which will
redound unto the Navy by the Act of Prohibition, concerning Importation, when
as sundry well experimented persons, in the traffic and navigation allege
store of arguments to the contrary, which are backed and confirmed by such
persons as have all their life time studied and discust the advantages proper
to their country men, who have observed amongst strangers those things which
are grounded on truth, and on most infallible Principles, an infinite number of
them concluding in one and the self same axiom, consonant unto the arguments
comprehended in the sixteenth and seventeenth pages of the second part of a
Seacabin Dialogue, of late presented to the public View.

Finally may the wisdom of this Commonwealth take such pious and christianlike
resolves in the behalf and favor of one of the tribes of Israel, beyond the
English Jordan, as that thereby the Kingdom of Christ may be advanced, and
manifested to all the Nations of the Earth, that so all true Israelites (in
whom there is no guile) as well here as there, may at length attain unto the
blessed condition of being all one in sincerity; whereby doubtless both the
Devil, the Pope and the Malignant crew will be out witted, confounded, and
made arch fools of to some purpose.

FINIS.

