L. Colonel JOHN LILBURNE revived.

Showing the cause of his late long silence, and cessation from Hostility
against alchemy St. Oliver, and his rotten Secretary; as also of the report of
his Death. With an answer in part, to the pestilent calumniation of Cap: Wendy
Oxford (Cromvvels Spy upon the Dutch, and upon the English Royallists,
sojourning in the United Provinces) closely couched in a late delusive
Pamphelet of the said Oxfords, called [The unexpected life, and wished for
death, of the thing called parliament in England]

All which, with many Historical passages, giveing light into the unvvorthy
practices of the English Grandees, is contained in three letters (The first to
a friend in the United Provinces. The second to a friend in Scotland. And the
third, To the Honorable, Colonel Henry Martin, in England)

Written by L. Colonel JOHN LILBURNE.

The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the roareing Lion at Oxford, and
out of the paws of the ravenous Bears at Guild Hall in London, and from all
the earnest expectation of their Masters, the incensed Beare-wards at
Westminster; he will deliver me out of the hands of the uncircumcised
Manqueller. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold he is in thine hand, only save
his life.

Job. 2.6. Go ye and tell that FOX, that a Pleader for his countries
liberties, and the performance of solemn Engagements and Promises, cannot be
murdered out of England. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature
the things contained in the Law (Romans 2.14) whiles alchemy Christians having
both Law and Gospel do nothing but make Remonstrances, Declarations, vows and
Covenants; and write Hypocritical Letters, to choke the Actings of otheres
more honestly minded. Printed in the Year 1653. In March

For my Loving friend and Countryman Mr. D.D. in the United Provinces.
Kind Sir,
THere is a saying in Scripture, that in adversity there is a friend to be
found, that is nearer then a brother. and truly although there is betwixt you
and me both in things moral and divine, a great deal of difference betwixt
our judgments, yet seriously without flattery or falsehood, I must aver, that
with that little accidental conversing, that now and then I have had with you,
dureing my abode in the United Provinces, I have truly found you one of those
real friends, that has been nearer to me then a brother, yea, and in my
present adversity I may really aver, I have found more obligations of true
friendship from you alone, then I have done from my brother, and all the
brothers in law I have in the world, put all together in one: and being now
really in the condition of a true man, set upon by a company of robbing
thieves, that robb him of all he has (for seriously since I left England, I
neither have now, nor ever had before, the absolute command of one Sixpence of
all my estate, the greatest part of which some months ago Haselridge as I am
informed, has got an extent upon) and when they have done that, lie waiting
with a company of murderers to take away his life also, which by the following
discourse, you will find to be my case. and being truly, really and bona fide,
in that condition; I hope it will not appear to you to be irrational,
unworthy, or an undervalueing of my self [and thereby an exposeing my self to
shame and contempt] for me, as much as in me lies, to cry out for help, to all
ingenuous men in the world, against their unjust, cruel, and unrighteous
dealing with me, especially seeing if I any longer sit still, an unavoidable,
and an apparent ruin is before me. therefore whither my present crying out,
will accomplish the end I wish and desire it may do, or the quite contrary,
there is in my present case noe choice at all; for necessity has no law, and
if I sit still, (in my own thoughts) I perish, and if I write and print, I can
do no more. therefore through the strength of the Lord God Almighty, I am
resolved to do that, which in my own judgment I apprehend to be my duty, and
then trust God [that never hitherto failed me] with the issue.

When I left Holland, to come to meet my wife in Flanders, I did not then
resolve to have been so long silent as I have been, neither has my long
silence arose in the least, from the fear of my adversaries greatness, or any
mischief they could do to me or mine, (for I have long since scorned their
courtesies, and contemned their malice) neither has it solely and altogether
to this day, proceeded from my tender affection to my wife, her and my poor
babes afflicted condition, but has somewhat I must truly acknowledge, been
mixed many times, with these and the like considerations.

First, because it has ever been esteemed by me, ignoble, and unworthy a man
of gallantry, and pure mettle indeed, [especially such a one as pursues a
righteous and just cause, as I am sure I now doe] to strike his adversary when
he is down, or to be revenged of him, when by casualtie and not by his
opposites immediate actings and endeavors, his hands are full with other
adversaries. and that this has been my practice to my present adversaries and
others, I averr it for truth, and give these instances for the illustrateing
and proving it.

Cromwell and I were professed adversaries to each other, in the year 1647. but
his adversaries by several risings in England, came upon him, and filled his
hands full of work; and my prosperity comes upon me, by my deliverance out of
the Tower, from almost a three years sad imprisonment, originally by the then
house of Peers. And having upon the 19. of January 1647. English style,
impeached Cromwell and his son in law Ireton (which impeachment is since
Printed) then in their full glory and Majesty, of high treason, at the open
bar of the then house of Commons, for an hour or two together, themselves
being then present in the house, for any thing I then knew, or do to this day
to the contrary, and offered, upon the hazard of my life, legally to make it
good, if they would put it judiciously to trial, which for fear of his guilt
they durst not do, but unworthily and basely committed me back again to the
Tower, by their order, as a Traitor for my pains. yet for all this, when his
own Major Robert Huntington, the 2. of August 1648. presented to the Parliament
a kind of a shrewd impeachment against him, and which is mentioned as a
considerable business, by the Author of the History of Independence (with which
book to my knowledge you are well acquainted) in his first part, Page 98. And
although I was proffered no small matters, by no small person or persons, to
have joined with the said Huntington against Cromwell; and solicited thereunto
by some that had a great interest in my affections, and to whom I owe a great
deal of obligations to, for singular courtesies done me; yet I abhorred it to
Huntingtons face, at the Parliament door, at the very nick of time he delivered
it (and principally because Cromwels hands were full with others, with whom in
the original, I was not in the least joined with against him.) And the next
day after I writ Cromwell [then in straits enough] a letter, and sent it by an
express, the copy of which letter [as it is recorded in the 32 Page of that
notable book called The Legal and fundamental liberties of the People of
England revived, asserted, and vindicated. for pretended making of which, I
was also arraigned for a Traitor at Guildhall, the foresaid October 1649.] thus
follows;

Sir, What my Camerade has written by our trusty bearer, might be sufficient
for us both. but to demonstrate to you, that I am no staggerer from my first
principles that I engaged my self upon, nor from you, if you are what you ought
to be, and what you are strongly reported to be, although if I prosecuted, or
desired revenge for an hard and almost starving imprisonment, I could have had
of late, the chief of twenty opportunities to have paid you to the purpose. But
I scorn it, especially when you are low. And this assure your self, that if
ever my hand be upon you, it shall be when you are in your full glory, if then
you shall decline from the Righteous ways of Truth and Justice, which if you
will speedily and impartially prosecute, I am

Yours to the last drop of my heart blood, [for all your late severe hand to
me] JOHN LILBVRN.
From Westminster this 3 of August, 1648. Being the second day of my freedom.

ANd besides this particular, I could instance several others of the like
nature, with this very CROMWELL at other times, and with several other
persons, of several other intrests, both Caviliers, Presbyterians, and
Independantes. but they would, all put together, be too long for the intended
brevitie of this Epistle, only one more I will take the boldness to insert,
and that is this.

There is one Captain Edmond Chillington, (a Captain of Horse now in Commissary
General Whaleys Regiment,) one of the fals-hearted Independents, who to
purchase his own Liberty, in the Bishops time, in 1637. in the Starr-Chamber
as their Agent, swore two false and wicked affidavitts there against me, by
virtue of which principally, I suffered al those unexpressable miseries I
underwent in the Bishops time [which are partly expressed in my late Apology
to the People of the Netherlands] which Chillington when I was a prisoner under
the King, in the years 1642. and 1643. at Oxford Castle, was also brought in
thither as another Prisoner. where he was brought to those straits, that he was
ready to starve, and where wanting money to buy him bread, he could not of any
there borrow Sixpence to buy him food to keep him alive from Starving, but
what he had of my self. who freely out of mere humane compassion, upon his own
bare entreaty, lent him both Silver and Gold, in the day of his very great
Calamity, to supply his necessities, and keep him alive. and afterward upon
his earnest entreaty, when at liberty, I improved my interest in An: 1643. in
the Earl of Manchesters Army, to make him an officer of horse, in that very
Regiment, (which as I believe) he has remained ever since in: and thereby is
grown now a rich and great man. But the ungrateful knave, like a false
hearted Independent indeed, in my late imprisonment in the tower of London, and
my contests with Cromwell then; was one of my principallest, reproachfullest,
maliciousest and most mischievous Enemies.

I confess this constant practice of mine, is not according to the Policy the
great men of the world walk by. yet I must averr, I find a great deal of peace
and tranquillity of mind, in the practicing of it. And must averr, and that in
truth, I am never so much an Heroic and dareing man, nor so much carried out
with Divine supportation, strength, assistance, counsel and presence of the
Lord God Almighty; as when by my wicked, base, cowerdly, and cruel
adversaries, I am most dealt with in the quite contrary, and thereby and by
their Barbarism, robbed and stripped (as it were) many times of all humane
power, means, earthly support, and advise. even then: and at such time as
this, and never before, am I in my delight-some Eliment, being then
accompanied with Divine strength and power, through the Lord Almighty, to
grapple, and and encounter with a Legion of wicked men and devils. and then
with ease, (at least in my own mind) to overcome all the difficulties, that
it is possible for the wickedness and greatness of my adversaryes to inviron
me withal. which was clearly and evidently manifested to an observant
spectator, at my carriage at my bloody and intended murdering trial in
October 1646, and which in a great part may easily be discerned by a judicious
and serious reader of the first and second parts of the said printed trial,
which contains betwixt 20 and 30 sheets of paper, of which trial I can truly
say thus much, to the praise of the Almighty, that I had not a friend in the
world, neither male nor female, but to their clear apprehensions their spirits
all failed them, and gave me over for a dead man, and endeavored with me as
Peter did with Christ, when he said, Master save thy self; at all of which and
whom [through the assisting strength of the Lord God] I laughed, being
absolutely confident, that there was that unresistable strength, and
fortitude, in naked truth and reason alone, that if I singlelie and thoroughly
cast my self upon it, it would with a witness carry me through, with a merry
countenance, and a cheerful heart: which I was as visiblie and sensibly
possessor of, without one minutes wavering, from the very first beginning to
the latter end of all, till the jurie cleared me. and then I confess my
countenance fell and changed, as being rapt up with Spiritual singing praises
unto God, even at the very Bar, for that infinite faithfulness, wisdom and
truth that he had clearlie, evidently and sensibly manifested unto me his
unworthy servant, even in that very trial and great deliverance. about my
method of mannageing of which, I neither did nor durst tell any man or woman
in the world what was my intentions, til I came to the Bar; least my
adversaries should get a hint of it, who I believe never expected but I would
have dealt with them upon a ranting high-flown score, in totally denying their
jurisdiction, and the authority of those that constituted them. but through
the strength of the Almighty, I went beyond their expectations, and gave them
such a cuff under their other ear, as I believe they will never thoroughly
shake of the smart and pain of it, whilst Cromwels beastly and most
grossly abominable Tirannie lasts. And yet, through the goodness of God, I
kept my principles to the breadth of an hair, in the whole mannagement of my
defense [that Masterpiece of all the earthly works (in my thoughts) that God
ever wrought by me, or for me.] But to return from this digression: I say, my
forementioned carriage or practice, is not only full of peace and
tranquillity of mind to me, but also in my own apprehension, and upon my most
serious scrutinie and examination, I never yet found my self a loser by it, no
more then the old and famous Commonwealths of the Acheens, or Romans did judge
themselves to be loosers by the like, of which Acheens Polybius the Grecian in
his wise and wel-pend History, fol. 414. gives this worthy testimony, viz.

That they were estranged from deceit toward their friends to advance their
power, by which they would not vanquish their enemies, holding it neither noble
norfirme if they did not vanquish by prowess, and in open fight. Wherefore
they ordained amongst themselves, that no man should make use of hidden arms,
thinking that an open Combatt hand to hand, was the true determining of war.
Finally they declared themselves to their enemies, and signified the war, when
they were once resolved to undergo the danger of the battle. The like they
did, of the places where they would decide it. And in the fame page he goes on
and says, there is yet in his time, [which was in the life of Hannibal the
great, that cut his way, in the depth of Winter, through the mountanous Alps of
Italy, to get his armies as nigh Rome, as their swords would enable them]
remaining in the Romans some relics of their ancient humor. in such
affairs, they signify their war before, and they seldom use any ambushes,
fighting readily hand to hand. Let these words [saith he] be spoken against
the affection which is much more ready then is needful, in malicious
practices, policies, and ambushes amongst Princes, as well in affairs of war
as policies. And Plutarch in his History, fol. 139. relateing how that the old
renowned Romans by their General, Consul Camillus, made war and besieged the
strong cities Falerians, which being a very strong place in all parts, made
the people within very secure. which their General Schoolmaster to their
Children perceiving, he [for his own treacherous ambitious ends] led the
Children day by day, out of the walls to play, and at last presented himself
and them before the Roman General, in hopes of great matters from him for so
doing. but the virtuous and gallant old heathen Roman [although he brought him
the chief men's Children of the cittie] said to those that were about him: War
of it self surely is an evil thing, because in it many injuries and mischiefs
are done, nevertheless amongst good men there is a law and discipline, which
does forbid them to seek victory by wicked traitorous means, and that a
noble and worthy General should make war, and procure victory, by trusting
to his own valiantness, and not by another vileness and villainy. Therefore
he commanded his Sergeants to tear the clothes off the back, of this vile
Schoolmaster, and to bind his hands behind him, and that they should give the
children rods and whips in their hands, to whip the Traitor back again into the
city naked, that had betrayed them, and grieved their parents. which when the
Falerians heard, that the Schoolmaster had thus betrayed them, all the city,
says Plutarch, fell a weeping, and men and women ran together in one another
necks, to the town walls, and gates of the city, like people out of their
wits, they were so exceedingly troubled at the loss of their children, but
when they see their children bringing back the traitorous Schoolmaster, as is
aforesaid, and calling the Roman General Camillus their father, their God, and
their Savior; not only the fathers and mothers of the children, but generally
all the other Citizens, did conceive in themselves a wonderful admiration,
and great love of the wisdom, justice and goodness of Camillus. so that
notwithstanding the great strength of their city, they presently called a
Counsel, and there concluded to send Ambassadors forthwith unto him, to put
their lives and goods to his mercy and favor; who sent their Ambassadors
unto Rome, where having audience before the Senate, the Amstassadors said;
because the Romans preferred justice before victory, they taught them to be
better contented to submit themselves unto them, then to be their own men at
liberty, confessing their virtue did more overcome them, then any force or
power could do: where upon the Senate left all to their General Camillus, to
do in it what he pleased. and he used them so as became a man of a truly noble
mind, that rather desired to overcome their minds with love, then their
bodies with fear and terror, and thereby choosed to have their subjection out
of the lasting principles of love, rather then to have it by the cobweb ties of
fear.

And as full of nobleness and justice, was that act of Fabricius, another of
the Roman Generals toward Pyrrus King of Epirus, a dangerous and formidable
adversary to the Roman Commonwealth, and who forced their Generals and Armies
in diverse pitched Battles, against whom his own Physician [for the hopes of
filthy lucre] conspired to take away his life; for the accomplishing of which,
he writes a letter with his own hand into the Roman Camp, in which he proffered
to poison the King his master, in case the Roman General would promise him a
large reward for his pains, and for ending their desperate wars, without
further danger. But Fabritius detesting the wickedness of the Physician, and
having made Quintus Aemylius his colleague, and fellow Consul, also to abhor
the same; wrote a letter unto King Pyrrus and bad him take heed, for there were
that meant to poison him. the contents of the letter were these.

Caius Fabricius and Quintus Aemylius Consulls of Rome,
unto King Pyrrus greeting.
You have (o King) made unfortunate choice both of your friends and of your
enemies, as shall appear unto you by reading of this letter, which one of yours
has writ unto us. for you make wars with just and honest men, and do your
self trust altogether the wicked and unfaithful. hereof therefore we have
thought good to advertize you, not in respect to pleasure you, but for fear
the misfortune of your death, might make us unjustly to be accused: imagining
that by Treachery or treason we have sought to end this war, as though by
valiantnes we could not otherways atchieve it. which letter procured the
execution of this physician for his treachery, and a high admiration in King
Pyrrus of the Romans worth and noble gallantry. Plutarch Fol: 409.

O Renowned and worthy heathens, far surpassing in honesty, and far
surmounting in Justice and rightiousnes, our great pretended Christians the
governors in England; that Judge noe means nor ways though never so
abominable in themselves, too vile for them to undertake for the accomplishing
of their own ends: whether it be treachery, murder, prejurie, breach of
faith, or what ever it be. and who have cheated all manner of Interests that
ever yet in their lives they dealt with, and hold it as an undoubted article of
their faith, for the support of their State and policy; that it is not fit
nor convenient for them to keep faith with any Interest or generation of men in
the world, longer then it serves their own ends: being absolutely in their
own thoughts (as their constant practices sufficiently demonstrate and
declare, as clear as the Sun at noone day) tied by noe engagement,
declarations, protestations, oaths, Covenants, or Contracts whatsoever [that
even amongst Pagans and Infidels themselves are most Sacred] longer then they
please. and if any of their mercenary penmen dare be so impudent as to deny
this, that I now say of them, and indeanor in there behalf to prove the
contrary; I dare hereby engage my life and reputation, by abundance of evident,
declared and known instances to prove these my pressent asertions, as clear
as the Sun in its most glorious shineing. therefore let all wise men be wary
and take heed how they trust them.

But a little further to go on, me thinks it seems ugly and so inconsistent
with the principles of a man that would really be reputed a Christian, and that
injoys Communion with the Lord of Life and glory, and believes his Almighty
power and faithfullnes; to be a pursuer of any design whatsoever, but what he
well examines, and before hand compares with the Rule of truth and righteousness
the revealed will of god contained in the Scripture, and which evidently upon
the examination appears to his conscience and Judgment to be just and honest
in it self, and in the mannageing of which he Steeres his course by those two
sure and never faileing cards or Compasses of righteousness, vizt: [doe as you
would be donn unto] and [yee shall not do evil that good may come of it] that
should I either undertake such wicked designs as my Cromwellish Bloody
adversaries constantly for these 5 or 6 Years together have donn against me;
or pursne the accomplishment there of with such false, treacherous, hellish,
diabolical, Bloodly, cowardly means and ways, as they have commonly done upon
me, not with standing any glorious outside pretenses of religious fastings,
prayings and preachings [which yet in themselves rightely preformed are
excellent good things] that possible I could have acted or performed: really I
should have Judged my self, so far from deserveing to be reputed to be a true
Christian indeed; that truly I should rather have thought that abundantly more
justly I had truly deserved, to have that saying of Christ in John 8: 44:
spoken unto me, that Christ himself spoke unto the hypocritical jews, that
boasted much to be Children of Abraham, but did not do his works, but the
quite contrary: and therefore says Christ to them, you are of your Father the
Deviland the lusts of your Father you will do. he was a Murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is noe truth in him. when
he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the Father of
it.

The second consideration that I have had in my thoughts, arises from that
indeared affection, that I justly bear to the Land of my nativitie above all
nations in the world, and that extraordinary obligeing cause and ground I have
to bear the same to multitudes of the honest in habitants thereof, for their
former tender affection in the day of my great adversity largely manifested
unto me. now if under the pretense of my indeavering to preserve my self
against Cromwells faithles, and apparent indeavoring, utterly to destroy me and
mine, and extirpating me from the Earth; I should in the present day of
Englands adversity by their wars with Holland, hand over head [rashly and
inconsiderately by way of hasty revenge] engage against it, and endeavor to
have done to the whole as several bannished men [upon far greater causes and
grounds then mine] that I have redd of, that were bannished from Rome and
Athens did; who by joining their presonall and particular interests; parts and
abilities to the strength of Rome and Athens their professed enemies, and
thereby several times brought their native Cities and countries almost to
utter desolation: I say should I have done or indeavonred to have done this, in
the day of Englands present adversity [though I have I am confident of it as
much cause given me, in any open avowed way in the world, to endeavor to right
my self, against that grand Tyrant Cromwell and his lawles bloodthirstie Crew,
as can be given unto a man] yet I say, if my indevoring my own right, should
intentionally or rationally, and consequentially tend to the mischeise and
destruction of the whole, I should have had little peace or comfort of mind in
it; or small honor or repute, in the estimation of righteous and just men who
might justly have told me, God himself [though absolute Sovereign over all
mankinde] in wicked Sodoms case, abhorred to destroy the righteous with the
wicked, Genesis 18. And all those that truly profess the fear of his name, ought
to be like unto him, at least in the habit or disposition of there minds. And
besides,

They might also have justly told me of Gods severe threatened revenge upon
Edom, for dealing with the house of his brother Jacob in the like case,
although the smitings of God himself, for their sins was upon them, yet in
this very case, God in Obadiah Verse 9.10.11.12.13.14.15. thus says, And thy
mighty men, o Teman shall be dismayed, to the end, that every one of the mount
of Esau, may be cut off by slaughter; for thy violence against thy brother
Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever. in the day
that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried
away his forces, and forraigners entered into his gates, and cast lotts upon
Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them: But thou should not have looked
upon the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a stranger, neither
should thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah, in the day of their
destruction: neither should thou have spoken proudly in the day of their
distress. Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people, in the
day of their calamity, Yea thou should not have looked upon their
affliction, in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their
substance, in the day of their calamity, neither should thou have stood in
the cross way, to have cut of those of his that did Escape, neither should
thou have delivered up those of his, that did remain in the day of distress,
for the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen, as thou have done, it
shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head.

And also having redd the Scripture, as I have done diligently, they might have
told me, if the blood of one righteous Abel causesly shed, called, or cried so
loud in the ears of God for wrath and vengeance against Cain; how much more
louder would the cry of many righteous Abels be against me, whose blood must of
necessity in the eye of reason have been shed, should I have taken or now
should take such a course, as to endeavor revenge of the whole, for a mischief
done me by those that oppress the nation in general in a great measure as bad
as they do me and I know it was Judah and Jerusalems condition, in the day of
her great adversity [as Jeremy in his Lamentations witnesseth] amongst all her
lovers to have none to comsort her, and to have all her friends to deal
treacherously with her, and to become her enemies, for which she wept sore in
the night, that the very tears remained on her cheeks, and their lamentations
were beyond expression, which made her in the bitterness of her Soul, to cry
out to the Lord her God, and say, Render unto them a recompense, O Lord,
according to the work of their hands; give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto
them, persecute and destroy them in anger, from under the Heavens of the Lord.
And these their prayers and outcries were not in vain unto God, (as a little
before may partly be seen in Edoms case) for the Apostle James says, chap.
5.16. that the efectuall fervent prayer of the righteous avails much.

All these confiderations laid together, though my provocations are many (and
aggravated very much, not only by the slightings and forgetfullnesse, but also
by the base and unworthy dealings with me, by some of those, for the
preservation of whom and their estates, I have apparently ran the hazard of a
total ruin, to me and mine) and my straits (as to the outward man) great, yet
through the goodness and loving kindness of my good God, by his special
assisting me with the foresaid, and other the like considerations, and by the
immediate necessities of self-preservation, that my adversaries basely and
unworthily have brought upon me, the way of my present goeings is not only
clear, to be just and righteous in my own understanding, judgment and
conscience, (that lively voice of God speaking in my own soul) but I am
confident I have so deliberately, rationally and justly gone on hitherto) in
the progress of my business, that I am confident, through the assistance of
God, I am sufficiently furnished, with a just and grounded plea to answer
fully, what ever can be objected against my present proceedings, by the most
maliciousest and cunningest of my adversaries, or the scrupulousest of my
friends in England.

And although in my own imagination and invention, I have of along time laid
down a method to my self (which I would not willingly go from) by me to be
used in my appearing in print again to the world, rationally and methodically
to prepare and make way for my formal appeal to the body of the people of
England (which my wicked and unrighteous judges, have several years agone
[viz. Upon the 4. of Janury 1648,] in words voted to be their masters, or the
Supreme fountain or orginall of all just power in England; as you may largely
and particularly read in the second part of the History of independency Page:
55: 56: 57: as alsoo the grounds and reasons that moved them so to vote) which
I resolved on in my own thoughs come life come death before I left England,
which was upon Saturday first of Feb: English style. in which appeal seeing my
cruel judges (merely for the accomplishment of their own ends, the more
coullorably to take away the Kings life, that so when they had slain him they
might take possession of his power and estate, and at their pleasure divide it
amongst themselves and their slaves, and by the strength and power of it
domineer arbitrarily and Tyrannically over the lives, liberties and estates of
the anciently free people of England, and maintain themselves unaccountable by
the strength thereof, either to God or man, law or reason) have in words voted
the people of England, under God, to be the Original of all just power there,
but never intended it, that ever in actions or reallitie they should in the
least enjoy it; I will by Gods assistance do the best I can in my appeal, to
discover the cheates of Alchemy Saint Oliver, and his graceless Tribe in that
vote: and also I will instruct the people of England, in the best way, method,
or form that I can, to set themselves in, to obtain the real exercise of their
declared rightful supreme power; and also produce them several presidents
from the practice of the people in the Ancient and most famous Commonwealth of
Rome, and the Ancient Grecian Commonwealths of Athens, Corinth, Thebes, etc.
how they practifed their supreme power upon many occasions, even upon the
greatest Generals, Patricians, Noblemen, Senators, or Parliament Men they
had, and there is abundantly more reason, and ground for the people of England
now to contest even to the death, for the election from amongst themselves of
Tribunes, or keepers, or desenders of the peoples liberties, endued with ample
power, to preserve them against the annhilating mcroachments, that their
present Tyrannical Riders have already made upon them; then ever in the days
of old, there was for the old Plebeans, or Common people of Rome, to contest
with their Patricians or Senators for such protectors of their Liberties,
because even when tbe contests begun, or were at the highest in Rome, when the
people in their numerous and cemented body, betook themselves to Mars-Field
against their Lords; they were abundantly (though Pagans and Infidels) more
just, compassionate, less Lordly, and less domineering, and more free-hearted
to the people of Rome, then ours are to the poor people of England.

And also I will show them grounds and reasons to demonstrate clearly to them,
that there is in a manner as great a necessity for them, to contest for the
establishing by a law (as to contest for the preservation of their lives) those
two essential Maxims, without which England in a Common wealth can never be
free; viz First, that the chief commander of their Militia, or the General of
their Forces, by Sea or Land, be often removed; at least once every two years,
upon pain of immediate death upon the least refusal to surrender his command.
And

Secondly, that they make strickt and sure provision, for the keeping out at
one and the self-same time, diverse of one family or kindred, in their chiefest
offices. And if by the help and benefit of this intended Appeal, the people of
England come to assume unto themselves, the true exercise of their public
declared Supreme power, that their present Tyrants in words have already
instated them in, and deal with my grand adversaries thereby according to their
just deserts: let my bloody and malicious adversaries thank themselves, in not
letting me alone to sit under my own Vine in peace and quietness, when I as
much endeavored it, in my own understanding and judgment, as much as ever I
did since I was a man, endeavor to preserve my life when it was in danger.

A late Book of one Captain Wendy Oxfords (a Spy in pay to Cromwell, or Scott
of the Counsel of State at white Hall) and the hazards accruing to my life,
and well-being thereby, has at the present put me out of my intended method.
and because there is an absolute necessity, that one thing which already I
have writ (saving a short introduction to it) be published in print before my
answer at large, to that false and lying Book of Oxfords comes out; and yet the
perfecting of that Introduction, will take up more time, then in prudence and
wisdom is fit for me to delay (being already lately allarumd from several
places, and from several of my loving friends, by more then bare hints, that a
private Pistol, a dagger, or a potion of Poison, is my speedy defined ruin)
by reason of the charge upon me in the 20. 21. 22. Pages of that Book; some of
which the foresaid Author, (Wendy Oxford) was in hopes, by his wicked,
cowardly, and bloody instruments, had so operated upon me, that he has
already all over Holland reported me to be dead [as a late letter from a
special friend of mine there does signify unto me] and therefore in the
interim, I have judged it convenient to send herewith unto you a copy [saving
a few words of alteration] of a late Epistle of mine, sent to Scotland; in
which this book, and the designs of Oxford, is so far mentioned, as the
publishing of it may at present be a rational security to my person, till a
further answer come from me, which I hope a little time will effectually
produce. and also seeing my foresaid piece, which is purposely pend for the use
of England, the greatest part of it being long since in Mr. Peter's hands [on
purpos to communicate to Cromwell, to teach him if he were capable of receiving
good counsel or instruction to be wise be times] will be delayed a little by
my going on with this, and seeing [as from England I am informed] diverse of the
rational sort of people there are a little awaked once more vigorously to
look after the enjoyment of their often and long promised liberties, and seeing
also by the like information I am informed the officers of the Army are also
again at work, to find out a speedy convenient way for the procurering of a
new representative, and for that end (as they pertend) have chose lately a
committie of officers, to consider of the business; which according to their
names sent unto me, I Judge out of a long knowledge or experience of them to
consist partly of evident knaves or creatures; Secondly of neuters, and lastly
mixed with some of their honestest Officers they have. but in the whole, I
look upon the establishing that committie, to be in its intention a perfect
cheat, [as all the actions and pretenses of the Officers of the Army to the
peoples liberties are] set up on on purpos to gull the people, and to keep of
(if it be possible) from acting, a more serious, honester, and through paced
generation of men.

The Grandees straits at the present being very great, as to any knowing man in
the affairs of England may evidently appear, by there calling for to debate
in the house the long-winded act for a new representative (their common and
well known cheat to gull the people, and to draw (in there immaginations) the
peoples affections to them, when they are in great straits) and that they are
in great straits, and great fears, evidently appears to me more fully out of
these considerations.

First I know when I was in England, it was the master piece of Cromwells, and
his Knipperdollings, Achitophels, or wise Oracles, or Counselors designs, to
perpetrate their arbitrary and Tyrannical power over the people of England; so
to make a peace and league with the Hollanders [if possible] that if hereafter
he and his perjured faith-breaking party, should any ways by the people of
England struggling for their liberties, come into any straits; that then for
his help and aid, he might have some sure friend in Holland to give him
assistance against them. but being not in his defired way able to accomplish
this; his intrest led him to engage in a plundering war wirh Holland, to beggar
(if it were possible) and spoil their Merchants, and thereby destroy their
trade, that so the averse people in Holland to an agreement with him, might
thereby be themselves necessitated to desire peace with him, in a manner upon
his own terms. and having in his own thoughts by his said plundering war, and
by his underhand tamperings, brought his design [at least in his own
imaginations] to a great perfection, before van Tromp his late foyling of
Cromwells General Blake. which action has given Cromwell and his
Knipperdolings or Counselors, a clear demonstration, that the Dutch will not
be brought to his bow, in his way, and also he clearly now sees that if the
war with them hold long in a lingering way, it will unavoidably prove so
chargable to him, that in a short time it will sorce him to increase the taxes
in England to that extraordinary hight, that in the eye of reason must mad and
vex the people, and and by consequence occasion the apparent ruin and
destruction of him and his wicked and cruel tribe. in which regard and to
avoid that eminent danger by lingering out the war, they are resolved at once
to put all to a push, and either (as in our English proverb we say in England)
win the horse or loose the saddle. in order to which their interest leads
them not only, to make all the preparation that the strength of England is able
to furnish them with, to offend the Dutchat Sea, but also to make it so strong,
as that (in their imaginations at least) they shall be enabled thereby to be
absolute Lords at Sea, this next summer, against all comers and goers; and by
consequence, thereby be able to land in their own season, when and where they
pleas, a formidable land-army of Horse and Foot, to be commanded by one or
both, of those notable shrewd men, viz. Leutenant General Monck, or Major
general Deane. only here is their alone fear that now troubles them, viz.
That in the absence of their land-armie, the true lovers of the liberties and
freedoms of England, should have an opportunity thereby, to imbodie together,
and so force the establishing of their longpromised, and long-contended-for
rights and freedoms: and then good night Oliver and all his hypocritical
cheates.

To countermine and delude whom once again (if it be possible) I am confident
Cromwell and his Caball associates, has under hand set the said Committie of
the Army a foot. To overbalance whose specious pretenses even to the public
view of the people of England, with real actions of transcendent good, done by
gallant old Heathens and Pagans (who in actions were better Christians then our
great ones) for their own Country and their oppressed Neighbors, I have sent
you a copy of an historical and pleasant Epistle, which in November last I
sent to that rational English head-peice Colonel Henry Martin.

I must conses its probable, the dutch may be offended at the first part of it,
for the preventing of which [if possible] I shall aver this [and that in truth]
that although I am very much an English man, yet I am (bona fide) noe enemy to
Holland and its welfare, but desire with all my heart, an honest and a just pace
betwixt them and England, to the rational securing distinctly the rights and
privileges of each nation, without incroachment of either side: in such a away
as to bring to condign punishment the great knaves of both sides (if Holland
have any) by stripping them of their Arbitrary and Tyrannical power, with
which ours in England (I am sure of it) have not only endeavored, but really
have acted the inslaving of their brethren. And this I do further protest,
that if my weak abilities, and shattered interest, could contribute any thing
to the accomplishing such a peace and agreement; I would heartily venture my
life, for the procureing of it, and all that I can call dear unto me in this
world, with as much resolution and hazard, as any Dutch man, or English man
breathing upon the earth whatsoever he be. I desire to see no better a day in
this world, but such a one, wherein I may be counted worthy to be made use of
to this end. Besides, let them give Oliver their chiefest enemy a box of the
ear, on the one side, in their own way, and give me but leave in my own way to
give him a box on the other care: and if I do not do it heartily, and to the
purpose, I will freely give them leave to account me a knave for my pains, and
if I do it heartily and effectually, although it be not in every puntillio in
their mode, yet I am sure they can be no loosers by it. So with my hearty and
true love presented to you, I commit you to the protection of the most High,
and rest,

Your assured faithful and loving friend, JOHN LILBVRN.
From my delightsome palace in my little Garden-house in the Mary-Brugh, in
Bridges Feb. 4. 1653. New style.
The copy of the forementioned Letter to Scotland thus follows.

Dear friend.
I Had thought the strength of your air in Scotland, would have breathed ere
now as far as Bridges in Flanders, but it may be the viewing of the finenes of
your gallant new Forts, and other fine Monuments of that rare Nation, with the
embraces of your lately married delight, has so taken up your time, that you
have had no leisure to think of an exiled and banished man in Flanders. I
confess I partly know it by experience, that diverse months after marriage are
most commonly a time of dotage, and many times proves so, even in the most
solidest persons, and therefore for once I will excuse your negligence and
remissness. I confess had it not been so great a journey from Air to London,
and so unseasonable a time in the depth of winter, and so irrational to desire
too suddenly to take you away from the enjoyment of your new delight and joy, I
should have presumed often ere now to have pressed you with all that little
Rhetorique that my dull pen can expres, to hasten your return to London, to
have lent my honest Besse your wonted assistance, and to have helped her
efectually to have solicited my business with my Tyrannical adversaries
there, who through her own ungrounded desire, to have me again in England upon
such sneaking terms as my Soul abhorres, and in my poor opinion no way becomes
a man of a gallant Ennobled and Heroic mind, who never was engaged in any
thing in his life to the purpose, but he deliberately and wisely looked into
every crevis of the business, before he too much engaged in it, that it was
both just and honest in the sight of God and man, and then was never fearful
to play a game at all, even life to the utmost, nay for a man that by virtue of
that power and assisting strength that is abundantly given him from the Lord
God Almighty, that thereby he is by faith sufficiently able to make him
encounter with a Denn of the most fiercest Lions in the world or a Legion of
the most dreadfullest men and devils in Earth and hell: Nay upon such terms
(as upon my conscience in the presence of God I speak it) as in my own opinion,
can no way be for the safety of my life, which can now never be secure so long
as Cromwels absolute Tirannie lasts, upon any promises that he can make
either before God or man. For in short, by too large experience I judge him to
be as false as the Devil himself, and who I will never trust again while I
breath, let him swear and protest never so much. I say my poor wife out of her
over-earnest-desire in Engeland to enjoy my company, has made thereby her self
a burden to her self, and forced me to the greatest use of my brains and
patience, that ever I was put unto in my life, to deal with her with that
tenderness (with a Salvo to my own peace) that does become a man of conscience,
gratitude and humanity, to an object so dear in my affections, several
years before from me she knew any thing of it, and who now for about 12.
years, has many times with a good proportion of strength and resolution, gone
through so many miseries with me, with so much affection as she has done; and
when she was last with child, with it, her sickness and grief, her condition
was so sad, that truly I scarce knew how gently enough to handle her, and
seriously betwixt the struglings of care and tenderness, my indeared affection
to her made me to have of her, and the strong beatings and compulsions of that
voice of God that constantly speaks in my inlivened and awakened conscience,
my Soul was many times almost rent in pieces, and in which condition for a
length of time I would not be again for all the Gold in the world.

And in the second place, when she was lately with me, she was so oppressed
with sickness, and the death of my little Babe, that my most entire affection to
her compelled me to deal with her as if she had been a Suckinge Babe, till she
got strength; and then beyond any bounds of reason, pressed me so far to
endeavor again in her way to get into England, that I was forced to tell het
to this purpose. Vict. that my present banishment was as delightsome to me as
my wedding day, and nothing in the world could more rejoice my heart then when
I was got out of England in Safety from Cromwell sir reconcilable malice and
blood thirstines, and Seeing she forced me so far, I must do more then Ever I
had thought to have don in my life, and truly tell her, that now England was
toe little, to hold Cromwell in the possession of his beastely and gross
Tyranny, and me in the earnest pursuit of my just freedom, and therefore I
ptayed her, as she loved my life, and her own welfare, not to expose me to such
hazerdous and dangerous new temptations, which whilst I was in England I was
scarce able to resist, being satisfied in my own conscience that Cromwell was
grown as perfect a bloody devouring Wolf, as any was in the world, and
justifiably both before God and man might be dealt with as such a one, having
enclosed himself with such a strong unovercomable power of the Sword, as no law
can possibly lay hold of him, for all his visible murders, rapines and
treasons; protesting further unto her, that if it had not been for the strong
affection I bare unto her and my poor babes, (whom willingly I would not leave
beggars when I did) and for that I had some grounded assurance in my own
spirit, that I should live to see his downfall, and the full restoration of
our English Liberties and freedoms, and my self be an actor or instrument to
procure it without so apparent hazard to my life as such an Act would be: I had
with my own right hand at the house door avowedly ended the quarrel betwixt
him and me, and the rest of the freeborn people of England, with a Paper of
reasons in my left hand, ready to be sent unto the Speaker, and with several
others in my pocket to justify to the whole world, the lawfulness and
justness of such an action, both by the laws of God, nature, and Nations, and
therefore her company by reason of her unreasonable, and not to be satisfied
importunity, was a burden unto me, and I longed [I must confesse] to be quit
of it, and in have upon those terms, shall not defire to enjoy it again; yet
professing most truly unto you thus much, that her company and society [if I
could enjoy it with security as not being oppressed with those most unpleasant
importunities, of submitting or acting in things which my own reason and
judgment is point black against] is more delightful to me, and more to be
desired by me, then all the delights in this world besides. And therefore that
we might part with as little disgust of Spirit as possible could be, and that I
might stoop to her as low as possible I could, and give her all the
satisfaction that my entire and unshaken affection to her, and the utmost of my
brains could possible imagine [stil with a Salvo to my own peace and
tranquillity of mind which I protest seriously in the presence of God, I
value at that high rate, and by above twice seven years experience, find it
so full of sweetness, and soul-satisfying content, that I had rather a
thousand times over part with my life, then part with it, for to die to me is
gain, which ever since 1637. was never one moment more dreadful to me, then
to eat and drink when I am hungry) I engaged to her to petition the Parliament
in my own way of Law, and reason, for the taking off my whole Sentence, that
so, if it were possible, my little estate might once again be free, which I
should willingly and absolutely surrender into her hands, to settle, with the advice of her own friends, and do what they would with, so that I might be
left to my self, to manage my own present business, as a master workman, or a
poor instrument, in the hands of the Almighty, to the purpose, to chastize
that hypocritical and Alchemy Saint Oliver Cromwell, betwixt whom and my self
without a new Representative (so undeniably the people of Englands due, as in
my late printed epistle to him, I have undeniably proved) it is impossible to
have any medium come life come death.

But thirdly, after she had past her promise to send me speedily over my
books, to enable me the more masculinely to complete such a petition, and
after she and I had seriously and solemnly agreed upon the Mode or Method to
manage it in, and I had told her the heads upon what I would compose it of;
yet through childishness, weakness, or womannishnesse, she in England falls
off from all, and takes new counsel, from some friends (wise enough in
themselves, yet I am confident unto whom she never declared what I had said
unto her, as is above expressed) and enters into new paper skirmishes with me,
something filled with womannish passion and anger, which yet by reason of the
sickness of my children (which I knew might not a little trouble her afflicted
mind) I bore with her in, with all the patience that possible I could, and
took so much pains in readeing, studying and writeing large Epistles to her,
to satisfy her with reason, that I have sometimes therewith almost made my
self Blind, and which I seriously protest, to be hired with gold to do the
like again, in so short a time, I would not be tied to do it for a thousand
pounds; the fruits of which in part the world with some new additions, had
seen ere now, had she not with sadness sent me word of the continuance of my
Daughters dangerous sickness, which made me out of mere compassion (and
because I would not justly be judged, apparently guilty of totally
overwhelming her) forbear these many weeks the printing thereof, although
long since, I had sent several sheets into the United Provinces on purpose to
be printed. but finding no satisfaction from her, (especially about sending me
my books) but dodgeing with me for these three or four months together about
them, and thereby necessitateing me to resolve that if speedily I do not
receive them from her, to procure money, and hire a messenger, to go to
England and buy them all over anew, and bring them to me. so that in the
conclusion of all, through her own folly, she has forced me to bid her set her
heart at rest, for I am now totally and positively resolved, if I can avoid it,
never to see England, so long a CROMWELS most hateful and detestable beastely
Tyranny lasts, unless it be in a way to pursue him, as the grandest Tyrant
and Traitor, that ever England bredd, or the people thereof ever redd or heard
of. And therefore once again in good earnest sound Trumpets and Drumms, and
have at thee Oliver once again with all my might, for the liberties of the
freeborn blades of England, by the agreement of the people! but withal I with
this sent her word, that seeing Haselridge and Cromwell, etc. pretends much
compassion pity, and affection to her, that if by her own pitition, she will
endeavor to strive for her self and her childeren (and let me alone to shift
in the world for my self) and get of the sentence upon my estate, I have
engaged to her and will stand to it to sign and seal any thing by way of
further settling of it upon her and her children, that she and my adversaryes
themselves rationally will have me, provided in the manageing of my business she
do it so, as that it is like the action of the wife of J. Lilburn, and that
to the General, nor Haselridge, nor none besides, she by promise etc. engage
not for me in any thing, that is dishonorable to me. for I assure her before
hand, I will keep and perform nothing in that kind she promises to them in my
behalf, notwithstanding which, if she should do that which is unworthy my
wife, I am confident it would take such a deep impression upon my Spirit, that
notwithstanding my now entire affection to her, I should never own her again
as the wife of my bosom while I breathed, although I should force my self
thereby to live in a voluntary Widdowhood all my days, which truly in my
present apprehensions of it, would be a condition almost as upleasant to me, as
to live under Cromwels bloody tyranny. And in her last Letter to me she tells me
she is now vigorously going about her said petition. the consequence of which
nor nothing else can make me delay any longer from speedily and effectually
endeavoring to appear in print again: because one of Tho: Scotts Spies whom
he sent over on purpose to contrive my murder, [as I have too evident and
apparent cause to judge] has lately published a Book at the Hague called [the
unexpected life and wished for death of the thing called Parliament in England,]
wherein he incites all the Princes and Potentates of Europe to rise up in arms
as one man against them, and to extirpate them from the earth as a pack of the
bloodiest, wickedest, and faithlessest Tyrants that ever breathed, and to
Re-inthrone his gracious Sovereign Charles the Second in his three Kingdoms.
The book is dated from his Lodging at Delf, the first of September 1652. but I
could never get sight of it, until a little before Christmas hollydaies, and
reading it over and over very seriously, I clearly perceived that in the 20.
21. 22. pages of it; the wicked and lying Villain, has layn a notable and
close design to have me murdered. I having already (for his former villainous
practices in that kind acted upon me in Amsterdam) by Scotts instigation as
Cromwels chief Agent) put him in Print in my late printed Epistle to Cromwell in
May last, entitled [As you were] Page 1. 2. by the name of Capt. Wendy Oxford,
where I positively accuse him as being a Spy in pay for Cromwell and Scot among
the Hollanders and Caviliers. but the impudent knave takes no notice of the
accusation, to make any defense against it, it being too true, and too evident
to be denied, and too easy for me as he very well knows punctually to prove,
and which in a Letter to an eminent person in the Hague, I have already
proffered to prove face to face before the States General themselves, but he
being at Amsterdam discovered by me to be in truth what he was and thereby in
danger not only to loose his large Salarie, (as being no farther useful to
Scott) but it might probably be his life also, to gull and cheat the Credulous
Cavaliers and Dutch men, and the better to take them off from the conceit of
his being a Spy. I believe with the advice or consent of Tho: Scott himself,
he has published his said Book, for his Wife, alias his Whore [as she is
avowedly by diverse reported to be] has several times since I came into these
parts, gone and come, to and from England, from Mr. Scott. and I could name her
the City and the Person, where she either begged or borrowed money the first
time she went, to bear her charges thither. and I could also tell her of a
Message that that very Person from whom she had the said money, immediately
after brought me to Bridges from her pretended Husband. And the knave to be
revenged to the purpose of me, knowing the Kings party to be so madd against
al those that were actors in the taking away of the late Kings life, that about
18 of them in the Hage in May 1649. beset the house of Doctor Dorislaus, the
Parlaments Agent there, and slew him therefore, although at most he was but one
of the petty under actors, prosecutors, or Lawyers to plead against the late
King at his trial, and if one of the inferior prosecutors of him, in the
Cavaliers thoughts deserve forcibly in his own lodgeing to be stabd and
murdered, then what in their opinion, must one of the chief complotters and
layers of the design deserve? But in the foresaid pages he accuses the people
nicknamed Levellers, to be the principal contrivers of the Kings death, and me
by name to be one of the principallest among them. and therefore if I have any
affection left to my own life and being, (notwithstanding all my Wives
irrational persuasions to be quiet and silent] or any reason left in me to
judge of things, it behooves me well to look about me, and not too long delay
to publish my Vindication in this particular; Especially considering besides,
the attempts that have been upon me, by this very Rogues underhand means at
Amsterdam, as I have too clear cause to judge, which are partly mentioned in
my already printed books.

At my coming from Holland to Bridges to meet my Wife, I was certainly informed
that as I past through that City at my first coming out of England [where I
lodged but two nights] there was a conspiracy to have stabd or pistold me
there, the actors in it, as my information told me, were to have been a Major
or such an officer of the late Kings, and two of the Duke of Lorraigns
soldiers, that were hired for that purpose, [as I have too much ground to fear
by the foresaid Oxford] and the first of the three came into my Lodging [though
unknown to me] to view my person and countenance, that so when the intended
blow should be given me, they might not be mistaken in my person, and thereby
destroy another for me. and upon a jealousy of a person in the world, asking
the reason of his earnestness to know me, the intention was discovered and
prevented, and the said Cavilier for his intended rashness could render no other
reason for it, but that I had been a devilish or zealous Parlamentier, and an
active man against the King in the late war. which actions and sayings makes
it evident to me, that my Friends that petitioned for me to the Parliament,
upon the 20 of January 1651. English style, before I came out of England [which
Petition is recorded in my Apology to the people of the Netherlands Page 53.
54. 55. 56] were no false Prophets, in that assertion of theirs, there laid
down, viz. that my banishment in relation to my person considering my affection
to Parliaments, and my zeal to, and for public freedom, renders all
foreign nations so unsafe to me, as that in effect [as they say] I am
bannished into a wilderness, exposed naked to the fury of Bears and Lions.
Whose affection to me [I mean the said peritioners] even in that one
particular alone, I can never in my own thoughts, value at too high a rate, but
especialy the contrivers of it, whom I very well know.

But the said book of Oxford, I could never get asight of, till about tenn
days before Christmas last that a friend brought it me from Amsterdam, since
which time I have been allarumd from several places and persons, that I know
wish me well, either speedily to answer that book or look to my self. and I
must confess, as soon as I red it, I apprehended my own danger sufficiently,
and apprehended that Cromwell and Scot [by whose consent or at least the one of
them, I am as confidently persuaded, as that I am a man, it is published and
doubt not but by the assistance of God in the answering thereof, to render
clear and evident reasons, for the evinceing the truth of my persuasions or
belief] had three things in their eye, one of the which they judged would
necessarily follow upon the publishing of that book.

First, that either I would not answer it, and then undeniably they would have
had a great part of their end, and be in hopes my silence would tacitly grant
the truth of it, and thereby would speedily cost me a Stabb or the like, by
some of the Kings madd blades. or, Secondly, if I did answer it, and do it
flatteringly, then I should thereby lose my interest in England, amongst my
friends there, which is the thing they so much desire, that so thereby I might
be rendered, but a single man, incapable by virtue thereof, any more to wound
or shake their Tyranny; or Thirdly, if I answer it home and thoroughly, to the
full justification of my former actions in the wars, then they hope I shall so
provoke and inrage the Kings party here thereby, as that from their hands, for
my so doing, I shall be in as much danger from them, as if I were totally
silent. for its apparent to me, these or some of these considerations must be
his, and his setters on ends, in taxing me with that notorious falsehood, I
being very well known and clearly long since published in England, that I said
more to the Grandees teethes, against their intended taking away the Kings life
[I am confident of it] then all the Caviliers put together in one, avowedly
durst have done. and after it was done [being all his trial and execution, 200
miles from London, at my coming home] I runn more apparent hazards, in
Speaking, and publikquely in the face of the Sun, acting against the essence
and being of all manner of High Courts of justice, then all the Cavaliers in
England put together again in one man, durst avowedly do. and in my zealous
manageing my public testimony, in bearing wittnes against all the Murders,
committed by the said high Court of justice, I am confident, I clearly gave an
apparent and evident testimony, that if I had had two sons of my own, that had
sat as Judges therein, and if I had had the chief judicial power of the
Nation in my hand, as once that famous and renowned consul Lucius Brutus had
in Rome; I should undoubtedly have acted by his president, and have given
sentence of death my self against my own two Sons, as grand Subverters (by
being of, and sitting in the high Court of Justice) of the fundamental
securities, of all English men's lives, liberties, and properties, viz. juries
(trials by which are as equally and justly due, to the grossest wickedst
English man whoever, in all cases whatsoever, as to the justest and semingest
righteous English man that breathes) and have seen their heads chopped off as he
did therefore who being Consul, or chief Magistrate of Rome did pass sentence
of death against his own two Sons, and see both their heads chopped off in his
presence, for con spiring to overthrow and betray the liberties of that famous
commonwealth into the hands of its adversaries, as you may read in Plutarks
History, in the life of worthy Publicola, fol. 101.102.103. And that I was thus
zealous against all their proceedings whatsoever, by a high Court of justice,
the understanding Author of the three parts of the most remarkable, and notable
history of Independency, does abundantly and sufficiently witness for me, in his
second part thereof, Page 32.61.129.133.135.136.138
154.156.161.162.165.166.168.178.179.180.181.197.201.151.257.263. and in his
first part, though he often uses my name, yet he neither speaks
contemptuously nor reproachfully of me, as there you may read, Page
35.50.63.98.114.120. and the said Author was Cavalier sufficient, even in the
highest, as his book plentifully witneses for him, and was as great an enemy to
all the Kings judges and the high Court of Justice as could be, as his putting
his judges names [in his 2 part, Page 103.269.] in red letters, and his
Commentaries upon their names, and acts, do plentifully witness; as also his
bitter and resolute assertions and protestations against them, and their
setters up, in his 2. part, Fol. 177.266.267. where he expresses himself thus,
viz. This kingdom of the Brambles now set up, viz. ( Oliver Cromwell, and his
purged little party in the House) being only able to scratch and tear, not to
protect and govern, I further declare and protest, that this combined
traiterous faction, have forced an Interregnum, and Justicium upon us, an utter
suspension of all lawful government, Magistracy, Laws, and Judicatories, so
that we have not de jure, any laws in force to be executed, any Magistrates or
judges lawfully constituted to execute them; any court of justice wherein they
can be judicially executed, any such instrument of the law, as a lawful great
Seal, nor any authority in England that can lawfully condemn and execute a
thief, murderer, or any other offender, without being themselves called
murderers by the law; all legal proceedings being now Coram non judice: not
can this remaining faction in the house of Commons, show any one president,
law, reason or authority whatsoever, for their aforesaid doings, but only
their own irrational tyrannical votes, and the swords of their Army. and also
(says he) our words were free under Monarchy, though now not free under our
new free State, so were they under the Romans, Tacitus an 1. subfinem speaking
of treasons, facta arguebantur dicta impune erant. These horrible tyrannies
considered [saith he] and being destitute of all other less desperate relief,
I do here solemnly declare and protest, before that God that has made me a man
and not a beast, a free man, and not a slave; that, if any man whatsoever, that
takes upon him the reverend name and title of a judge, or justice, shall give
sentence of death upon any friend of mine, upon this [before mentioned] or any
other illegal act, of this piece of a house of Commons; I will, and lawfully
may (the inslaving scarecrow doctrine, of all time-serving, State-flatteriing
Priests and Ministers notwithstanding) follow the example of Sampson, Judith,
Iael and Ehud: and by poison, poniard, pistol, or any other means whatsoever,
secret or open, prosecute to the death the said Judge or Justice, and all their
principal abettors; and I do hereby invite and exhort all generous freeborn
Englishmen, to the like resolutions, and to enter into League, defensive and
off nsive; and Sacramental associations [seaven or eight in a company, or as
many as can well confide in one another) to defend, and revenge mutually one
another persons, lives, limbs, and liberties as a foresaid, against this and
all other illegal and tyrannous usurpations. And in his third part of his said
history of independency, he sufficiently shows his enmity against them by
arraigneing the high Court of Justice, or Cromwels new Slaughter house in
Engeland (as he calls it) with the authority that constituted it, and ordained
it; and by law convicting and condemning them both, of usurpation, treason,
tyranny, theft, and murder. in which third part of his said history are the
notablest things against the illegallitie and being of a high Court of
Iustitie, that ever I redd in my life. all which three parts bound up together,
are openly and avowedly to be sold at the Hague, and of which the said false
Knave Oxford, in the 15. page of his said book declares he is not ignorant of,
for there, speaking of the late Earl of Essex, he setts down his Character,
completely transcribing it, out of the first part of the said history of
independencie page 25.

And the Apostle Paul declares Act. 17.28: and Titus 1.12 13. that there is no
better testimony in the world, to witness against a man then the testimony of
one of his own party, and that the considerations aforesaid toward my person
(and not a design to make the Parliament rationally odious (as he would seem by
his book to do to Foreign Nations) is Oxford design, is to me very evident
by the simplicity and Falsehood of Oxfords said book, which upon my life I
dare aver and easilye undertake to prove undeniably that it has above half a
dozen if not above half a score lies and falsehoods in only one lease. and
therefore when any piece of a rational and pertinent answer, is published
against it, its effects in that particular cease. But if by books it had been
his design indeed to have don the Parliament a mischeife with a witness, he then
should either have gotten the said most notable three parts, of that most
mischeiuous book to them that ever was pend in the world against them; and
which was done by a learned man in the knowledge of the laws of England, and
one commonly reputed one of their own members, and thereby immediately
furnished with the true and certain knowledge of abundance of matter of fact,
contained in it, which one without doors could have but by hear say,
translated and published in Several languages, or else have got diverse
thousands of them dispersed in England; where 3. years ago to my knowledge,
one single book of one single part of them, has been sold for 10. sh. and 20
apiece. and tenn or twenty thousand of the last part against the high court of
Justice (which in it self is but a short book) well dispersed in England and
its territories by the operation of it, in a very few months after, would
pussell Cromwell and his grandees there more, I am confident of it, then van
Tromp and all his fleet at Sea, which yet many letters out of Engeland say is
not a little.

My dear faithful friend, I have been the more large and plain in
unbowelling my Soul in my present condition to you (who in times by past I have
found so much truth, faithfullnes, and simpathizeing in; and so much willignes,
readiness, and activitie to be a fellow Soliciter, and helper to my wife in her
former greatest straites, especially in my Guildhall business in 1649.) on
purpose if it be possible and savor not of toe much unreasonablenes, to create
in you a serious apprehension of that extraordinary steed, you may stand me and
my poor wife and babes in, in reference to our estate only by as speedy
repaireing to London to help her and me [and where yet I have something of
instructions about it more to say unto you when you come thither, then is fit
to be put in this hazardable to miscarry paper] as possible the parting with
your own delightful enjoyments will permit you, and the season of the weather
will rationally afford you safety to travel in. which will be the greatest
obligation that ever you put upon me in your life, and probably of the greatest
conse quence to me, of any action that ever you did in your days, and of which
journey I am confident hereafter, you will have no cause to repent. So with my
hearty and affectionate respects presented to your whole self, with my true
love to all the honest Seagreen blades, that in your quarters shall ask for
me; I committ you to the protection of the most high and shall rest,

Your faithful and very loveing Friend and Servant. JOHN LILBVRNE.
Bridges in Flanders Saturday the 18 January 1653 new, or the 8 January 1652
and 3. English style.
POSTSCRIPTVM.
I hear by a letter from London, there is likely to happen a strange thing,
viz: a resurrection from the dead, or a conjunction of several honest blades
of formerly disjointed interests, once more vigourously to act again, for
their known, full, and declared libertyes. and I perceived this is occasioned
by van Trumps late beating of Blake. If such good effects follow such kind of
actions; I wish he would come and do as much for you in Scotland, provided it
would make you rise again from your dead condition, in most unworthily and
basely turneing your backs, upon all your printed promises, and solemn
engagements in reference to the peoples liberties, thereby rendering your
selves, the scorn and contempt of all Europe, and also thereby having given
too just occasion to the nations round about you, to Judge you less faithful
and your oaths and promises less to be regarded, then Turks, Pagans, and
infidels with abundance of whom [as History does fully witness,] their solemn
and Public faith, has often times been more valued then their lives, or all
other earthly relations. the so open, palpable, and not to be hid, or covered
over or pleaded for breach of it in you, undoubtedly will be the visible
occasion of the hazard of a total ruin of the English nation, which must
needs and unavoidebly fall upon you, if speedily you do not manifest your
repentance, by a speedy settleing the nation upon that just fundation or
principles of rightiousnes, you have so often before God and the World
solemnly declared for; as the only and alone Justifiable ground and reason, to
warrant you either before God or man, for breaking all the settled and legally
established power and Magistracy in England, as you have done; and as the only
and Justifiable reason, to acquit you before God and man, of being reputed
absolute, and wilful murderers, of all those persons, of what kind or sort
soever, you have slain with your Swords, Sterved or adjudged to death in the
3. nations: and which is the only Justifiable reason, that can acquit you in
the thoughts of any rational man in the world from rendering [by your most
reproachful and perjured actions] religion and the power of godliness, more
reproachful and contemptible, in the Eyes of the Sons of men then ever the
foolish and ridiculous actions, Fathred upon and said to be conmitted, at
Munster, in Germany, by Iohon of Leyden and Knipperdolling: whom in folly,
murder, madness, and ridiculousnes: you have, visibily in the face of all the
world outstripped, and already made good, the truth of the worst of the Kings
sayings against you, or the sharpest and bitterest of his penns against your,
and who, in History to future ages, must leave behind you, the blackest name
that ever the sonns of men did, and for whom noe defense or excuse or a shadow
of a bare figg-leafe covering can be made for you, without the speedy doing
the thing aforesaid, to the full performing all your promises made for good
unto the English people. therefore woe, woe, woe, unto you, if speedily, and
effectually you do it not, before once again you have made England an
Aceldama or field of Blood, as by the breach of your solemn faith, public
oaths, and promises you have 3 or 4 several times already done since it was
in your power [as clearly it was in 1647] rationally to have made it the freest
and happiest nation in the world, and thereby Justify your fore Fathers in all
their wickedness, yea and by many degrees far out strip the worst of those you
have destroyed for the Capitallest offenses. that so upon your heads as Christ
says (Math: 23.29 to 36.) might come all the righteous Blood shed upon the
Earth, from the Blood of righteous Abel even unto this very day.

Farewell. JOHN LILBVRN.

To the Honorable and his very good Friend Colonel HENERY MARTIN, a Member of
the Parliament, and Counsel of State of the Commonwealth of England. At his
house in Cheynel-Row, in Westminster; These present.
Honored Sir,
HAving found you by many years experience to be one of those amongst that
great Assembly and Counsel in which you sit, that principally mind the real
good of their Country and of the generality of the inhabitants thereof: I am
thereby encouraged now and then in my banished condition, to trouble you with
some of my scribleing lines, and sometimes to give you an hint of something
concerning public good, which at this time I shall make the subject of my
penn.

It is not long since I wrote a letter to you, by two masters of Ships, at
their earnest entreaty, and therein gave you some reasons why it was requisite
that a speedy convoy should be appointed and sent for the convoying in safety,
that rich laden fleet of small English Vessels at Ostende, to London. And the
Masters to your commendation, at their return hither told me you were active to
get, and did procure for them an Order for a speedy Convoy often good Ships,
sorthwith to be sent for that end. Which Order being as yet unaccomplished,
give me leave without offense, to put you in mind of it again, and to use now
but two reasons unto you: the first whereof shall be drawn from the utilitie
and gain, and the second from the honor and security that will arise from so
doing.

Now for the first, I cannot imagine but your great public expenses drive you
sometimes to a little straites for money, so that all ways for supplying you,
cannot but in reason be very acceptable to you, especially those that are just
and honest. Now here are diverse rich laden Vessels at Ostend, whose cargo or
loadeing is worth several hundreds of thousands of pounds; which as diverse of
the Masters aver to me, they are confident will bring the Parliament in more
Custom and Excise then either your late East India Fleet did [for whose Convoy
you judged it requisite [as I have been informed] to send Sr. George Askew his
whole Fleet to Plimmouth] or then your Turkey or Straits Fleet will bring you
in, for whom your Ships or men of war in those parts have runn so many
hazards to preserve and convoy them. For some of the Masters have informed me,
that some of those little English vessels (besides great store of Threads and
Linnings, both rich commodities) have 40 Bailes of Silk, every Bail of which
paies custom in England 35. pounds, besides the Excise. Which will amount in
the whole in Custom and excise, to no inconsiderable sum of money.

Secondly, As for the point of honor and safety; I judge the reputation pf a
Nation [especially in foreign parts] to be no small part of its honor, and
by consequence of its safety. Now what a dishonor is it for those that lay
claim to the Sovereigntie of the Narrow Seas, not to be able, or not to dare
to venture to fetch home so rich a Fleet of Ships, that are but 6 or seven
hours good sailing from their own doors, in five or six months time; for so
long some of them (to my knowledge) have bin ladden, and waited for a Convoy.
For shame rather, then they should lie 20 days longer, send the whole Fleet
for them, who if they should all come hither for that end, would be in the
rode-way to daunt and offend their adversaries, as much as for any thing I
know, they are in any part of the Seas, which they can sail in.

The second point of honor and safety lies in this; that you shall by doing
thus, very much encourage the Seamen (who must now, under God, be your walls
and bulworks) and make the trade, for these parts, English. And in the not
doing hereof, you cause the traffic of these parts, to be in a manner wholly
in Flemish bottoms, which I am sure of it, is neither for your profit, nor for
your honor.

And again, by the neglect hereof, you cause the poor Seamen to hang down
their heads, which I am sure of it (at the present, at least) is not for your
safety. And besides, by the neglect hereof, you give just cause to all
rational men in these parts, that are lookers upon you, to account you a
weake-witted people not able to manage your busynes as you should, or else a
careless and regardles People, that will not do it as you ought and might;
which also (I am sure of it) is neither for your honor nor safety. Wherefore,
as you love the honor and safety of your country, let me as your true friend
advise you, to strive effectually to get a speedy convoy sent for them, though
it be of your whole Fleet, if a lesser number dare not come to fetch them. I
have prevailed with the bearer my very good friend and present neighbor to
promise me, with my wife to deliver this unto your own hands, and in a few
words besides to set it home to you, if it be needful, and either prevail
with you to write me your answer, or with them to do it.

For my part (Sir) my End is no other then English in it, it being in no manner
of respect a farthing advantage unto me, either in possession or expectation.
Only, it is one of the greatest ambitions I have in this world, to be really
and substantially a true lover of my Country and its real liberty. And the
rather because of late in readeing some store of History, I find that many
gallant and worthy heathens, made it their work, study and hazard, to make the
sonns of men liveing in this world, happy in their lives; yea and to march with
Armies valiantly to venture their lives, to set at liberty and freedom their
neighbors, that they might enjoy their own laws and customs (which they
themselves had according to reason and the light and law of nature (that
supreme and original guide, that God man's alone absolute Sovereign had placed
in every man's soul) by common consent chosen and established, or hereafter
should choose and establish (the actings according to which principally (if not
only) makes Man to differ from a brute Beast) and be delivered in good
earnest, from the bondage and slavery of Tyrants and Opressours (or rather
salvage brute Beasts in Man's shape) not in words only, but in deeds also. Of
which without being judged tedious, suffer me (I beseech you) to give you a few
remarkable instances.

The first is of the City of the Acheens, who by their good and just
government and common liberty became (as says that old and rational historian
Polybius fol: 28.83. etc) a certain president of a true Commonwealth and
reconciled thereby all Morea. And one of their chiefest and most virtuous
Cittyzens called A rate, made it his chief work to study by all means, to
chase away the kings or tyrants (as they are there called) and to preserve the
common liberty of the Country of Morea: and prevailed with Lysidas,
Aristomachus, Xenon and Cleomenes to lay down their crowns and renounce their
royal principalities and to join themselves to the league of the Acheeens; of
whose virtuousnes, faithfullnes and noblenes of mind, the said author gives a
most commendable character in fol: 414. in which Plutarch fully concurrs with
him in his famous History of the lives of the noble Graecians and Romans, fol:
371. yea the said Author Polybius declares, that when Antigonus, a Governor
and General under a king and Tutor to his Son, had overcome the Lacedaemonians
by force of Arms and thereby had made himself Lord of them, if he had pleased
so to be; yet he forbear to use any outrage or cruelty toward them, and
carried him self not only like a moderator and temperate man; but was also
gracious unto his very Enemies, and returned into his Country, leaveing them
in their full liberty and doing them many favors both in General and
particular. So as they not only termed him at that time their benefactour, but
after his death they called him their Savior folio 86.100.229.353.

Yea Plutarch in his foresaid history declares, that Lycurgus when he had the
power of the kingdom of Sparta in his own hands, and might easiely have kept
it; yet so sincere, just, and full of virtue was he, that he voluntarily laid
it down and betook himself to a weareing and toilesome life, to study and
find out a government, that might make that City and its territories, a free,
happy, and pleasant Commonwealth; which he accordingly did. And as that
judicipos Author says, made it one of the famousest that was in the world: and
filld it full of valor, virtue and love for many years together. Their very
children being trained up in it from their cradles (that so it might be as it
were incorporated into their very natures) and there being in it no
coveteousnes, nor poverty, nor lack; but a fullnes of abundance with a quiet
and sober life. Having also two singular good properties besides viz: that it
had no Lawyers, nor yet any suites in Law. And 2dly, whilst these Laws of
Lycurgus were observed, and kept their life and vigor (which for many years
they did) Sparta seemed not to be a policy or a Commow wealth; but rather a
certain holy place and order of religion; and of that respect and honor
amongst their neighbors, that with a little scrowle of parchment and a poor
cap the Spartans commanded and gave Laws to all the rest of Greece, even with
their own good likenig and consent; yea and expulsed and chased away the
tyrants which usurped tyrannical power over any of their neighbors Cities;
and did decide all controversies and often times pacified their seditions,
without sending out one soldier, but only a simple poor Ambassador. So great
reverence had their neighbors of the good government and justice of the
Spartans. Plutarch fol: 42.44.49.56.57.60.78.

It would be too tedious unto you, for me to be any thing large upon too many
instances. And therefore I shall but only name the hazards that love to just
liberty and freedom (that rational image of God amongst men, who only as
absolute sovereign Lord of Man commands him by his will) led Clisthenes to run
into, to set Athens free from their tyrants and tyranny, wherewith they were
oppressed in his time; and that Pericles under took to deliver Samos from its
tyrants and tyranny, or small aristo-craticall, or olig-archical government
of a few nobles, to establish a popular Government, or Sovereign Authority
or Majesty of the People (as the aforesaid Author calls it) or that Alcibiades
and his associates underwent again to recover the Liberty of Athens from new
upstart tyrants: or that Pelopidas, Ismenias, Androclidas and Pherenicus with
their associates hazarded, to deliver the City and Commonwealth of Thebes,
from the usurpation and tyranny of Archias, Leontidas and Philip, with their
associates and mercenary soldiers. Which story especially: is extraordinarily
well worth the readeing. All which are by Plutarch touch 't upon, in his
foresaid history, in fol: 158.171.212.288.289.290. And in fol: 300.302.305. he
shows that Pelopidas being by his City sent Ambassador to Artaxerxes king of
Persia (who very much honored him for his valiantnes and Wisdom) procured of
him that all the People of Greece, should be free again. And his City and he
being solicited by the Thessalians to help to deliver them from the most
unsupportable and beastly uglie tyranny of their grand Tyrant Alexander; they
made it their work to deliver all such as were oppressed by tyrants; yea and
sought to root out tyrannical government throughout whole Greece. For the
obtaineing of which in a pitched battle, with the forementioned tyrant
Alexander, that valiant and worthy Captain Pelopidas lost his life; which the
Thebans immediately after sufficiently revenged and compelled the Tyrant to
withdraw his garrisons and set those Cities free, which he kept in bondage.

Yea, when the ancient and most famous commonwealth of Rome came to have power
in Macedonia, after the Consul Paulus Aemylius had overthrown king Perseus in
battle, and Slain in the field above twenty-five-thousand of his men, whereby
their country was forced to submit unto him: yet notwithstanding, the history
says of him, that he redelivered the Macedonians their Country and towns
again, with power to live at liberty according to their own laws, paying
yearly to the Romans for tribute an hundred talents, where before they were
wont to pay unto their Kings ten times as much.

But most worthy to be written in letters of gold, are those two most
commendable, admirable, virtuous and most noble presidents of Corinth and their
General Timoleon; and of that worthy General and Consul of old Rome, Titus
Quintius Flaminius. The substance of which in breife, is thus.

After Dion had driven out the Tyrant Dionysius of Syracusa in Sicily, and
restored the People thereof to their freedoms: yet through their folly or
baseness, the tyrant got in again, ten years after he was first driven out,
and made himself King. Upon which the chief Citizens repaired to Icetes
tyrant of the Leontines, who being borne in their own city, they believed
would afford them help to deliver them from the insufferable bondage of the
said tyrant Dionysius. And having chose him their General, the Carthaginians
invaded Sicily with a great Army, which put the Siracusians into a great fear,
and necessitated them to send Ambassadors into Greece, unto the Corinthians, to
pray aid of them against the barbarous people. Having better hope of them
then of any other Grecians; not only because (says the History) they had some
relation to them, and that they had formerly received favors from them; but
principally because they knew that Corinth was a City that in all ages and
times, did ever love liberty and hate tyrants; and that had made always their
greatest wars, not for ambition of Kingdoms, nor out of a covetous desire to
conquer and rule, but only to defend and maintain the liberty of the
Graecians. Upon the arrival of whose Ambassadors, they were very forward to
relieve them. And amongst others that proffered their service, and were named
for Generals; a mean private Commoner names one Timoleon, a man that until
that time was never called upon for service, neither looked for any such
preferment. Yet he was naturally inclined to love his Country and
Commonwealth, and was always gentle and courteous to all men, saveing that he
mortally hated tyrants and wicked men.

The people of Corinth willingly accepted of him, and freely chose him for
their General. In which mean time, the forenamed Icetes had forsaken those
that chose him for their General, and turned traitor, by joining with the
Carthaginians, on purpose to divide all sicily betwixt himself and them; and
therefore wrote letters to Corinth, to dissuade them from comeing, or putting
themselves to any charge or trouble; forasmuch as the Carthaginians did lie in
wait with a great fleet of Ships to meet them, and to destroy them. Whose
embassage was so far from cooleing them at Corinth, that it filled them full of
choler and zeal to go on with their busynes. and accordingly their General
set sail with 17 galleys and being waylaid by the Carthaginians, with a far
greater power then he had; he by a slight got from them and arrived safe at
the City Tauromenion in Sicily, where they were very well received by him
that governed the City; who ruled his Cittyzens with all justice and equity,
and did allwaies show himself an open Enemy to tyrants. He lent his City
to the Corinthian General to gather forces in, he having of himself not
above a thousand footmen in all, and neither provision nor so much money as
would serve to pay them: the People having bin squee zed so much before, by
some that had formerly bin with them, upon pretense that they came to set them
at liberty and to drive out tyrants, and yet nevertheless (just like your
General Cromwell and his mere mercenary Army in England whose wicked way of
getting their liveings by killing of men merely for hire I judge to be abaser
and more sordid trade then, that of a common Hangman, who earnes his bread by
killing of those the law has legally convicted and condemned; or then the
trade of a common whore that prostitutes her body to all comers and goers) had
done so much hurt unto them, that the misery and the calanity which they had
suffered under the tyrants, seemed unto them a blessed condition in comparison
of that which such Captains had made them to undergo. Now in a little City
called Adranus, there being dissension amongst the people thereof; one Part of
them sent for Icetes the traitorous General, who came with about five thousand
men; and the other part sent for Timoleon who with all he brought from Corinth
and those he had gat in the Island could make but twelve hundred men, with
which he overcame his adversary Icetes and his Axmy. And having spoiled his
Camp, the Cittyzens of Adranus opened their gates and received the Corinthians
in. After which many Cities sent to join in league with their General
Timoleon. And the Tyrant Dionysius having bin beaten before by Icetus and pent
up in his strong Castle at Syracusa, and much esteemeing the valiantnes of
Timoleon; sends privately to him, to yield himself and his Castle into his
hands. Who having with the like privacy taken Possession of it, and several
times put in four hundred of his own soldiers to garrison it, which was full
of riches and arms of all sorts, he sent the Tyrant away to Corinth. This good
success of Timoleon (haueing done all this in 15 days) encouraged his masters
the Cittyzens of Corinth to send him a supply of two thousand foot and two
hundred horse; who found it almost impossible to get to their General
Timoleon, because the Carthaginians kept the Seas with a great navy of Ships.

In the mean time the traitor Icetes, kept the said Castle blockt up and also
hired two soldiers privately to go and kill Timoleon, (who kept no guard about
his person, nor mistrusted any danger) which by a kind of miracle was
prevented. At which Icetes being mad, and also understanding that multitudes
were daily drawn to Timoleons devotion; he causes Mago the Carthaginian
General with his whole fleet of an hundred and fifty sail to come into the
harbor to his aid. Out of which he landed threescore thousand men, and lodged
them all in the City of Syracusa. Which greatly distressed the Corinthians in
the Castle. But yet their General supplied them with some provisions from
Catana, in little fisher-bootes. Which Mago and Icetes finding out, they took
the best soldiers of all their Army, and sailed away to take Catana, to hinder
thereby the releife of the Corinthians.

But Leon the Corinthian Captain that kept the Castle, perceiveing it, and
that the enemy within the City kept but a slender guard, he sallied out upon
them, killed abundance of them, and took a good and strong part of the town,
where he found great store of corn and of gold and silver, which he secured;
and within a short while after, through many Straites and difficulties, the
foresaid Corinthian succor arrived; with which their General Timoleon joined,
so that all his forces put together made up about four thousand men. With
which he marched forth toward Syracusa to relieve his men in the Castle there.
Whereupon Mago the Carthaginian General in a kind of panic fear and
supposition of some treason, hastens away with his great Army and Fleet, in to
Africa from whence he first came. Yet Icetes having got great spoils together,
and secured him self with great store of men in a very strong part of the
City, would not yield till Timoleon desperately stormed him on every side and
so took the City. Where he pulled down the tyrants strong fort, and made
council Halls and places of justice to be built where it stood: and did
establish a free state or popular Government, suppressing all tyrannical
power. And because that City and many others were by the cruelty of the
tyrants and by the wars much destitute of inhabitants; he and all his
Captains did write to Corinth to send People out of Greece, to inhabit those
desolate Cities. Which letters being arrived with the Syracusian Ambassadors;
the Corinthians did not (says the History) greedily desire to be Lords of so
great and goodly a City; but.

First, they proclaimed by sound of trumpet in all the assemblyes and solemn
feasts and common plays of Greece, that the Corinthians having destroyed the
tyrany that was in the City of Syracusa and driven out the tyrants, did call
the Syracusians that were fugitives out of their own Country, home again,
with all other Sicilians that liked to come and dwell there, to enjoy all
fredome and liberty: with promise to make equal and just division of the lands
amongst them, the one to have as much as the other. Moreover they sent out
posts and messengers into Asia and all the Islands where they did understand
the banished Syracusians remained, to persuade and entreat them to come to
Corinth, and that the Corinthians would give them Ships, Captains and means
safely to conduct them to Syracusa, at their own proper costs and charges. (o
most worthy and compassionate, most noble and gallant old Heathens! hereby
truly showing themselves real actors in the true fruits of the true knowledge
and adoration of the supreme Diety [who prefers Mercy and righteousness before
all services and sacrifices whatsoever] and therein far out stripping our
great, and fair-seemeing Alchemy christians, at this day ruleing in England.
These heathen Corinthians dealeing hereby a thousand thousand times more
honorably, nobly, justly and righteously with the Syracusian strangers and
aliens, then our great Hypocrites in England deal with their own Countrymen
and brethren, (notwithstanding all their many solemn fair and glorious
promises to the contrary: and notwithstanding in an extraordinary and free
measure, they have bin assisted by them, against their Enemies with abundance
of their blood and treasure) In recompense of which most noble and commendable
acts of the worthy Corinthians, they received (says my Author) every man's most
noble praise and blessing.

Nevertheles, such of the Sicilians as repaired to Corinth upon this
proclamation (being but a small number to inhabit so great a Country) besought
the Corinthians to join to them some of their own people and others of other
parts of Greece. Which was performed, and there were Shipped to the number of
about tenn thousand, which with others that Timoleon had got together from
other parts, came to about threescore thousand persons. With all whom he dealt
so virtuously, honorably, justly and compassionately; as he rather seemed to
be an indeared and tender father unto them, then a valiant and victorious
conquering General over them. And havenig settled that great City in freedom
and in a way to flourish, he resolved to set all other Cities in that famous
Island at perfect liberty also, and totally and utterly to root out all the
tyrants of Sicily. And the better to obtain his purpose, he went to make wars
with them at their own doors.

And first he began with the forementioned Icetes, who by flight had saved his
life at the taking of Syracusa, and him he compelld to forsake his league with
Carthage; to raze all his strong holds and to live a private life. And Leptines
the tyrant of Apollonia and diverse places there unto adjoineing, out of fear
submitted unto him, whom he sent to Corinth. And when he had done this, he
forthwith returned to Syracusa, about the establishment of the Commonwealth;
assisting Cephalus and Dionysius two notable men sent from Corinth, to reform
the Laws and to help him to establish the goodlyest ordinances for their
Commonwealth that might be invented. After which, the Carthaginians
perceiveing, they were totally like to loose their footeing which they had in
Sicily, came down with an Army of threescore and ten thousand men, with two
hundred galleys and a thousand other Ships and Vessels, which carried all
sorts of provisions for wars. Against whom (after several of his people and
soldiers had fainted in the way) Timoleon with five thousand footmen and one
thousand horse, resolutely marches eight days journey, with a full intention
to give them battle in the open field. And observeing his advantages, when he
came nigh his Enemies, he got to the top of an Hill: where a mist ariseing, and
the Sunn after a while (it being in May) breakeing out, made the valley wherein
his Enemies were, clear, whiles the mist continueing on the top of the Hill
hid him; where he could see his Enemies and the warrlike manner in which they
passed over a River. where he suffering a great many of them to come over,
took his advantage (allthough they were fronted with armed carts and wagons
before them) and gave a most furious and soldierlike charge upon them, both
with his horse and foot. Where comenig to the close fight of Target-and-Sword,
with them who were heavily armed, and being much helped by providence from
Heaven, that sent a mervailous tempest of thunder, lighteing, wind, rain and
hail, that bet full in the Carthaginians faces; after he had slain the front
of their choicest men, the rest fled, diverse of them being slain and the rest
drowned, by reason that the rain newly fallen had much increased the river.
There were three thousand natural Carthagenians and of their noblest families,
and seven thousand of their mercenary or hired soldiers slain in this battle,
and five thousand prisoners taken with their whole Camp and Baggage, being
very rich. After which Icetes and Mamercus the tyrant of Catana, perceiveing
that tyrants could look for no peace at Timoleons hands; they made a league
with the Carthagenians again, and wrote unto them that they should send
another Army and Captain suddenly, if they intended to preserve any footeing
in Sicily. Whereupon they sent Gisco thither with seventy sail of Ships. Who
having done several mischeises unto Timoleon and his men, Timoleon thereupon
Ied his Army before the City of Calauria. In whose absence, Icetes with a
maine Army, enters the confines of Syracusa, and carries away a mervailous
great spoil. And returning by Calauria (because he knew that Timoleon had but
few men about him) is notwithstanding fought with by him, and put to flight and
pursued to the City of Leontinus, where Timoleon takes him and his son alive
and putts them to death like Traitors and Tyrants.

And afterward he went to Catana, where he overthrew Mamercus and his Army in
Battle; made peace with the Carthaginians, confineing them to keep beyond the
river Lycas, and engageing them that they should enter into no more leagues
with any of the Tyrants. After which the City of Catana was yielded to him.
But Mamercus fled to Messina to Hippon the Tyrant thereof, whither Timoleon
pursued him, and besieged the City, both by Sea and Land. But the Messinians
having the Tyrant in their hands, made all their children come from Schole
into the Theater or playhouse, to see the Tyrant punished, who was openly
whipped, and after put to death. But Mamercus yielded himself to be tried by the
Syracusians, where he was condemned and put to death. Thus did Timoleon root
out all tyrants out of Sicily, and made an end of all wars there; and did not
only assure the inhabitants of peace and sasetie to live there, but willingly
did help them besides, with all other things necessary to his utmost ability.
For which they loved and honored him as their father and fonnder. And he
accepted of a fair house which the Syracusians gave him in the Country, for
his good service, and returned no more to his own Country, but sent for his
Wife and Children to come to him. And that which completely crowned all the
rest of his most worthy Acts, and rendered him a most just and virtuous man
indeed, was, that of his own voluntary accord, he laid down his Office of
Generallship, praying the Cityzens to accept of that which he had already done
for them, being not at all puffed upp with pride, by all his conquests or
glorious and wonderful successes, whereby he might make himself envied of the
honest Cityzens. Yet notwithstanding two busy Fellows put in an accusation
against him, before the Supreme assembly of the People. at which the honest
Cityzens began to mutiny against those accusers, and would not in any case
suffer the day of adjuournment for the putting in his answer to take place. But
the good old and honest General pacified them, telling them that he had taken
all that extreme labor and pains which he had done, and had passed so many
dangers, that every cittyzen and inhabitant of Syracusa, might frankly use the
liberty of their Laws. And another time, Demaenetus in open assenbly of the
people reprovenig many things which Timoleon had done when he was General:
Timoleon answered never a word, but said unto the people, that he thanked the
Gods, they had granted him the thing he be had so requested of them in his
prayers; which was, that he might once see the Syracusians have full power and
liberty to say what they would.

So he lived to his dying day, with the greatest and universallest honor and
respect amongst those people, that possible could be given to a truly virtuous,
wise, just, and upright man; being esteemed a most loving and common father
unto them all. As you may read at large in Plutarchs said history, Fol.
266.267. unto 285.

O Sir! that in England, amongst all the present great men thereof (that in
outward show profess the highest enjoyment of union and communion with the
Lord Jesus Christ [the truest fountain of pure righteousness that can be
enjoyed,] and pretend assuredly to look for and expect the future possession of
a most glorious immortality (with the Lord of life and glory) in the life that
is to come) there could be found out one amongst them all, that could jnstly
deserve in the least, for his virtue indeed, valor, justice, humanity,
compassion and nobleness of mind, to be compared to this most honest old
Heathen and Pagan General Timoleon. If but any one could be sound out amongst
them all like him, how soon would all your desperate and dangerous divisions be
closed up with humanity and brotherly affection; and that great issue of blood
[for the cause and continuance of which, some have a large and dreadful
account to make] that for many years together, has bin let openly run amongst
you, and is still without remedy like to continue. All of which by the
practice of this Heathens thens most commendable virtues, would quickly be
stopped, and healed up; and your selves made truly formidable and dreadful
throughout the world, to all those that durst account themselves your
adversaries. For the very fear of having their people infected (as they term
it) with your righteous principles of justice and reason, would more trouble
and affright them, then all your great strength and power [for verily great is
the power and strength of truth and reason, and it will at last undoubtedly
overcome and prevaile] by Sea or Land does. And undoubtedly, if God be the God
of truth and righteousness [as absolutely he is] he will speedily, and with a
witness blast you, and make you a perfect hissing and scorn to all the Nations
and people round about you, if you continue to walk in crookeder and wickeder
stepps and paths, then all or any of those did, which you your selves have
condemned and executed for notorious Tyrants and Oppressors.

And yet for all that which has bin largely spoken of the foresaid honest and
worthy Timoleon, give me leave to speak a few words of another old heathen,
who may most fitly be compared unto him for humanity, justice and righteousness;
and that is the most famous old roman Consul and General Titus Quintius
fflaminius, who when he was but a young man not thirty years old, was by the
clear voices of the supreme assembly of the body of the People of Rome, for
his virtue chosen into that high dignity of Consul of Rome, in its most
glorious, commendable and flourishing condition; although two of the Peoples
Tribunes or Protectors of their Liberty, spoke aginst his Election.

Who after his Election being ordered to make wars against Philip king of
Macedon; immediately departs to his charge, with three thousand gallant old
Roman soldiers, which being added to the rest of his supplies in Macedon,
under the command of the last years General and Consul Paulus Junius, made
his Army above, twenty six thousand fighting men. Which yet was a less number
then King Philips was; who had in such naturally strong and almost in
accessible mountanous places planted his Camp, that Romes former Generals
could not come at him, but at the end of their annual Consul-ship or General
ship, came away without hurting his Army. Yet Titus Flaminius with pains,
care, industry and valor got up to him, although the Macedonians throughout
the world were most highly esteemed for valerous and good soldiers, by reason
of the famous and wonderful acts, that Alexander the great not long before had
done with them: betwixt whose Armies there was a most feirce fight, the Battle
of the Macedonians being usually joined target target to target so close
together; that before it be broken, it seems as it were the body of a beast
of a force invincible. Yet notwithstanding, the valiant and wise Consul was not
long in overcomeing them, and forced them to fly, leaveing eight thousand dead
upon the place, besides five thousand taken prisoners, and when he had done and
thereby had the whole Country at his mercy [who were miserably divided with
abundance of civil wars and oppressions of Tyrans] yet he took not the
avantage against them, which he might have done. But he sent his herald
forthwith into their public meeteings or plays, where in great abundance they
were assembled together, by sound of trumpet with a loud voice to proclaine in
their Assemblies, that the Senate of Rome and Titus Quintius Flaminius Consul
of the People of Rome (now that they had overthrown King Philip and the
Macedonians in battle) did thenceforth discharge them from all Garrisons and
set them at liberty from all rapes, subsidies and impositions for ever, to
live after their own ancient Laws and in full liberty. which privileges
should extend to the Corinthians, the Lochians, to those of Phocide, those of
the Isles of Euboea, the Achaians, the Phthiotes, the Magnesians, the
Thessalians and the Peirobeians. And the second time after silence made; the
Herald proclaimed it far louder, that so the People might hear it distinctly.
At which there a rose such a loud shout and cry of exceeding joy throughout the
whole people, that the sound of it was heard to the very sea. and the people
rose up full of joy from their seats, and let the fenceing sword plays and
other games alone, and went together with abundance of joy to salute, to
embrace and to thank Titus, the recoverer, protector and patron of all the
liberty of famous Greece. and then was seen (says Plutarch) in strange and
wonderful manner the power of Men's voices; and the People were so violent in
expressing their joy to Titus, that if he had not got him away betimes, he had
hardly escaped from being stifled amongst the People, they came so thick about
him, from all places. who after they were weary, with crying and singing about
his Pavilion till night, they went away. and as they met any of their kindred,
friends or cittyzens, they did kiss and embrace one another forjoy, and so
supped and made merry together. And yet in their Farther rejoicing, at their
tables they had no other talk but of the wars of Greece; discourseing amongst
themselves, what sundry great wars they had made, and what they had endured
here to fore, and all to defend and recover their liberty. and yet for all that
could never so joyfully, nor so assuredly obtain it then they did even at that
present, receiving the honourablest reward and that which justly deserved the
greatest fame throughout the world, that by the valiantnes of strangers, who
fought for the same (without any bloodshed of their own in comparison, or the
loss of the life of any one man, whose death they had cause to lament,) they
were so restored to their ancient freedom and liberty.

And (says my judicious and wise another) it is a very rare thing amongst men,
to find a Man very valiant and wise withal. but yet of all sorts of valiant
Men, he says it is hardest to find a just valiant man yet did al these three
most commendable perfections of valor, wisdom and justice meet in rare
perfection in this young heathen Roman. The Grecians (it is true) had amongst
them selves many famous and valiant Captains or Generals, who had very good
skill to lead an Army and to winn the Battle, as well by sea as by Land; but
to turn their victories to any honorable benefit or true honor amongst men
(as he calls it) to reconcile their homebred differences and cement themselves
in union; they none of them could ever (of late especially) well skill of it.
And excepting a few battles which the author names, all the other Battles and
wars of Greece that were made, sell out against them selves and did ever bring
them into bondage, and all the tokens of triumph which were ever set up for the
same, was to their shame and loss. So that in the end Greece was utterly
destroyed and overthrown, and the captains of the Cities, one envying
another doeings. Whereas a strange nation the which had very little or no
occasion at all to move them to do it, have notwithstanding with dangerous
battles, and infinite troubles delivered it from oppression and servitude of
violent Lords and Tyrants. This and such like talk did at that time occupy
the Grecians heads. And moreover the deeds following did answer and perform
the words of the proclamation. For at one self same time, Titus sent Lentulus
into Asia, to set the Bargilians at liberty, and Tetillus into Thracia, to
remove the garrisons out of the Isles and Cities which Philip had kept there.
And Publius Julius was sent also into Asia, unto king Antiochus, to speak
unto him, to set the Grecians at liberty which he kept in subjection.

And as for Titus, he went himself unto the City of Chalcyde, where he
took sea and went into the Province of Magnesia, out of the which he took
all the garrisons of the Cities, and redelivered the government of the
Commonwealth unto the Cittyzens of the same. And after he had spent some time
in mirth with the People, in celebrateing some feasts and games: he caused
again solemn proclamation to be made openly, for the General liberty of all
Greece. Furthermore, visiting the Cities, he did establish very good laws,
reformed justice, and did set the inhabitants and Cittyzens every one of them
in good peace, amity and concord one with another; and did call home also all
those that were outlawes and bannished men, and pacified all old quarrels and
dissentions amongst them. The which did no less please and content him, that
by persuasions he could bring the Grecians to be reconciled one with another,
then if by force of arms he had overcome the Macedonians. In so much as the
recovery of the liberty that Titus had restored to the Grecians; seemed unto
them the least part of the goodness they had received at his hands. O rare
perfection of wisdom, Righteousness, true Virtue, Gentleness, Goodness of an old
heathen and pagan Roman (not in the least to be found amongst our great
seemeing saints and pretended Christians in England) which in the glorious and
transcendent rare Effects it produced, reaped its full recompense of reward.
For, says my said Author, the good deeds of the Romans and of Titus Quintius
Flaminius, done unto the Grecians, did not only reap this benefit unto them in
recompense, that they were praised and honored of all the world, but they were
cause also of encreaseing their dominion and Empire over all Nations, and that
the world afterward had great Affiance and trust in them, and that most
justly. So that the People and Cities did not only receive the Captains and
Governouis the Romans sent them: but they also went unto Rome and procured
them to come, and did putt themselves into their hands.

And not only the Cities and Commonalties, but Kings and Ptinces also that
were oppressed by others more mighty then themselves, had no other refuge but
to put themselves under their protection. by reason whereof in a very short
time (with the favor and help of the Gods as my Author is persuaded) all the
world came to submit themselves to their obedience and to be under the
protection of their Empire.

Titus himself also did glory more, that he had restored Greece again unto
liberty, then in any other service or exploit he ever had done. and having
besides all this, done many more famous things, he went to Rome with a world of
riches and treasure, and triumphed. And this year being out, (longer then which
no Roman General did ordinarily hold his place, especially in the purity
and glory of their commonwealth) and mischeife in his absence being a brewing
amongst the poor Grecians, by the forementioned Antiochus a potent king, who
went out of Asia into Greece with a potent fleet of Ships and a very puissant
Army, to stir up the Cities of Greece to forsake their league and alliance
with the Romans. Thereupon the Romans fearing the riseing of the People in
Greece, and the fame of the power of that great king Antiochus, they chose and
sent out for the next year Manius Acilius for a General, and Titus was
content without scruple to go under him as one as his Lieutenants. Whose
behavior in that Journey was as full of wisdom and humanity, as in the
former; in saveing several Cities by his sweet and overcomeing persuasions,
from the fury of the present Generals Rage; who in battle having
overthrown the said great king, sought and prosequted revenge on those that
had any way sided with him. Which made the poor People of Greece when beseiged,
to look over the walls to spy Titus and to call unto him by his name, holding
up their hands unto him and praying him to take pity upon them. But he
answered never a word to them at that time, but turned his back and fell a
weepeing. Yet was he their sure Intercessor to prevail with the General for
their pardon. Which made one of the Cities being preserved by his means, to
consecrate unto him all the remembrances, that that heathen Age could devise to
honor a Man with. And in the Temple that they dedicated to him, they had a
Priest chosen by the voice of the People to do sacrifice unto him. After
which, the People sing a song of triumph made in praise of him, the latter end
of which runns thus.

The clear unspotted Faith
Of Romans, we adore:
And vow to be their faithful friends,
Both now and evermore.
Sing out ye Muses nine,
To Jove's eternal fame:
Sing out the honor due to Rome,
And Titus worthy name.
Sing out, I say, the praise
Of Titus, and his faith:
By whom ye have preserved bin
From Ruin, Doole and Death.
And after his return from the wars with Antiochus, he was chosen Censor at
Rome; which office is of great dignity, and, as a man may say, the crown of
all the honors, that a Citizen of Rome can have in that Commonwealth. And he
and his fellow Censor, by their office having power to put all such as they
judged unworthy persons out of the Senate, did put out only four. They did
receive also into the number of Cittyzens of Rome, all such as would present
themselves to be enrowled in their common Register, with a proviso that they
were born free by Father and Mother, unto which last they were compelled, by
Tenentius Culio, Tribune or protector of the peoples liberties. who to despite
the Nobility, persuaded the people of Rome by their Supreme authority, to
command it should be so. After all which high dignities and honors, and brave
and noble actions, he abased himself to become a Colonel of a thousand foot,
being obtained of and by his own seeking, of purpose to go into the wars, to
fight for the glory of his Country, which action in my opinion is to be
commended in him. For I believe none of the great Generals of our age, but
would scorn, after their being Generals, to go into the wars again as
private Colonells. And so much for famous and renowned Titus Quintius
Flaminius. All which you may read more at large in Plutarchs Lives. Fol.
381.382. to 395.

Making (Sir) no farther Application of these things at present, I only beg
your pardon for my tediousnes, to you especially (to whom I know large Epistles
are no way pleasant) entreating you likewise; to steal a little spare time
from your many great occasions, to read these lines seriously, which I very
strongly imagine may prove of some use to you. And oblige me yet so far unto
you, as to present my hearty service to my old true-hearted, plain and blunt
friend Mr. Moyle of your house, and tell him from me, that he often used to
clap me on the back, and call me Noble Cato; which before I came to Flanders]
did not fully understand, what he meant by it. But having red so much of
famous Plutarchs Lives lately, with so much delight and seriousnes as I have
done (reading for many days together fifty of his large Folios in a day, and
also largely taking notes as I read (my common practice in reading any book
that pleases me) I hope shortly in a few lines, which I intend to present him
with, to let him know I now fully understand his meaning. So with my hearty
and true love and service presented to you, I take leave to subscribe my self

(SIR,) Your most affectionate Friend, heartily to serve you [being yet as much
an English man as ever I was] JOHN LILBURN, Semperidem
From my delightful dwelling in Bruges, Saturday, November. the 9. 1652. New
style.
The End.

