THE IVGLERS DISCOVERED, In two Letters writ by Lievt. Col. John Lilburne,
prerogative prisoner in the Tower of London, the 28. September, 1647. to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of all the forces in England
and Wales, discovering the turn coat, Machiavell practisers and underhand
dealings of Liew. Genesis Cromwell, and his soon in law, Commissary General
Ireton, and the rest of their Hocus Pocus faction in his Excellencies Counsel
of War, the first of which Letters thus follows. Unto which is annexed some
advice to the private Soldiers.

Honored Sir,
I Have yesterday seen a paper coming from yourselfe, and your Council of
War, wherein there is mention made of my self, and and though it do not
reach what I stand in need of, yet can I not but judge my self very much
obleiged unto your honor, and the rather because the first motion made unto
you by my true friends the Adjutators, found such a noble and respective
acceptance at your hands, (as my intilligence gives me to understand it did)
though it received obstructions from others, Viz. Commissary General Ireton.
etc.
from whom I might have challenged more interest then from your self. I
beseech your Excellency give me leave to state my case unto you, which is thus,
upon the 10. June 1646. I was by warrant from the House of Peers, brought to
their bar, to answer such things, as I stood charged with before their
Lordships, concerning a Pamphlet entitled, The just man's justification, or a
letter by way of plea in bar, and hereof he shall not fail, as he will answer
the contrary at his perrill. Which said Order you may verbatum read in the 3.
page of my book called the free man's freedom vindicated: in which you may also
read what passed betwixt us at their bar, as also my protest I delivered in
against them, and my formal Appeal which I sent unto the house of Commons from
Newgate.
And being there, I was by their Speaker, the Earl of Manchester, pressed at
their bar (inquisition like, against all law, and justice) to answer to
Interrogatories against my self, without having any visible accuser or any
accusation at all laid unto my charge, which I pleaded at their bar, was
against the very fundamental laws of the land, and so declared by themselves,
the 13. of February, 1645. in my own case, against the Star Chamber, but being
eagerly pressed to answer their interrogatories, I was driven to my last
refuge, to protest against their assuming a jurisdiction over me in a criminal
case, being a Commoner, for which and nothing else, I was most illegally the
11. June, 1646. committed by them to Newgate, as your Excellency may read in
the 7. page of my book, called the free man's freedom vindicated, now with the
rest of my books in the hands of Mr. Saxby, and the 16. of June 1646. I sent
my Appeal (appealing from their jurisdiction) to the House of Commons, which
Appeal you may read ibim. page 9, 10. 11. which said appeal the House of
Commons received read, and approved of, and committed it and my cause to a
Committee where Col. Martin had the chair, who twice examined the business,
but I could never get him to make his report unto the House to day, upon whose
delay the Lords took courage and the 22 June 1646 sent for me up to their bar,
where they commnaded me to kneel, which I absolutely refused, and stood stiffly
to my said appeal, upon which they committed me close prisoner to Newgate, and
also ordered that I should not be permited Pen, Ink, or Paper, or any to speak
with me, or to have acces to me in any kind, which order you may read in half
a sheet of paper called the Just man in Bonds, now also in Mr. Saxbyes hands;
which said order was so barbarously executed upon me, by Ralph Bristo the
Clarke of Newgate, that my wife was not permitted to come into the prisonyard
to speak with me out of my window, neither was she, my, servant, nor any of my
friends p^^mitted to deliver into my hands, either meat, drink, money, or any
other necessaries, till the 11 of July 1646. upon which day by a Warrant I was
brought to the Lords Bar again, iz. Mr. Sargant Finch, Mr. Hayle, Mr. Glover,
and Mr. Hearne.
of purpose to be supprised, they having had as I was informed, 3 or 4 Lawyers
constantly at work all the time I was close, secretly to draw up a charge
against me, As you may more fully read in the 12, 13, 14, 15. pages of my
Annotamy of the Lords tyrannay.
and being at their bar I refused again to kneel^ or to do any action that
might declare a subjection ^o their jurisdiction, telling the^ I was resolved
to spend the last drop of my heart blood in justification of my Appeal to the
House of Commons * whereupon they then and there for so doing, sentenced me in
two several sentences, to pay to the King 4000. l. to be imprisonned in the
(extraordinary chargeable prison of the) Tower of London, for 7. years,
without, according to the custom of the place allowing me subsistence, and
that I be for ever incapable to bear any office or place, in military or in
civil government, in Church or Common wealth, as more at large in the sentence
it self, printed in Vox Plebis, page 31, 32 33. 34. you may please to read.
And being by warrant that day sent to the Tower, where in my judgment I was
very hardly used in many particulars, but especially in being compulsively and
strictly devorced from my wife, (that meet help that the wise and merciful
God had provided for me, to bear part of my afflictions) tell the 16. of
September, 1646. about which time both she and my self petitioned again to
the House of Commons, which you may be pleased to read in the last end of my
book called Londons liberty in Chains, with which Petitions she with some
scores of Gentlewomen her friends and mine, followed the House day by day, with
the importunate widows cries for justice, to men abundantly more unjust then
her unrightous judge, that upon no importunity for these six years together,
will do me one dram of effective justice, though I dare boldly say I have
spent one way and another, in following them, above a thousand pound. But with
her importunity, the same Committee with some additions as I remember, was
appointed by the house fully to here and report my business, and after the
greatest part of twenty days waiting. I got the Committee fully to hear me,
upom the 6. November 1647. at which time, Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, Col. Fleetword,
and Mayor Harrison now with you were present, and so fully heard and know the
whole state of my business that if their memory had not been very forgetful,
I should have thought they should have been able fully to have directed the
Council of War, to have desired something of the House of Commons, that
might really have been good for me, viz. without delay to have adjudged my
cause and appeal, either to my justification, or condemnation, which is the
chiefest thing is the first place I desire, and which may easily be done in one
hour.

Upon the hearing fully of all business, so that in 7. years time I know not
what more effectually to say then then I did, I was commanded by that
Committee, by the 9. of November, 1646. to bring in writing what by word of mouth
I had said to them, which I accordingly did, and since printed it, and
entitled it an Annotamy of the Lords tyranny. And have since that time with
all my might, by all the ways and means I had in the world, endeavored with
Mr. Martin to make my report to the house, as you may fully understand, by
reading the first part of my epistle to him, dated the 31. of May last, (which
in print I lately sent unto your Excellency) and, in this enclosed epistle sent
unto him yesterday, Which is now printed in the last page of my book, called
Ionahs cries out of the Whales belly.
but what should be the reason why he will not do it, I cannot tell, unless
it be that he is conjoined in interest with the Lords, to buy, sell or betray
the liberties of all the Commons of England, who are all and every of them
concerned in the Lords arbitrary and tyrannical dealing with me, for what is
my case to day, may be their case to morrow, and seeing by entreaties and fair
words, I could do nothing with him, But in answer to the forementioned letter,
he sent me a letter in which he gives me information, that he has proferred
20. times to make my report, but the house would not hear him, and he also
promises me to do it the first opportunity he has; which he did perform
the 14. Sept. 1647. which has given me full satisfaction, which I have
acknowledged to him in my late two printed letters to him.
I underhand in City and Country applied my self vigorusly to my friends and
fellow Commons, strongly to petition to the House of Commons, to adjudge my
cause, and either to justify me or condemn me, for favor or mercy I craved
none from them but only law and justice, some of whose petitions, by the
interest of a company of tyrannical, treacherous Villains there, Hollis and
Stapleton, etc. was slighted and would not be received, and others they burnt
by the hands of the Common Hangman, and for ever to terrify the Commons of
England again to petition for justice or their liberty, they most illegally
and uniustly caused several of the Petitioners to be imprisonned, for which
action alone, by the principles of justice and reason, they deserve in my
judgment to be hanged. And when I see that all my importunity and all the
fair means I could use, would do me no good; and knowing that* it was as bad
as murder in me, to leave any means whatsoever unattempted for my own
preservation, being by my tyrannical imprisonment likely to be murdered and
destroyed, without and against all law, and justice, and being in my own soul
confidently persuaded, that if I sat still I must perish, I made a vigorus and
strong attempt upon the private Soldiery of your Army, and with abundance of
study and pains, and the expense of some scores of pounds, I brought my just,
honest, and lawful intentions, by my agents, instruments, and interest to a
good ripeness, not daring to meddle with the Officers, having had so large
experience of the selfeishnesse, and timerousness of the chiefest of them,
sitting in the House of Commons, who I had sufficiently tried, to see what
mettle they were made of, and found them quivering spirited, overwise,
prudentiall men, not any one of them that I could hear of at any time daring
to carry a high, though just Petition into the House, to deliver it, and
speak unto it, so that at present they were to me become reprobate silver, and
therefore knowing by the morrall law, that murder was odious in the sight of
God, especially self murder, I durst not but do the uttermost that I could
to preserve my self, which in my understanding could by no other means in the
world be effected, but by men that had swords in their hands, and resolution in
their spirits, which I believe had been done ere now to the purpose, if I had
embraced their earnest desire to break prison and go to them, which for
diverse weighty reasons I could not, and truly Sir give me leave to tell you
without fear or dread, had I come, and could have got so many to have followed
me, as would da^e enabled me with my sword in my hand, to have done justice and
execution upon those grand treacherous fellows, and tyrants at Westminster,,
that have not only tyrannised over me, but the whole kingdom, I should have
made no more scruple of conscience with my own hands to have destroyed them,
(who have destroyed all law and justice, equity and conscience, and destroy us
by their arbitrary and tyrannical wills) then to have destroyed so many
Weasels and Poule-Cats; but I hoped the great work of the kingdom would
speedily be done, by more abler and wiser instruments then I judged my self to
be, but when I see and heard of diverse great ones in your Army to cool the
business on foot, I sent my wife then big with child, and several other
Agents down to St. Albons, to revive my earnest desire, with those I had an
interest in, for the obtaining of my just ends, justice, and my just liberty,
never in my life time coveting or desiring the interest and power of your Army
to be a clooke or covering for any of my misdoings; making always so far as I
knew, the law of the land the square of my actions, in reference to civil
things amongst men, having always this rule of true reason and justice before
me, to do to every man, as I would have all men do to me, but understanding
from time to time of plotted and contrived tricks put upon me etc, by some
fair outsides under your Who I have named in my book called Ionahs cry, and
in an Epistle to Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, bearing date 13. Aug. 1647. and lately
printed with my two letters to M. Hen. Martin.
command, (although I never heard any thing of your gallant, just and
magnanimous self, either in reference to me or the public, but what deserves
my choicest thanks and praises, and the rather for that I am as it were a
mere stranger to you) which now to you, J judge it altogether inconvenient to
take the boldness to complain of, but hearing from time to time, I was not
forgot amongst those, that have no more ends then I have, viz. justice, and the
universal good and benefit of all just interests in England. I waited with as
much patience as my unsimpothized with condition would enable me to do, for
the good hour of my just and long expected liberty, justice and reparation,
procured for me, by the means of your self, and those men of honor and
justice with you.

But most Noble, and most Honored Genesis give me leave without your displeasure,
truly to tell you, that though I must (as you justly and truly deserve from me)
return you extraordinary hearty thanks, for your cheerful willingness to
give countenance to anything that may justly be undertaken, (in my doulfull and
sad condition) to procure for me justice, and my just freedom^; yet I am apt to
think there is intentively some tricks put upon me, by some of the contrivers
The chief contrivers I judge to be King, Crumwell, and his son Prince Ireton.
who are the principal instruments that keep me in prison, because I will not
comply with their turncoat Lordly interest, and yet at that time durst not
well, but seem to do something far me in regard of the honest Adjutaters
impertunitie, about it, but yet by their subtilty did it in such a manner that
they were sure would do me no good.
of that paper to the House of Commons, Dated at Reading July 19. 1647. sent by
your Excellency and your Council of War, for most Noble Sir, the thing that
will do me good is vigorrously to press the House of Commons, to command Mr.
Martin to make my report unto their House, and then to adjudge my cause, for
either the House of Lords have by law a Jurisdiction over me, and all the
Commons of England? in crimminall cases, or they have not, and in my protesting
against the Lords juridiction, in crimminall cases, and appealing to the House
of Commons, as my leagall and proper judges I have either done evil, and
illegally, or else justly and legally, If I have done evilly and illegally I
crave no favor at their hands, but desire them to condemn me, that so I may
know what to trust to, that so I may use some means to the King etc. for to
the House of (Lords I will never in this apply my self.) For the taking of my
4000 l. Fine, and restoring me to my liberty and freedom, and not be forced
all my days to live in prison, and in the conclusion be forced to strave for
want of bread, or else to eat my wife and children,

But if in my protesting against the Lords jurisdiction in crimminall cases,
and appealing to the House of Commons as my proper and legal Judges, I have
done well and legally, why do the house of Commons suffer me to be kept in
prison, and not adiudge my cause, and deliver me with just reparation, and a
just punishment upon the causers of my causeless torments and sufferings, and
this alone is the thing most noble General, I want and stand in need of, which
only will do me good, and which in it self is such a rational and equitable
piece of justice, as by no just man can be denied.

For alas, most noble General, what will liberty in England, without judging
my cause (and Appeal) do me good, am I not subject every hour in the Kings
name and behalf? though it may be against his previty, will or mind, to have
my body cast into prison, for the 4000. l. which by that unjust fine I in law
owe him? or if my body by absence cannot be seized upon, is not that little
that I have liable by the law every hour to be seized upon? yea, and the very
beds that my distressed, helpelesse, and unpittied wife and children lie upon,
subject to be taken from under them, yea, and stripped of their very wearing
clothes They were, And truly Sir, so large experience have I of the merciless
and cruel temper of my adversaries, that I will not trust in the least, to the
mercy of the merciless Lords at westminster, or their cruel and merciless
confederates, in the House of Commons, Assembly, or Common Counsel of London,
any of whom I am sure, would willingly, Vote, Petition, or Remonstrate me to
death.

And again Sir, should I put in bail as your paper desires, I should run my
self into such a snare, as I should never get out of again while I live, but
thereby should like a foolish fellow, undo all that in the heat of the fire I
have been doing almost this 14. months, viz. preserving and defending the
liberty of all the Commons of England, against the tyrannical invasions of the
House of Lords: For whose prisoneram I? surely the House of Lords, and no
others, (unless it be negligent Henry Martins) and to whom must I put in
security? surely to no other then the Lords. And undoubtedly I should both in
reason and law, by so doing justify the illegallitie and uniustnesse of their
sentence past against me, and not only so, but also justify their jurisdiction
and power over all the Commons of England in criminal cases, which were an
act, that would not only as much as in me lies, destroy the best and
fundamentallest Laws of England, (viz. Magna Charta, and the most excellent
Petition of Right, etc.) But also destroy and overthrow the rational,
natural, national, and legal liberties of my self and all the Commons of
England, which would be an act in my judgment, not only of the greatest
business in the world, but also of the greatest treason that I could commit
against the land of my nativitie and my own being, of which wickedness I would
not justly be esteemed guilty for all the gold in the world.

Now most noble and heroical General, if it should be objected against me,
that the House of Commons, are full of the great and weighty affairs of the
Kingdom, and therefore want time to debate and adiudge my particular
business, to which I answer and say, I am confident they have not a business
of greater weight and consequence before them, then mine in the latitude of it
is, for it is concerning the escentiall and fundamental liberties of
themselves, of me, and of all and every individual Commoner of England, and I
wonder what greater business they can spend their time about, then a business
of so grand and universal concernment, without the settlement of which, it is
easily to be evinced, that all that you have done with your swords, and they
with their tongues is to no more purpose then to blow in the air, for invasion
of rights, was the true cause of all the present wars, and their so visible
invading of the just and legal rights, and freedoms of all the Commons of
England, is not the way in the least to pacific and still them, but to foment
and newly increase them, and make them a fresh flame out again Espccially when
the Commons of England, shall see the most base and wicked juglings of L. G.
Cromwell, and his' son Ireton: whose power and interest in the Army (by those 4
grandiuglers means, viz. Lord Say, Lord Wbarton, young Sir Hen. Vain, and
Soliciter St. John) is now vigorusly improved to support and uphold the Lords
usurpations, tyranny, and grand opprossions, that so they may merit, to be
voted by them to be domincering, tyrannising Lords with them, or else why am I
kept in prison by them, seeing it is every hour in the day in their power to
deliver me if they pleased.
with strong violence which if it do, I hope it will be to their fatal and
final destruction: which I with all my might and strength with as much
earnestness as Sampson prosecuted the Philistems, should help forward, though
I should thereby pull the roof of the house about my ears as he aid.

And truly Sir I cannot think that the House of Commons are so mindful of the
good of the kingdom, that the providing therefore, so straightens them, that
they have no time to hear my report, and adiudge my cause. Sure I am since my
report was ready, they have found time enough to vote and devide among
themselves like wicked stewards, hundreds of thousands of pounds of their
masters the Common wealths money, and I am sure they can find time enough to
vote all the Commons of England slaves, by voting their honest and just
Petitions, to be burnt by the hands of the Common Hangman, yea and to vote and
declare them Rebe'ls and Traitors to the kingdom, (which principally is
themselves) for endeavoring by petition to make known their grievances to them
their servants, whom they choose and trusted to provide for their weal but not
in the least for their woe, 1. part book Decl. p. 150. And besides they can
find time to violate the laws and justice of the kingdom, by voting the 11.
Members particularly impeached of no less then high treason, by accusers ready
to prosecute and make good at their perrils their charge and impeachment, to
have liberty without security to travel where they please for six months,
and yet can find no time in 13. months to deliver me from the tyranny of the
Lords, who originally laid no crime nor legal charge to my charge, nor never
in the least produced any accuser or witness against me, but merely imprisoned
me because I would not be a slave to their tyrannical wills and unbounded
lusts, which is the hight of injustice. See Vox Plebis, page 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 18, 19. etc. See my Annotamy of the Lords tyranny, p. 8.9.10. and my
book called the resolved man's resolution, dated 30. April 1647. p. 3, 4, 8, 9,
10. See also regal tyranny, from the 62. 63. to the 84. page
Besides Sir, if I had do evil, add lying in prison after so many Jail
detiveries, and being so strongly committed by those, that I am confident never
a Judge in Westminster Hall, dare grant me a Habias Corpus against; there being
no visible and formal power in England but the House of Commons, to save me
from Arbitrary destruction, they ought by law, though never in my self so
guilty of violation of the law, being the Lords have let so many Jail
deliveries pass, and has never called me oat to erye me by law, nor yet to
this day has laid no legal crime to my charge, for by the law of England
(which they havee often sworn to maintain) there ought to be Jail deliveries
held 3. times a year, or oftener if need require, either for the condemning or
acquitting all prisoners whatsoever, 5 Ed. 3 2. 4. part Sir Edward Cooks
institutes, folio. 168, 169. See the oppressed man's oppressions declared. page
3. And Jonah cries outt of the Whales belly page 10. See also the beginning of
Vox Plebis.

And Sir, give me leave to tell you, I am as free a man, and have as good a
right to the benefit of all the laws in England as any Member of the House of
Commons what ever he be, (as they confess in their own Declarations, cited by
me, in the Outcryes of Oppressed Commons, for all their vapring with their b^g
swollen blatherly privileges, they having none at all in referrence to the
Commons of England. But freedom from arrests, and that but for a short time,
and that not for aprenti^ship, much less for ever, being as liable to the law
as any other man, either for the breach of the peace, Felony or Treason, as
Sir Edward Cook their own learned oracle declares in the 4 part of his
institutes, chap. high Court of Parliament, fol. 25. And I find by his
discourse there, that they have no privileges by law in referrence to the
King, but freedom of speech and debate, and that he shall not take notice of
any thing done and debated among themselves, tell they themselves in a
Parliamentary way transmit the cognizance of it to him. And if this be true as
that learned Lawyer, etc. declares it is, then I humbly desire the pressing of
this argument unto the house without any more dispute, at least at present to
deliver me, because I have lain so long in prison without any legal
accusation at all, or legal trial, or so much as without any prosecuter or
informer against me at all, which is against all law and justice in the highest
degree whatsoever, for the words of their own late Vote in the behalf of the
eleaven impeached Members is.

That by the law of the Land, no Judgment can be given to suspend (and
therefore much less to imprison) those members from sitting in the House, upon
the papers presented by the Army, before particulars produced and proofs made,
and if this be true, then I am sure they are most unjust in not delivering me,
who orriginally never had any charge at all against me, nor never see
prosecuter nor witness examined against me, to this very day; O hight of
injustice, and partiallity? thus to vote, and thus contrary to that vote, to
deal with me, who am equally free and intaled to the Law of the Land as any of
their Members.

But yet most Noble sir, give me leave to aver unto you that I am not only
illegally imprisoned, but that their vote in favor of their impeached members
is most illegal in it self, and against the law, and the practices of the law
in England, or else they themselves violated it in the highestd degree with the
Earl of Straford, who upon a general charge of high treason, without
mentioning particulars, further then for endeavoring to subvert the
Fundamental Laws, without nameing any witnesses or prosecutors, unless it
was their own Clarke, and yet required at the nick of time, not only to
sequester him, from the House of Lords, but also to secure his body in prison,
which was accordingly done at the very instant, and then, and not before
examined witnesses against him, and out of their examinations, drew particular
articles, to make good their general Charge, and I have from good hands been
told, Mr Hallis under hand, was one of his chief prosecutors, and sat up many
a late night to beat his brains to destroy him, and therefore just, or not
just, it is but just, that he himself should ^aft of his own law, which he
etc. is so far from doing, that he is yet at liberty, and voted by the House
to have leave for 6 months to go whether he pleases, the which if the Army
with patience suffer, I am sure their credet is lost forever, And now it is too
apparent that Cromwell and Ireton, there these impeachers, with their fore
mentioned associates here at Westminster, desired no more but to be rid of
their company, that so they might not stand in their way, as an antifaction to
hinder them from their tyranicall intended tyrany and Lordly domination, now as
apparent to any impartial observant rational man as the Sun that shines at
noone day.
and all men will conclude they can prove nothing against them. Sir I have
stated my case to you, and must crave pardon for my teadiousnesse, leaving all
to your judicious and wise consideration, to do in it as God, justice,
humanity, and conscience shall direct you; craving nothing from your power to
justify or protect me in any evil, or wickedness; but only that I may have
justice and fair play above board, and upon them terms I bid defiance to all
the adversaries I have in England; to do the worst they can to me, only I
humbly and earnestly supplycate you, that what you shall resolve to do for me,
you do it speedily and vigorously, for perrish I can not, nor will not if I
can help it, and if nothing will serve the 2 Houses but my causlesse
destruction, I am nesscesitated like a plain dealer, that fears no cullers,
to protest unto your Excellency that if speedily they will not do me justice I
will appeal to all the Commons of England, and the private Soldiers of your
Army, Which I had done ear now if I had not been deluded With fair words, and
cheate^ with fair promises,
and do the best I can to set them about their ears, to cut their tyrannical
throats, though I perish with them; so committing your Renowned Excellency, to
the faithful protection, care and direction of your wise and powerful God,
desireing of him for you, that your heart may be kept upright, and sinscere
before him, tell the Glorious and joyful appearing of our Capt. Genesis the Lord
Jesus Christ, and so I humbly take my leave and subscribe my self

From my watch Tower, in the Tower of London, this 22. July, 1647. Sir, Your
Excellencies cordial, obleiged and faithful servant for the common good of
his Country, ready to spend his heart blood with you. John Lilburne.

The second Letter thus follows. For his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, this
at Kingstone present with speed.
NOble and right worthy Genesis vouchsafe unto me I beseech you leave, to present
unto your Excellency, the grateful acknowledgement of my heart for your
Excellencies senceablenesse of my affl^ctions, and your readiness and
willingness to improve your interest to abaite them, and particularly for your
late Noble favor which I was made partaker of, by the hands of your Secretary;
and give me leave humbly to acquaint your Excellency, that by my wise who has
bin all the by past weeks at Kingson, to see what she could do for my liberty,
I received a message by her coming from some of no small influence and Viz Mr.
Allen one of the Adjetators for L. G. Cromwels Regiament, and his Officious and
extraordinary creature in the employing of al his subtilty and parts to make
fruitless the honest negotiations of the honest and uncorrupted adjetators,
and to support the usurping Lords in their tyrannical oppressions, as I have
largely declared unto himself in my letter unto him of 23 August 1647,
parts that I should petition to the Lords for my liberty as the only way to
procure it, which advice is as acceptable to me as to desire me with my own
hands to cut my own throt, and little should I have exspected to have received
any such prenitious distructive advice (to justice and true freedom) from the
mouths of any in your Army, that has eminently pretended to be patrons of
true, and impartially justice, and the Commons true legal and well known
privelidges; and therefore fearing that by the destructive advice, or
incinuating interest of some about you that pretendedly would serve me, you
should be put upon some addresses to the Lords for me, the thoughts of which I
can not but in justice and honesty abhor and detest, and had rather desire to
rot here then not with all my interest as far as I am able to hinder such a
thing, for to the bar of the great interest of the Commons of England I have
appealed in the iustifiing and presenting of which appeal I will live and die;
stand or fall I desirnothing but either legal justification or condemnation
and thereeore most Noble Genesis if there be no other means within your power to
ease me of my sorrows and to obtain justice, for me and all the Commons of
England concerned in me, but by applycation to the Lords, I most humbly and
most earnestly beseech and entreat your Honor to disist and throw my business
behind your back, and forever to bury it in the grave of forgitfulnesse, and
truly I cannot but apprehend that this advice flows from the same intrest, that
over ruled the rational and just disenters at that council of War, that sent
up their desires to the Parliament the other day, that I might put in bail for
my liberty, the snares of which desires I took the boldness largely to evince
in my letter of the 22 July 1647. to your Honor.

And Noble sir, though it should or might be said to me that the Lords are
grown, very gallant, and for now in honesty outstrip the present House of
Commons, and therefore sit for me to comply with and address unto; yet give me
leave to tell your Excellency, I walk not, nor act not from accidents, but from
principals, and being thoroughly persuaded in my own soul they are just,
righteous, and honest, I will by Gods goodness never depart from them though I
perish in maintaining them; and not only the principals of reason, but the
known and just law of England, and the experience of all ages tells me, that the
usurpations of illegal prerogative Lords, over honest and free Commons: is not
only distructive to true justice and right reason (the fountain of all just
laws) but also to all true and just freedom, and therefore I both must and
will run the hazard of spending my heart blood, to root up and destroy their
illegal and unjust usurpations, being now so deeply engaged, and can never
willingly without being a Trayter to my self and Country, consent in this to
close, with them, knowing very well, that it is an easy thing for a
scholmasters to make a t^merous boy for the saving of himself, to say and do
what he pleases, when he has taken him in a notorious crime, and has got his
breeches down, with a good rod in his hand, to whip him soundly, and yet as
soon as tha: present fear is over, to be as ready as ever, to run into the
same transgression, and truly most Noble Sir, give me leave to think, that if
the present House of Lords were truly and in good serious earnest, resolved to
repent of their evils, and amend their ways by doing unbiased justice and
right, they would of themselves without any addressing unto, have forthwith
done justice and right to me, and other afflicted one whom they have by
unmerciful imprisonments contrary to all equity, reason, law, and justice, yea
and I dare boldly say it, against the light of their own consciences; And truly
Sir, give me leave to assure your Honor from the mouths of some of
themselves, to some of my true friends. I might at the first Contest with them
have had my liberty, etc. from them, if I would in any way of my own framing,
have made but any addresses to them. And truly Sir give me leave in the
sincerity and uprightness of my heart before the presence of God to tell you,
it is merely a principle of conscience within me, to justice and honesty, and
not any wilful stubbornness* or base self ends of my own, that makes me I
cannot, ingeneously professing unto your honor, I received more, justice and
courtesy in three months from the House of Lords, then I have done almost in
seven years from the House of Commons. And I do protest before the Almighty,
(and I appeal unto the Lord Wharton to bear Unto whom I showed my protest
before I delivered it, and told him both what I must and would and offered him
to do any thing that the Lords in reason or justice could require of me, so
they would not force me to to their bar. See the 4. page of my book, called
the free man's freedom vindicated.
me witness) that I did the utmost that in me laid by way of gratitude and
thankfulness unto them to hinder a contest with them, but the revenging
malice of the Earl of Manchester (who I am apt to think had long since lost
his head, for his base and palpable treachery, and transcendent wickedness,
if Lieutenant General Cromwell had effectually discharged his duty to the
whole kingdom as he ought to have done) at me, for engaging with Lieutenant
General Cromwell, in his just cause against him, would be satisfied with no
reason, but the crushing me to pieces, by whose means principally, with Col.
Edward King, one of his treacherous wicked confederates, I suffer all that I
do at this day, See my printed narrative to the Ad^utators of the 21. August
1647. printed at the last on of the 2. Edition of my Epistle to Judge Reeves.
and I dare confidently affirm it, that if I could have addressed to them
since my Appeal to the House of Commons, I might have had solid grounds, not
only to have had my liberty: and my fine of 4000. l. taken of, but also some
thousands of pounds by their means in my purse, which now in my thoughts is a
very great hazard whether ever I shall enjoy or no.

Therefore to conclude all. I shall humbly state a case unto your Excellency,
and leave the application of it to your self, which is this. An honest and a
true man is following his lawful occasions, and there meets with him a company
of bloody Murderers, Thieves and Robber, who being stronger then he, set upon
him, and attempt the taking away his purse and life, and whiie he is struggling
with them, by comes a company of honest and true men, stronger then the Rogues
and Thieves, unto whom the honest, almost destroyed man addresseth himself, and
acquaints them truly and fully with his present case, and pitifully cries out
to them for help, but they though they seem to pity him in words, pass by
him and do not effectually rescue him, by means of which he is not only
robbed, but also slain and destroyed. Now the question is, whether by the law
of humanity, nature and reason, the aforesaid honest passengers were not tied
in duty and conscience without any more dispute, to have at least rescued the
honest oppressed man, and have set him free? (or at least to have secured him
and them to the next just Magistrate) and endeavored the obtaining of justice
for him, upon those that would have destroyed him. And then the second question
is, whether or no that in the case before mentioned, they suffer him (being
easily able to rescue him) to be robbed and murdered? whether in the sight of
God and all just men, they be not clearly accessaries of the robbery and
murder? and as guilty of it as those that committed it. So craving pardon for
my boldness and tediousness, I commit you as my own soul to the careful
and powerful protection of the Lord Jehovah, desiring of him for you, to
mainetaine and uphold you, in your integrity and true plain uprightness, that
you may shine and be truly glorious in the eyes of our Lord and master, and all
just men, I humbly take my leave and rest.

From my causeless and unjust inthralment, in the Tower of London, this 21. of
August, 1647. Sir, your most devoted faithful servant, that without fear or
flattery highly honors you. John Lilburne.

Advice to the Private Soldiers.
SIRS,
MY best advice at your earnest desire, unto you and all the private Soldiers of
your Army is: to the death to contest for the preservation and performing of
your Solemn engagement, made and subscribed at New Market the 5. th. July 1647.
especially in the first branch thereof: and not to suffer any thing to be acted
or done in the Army, to the violation thereof, but forthwith vigorously to
demand justice upon every person, though never so great, that you can prove
has or does attempt the infringment of it, and to set a brand of infamy upon
him as a deceiver, and a man not fit to be entrusted, and also immediately to
require an account of your respective Adjutators, what they have been doing all
this while: and suffer not one sort of men too long to remain adjetators,
least they be corrupted by bribes of offices, or places of preferment, for
standing waters though never so pure at first, in time putrifies, and also
instantly press your Adjutators to move vigorously for the imediate and total
purgeing of the House of all those that sat in Mr. Pellums factious traitorous
Juncto: who are so declared already by your Army? by whose illeagall pretended
and unbinding votes, a new War was defacto raised and leavied in the Kingdom,
to the visible hazard of the ruin and utter destruction there: and if you do
not this effectually, but for the factious Lordly ends of some great ones (as
L. G. Crumwell, Commisary Gen, Ireton) suffer that factious illeagall
Combination and assembly of men, to run away with the name and power of a true
House of Commons, then it will evidently follow, that your General and your
whole Army, and all those members of the House that came to you, and adheared
to you, are all Parliament Rebels and traitors, inforceably opposing them, and
marching up against them in all Warrlick manner, as you have done, and by your
Remonstrances, declarations, and proposals, declaring that whole assembly of
Mr. Pellumes Juncto See the latter end of the Armies Remonstrance of 18.
August, 1647. published to the wh^le Kingdom, by the spesciall order of the
present House of Peers, 20. Aug. 1647. see also the Adiutators proposals or
addresses 5th, and 14. August, 1647. subscribed by 53 of their hands, and
printed by the Armies printer.
blades to be usurpesr of a Parliament power, Traitor and enmies to their
Country, and the trust reposed in them, ands fit to beseverely punished, and
not fit to be continued any longer as Judges in the Kingdom, or their own
causes; and their sitting still in the House will reader all the orders and
ordinances made while they there sit to be questionable, as unvailed and
unbinding, being made by the co^currant votes of so many as you your selves,
and al those members that concurd with you, (but espescially the present House
of Lords) have so visibly and publicly declared Traitors to the whole
Kingdom, and therefore are not fit to be law makers, nor Judges in their own
causes, and the greatest and weightiest things of the Kingdom, and besides how
can you, or any that have adheared to you (in justice) press for the punishing
of any in London, that was active in leaving War against you the Kingdoms and
Parliaments Army, as you call your selves, in your notable and large
Remonstrance of the 18 August 1647. seeing what they did, was in obedience to
Parliament authority, if you suffer the most, or any of Mr. Pellums Iuncto
Blades, to set in the House, and so to go scot free without punnishment, for
to let the principals, (the Parliament men) go free without punnishment, and
to punnish the accessaries, the Citizens) for putting in execution their orders
and ordinances; is the greatest in justice that can be acted in the World, and
besides, if that any of the Juncto Blades that sat in the House, when the votes
passed, for leavying a new war on the Kingdom, sit still in the House and so
gac on unpunnished: and the active zealous Presbyter Citizens that did obey,
and execute their Ordinances, shall any way be punnished, therefore what will
this else, but be a just ground to all rational men to combine together, and
resolve in future time, never to obey any more orders, Ordinances of
Parliament: least they be by the Parliament soundly punished therefore: And for
Sir Thomas Fairsax to command a Soldier to go charge such an enemy, and do
the best he can to kill him, and when the obedient Soldier has zealously put
his command in execution, and for Sir Thomas when he has done to go about to
hang the Soldier for his pains, is not only the hight of in justice, but is
also the ready way to breed a muteny in his Army that in future times, his
commands will never be obeyed.
and grant that Iuncto to be a House of Commons in any sense, and all the late
active zealous Citizens against you are acquitted thereby from all their
Junquits and made just persons, and your selves the Traitors and transgressors,
and it may be, before you be a year older, ye may get your recompense by
loosing your lives at Tiburne, or else wheare, as you will justly diserve it.
In this particular you play the Iuglers, or suffer your selves to be foold, and
do not effectually see fulfilled, your own forementioned Declarations.

Therefore say I, immediately press vigorusly for the total purging the House
of all that sat with Mr. Pillam, that so there may be way made for the
exemplary punishing of the Lord Mayor of London, and all the chief
ringleaders, actors in the late desperate and traiterous engagement. And also
press for moneys to pay your quarters, the want of which will speedily (by
free quarter) destroy the Army in the poor country peoples affections, whose
burdens are intolerable, in paying Excise for that very meat the Soldiers eat
from them gratis, and yet paying heavy taxations besides, and being also
liable by the Persons and Impropriators, to be every year robbed of the tenth
part of their labors, stock, i and increase, under the name of payment of
Jewish Tithes, long since by the death of Christ abolshed, Heb. 7. 5. 11. 12.
18. 19. 17. and 9. 9. 12. 14. 16. and 10. 1. 12.

And if they be any thing stuborne in this particular of parting with their
proper goods, to those that never sweat for it, then by the late Independent
Ordinance of Parliament, they are subject by the Arbitrary pleasure of two
Justices of peace to pay them trible. Also it is worth your consideration to
press that the public treasure of the kingdom may be taken out of that
uncertain, cheating and cosoning way of receiving and paying, that now it is
in, and put immediately into the old, experienced, sure, and undeceiving way of
the Exchequer, by means of which the Kingdom may be sure to know what is done
with their money.

And without which both they and you will be everlastingly consumed and cheated
Read a late notable book entitled an eye salve for the Army.
but above all press for the immediate doing of impartial justice without any
more delay ^ail men without exceptions, that are under oppressions and suffer
wrong, and down withal sorts and kinds of Monopolies, that so all the people
may enjoy their birth right, free trade. And take effectual care of all our
laws and the proceedings therein, may be translated speedily into English that
so the people may speedily enjoy some fruits by all your b^^ss^ng and gallant
promises, and may no longer have overmuch cause to say as now commonly they do
both in City and Country, that you have cheated and guld them* with fair and
plausible Declarations, which when you made, you never intended (as by your
present actions you fully declare) to endeavor the fulfilling of, but made
them as stalking Horses to attain your own ends, (of present power, and future
expected honor and profit, and so suck the people dry, and make them slaves,)
as the Grandees in Parliament have done with all their Declarations.

But above all the rest be sure not to trust your great officers at the
Generals quarters, no further then you can throw an Ox, for they are
generally corrupted, and to the true and legal liberties of the Commons of
England are turned enemies and reprobates, being grown Lordly and selfe^sh in
the highest nature (having by their plausible but yet cunning and subtle
policies, most uniustly stolen the power both from your honest General, and
your too flexible Adiutators, and devolved it upon a company of corrupt Linsey
woolsey men sitting at Westminster. Who I am sure are not short in acting all
manner of tyranny and appression whasoever, that may render a power or
Magistracy, to be for fitters of their trust, and degenerate from the true
Magistrates into real Tyrants.
That in June or July last declared you Traitors for endeavong by petition to
make known your grievances to them, and in August last, voted and leavied a
war against you, intentively to have murdered and destroyed you. Whose
principal care in all their visible actions, is to rob and pole the poor
kingdom of all their treasure, and share it by thousands and ten thousands,
amongst themselves, and to do effectual justice and right to no man, but
themselves, kindred and friends. Who by the serious of all their visible
actions, intend when the people are poor enough to make both them and you
their vassells and slaves, and themselves domineering Lords and masters over
you, and your aforesaid officers present carriage being such, as that they give
too just cause to me, etc, to aver it under my hand, with sorrow and grief,
that as sure as I believe there is a God, so surely do I believe that they are
joined with the Lords against me, and become the principal instruments to keep
me fast in my unjust imprisonment, witness my hand this 8. Sept. 1647.

John Lilburne.

FINIS.

