THE RESURRECTION OF JOHN LILBURNE, Now a Prisoner in Dover-Castle, DECLARED
And manifested in these following Lines penned by himself, and now at his
earnest desire published in print in these words.

London. Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread Eagle, near the
West End of Paul's. 1656.

THE RESURRECTION OF John Lilburne, etc.
HAving many and strong compulsions, from the measure of the light of the Lord
now shining clearly within me, and raised up now to a good degree of life and
power in my soul, to make a public declaration in print, of my real owning,
and now living in, (in my present attained to measure) the life and power of
those divine and heavenly principles, professed by those spirituallized people
called Quakers; at my owning of which, all my old and familliar friends (in a
manner) are so much troubled and offended with me for, and my great adversaries
so jealous of the real intentions of my heart within me, at my so doing, and
by that measure of the Light of JESUS thining in my soul, I am now directed and
guided to entitle it as aforesaid, and here at this place (as an introduction,
before I come to the main thing of that which through the strength of God I
have now to say) to insert here the copies of the very two first Letters, that
ever I writ of note, after the great and glorious power of God had seized upon
my soul, to let in the real beginnings of convincement into my soul, of my
spiritual blindness, deadness and emptiness, and by which I came to see a clear
glimps of that spiritual fullness that was, and really is, in the divine and
heavenly declared principles of the aforesaid precious people: The first Letter
being to my wife, take in these following words.

Dover-Castle the fourth day of the tenth month, 1655.
For my deer and loving wife Elizabeth Lilburn, at her friend George Wades
(house) a Cook, at the Sign of the Sun near Guild Hall, and Lawrence Lanes end
in London, these with speed deliver.
My dear heart,
WHat in a great measure my temper of spirit was before thy coming to me, I in
its measure communicated unto thee, by the copy of my letter to Luke Howard,
which I have here enclosed thee at thy leisure to peruse: And what
distemperedness my earthly spirit was in, at, and toward thee, at thy and my
last meeting upon Saturday, the tenth of November last, I need not to repeat
unto thee, being (I believe) it is fresh enough in thy own memory.

And the frame of my heart, after thy reconciliation and mine (so far as God
has given me the spirit of discerning, and searching it) I in no small
proportion in reallity discovered to thee.

And since my departue (upon Wednesday the 21. of November last) setting my
self seriously to a deep and weighty consideration of that work that my soul
longed for a new to be a traveling in; And giving fullness of scope to that
divine and heavenly voice of God speaking plainly in my heart, unto which I am
truly able to se^ my seal ^o, that it is that spirit, or power of the Holy
Ghost, or true Comforter, spoken of Joh. 16. 7 8. that convinces, or reproves
the world, or the carnal, or first, or fallen nature in me, of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment, and is that eternal and everlasting spirit of
truth, that (embraced and closed with) leads my soul by its divine and strong
power, or attractive drawings, step by step in its measure and degree into
truth, and in my heavenly fathers good time, I doubt not but it will establish
and build me up in truth, Ioh. 16.13. and mould me into a real conformity in
life and power (in real and substantial enjoyment) to the ways of truth, of
light, and life, be they never so difficult to the flesh, carnal man, or
fallen, or first nature in me, or never so full of the cross, or self-denial,
or giving up my own reason, understanding, will, wisdom, and affections, to be
crossed and crucified by the Will and Wisdom of JESUS, the anointed above
measure of the Father, and to be guided or led on by him the living life,
light, or power in all the sons of men, that have the greatest degree, or least
of sparks of divine or heavenly light, shining within their dark, (in their
small degree or measure) or enlightened, inlivened souls, in their larger degree
or measure.

I have, since I see thee, read extraordinary much of those two volumes which I
showed thee, containing both almost seventeen hundred pages, of the writings of
those preciousest (though most contemptible) people called quakers; the-truly
beloved objects of my soul. And this at present, (because I rather now heartily
desire to live in the possession, power, or life of truth in my soul, then in
the bare profession, notion, or talk of it) I shall, and can in sincerity say
to thee, that my soul has been amazed, and even confounded by them; not as
Herod by John Baptist preachings was, for fear of eternal wrath (or loss of his
Tetrarch-ship by, or) for his sins, which to avoid made him reform, and amend
many things, Mark 6.20. but of real breakings, or shame of soul, that so
glorious a Talent, as my Lord and Master (by the clear, lively, and powerful
breakings in of his divine and heavenly light into my heart) long, and many
years ago bestowed upon me, should by me (or my first, and carnal wisdom) be
most ungratefully, and unfaithfully, like a lighted candle put under a bushel,
or hid, or buried in the earth in me, in obscurity and darkness: Or, that my
soul should by the will and wisdom of the first nature, ambitiously (Adam-like)
eat a new upon the tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and thereby covet to be
esteemed something amongst the sons of men, (more then the Divine Wisdom would
have me) with that measure or degree I had attained to; and therewith be with
it (like the unbelieving Jews, the type in the flesh) or the first (or mean in
its degree or measure, to what I ought to have thirsted after) outgoings of
the divine and heavenly teaching, and instructing spirit, or voice of God in,
or unto my soul, willing and content to sit down in the wilderness, or
journeying way to Canaan; and not with precious Ieshua and Caleb (the spiritual
anti-types in that particular, or in another particular, the outward types, of
the spiritual traveling anti-types, the seed of God under the Gospel, into
Gods spiritual rest in himself) be willing, longing, and desirous, by faith in
the strength of God, (resting as the old Israelites after the flesh ought to
have done, in his faithful and powerful promise of carrying me on) through
all difficulties, self-denyals, crosses, and hardships whatsoever; to travel
into the spiritual Kingdom, or heavenly Land of Rest, that God in the naked
enjoyment of himself has prepared for (and at this very day I believe has
experimentally and really bestowed the clear enjoyment of, upon many of) his
Ransomed ones, contemptibly and scornfully called quakers.

I say unto thee, the real (and close applied home unto my soul by the spirit
and power of life from God, that now aloud again speaks within me)
consideration of the premises, or that which is foregoing, and that people afar
off, (yea, ignorant idiots, fools and profane As is clearly proved by the
printed speeches of several of the prisoners in Northhampton and Eversham
Goals.
ones) in comparison of my being so nigh at hand so many years ago, to the
clear and full possession of the spiritual Land of Canaan, should enter into
the glorious Kingdom of God, or that clearness of Rest, Peace and Union in, and
with him, that now clearly to my spiritual understanding they enjoy, and there
bring forth the ripe fruits of spiritual old age in comparison of me, of
Praises, Honor, and Glory to the Lamb: and to the ancient of Days, that
clearly sits upon the Throne in their hearts, as having judged down, conquered,
and overcome, within them, all their sins or spiritual enemies, and caused
them to triumph over them, as in his strength, divine and heavenly power,
reigning and ruling as King and Lord over them.

O, I say unto thee again, the real sight (in its measure and degree) and
spiritual consideration of these things, since I last see thee, for diverse
hours in several nights, one after another, when my God denied sleep unto my
outward eyes, and caused my soul to be awake with himself, and to be really
exercised in an interchange of Divine conference, contemplation or parley with
him, has even caused my soul to weep, sigh, and mourn within me before him,
and in his strength and almighty power to indent with him, and now in good
earnest to engage in my soul, or spiritual man, to be obedient to his heavenly
and divine voice, speaking clearly in me, and to follow him (least I should
now, by any longer resistance, totally quench his divine drawings, through the
denial of my own (or natural reason) will, wit, wisdom, desires and
affections; with a real weanedness from worldly or fleshly honor, applause,
glory, riches, or creature-fulness, yea, even to a final denial of father,
kindred, friends, my sweet and dearly beloved (by me) babes, or thy own self,
who viz. thy self, for many years by past, I must avow it before the Almighty
in sincerity and truth, has been to me the greatest and dearest of all earthly
delights and joys.

And now therefore look about thee in good earnest, and see what thou have got
to thy self, as to the flesh, by thy eager desires, and strong endeavors to
bring me back again into England; for the day of thy real, strong, and full
temptation and trial, never came upon thee till now, if God give thee not by
degrees the fullness and compleatness of spiritual and heavenly strength and
ability to bear it and go through it. For my part I am now in reallity and
truth, in the clearly, lively, or evident seeing of the wisdom, and loving hand
of a tender and indeared eternal Father, in stripping me naked of all earthly
and created excellencies, and taking my outward estate and profitable
employments, and all my worldly glory from me, and graciously, and supportingly
leading me through the valley of Baca, Psalm. 84 6. or Tears, outward Dangers,
and Death, for now almost four years together, and separating from me for a
long time, that wonted delight that used to be betwixt thee (my old and real
Idol) and me; and at my coming to this place, clearly unto being me of all and
every one of my old Friends, and familiar Acquaintance, that were any way fit,
or able to do any thing for me; and thereby hedging up my way, that I must,
whether I will or no, in spite of my teeth, once again give ear to the serious
and plain voice, call, or counsel of the Most High, speaking in, and unto my
soul.

And so in much mercy and indeared loving kindness, as he did in my great
straits in the Bishops time, provided and sent unto me a poor disspised (yet
understanding) Priscilla, to instruct me in, or expound unto m^^h way of God
more fully, or perfectly; (whom I am compelled now to tell thee, I shall love
and respect therefore, the longest day I live upon the earth, let her continue
by whomsoever to be judged never so rigid or contemptible) so here at this
place he has also provided for me an (...) (being a contemp^ible yet
understanding, spiritually, knowing, and single hearted Shoemaker) to do the
same now to my spiritual, and no small advantage, refreshment, and benefit, by
means of all which I am a present become dead to my former busling actings in
the world, and now stand ready with the devout C^n^u^ion, or Captain, spoken of
Act. 10. to hear and obey all things that the lively voice of God speaking in
my soul shall r^quire of me, upon the further manifestation of whose glorius
presence, my heart with a watching fear and care desires to wait, and to walk
faithfully, and tenderly, and humbly in that measure of Light already received;
and out of the strength of indearedness of love, and tenderness of affection,
that has long in times bypast, dwelt in me toward thee and of late in much
sincerity is renewed unto thee again; I have with the same eternal, wel-wishing
of thy spiritual happiness, as I do my own-ordered Giles Calvert to send unto
thee several of those printed pieces of the quakers, that in the serious
reading of which have been most convincingly, instructive unto my soul; amongst
which I have judged in the first place James Naylor (that strong, or tall man
in Christ) his Something in answer unto (thy and my indeared friend) John
Jackson (that tall Cedar in great profession of Religion) his book called,
Strength in weakness, (which book the last Post I received from thee) in the
reading of which piece of James Naylors, I must set my seal to it, that there
goes along in the breathings out of it a great deal of the quickening life and
power of the spirit of God, and unto it are annexed several pieces of that
precious and divine soul, William Deusbury, the Lords now, or late glorious
prisoner, in Northampton common goal, (to whose precious and heavenly spirit,
although I never see his face, mine indearedness of love is glued unto) whose
book is called, The discovery of the great enmity of the Serpent against the
Seed of the woman, and his discovery of man's return, have been pieces in my
reading of them seriously, that by the power of the Almighty has spoken home
to my soul I have ordered to be annexed unto them (as I remember) as many as
makes them ten in number; and then twelve more in another volume principally
for answering Objections, I have ordered to be sent unto thee, which I hope
thou will receive (before this come to thee) bound up in that method that J
have directed.

And now my dear love, for whom my soul travells with God for thy eternal good,
with the same sincere heartedness as for my own, hoping that thy late out-fall
and mine was but for a set season, that so as divine Paul in another sense
speaks, Phil. 15. thy reconciliation and mine again might now remain firm in
love for ever.

I therefore earnestly entreat thee, not to much cumber thy self in thy many
toilings and journeyings for my outward liberty, but sit down a little, and
behold the great salvation of the Lord; and if by any means possible thy spirit
can be made free to it, retire thy self but for one week, or the like, into thy
own chamber (as being sequestered from all thy friends and acquaintance) and
with as much seriousness and deliberation read this, and the forementioned
precious books, with the letter that thy and my indeared, sp^ritual, and
faithful friend, Luke Howard, yesterday sent unto thee (as the real outgoings
of the measure of the spirit of God in his heart toward thee) as I have often
and deliberately read thy last Post-letter to me, Dated at White Hall, upon
Wedneseday the 28. of November last, and often wept for joy and gladness of
heart, at that thy honest exhortation to me, at the last end of it in these
words, viz. My Dear, Retain a sober patient spirit within thee, which I am
confident thou shall see shall be of more force to recover thee, then all thy
keen metal has been; I hope God is a doing a work upon thee and me too, as
shall make us study our selves more then we have done.

O my dear Love, I am deeply already entered into my part of it: The mighty
power of God enable thee to get in too, and also to go through thine, and
effectually to go cheerfully and willingly a long hand in hand with me, which
abundantly would render thee more amiable, lovely, and pleasant in mine eyes,
although thou were then clothed in rags, then thou could be to me in thy
drawings back, or standing still where thou wast when I last see thee, though
therein thou were clothed all over with rich, and outwardly glistering earthly
Diamonds, and in the greatest of earthly prosperities.

I am sorry for that hard portion thou tell me thou had in going from me,
in thy dangerous traveling upon the Thames, and I desire to bless God for thy
deliverance from so nigh a death.

I am also sorry thou art so straightly put to it for money, but to live upon
God by faith in the depth of straights, is the lively condition of a Christian:
O that thy spirit could attain unto it!

According to thy desire in thy Letter, and my own present genius or frame of
Spirit (which now can contentedly feed savourily upon bread and cheese, and
Small-Beer alone) for saving of money. I have discharged my old Nurse, and
borrowed 20. s. to give her to carry her toward her husband, and by her have I
sent these lines to deliver to thine own hands.

Of which, poor ignorant soul, I must say this to thee in truth, that although
the woman, in my clear understanding, be but wholly in the first nature of
fallen mankind, yet she has been in the hand of God, an instrument of much
service, (honesty performed) faithfulness, and tender compassion to me, in the
day of the greatest and unparalelled extremity of my outward desires in the
Isle of Jersey, for which, in her station, I must value her as long as I live,
and if ever outward prosperity in any competent degree be my portion, really
requite her; therefore I expect from thee, if she have occasion to use thee,
that thou be tender and respectful to her for my sake.

And for my Liberty, about which thou so weariest and spendest thy self and
earthly strength, as thy Letter acquaints me with thou do, I can say no more
to thee then what was contained in my Letter, directed to thee, and Dated Nov.
21. last, (which I gave here to thy own hands) but that I am in my present
temper of spirit, ready really with Peter at the sight of the glorlous
transfiguration of Christ, to say, its good being here (for me) for here in
Dover Castle, through the loving kindness of God, I have met with a more clear,
plain, and evident knowledge of God, and my self, and his gracious outgoings
to my soul, then ever I had in all my life time, not excepting my glorying and
rejoicing condition under the Bishops, and now the pangs and traveling throes
of God are powerfully a fresh upon my very heart, and therefore now in my own
will, I could rather wish thee and my sweet Lambs to be with me here, then I at
present with thee and them where thou art, yet submissively and heartily I say,
and can say, the Will of my heavenly Father be done in me, by me, and for me;
in whose Will I leave thee and thine, with all thy and my friends, and rest,

From Dover-Castle, the place of the present enjoyed delightful dispensations
of the eternal, everlasting love of God unto my soul, the 4th. day of the 10th.
month, 1655. Thine in the strength of renewedness of true love, John Lilburn


The forementioned second Letter, take in these following words.

Dover-Castle, the fifth day of the tenth month, 1655.
For my indeared Friend, William Harding (commonly called Mayor) at Weymouth in
Dorcetshire, these deliver.
Kind Friend,
SInce my arrival here, I have often been desirous in my own spirit, at large
to have writ to thee, but hitherto by a power above me, I have been hindered,
and yet am, as to the particular aforesaid, only now I thought it not only
convenient to acquaint thee, but am thereunto compelled to tell thee, that
meeting here with one of those precious people called quakers, (of which people
thee and I at the Isle of Iersey had much talk of) and getting into my hands
two volumes of their printed papers, amounting to about seventeen hundred
pages, I have with serious of discourse, and seriousness reading therein, been
knocked down off, or from my former legs, or standing; and giving scope to my
true teacher and guide, the light of God speaking in my soul, I am become at
present, dead to my fallen, or first natures reason, wit, wisdom and desires;
and also totally become dead to my old busling ways in the flesh, and now in a
great degree or measure, am struct down dead to the very earth within me, and
by that Light which gloriously within my soul has shined round about my first,
or corrupt nature within me, I am like Paul, with astonishment and mazement,
Act. 9. fallen down flat at the feet of Jesus, and hearing a voice speaking
within me, to persuade me for my good and benefit, to become willing to be
guided and directed by the heavenly wisdom of Jesus my anointed; I have
thereupon given up my self wholly to be guided by his Divine teachings shining
within me, before which I now stand ready to give ear to what by it shall be
told me, being willing and desirous to have the seals fall further from the
blind eyes of my soul, that they may be further opened, and that a power
therewith may come in to my soul from the Holy Ghost, which may enable me in
the strength thereof, to redeem my lost, and misspent bypast precious time,
and not now to consult with flesh and blood in my daily taking up the Cross of
Christ, and following him whithersoever he shall by his call, or heavenly
Divine voice within me, lead me.

I say, I am compelled from a power within me, at this present time, in brief
to tell thee these things, and to require thee from God, to give ear to that
true convincing light, that clearly speaks in thy conscience, and by the
assistance thereof to strive with the first, or fallen nature yet ruling in thy
soul, and lay aside that greatness of wit and earthly wisdom that thou have
attained to, and in that measure of Light that long since thou have received,
withdraw into thy private Closet, and seriously meditate upon these brief
lines. And being thou in my late conversing with thee, told me, thou had
read, or had sent me down from London most of the Quakers Books; Let me in
love to thy soul, earnestly entreat thee, with seriousness to read over (strong
and tall in Christ) James Nayler, his sheet of paper, entitled, Something
further in answer to John Jacksons book, called, Strength in weakness; (which
John Iackson is my indeared friend, and old and long acquaintance, and a
greater professor of Religion now, then ever thou thy self in all thy zeal once
was; therefore in him thou may plainly read thy own condition) and that
precious prisoner of the Lords in Northampton Goal, William Dewsbury, his two
books, the first and excellentest of which is called, The discovery of the
great enmity of the serpent against the seed of the woman: and his other book
is entitled, The discovery of man's Return: and the Lord by his almighty power
set them home to thy soul. I heartily desire to return thee my hearty thanks
for all thy kindness and tenderness manifested to me at Jersey, in our passage
from thence, and at thy own house: so with my hearty salutations presented to
thee, and all thy friends that were with me at thy house at Weymouth. I desire
to let thee know, that by my moral, honest, careful, and industrious old Nurse
Elizabeth Crome (who by reason of shortness of money with me, I am forced and
compelled to part with) I have writ thee a few lines in her behalf, entreating
thy countenance and favorable respect to the old (and real serviceable to me
in my great distress in Jersey) woman; in case in things that are just and
righteous before God, she desire thy favor, and what thee, or thy friend and
mine, Edward (commonly called Lieutenant) Tucker, in that particular does for
her, I shall thankfully look upon as actions done to thy souls

Faithful, hearty, and real wel-wishing friend, John Lilburn.
From Dover-Castle, being a place wherein God has more clearly then ever
before, opened the eyes of my understanding, the 4. day of the 10. month,
1655.

With which forementioned main or principal thing that I have now to say, I
thus proceed, and go on with it; and here in the especial presence of the Lord
declare, that by that present measure of light now born up in my understanding,
and moving in my soul at this very time, I am here compelled to let the Reader
(whosoever he be) to know, that as I have long understood from my wife the
original of my foregoing Letter to her, she conveyed to the hands of Oliver
Cromwelhimself, and at his Sonin Law's desire, Charles Fleetwood (my old, and
sometimes much familiar greatly obliged friend) gave him a copy of it, and
notwithstanding the clear declarations of a sincere (changed in measure) heart
in the said Letter, at the penning of which, I had then lost all manner of
ability to consult with one grain of Machivel, or humane deceitful policy,
having then the very dreadful, and aweful, immediate, convincing, judging, and
burning up power of God upon my soul; yet upon my said writing, and my wifes
disposing, as aforesaid, of my said Letter, many and great jealousies arise
upon me at White Hall, at the strange politic contrivance of my (largely
reputed by them) politic heart in my turning quaker, (of which I had several
ways exact information) which it seems out of humane fear, took that powerful
impression upon my poor weak wife, as that, as I judged by her Letters to me,
troubled the poor afflicted Woman at the very heart, and compelled her by
writing in a vehement manner, to press me to sign such an engagement as George
Fox did, (the Copy of which I have seen and read) and sent it up to Oliver
Cromwell to secure him from his pretended fears of my politic endeavoring to
draw the temporal sword against him; unto which for many reasons having then no
manner of freedom in the earth to do it (George Fox though even then a precious
man in my eyes, his particular actions being no rules for me to walk by, unless
I lived in the very same life and power of Spiritual enjoyments that he did,
and had the very self-same motions in spirit from God, that led him to a
freedom and ability to do such, and the like particular actions) I therefore
then ceased it, and did it not; and if I had then done it for my own particular
human ends, as to avoid further persecution, and the like, I had in so doing
been an outside pharisaical imitator, and the greatest and basest of
hypocrites, which sin alone is the height of Gods Mat. 24.51. Rev. 3.15, 16.
See Mat. 6.5. and 33.13, 14
abhorrance, for although I must before the Lord now truly avow, that the said
Letter was a true and faithful (without fraud or guile) declaration of as real
and spiritual a power of God in its measure, seizing upon my soul, for my
conviction of my spiritual blindness and sinfnlness, as ever seized upon Paul,
declared in the 9 of the Acts, or any man's that ever breathed upon earth, yet
betwixt the Winter-storms and fierce tempests of conviction, (or rather the
beginning of it) and the pleasant Sunshine, dews, and springing days of growth
into a measure of refreshment, there is a vast difference; and therefore then
the true occasion, or real ground of all outward war and humanc busling contest
being not taken away, or absolutely crucified or subdued at the very Root in my
soul, if then I had signed such an engagement, I had clearly gone beyond my
souls then living and real seize, and there by ran presumptuously and
wickedly beyond my measure, and so had tempted the Lord my then present Leader,
and spiritual guide, and abominably sinned against him.

But now in my already attained growing up measure, having the experimental
witness of God within my 1 John 5. 10.
self, that I am already truly and really attained, in substantial, and
witnessed within me, real truth, with the young men in Christ, spoken of by the
Apostle 1 John 2. 13.
John, to a good measure or degree, in overcoming the wicked one within me, so
that now I am able to witness in truth and righteousness, that the true grounds
or real occasions of all outward wars, and all carnal buslings, and all
fleshly strivings within me, is in a very large measure, or degree, become dead
or crucified within me: which true grounds and real occasions, of all the outward
iron and steel sword war in the world, and all the wicked and fleshly
forerunners of it and dependants upon it, truly rises from its fountain, the
raging power of sin, or lust within, in carnal, and unregenerated,
unsanctified, and unjustied (before God) men's hearts, as is plainly and truly
witnessed by the apostle Jam. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
James in these words, From whence comes wars and fightings among you? come
they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members? ye lust, and have
not; ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye
have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss
that you may consume it upon your lusts. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know
you not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God: whosoever
therefore will be a friend to the world (that spiritual Kingdom of Satan in
unsanctified men's souls) is the enemy of God.

And therefore Christ, the true Lord of the soul, and the true Head-Master, and
King of that heavenly spiritual kingdom (as the Devil or Prince of the air, is
the Head-Master, King, or God of the Kingdom of this world, in the hearts of
the children of unsanctified, and unjustified, disobedient Ephesians. 2.2.3.5, and 6.
ii. and 2 Cor. 4.4. Jam. 1.13,14,15. Joh. 12. 3. and 16. 11. Romans 6.16.20. and
2 Timothy 2.26. and 2 Pet. 2.19. and 1 John 3.8.10.
men) that he has provided for all redeemed, sanctified, justified and
righteous Romans 6. 20, 22, 23. and g, 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 14. 17. and 15. 13, 14.
and 1 Cor. 4. 20. and 2 Cor. 46. Gal. 5. 22, 23, 24. Ephesians. 57, 3, 9. Heb. 12.
22, 23. and 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. Rev. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. and 21. 3, 4. 22, 23.
and 22. 1, 2, 3, 4. Isa. 60. 19, 20, 21.
souls, declares at his very answer before Pilate for his life, and says, My
Kingdom is not of this world, if my kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my
kingdom not from Joh. 18. 36.
hence; and therefore it was when Judas betrayed this spiritual King, Christ,
into the hands of his murdering enemies; and that his servant Simon Joh. 18. 10.
Peter stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and stroke a servant of the
High Priests, and smote off his ear; that this spiritual King, Lord and Master,
cured the wounded man, although he was his Luke 22. 50 51.
enemy, and commanded his servant Peter to put up his sword again in his place,
further saying to him, For all they that take the Sword [mark it well] shall
perish with the Mat. 26. 51, 52, 53. see Genesis 9.6. Rev. 13.10.
Sword: Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more then twelve A constituted full Roman Legion of
soldiers, at this time as I remember the Roman Histories, was reputed to be
commonly about 7 or 8000. men.
Legions of Angels. And therefore all the whole Laws of his inward and
spiritual Kingdom, are made in quite opposition against the Laws of the mere
glorious outside kingdoms of the God and Paince of this world; unto which two
Masters, or Kings, or Lawgivers, it is impossible for any man in the world, or
upon this globy earth, to be a servant to them both, at one and the same Mat.
6.24. Luke 16.13.
time, but he that commits sin is the servant of sin, and so the servant of the
Joh. 8.34.4i, 42, 44. Romans 6. 16. and 2 Pet. 2. 19. and 1 John 3. 8. 10.
devil; and he that is the servant of sin, is free from Righteousness, and so
from being a servant or subject unto Romans 6. 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23 1 John 1.
6. and cap. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 9. and 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 19. Joh. 7. 17. and 8. 31,
32. and 9.31. and 12.26. and 14.15.21, 23, 24. and 15* 4.7.10.14.
Christ: And therefore the Spirit of Christ, this spiritual inside King,
dwelling in the Apostle Paul, declares, that there is no fellowship betwixt
righteousness and unrighteousness, nor no communion betwixt light and darkness,
nor no concord betwixt Christ and Belial, nor no harmony betwixt the true
believer (that knows Joh. 17. 3.
God) and the infidel, (and such are all they that truly knows not 1 Thessalonians. 4,
5. See Tit. 16. Ex. 5.2. Psalm. 79.6. Jer. 10. 25. To. 1.19.21. Ephesians. 4. 17, 8,
19.
God) and there he further demands, what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? for ye are (says he to the true knowers of God in Corinth) the temple
of the living God, as God has Levit. 26.12.
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people; wherefore come out from among them, and be ye Isa. 52.11.
separate says the Lord, and touch not (mark it well) the unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto Jer. 31. 1.
you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters says the Lord 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18.
Almighty. And therefore it is, that the very same Divine Spirit that dwells in
this Spiritual King Jesus, speaking in the Apostle John, requires all his
Spiritual and true Subjects, not to love the world, neither the things that
are in the world, for, if any man love the world, (that Kingdom of Satan the
Prince of Darkness, as) the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world; and the world (and
the vanities and empty pleasures of it) passes away, and the lusts thereof;
but he that does the will of God abides for 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17.
ever.

Yea, the contrariety is so great betwixt the foresaid two Kings and Masters,
that whatsoever in the King, or Ruler in the Kingdom of the world, (or fallen,
or unrenewed man) and the Subjects thereof, is esteemed highly or excellent, is
an abomination in the sight of Luke 16. 15. See chap. 6.24, 25, 26. Mar. 13.
13. Job. 5. 41. 44. and 7. 17, 18. and 8. 50. 54. and 10. 42, 43. and 15. 19.
and 16. 35.
God: And therefore this spiriual King having purchased all his Subjects and
Servants with a glorious price, (as the greatest demonstration of love) of his
own blood, by his spiritual Command requires them not to be the servants of 1
Cor. 7* 23.
men, but to glorify him both in body and 1 Cor. 6. 20. see chap. 3. 16, 17
and 2 Cor. 2. 5. 15.17. etc. Psalm. 1.10. see 4. 3.9, 10.11. and 5. 1 Col. 2. 8.
20. 22.
soul; and therefore his grown up servant Paul, declares himself to be no
man-pleaser, avowing himself, that if he were a man-pleaser, he should, nor
could not be the servant of Christ.

And therefore the same apostle, by the infallible spirit of the Lord, requires
the spiritual Subjects of this spiritual King Jesus, to present their bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which (says he) is your
reasonable service; and be not conformed to this world (the kingdom of the
Prince of darkness) but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that
you may prove what is that good, and acceptable and perfect will of Romans 22. 1,
2.
God; and therefore when any man once becomes a spiritual subject of this
spiritual King Christ, and dwells in him, he becomes a new creature, and old
things in him are past away, and all things in him are become 2 Cor. 5.17.
new, spiritual and savory, yea even his very thoughts and his words are found
few and divine, his behavior righteous and solid, his deeds upright, and free
like God from all respect of persons: Mat. 3.34.37, 39, 40, 41, 45, 46, 48. and
6.25 31,32, 33. and 7.12, 13. and 23, 3.5, 6, 7. and 9. 10. Mark 12. 14. Luke
20, 21. Act 10. 34, 35. Deu. 10 17. Esth. 3.2 5, 6. Job 32.21, 22. Prove. 10.
20. and 28.21. Romans 2.11. and 1 Cor. 2.16. and 15.33 Gal. 2.6. Ephesians. 4 29. and
5.4. and 6.9. Phil. 2. 5. Col. 3.15.8, 5. 16. 3.4.6. 1 Timothy 1.10. and 6.3, 4,
5, 6. and 2 Timothy 1 7.13. and 4.3. Tit. 1. 19. 17. and 2.1, 2.8. Jam. 2. 1. to
10. and 5. 12. and 1 Pet. 1.15, 16, 17. and 4. 12. and 2 John 9, 10, 11.
and although there be such a perfect and absolute contrariety betwixt all the
laws and constitutions of these two Kings or Masters, and a continual and
perpetual war betwixt the Subjects thereof, yet the weapons of the warfare of
Christ's Spiritual, Heavenly, and glorious Kingdom, handled and used by his
Servants and true Subjects, who although they do walk in the flesh, yet do they
not war after the flesh, and therefore their weapons of warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of
2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5.
Christ: The Armor of Proof of these Spiritual war^ing Subjects and Soldiers
of this spiritual glorious King, is to have their loins girt about with truth,
and having on them the Breast Plate of righteousness, and their feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all, taking the Shield of Faith,
wherewith they shall be able to quench the fiery-darts of the wicked, and
taking the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word
of Ephesians 6.13, 14, 15, 16.17.
God; which Spiritual Sword, or Word of God, is quick and powerful, and sharper
then any two edged Sword, piercing, even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart; neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his
sight, who is this Spiritual sharp Sword, or eternal and everlasting Word of
God that indures for ever; but all things are naked and opened to the eyes of
him with whom we have to Heb. 14.12, 13.
do. With which Spiritual Sword this spiritual conquering Lord and King,
pricked and wounded to the very heart three thousand of his enemies at once, by
the Ministration of his single Spiritual Soldier, the Apostle Peter, which
made them bitterly to cry out for a Plaster, and a Physician to heal and cure
Act. 2. 37. 4i.
them: which spiritual Sword is the only and alone weapon that this glorious,
conquering, spiritual King uses to sight withal against all enemies, the
powers of the Prince of Darkness of this world; and with which only and alone
he conquereth and Rev. 1. 16. and 2. 12. 16. and 19.15.21. Hos. 6.7.
overcomes carnal Weapons of any kind whatsoever, having no place, nor being
of no use at all in his spiritual Kingdom, for his Subjects are to love their
enemies, to do good unto their haters, and to resist or requite their evil
with Matt. 5. 39, 40, 44, 45, 56.
good, and to dwell in love toward all men, as the God of love himself dwells
in Gal. 6.10. and 1 These. 3 12^ and 5.14, 15.1 Joh. 4.16, 17.
love, and to be holy as God is 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
holy, and perfect as he is Matt. 5.48.
perfect, and therefore not in the least to draw temporal weapons against their
enemies; for among the true and real Saints of the Lord in the mountain of the
Lord, where the Lord himself is the inward and soul-teacher and instructor of
his people and Subjects in his own ways; there all the temporal swords are to
be beat into plowshares, and their earthly spears into pruning hooks, and no
more using of carnal swords, or so much as learning of earthly war, is to be
exercised amongst Ila. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
them, but they are to walk in the pure, holy, and peaceable light of the Lord,
which shall and will lead the sanctified, justified and redeemed soul to
advancement, or set up the innocent, harmless, peaceable lamb-like nature, or
seed of Christ, to become Lord and King in the heart, of, and over the Lion
like warring; devouring, and destroying wicked nature of the serpent, the
devil, and satan, within man, yea in the Gospel-mount of God, or the spiritual
kingdom of Christ (under the Gospel Dispensation) the habitation of the true
Saint of God; The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall ly down
with the kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a
little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their young
ones shall lie down together. And the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And
the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the Cockatrice Den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy Esa. ii.6, 7, 8, 9. and 65. 25.
mountain, says God; For the earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord,
as the waters cover the Sea. Yea, they shall be far from Esa. 54. 14. and 66.
11, 12.
Oppression: Yea, and violence shall no more be heard in the Land; (or the
spiritual Kingdom, inhabited by the spiritual subjects, or true Saints of
Christ, nor) wasting, nor destruction within their borders; but they shall call
their wall salvation, and their Gates Praise. The Sun (or borrowed humane
Lights, or Rudimentall Ordinances) shall be no more thy Light (says God) by
day, neither for brightness shall the Mooa give Light unto thee: but the Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy glory. Thy Sun shall
no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall
be thine everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy
people shall be all Righteous, they shall inherit the Land for ever, the branch
of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one
shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation; I the Lord will hasten
it in his Esa. 60. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. See chapter 40. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26.
Rev. 7. 14, 15, 16, 17. and 21. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 10. 11. 22, 23, 24, and 22. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
time.

In all which consideration, I say, I have now the faithful and true witness
in my own soul, that the Lord himself is become within me, the Teacher of my
soul, and inabler of me to walk in a measure of his pure ways and paths; yea,
and so clear a teacher within me, is he already become unto me, as that I with
confidence believe my inward Teacher shall never now more be removed into a
corner; but is, and shall be as a continual voice speaking in my ears; This is
the way, walk in Esa. 30. 20, 21. see chapter 24. 18, 19. and 35.7, 8. and 42.2, 3,
4. 7. and 44 3. and 51. 7. and 54. 13. Prove. 6. 22, 23. Ps. 37.31. Deu. 18.15,
16.18, 19. and 34. 6. Jer. 24.7. and 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and 32. 14, 15. Eze.
11.19. and 34.22, 23.24, 25, 26. 27 and 36.2^, 25, 26, 27. and 37. 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28. Joel 2.28, 29. Matt. 11. ^7. Luke 10. 22. Joh. 1.5 9 12 and
3.21. and 6.41. 45. and 7.37, 8, 39. and 9.5.39. and 10.7.9, 16. and 11.9,
10.25. 22. 12. 35, 36, 46.48. and 14. 16, 17, 18, 19.23 26. and 15.5.15. and
16, 17, 18.13, 14.26, 27, 28. Act. 1.4. and 2.4. 16, 17, 18. Romans 10.7, 8, 9,
10. Gal. 1.15, 16. Heb. 8.7, 8, 9 10, 11. and 10.16.19, 20. and 1 John 2.2.
20.27, and 3. 24. and 4.13. and 5. 10. see Act. 17.27, 28.31. and 26. 16. 18.
Romans 1.19.21. and 2.15.26, 27, 28, 29, and 1 Cor. 7.19. and 2 Cor. 2.3. and
4.6. Gal. 3.3. and 5.5,6. and 6.15. Phil. 3.3. Col. 2.11. and 3.11. and 3.11.
and 1 Timothy 4.10. Tit. 2. 11, 12. and 1 John, 1.5, 6, 7.
it: By which divine teaching I am now daily taught to dye to sin, and led up
by it into living power, to be raised up, and enabled to live in a pure measure
of Righteousness; and by which inward spiritual teachings, I am, I say again,
led up into power in Christ, by which I particularly can, and do hereby
witness, that I am already dead, or crucified, to the very occasions, and real
grounds of all outward wars, and carnal-sword-fightings and fleshly buslings
and contests; and that therefore I confidently now believe, I shall never
hereafter be an user of a temporal sword more, nor a joyner with those that so
do. And this I do here solemnly declare, not in the least to avoid persecution,
or for any politic ends of my own, or in the least, for the satisfaction of
the fleshly wills of any of my great adversaries, or for satisfying the carnal
will of my poor weak, afflicted wife; but by the special movings and
compulsions of God now upon my soul, am I in truth and righteousness compelled
thus to declare, that so I may take away from my adversaries all their
fig-leaf-covers, or pretenses of their continuing of my every way unjust bonds;
And thereby, if yet I must be an imprisoned sufferer, it may from this day
forward, be for the truth, as it is in Jesus: Which truth I witness to be truly
professed and practiced by the savouriest of people called quakers: And to this
my present declaration, which I exceedingly long and earnestly desire to have
in print, and for which I know that I can cheerfully and assuredly lay down my
life, if I be called to witness the truth of it, I subscribe my outward name

From my innocent, and every way causeless captivity in Dover-Castle, the place
of my souls delightful and contentful abode, where I have really and
substantially found that which my soul many years has sought diligently after,
and with unsatisfied longingness, thirsted to enjoy, this present first day of
the week, being the 4th of the 3d. month, 1655. JOHN LILBVRN, the new, or
inward spiritual name, no man knows but he that has it.

The End.

