The Innocent Man's second-Proffer, Made unto his present Adversaries October
22. 1649. And Communicated unto them, by his loving Brother, Collonell Robert
Lilburne,
Brother,
IN Answer to your late Letter I can make no other Proposition besides what is
in my Letter to Mr. Heveningham, of the 20 present, then this:

That seeing my self, and the Principles I Profess are a burden to the Men
in present Power; Therefore (for Peace and quietness sake only) I will engage,
(enjoying my Money, and my immediate Liberty) that I will within six Months
time transplant my self into some part of the West Indies.

Provided, that all those that are free, and willing to go along with me, of
what quality soever, may have free Liberty, at their pleasure to go, and

Provided, seeing many of those I know willing to undertake the Journey are
made very poor, by reason of their sufferings in the present Distractions, may
have all such Moneys, justly paid unto them as is owing them, either upon
Arreares, for faithful service already done, or for Moneys lent to the
Public, that so they may be the better, enabled for their Journey, they
engaged thereupon to go. And,

Provided, That others that are willing to go, and are so very poor, that
they cannot transplant themseles, may have from the Public some reasonable
allowance for that end, this being the land of their Nativitie, where, by the
Law of nature, they may challenge a subsistence, and therefore it is but just,
seeing their company and Principles are a burden and trouble to the men in
present Power, that they should make their willingness (for Peace sake) able
to transplant themselves into a Desert, where, with industry and the blessing
of God thereupon, they may expect a livelihood; and this with the engagement of
the present Power, for a peaceable protection while we stay in England, and
for their assistance for a reasonable convoy in some part of our Journey, I
will engage in security, I will not act against their Power during my stay in
England, directly nor indirectly; but for me to engage singly to go alone,
seeing I know noe Plantation already planted but I would sooner choose to be
cut in pieces in England then engage to go to it, therefore particularly I
shall not engage without the terms above said, come life, come death, to
which I shall stand: Witness my hand;

Tower, October. 22. 1649. JOHN LILBURNE.

The names of the several Books and Papers, written and published by
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne
Since his first Contest with the Bishops, in the year 1637.
1 and 2 Part of the Christian Man's Trial. 3 Come out of her my People,
printea anno 1639. 4 An Answer to T. B. his 9 Arguments. 5 An Information for
the Ignorant. 6 The Poor Man's Cry 20 December. 1649. 7 and 8 Two Epistles, to
the Lord Major, and the Apprentices of London. 9 A Letter to the Wardens of the
Fleet, since the Parliament, 3 Nouemb. 1640. 10 A Letter to Mr. William
Prynne. 11 Reasons for writing thereof. 12 A Letter to a Friend, July 25. 1645.
13 Innocence and Truth justified. 14 The second part of the same. 15 My
Relation before the Lords, Feb. 15. 1645. 16 The just Man's justification, with
a second Edition June 6. 1646.
Since my Contest with the Lords.
17 The Free Man's Freedom Vindicated. 18 Londons Liberty, in Chains,
Discovered. 19 The Charters of London. 20 An Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny. 21
The Opressed Man's Oppressions Declared. 22 The Outcries of the oppressed
Commons, being two Editions. 23 The Resolved Man's Resolution. 24 Rash Oaths
unwarrantable. 25 Jon^hs Cry out of the Whales belly. 26 The Juglers
Discovered. 27 Two Letters to Mr. Henry Marten Esquire. 28 and 29 His grand and
additionall Plea, etc.
Since his Contest with Commons and Lords jointly, being Committed by them
both. Jan. 1647.
30 The Peoples Prerogative. 31 A Whip for the House of Lords. 32 The Prisoners
Plea for a Habeas Corpus. 33 The oppressed man's cry to be brought to the Bar
of Justice. 34 The Prisoners cry against the Judges of the Kings Bench. 35 The
Laws funeral. 36 An Epistle to every individual Member of the House of
Commons.
Since his Contest with the Counsel of State March 28. 1649.
37 Two Pictures of the Council of State. 38 A discourse with Mr. Peeters. 39
The Legal fundamental Liberties of England Revived, being two Editions. 40 A
manifesto from all the four prisoners of the 14. of April 1649. 41 An
Agreement of the free People, of the 1. of May 1649. 42 An impeachment of high
Treason against Cromwell and Ireton. 43 A preparrative to an Hue and Cry after
Sir Arthur Haslerig. 44 Strength out of Weakness, being a discourse with Mr.
Prideaux. 45 Salva Liberate, sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower.
In all which Books, Papers, etc. the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne
has constantly and fearelessely opposed himself against the Tyranny of the
times, not in the least, in opposition to a just Government, having always (as
now) had the Law o^ England on his side, for the just defense whereof, and to
satisfy the blood thirsty malice of old Sir Henry Van^, Manchester, Crumwell,
Sir Arthur Haslerig, etc. he is now exposed to a Trial for Life before
Arbitrary Judges, who can no way justify themselves, but by his condemnation.
Let therefore Angels and Men judge wh^^^er they can deserve the benefit of Law
themselves, which thus wickedly deny it to others; and if this b^^ suff^^^d,
what possibility of protection can there be for any since therefore ordinary
means cannot prevail, extraordinary must, and if in the use thereof we
perish, we perish.


