The LAWS Funeral. OR, An Epistle written by Lieutenant Col. JOHN LILBURN,
Prisoner in the Tower of London, unto a friend of his, giving him a large
relation of his defense, made before the Judges of the Kings Bench, the 8. of
May 1648. against both the illegal commitments of him by the House of Lords,
and the House of Commons, and how that the Judges in open Court, were
necessitated to confess, there is by neither of the commitments any crime in
Law laid unto his Charge, yet though he was imprisoned for nothing, being
committed by a superior Court the Lords, and that upon a Sentence, they could
not release him, but remanded him back again Prisoner unto the Tower, which is
a full Declaration, there is no Law left in England now, but that the people
thereof must be governed by the lust, will and pleasure of the House of Lords,
etc. and though they deal never so unjustly with them, to the causeless
destruction of their Lives, Estates, and Families, yet the Judges of England
(being in deed and in truth mere Ciphers) cannot remedy it, because it is done
by their superiors, the House of Lords; wherefore the said John Lilburne does
declare his sorrowfulness in his great mistake, in zealously stirring up the
people of England to stand up to maintain their Laws, seeing they have none in
being, but the will of the Lords, and therefore according to his promise, to
the Judges in open Court; he provokes all the Commons of England out of all the
Counties thereof, to hasten up to Westminster to the Lords house, and there
suffer the Lords (who now have conquered and subdued all their Laws) to bore
them through their ears as their vassalls and slaves, if they can bear it
with patience.
Proverbs 28.1. The wicked fly when none pursues; but the Righteous are as
bold as a Lion.


Dear Sir,
AT your earnest desire, I cannot choose but give you, and the world, as perfect
account as I can, of all that passed before the Judges of the Kings Bench, in
reference to my self, upon Monday last, being the 8. of this present May. And
in the first place, I must entreat you to take notice, of the reason or cause
of my being there that day, which was upon my own earnest desire; for looking
upon my self unavoidably in the road way of destruction, in the continuance
of my causeless and arbitrary imprisonment, and finding the generality of the
House of Commons, (who should be the true and faithful conservators of the
Laws and Liberties of England) deaf unto Justice, and their ears and hearts
sealed up against it, so that of them, I for my part may almost complain, as
the Psalmist does, they are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy:
there is none that do good, no not one; for they eat up the people as they eat
bread, and call not upon the Lord. Psalm. 14.3.4.

I say, at the serious consideration hereof, musing with my self what to do
for my own preservation, and the preservation of my wife and little Children
(which nature and the Law of God teaches me to endeavor with all my might)
who are all in the eye of reason unavoidably destroyed in my continuance in
prison, and I was staved of in my own Conscience, from the use of extraordinary
means for my deliverance, till I had attempted what the Judges of the law
would do for me, whom I looked upon as my last legal refuge, and supposed they
might happily do me some good; but I durst not feed my thoughts with any
confident hopes of Justice from them, being they are created, and made Judges
by the power and authority of my potent adversaries, and therefore must needs
serve their ends, or else be thrown out of their places, yet I was resolved to
put all the strength I had to the work; and for that end, I, the 4. of April
last writ an effectual letter to the Speaker of the House, and in print
intitulled it, The Prisoners Plea for a Habeas Corpus, and therein print my
Petitioned to the Judges of the Kings Bench, for my Habeas Corpus, and because
Council the last Teime had failed me, and durst not move for me; I was
necessitated to write another Epistle the 7. of April 1648. to all the moral
honest Englishmen, in and about the City of London, whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, or those commonly called Sectaries, and in print intitulled it,
The oppressed man's importunate and mournful cries, to be brought to the Bar
of Justice, in which I earnestly entreat them the first day of the Term,
being April the 19. 1648. to deliver my Petition for me, and get me a Habeas
Corpus, which now I thank them, diverse of them did; and procured me a Habeas
Corpus, which the Lieutenant of the Tower withstood, and did not carry up my
body; whereupon I by a new Petition complained of him to the Judges, but they
in my apprehension grew somewhat deaf; upon which I was necessitated the very
present to write a rufling letter to Judge Roll, which in print is entitled,

Upon which letter I had an Alias granted me, with a penalty of 40 l. which the
Lieutenant obeyed, and accordingly upon Monday last, sent my body to
Westminster, where I arrived betwixt 8. and 9. a Clock, and found both the
Judges and my Grandee Adversary, Soliciter, Sr. John, etc. very hard at
whispering discourse, near the Chancery Court, and upon the Judges going to
the Bench, I stepped to the Bar, and presently the Lieutenant of the Tower was
called to make a return of his Habeas Corpus, whereupon his Servant Mr.
Comport and my Keeper, made answer, here was the Prisoner Mr. Lilburne at the
Bar, upon which the Judge asked him for the return, and he told him he was
but a Servant, and at the Command of the Lieutenant, had brought up the body of
Mr. Lilburne, which was all the return he had, and immediately the Lieutenant
himself, as I conceive, gave in the return, and then Mr. Justice Bacon
demanded of me, where my Council was, and being standing up upon a high place
before the Bench, with a loud voice I answered him, I had none, neither would I
have any, but desired to cast the weight of my Cause upon my own abilities,
which were sufficiently able to enable me to plead my cause my self before
them; and therefore Sir, said I, (with a shrill voice) I crave and demand at
your hands, as my natural and undoubted right, the same benefit and privilege
that Paul always enjoyed from the hands of the Pagan and Heathen Roman Judges,
who always gave him free liberty as his Right to plead his Cause before them,
and to speak in the best manner he could for himself; but Sir, if you will
not follow that just example of the Pagan Roman Judges, Then in the second
place, I crave the same privilege from you, that I enjoyed from the hands of
the Caviliers at Oxford, who when I stood before Judge Heath for my life,
(being arrained in Irons for High Treason, in levying War by the Parliaments
Command against the King,) he nobly told me, he would give me the utmost
privilege that the Law of England would afford me, and further declared unto
me, it was my right by Law to plead for my self, and say whatsoever I could
for my self, which he freely without any interruption gave me leave to do; and
Sir, I hope you will not be more unjust unto me, then the Pagan Roman Judges
were to Paul, or the Caviliers to my self at Oxford, in denying me my
privilege to speak and plead for my self.

Whereupon Mr. Justice Bacon replied, and said, Sir, it is a favor that you
are permitted to plead by council. Sir, said I, by your favor, I do not
judge it so, and besides I desire Mr. Justice Bacon, with all respect unto you,
and desire to let you know: I do not com here to beg boones or courtisies at
your hands, but I come here to claim my right, and do with confidence tell you
Sir; that it is not only my undoubted natural right, by the light and Law of
nature; yea and by the ancient common Law of England to plead my own cause my
self, if I please, but it is also the natural and undoubted right of every
individual Englishmen, yea and of every man, upon the face of the Earth, in
what Country soever; and therefore, Sir, I demand from you, liberty to specke
frealy for my self, not only by the Law of nature, but also by the ancient
Common law of England, freely telling you that I Judge my cause of that
consequence to my self, and all the Commons of England, that I will trust
never a Lawyer in the Kingdom to plead for me, and therefore again demand to
as my right, leave to plead my self, the which if you will not grant me I have
done, and have no more to say to you, whereupon the Judges commanded the
lawyers to make me room and called me closse to the Bar, where I did my
respect unto them, and they caused the return to be read, which consisted of
my commitment from the Lords the 11 of July 1646, and my commitment from the
Commons. 19 Ian: 1647 and a late order of the commons to command the
Lieutenant of the Tower, upon removeall of his prisoners not to remove the 4
Aldermen, nor Sir John Maynard, nor my self; which return in the conclusion
hereof I shall insert, and then as I conceive because some of the return was
latten, Judge Bacon asked me if I understood it, and I said, yes, for I had
cause enough given me so to do; whereupon he begun to tell me I might easily
perceive I was Committed by the Lords upon a Centence, and begun to amplify
their power, as a superior court, whose actions were not to be questioned or
controled by the Judges of the Kings Bench, because they were inferior to them.

Unto which I replied. Sir, I desire the return may be ordered to be entered
upon record, and this I pressed diverse times, and desired that if the
Lieutenant had any thing to add to the return, he might now speak, or else
forthwith it might be made a record, and he thereby debarred of making
additions to it which was accordingly done, and then I pressed to be hard, and
said, Mr. Justice Bacon, I desire to keep you close to my business which is
thus, I am in prison and having no crime laid unto my charge by those that do
commit me, (as clearly appears unto your Honor by the return, for generals,
you know better then I do, are no charge nor crimes in Law,) and therefore
according to the law I crave leave to make my exceptions against the return,
and when I have done, I shall willingly submit my discourse, my cause, and my
person to your Judgments and consciences; but I pray, hear what I can say for
my self and my liberty, or if you will not command me silence, I will obey
you; And then Mr. Justice Roll spoke like wise to the Lords power, and would
also have staved me of from going on, but I pressed still to be heard what I
could say against the return, and he pressed me to keep close unto it, and not
be extravigant in meddling with impertinences, but I told him, I did not know
what he would judge impertinences, and therefore pressed hard to be heard,
telling him, if I spoke that which by Law I could not Justify, they might the
easier tript up my heales, but I assured him, I was an honorer of Magistracy,
as being the chief means God had appointed to keep the world in order, and
therefore I was resolved to speak with all honor and respect both unto their
office and persons; so I had leave granted to go on, and having my plea in a
readiness, writ, I put on my spectacles and held it before me as the Lawyers
do there Briefes, and begun, and said as was contained in my paper which I
shall give you, as I had pend it before I came to the bar, though I confess I
had many bickering interruptions by both the Judges, which in the best manner
my memory will serve me, I shall note in the Magent, as I go on with my
discourse, which thus follows.

Mr. Justice Bacon, I do ingeniously confess, that I judge Universal safety
to be above all Law, and that it is the ouldest Law of any in the Kingdom, and
therefore I shall not dispute, in the least, the Parliaments irregular actions,
that they were necessitated too, for common preservation in the height of the
Wars, but the Wars being ended, as they themselves declare they are, (in
their late Declaration against the Scotch Commissioners) and thereby the
affairs of the Kingdom reduced into a more peaceable and hopeful condition
then heretofore; wherefore I may now groundedly from the full stream of all
their Declarations, and promises; expect, challenge, and look for the absolute
benefit of the Law, and the common justice of England, in the ordinary courts
of Justice thereof; which they have declared, and promised they will not now
enterrupt, (See their Declaration of the 17. of April, 1646. 2 Part. Book
Declam. page 879 and their Ordinance, of none addresses to the King, in January
last, where they promise the people, though they lay the King aside, yet they
will notwithstanding govern them by the Law, and not to interrupt the ordinary
course of Justice, in the ordinary courts thereof; And therefore Mr. Justice
Bacon, I am not a little glad that I stand before you at this Bar of Justice,
which is bounded by the Law (where I never was before) for seeing that the
great Judge of all the world, Styles himself to be a God of judgment, Esa.
30.18. and further says of himself, That I the Lord love judgment and hate
robbery for burnt offerings. Esai. 61.8. and therefore lays his command upon
Judges, those gods upon earth, Psalm. 82.6. That they shall defend the Poor and
Fatherless, and do justice to the afflicted and needy, and deliver them out
of the hands of those that are to strong and mighty for thim; and that they
shall judge righteously betwixt a man and his brother, and his neighbor, in
justifying of the righteous, and condemning of the wicked, without wresting
judgment, or respecting persons, but that with judgment they shall bear the
small as well as the great; and above all, that the Judges shall not be afraid
of the face of man; for says he, ye Judge not for man, but for the Lord, who
is with yon in judgment; and therefore (says he) take heed and dee it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor taking Exodus
18 21. and 23.2.6.8. Deuteronomy. 1.16.17. and chapter 16.19. and 25.1. and 2 Chro. 19.6.7.
of gifts.

And as God is thus delighted in doing Justice, and Judgment, so on the
contrary side, he has declared, he as much abhorres those that turn Judgment
into wormwoode and ganle, and leaves of righteousness in the earth, and
commits mighty sins in afflicting the just, in taking of bribes, and turning
aside the poor in the gate, from their right. Esa. 1.23.24. and Jer. 5.28.29.
and 22.16.17.18. and Amos 5.12. and 6 12, 14. Mic. 3.9.11. and Zek. 8.16, 17.


And that, Sir, which adds unto my gladness is this, that now I stand not
before Arbitrary Judges, which judge themselves bounded by no law, or rules,
either of God or man, but are left loose unto the reins of their depraved,
corrupt lusts and wills; by virtue of which, I have not a little been tossed
and tumbled from Gacle to Jail, and not for some few hours, days, weeks or
Months; but for some years: without having any legal crime laid to my
charge, or ever been brought out unto any Legal trial; But Mr. Bacon, here I
stand before you, who are sworn, and proper Judges of the Law, Ye of the Law
of England, with that learned Lawyer, Sir Edward Coke, often styles a Law of
righteousness and mercy, especially, to Prisoners in my case, 1 Part. insti.
Sect. 438. fo. 260. and 2 Part. instit. so. 42 43.46.55.56.115.186.189 190.526.
and 4. Part. instit. so. 168.
who have been almost this two years imprisoned, First, By the House of Lords;
and then Secondly, By the House of Commons, for nothing, as clearly appears
unto you by my Warrants of Commitments, which only charge me with generals,
and generals are no charge, nor crimes in 2 Part instit. so.
52.53.315.318.591.615.616. and 1 Heart Book declar. page 38. 77. 201. 845. and
the Votes upon the impeachment of the 11. Members, and the Petition of right, 3
C. R. and the Act that abolished the Star Chamber, 17. C. R. Printed in my
Book, called The Peoples Prerogative, Page 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
Law but if they were (as they are not) Yet those ( viz. the Lords and Commons)
that made them, were never betrusted by the Law, to be the executors of the Sea
the 14. and 29. Chapters of Magna Charta, and the exposition upon them. 2 Part.
instit. fol. 29.46. etc. and the Petition of Right, and the Act that abolished
the Star Chamber, and Rot. Parl. 5. R. 2. number. 45. and Rot. Parl. 1. H. 4:
Mumb. 14. numb. 79. and 5. H. 4. chap. 6. and 11. H. 6. chap. 11. and 23. H. 6.
chap. 11. and 15. and 4. H. 8. chap. 8. and 1 and 2 P. and M. chap. 10. and 4
Part. instit. fol. 25. and 1. Part Book Decl. page 48. 278.
Law.

And therefore, Mr. Justice Bacon, with all honorable and due respects upon
your Office and persons, I desire with as much brevity as I can, to make my
defense against both the Warrants of my commitments, and I shall crave leave to
observe this Method.

First, although I grant that the House of Commons and the House of Lords, have
by the Law and Custom of England, their proportionable power and interest in
the making and repealing of Laws: yet I do aver that neither divided nor
conjoined, they are not in the least betrusted to execute the Law; but your
honors, and the rest of the sworn Judges, Justices of the Peace, and the
Constables, etc. are by Law betrusted to be the sole and only executors of it.

And that no Commoner of England, is to be restrained of his liberty, by
Petition or suggestion to the King, or to his Council, unless it be by
indictement, 5. Ed. 3. chapter 9. and 25. E. 3. chapter 4. and 37. Ed. 3 chapter 18. and
38. E. 3. chapter 9. and 42. Ed. 3. chapter 3. and 11. R. 2. chapter 6. and 2. part instit.
fo. 46. and Petition of Right, and the Act that abolished the Star Chamber.
or presentment of good and lawful men, where such deeds be done, and no
Commoner of England is to be past upon, to lose either life, limb, liberty, or
estate; but by legal Trial by a Grand Jury, and Petty Jury of his peers or
equals, which Sir Edward Cook calls the ancient and undoubted Birthright of
an Englishman, 4 part insti. fol. 41. before a sworn Judge of the Law in the
ordinary Courts of Justice, the proofs to be in cases of Treason, etc. by two
sufficient witnesses at least, plain and upon their Oaths, See the 14. and
29. Chapter of Magna Charta, and 2. part instit. fo. 29.46.50. and the Petition
of Right, and the Act that abolished the Star Chamber, and the case of the
Corporation of Cambridge, Rot. Parl. 5. R. 2. Number. 45. and the notable Plea of
A. B. a Citizen of London, page 24. and 5. part. insti. fo. 25. and 1. Ed. 6.
chapter 12. and 5. and 6. E. 6. chapter 11. and 13. Eliz. chapter 1.
And Mr. Justice Bacon by Law, a Lord of the Parliament is not so much as to be
of the Jury of a Commoner, as learned Sir Edward Cook declared, 1 part. insti.
sect. 234. fo. 156. and if by Law he cannot be of his Jury, much loss can he
be his absolute Jury and Judge both.

And also by the Act that abolisheth the Star Chamber this present Parliament
17. Car. Rex. it is firmly and strongly inacted, that all Laws, Orders,
Ordinances, Judgments and Decrees, made in deminution of the 29. Cha. of Magna
Charta, and the Laws before recited, are and shall be null and void in Law,
and holden for error; and therefore at present to conclude this point about
jurisdiction, I shall wind it up with Sir Edward Cooks words in his proeme to
his 4. part institutes, viz. That the bounds of all Courts are necessary to be
known; for as the Body of a man is best ordered, when every particular Member
exercises its proper duty; so the body of the Commonwealth is best governed,
when every several Court of justice exempteth his proper jurisdiction; But
(says he) if the eye, whose duty is to see, the hand to work, the feet to
go, shall usurp, and increach one upon another works, as for example, the
hands or feet, the office of the eye to see, and the like; these should
assuredly produce disorder and darkness, and bring the whole body out of
order, and in the end to destruction; so in the commonwealth, Justice being the
main preserver thereof, if one Court should, usurp or incroach upon another, it
would introduce incertainty; subvert Justice, and bring all things in the end
to confusion.

But Sir, I shall at present in this place, spare the full opening of my plea,
in this particular, and reserve it to the place most fit for it.

And therefore I shall infist upon the 2 part of my plea, which is, that the
matter and form of my Warants of commitments are illegal, the legality of
which ought, as Sir Edward Coke declares in his 2. part instit. (which is
published by the present House of Commons for good law to the Kingdom, as
appears fol. ult.) who therein fol. 52.590.591. expressly says, 5. things
are essential in Law, to the making of a commitment lawful, viz. 1. That is
be by dur Process or proceeding in Law. 2. That he or they that do commit have
lawful authority. 3. That this warrant or mittimus be lawful, and that must
be in writing under his hand and Seal. 4. The cause must be contained in the
Warant or Mittimus, and that not in general terms, but in particular, as for
treason, then for what particular Treason; and of for felony, then for what
particular felony; and if for misdemeanors, then for what particular
misdemeanour. 5. The Mittimus containing a lawful cause, must also have a
lawful conclusion: viz. and him safely to keep until he be delivered by due
course of Law, and not until the party committing please, or does further
order, or for 7. years; Now Mr. Justice Bacon, all and every of these
particulars I do aver, is wanting in both my Commitments. For, first, there
was no due Process of Law against me, no Bill filed, or Indictment preferred,
nor no legal complaint exhibited against me, neither did I see any legal
prosecutor, before I was originally committed, no, nor not to this present
hour, although I have been almost two years in Prison; First, in Newgate; and
then secondly in the Tower devorsed from my wife, debarred of my friends,
deprived of pen, Inck and paper.

But I desire to cease this at present, and go on to the main things. And
therefore 2. I aver that by the known Law of this Land, neither of the Speakers
of either House, nor neither House themselves, have the least shadow or color
by any declared and known Law of England, to commit the meanest Commoner of
England (that is not one of there members) to prison, either for treason the
highest crime ( for that is expressly to be tried by the common Law, by people
of the neighborhood of the same condition, as appears by the 25 Edward 3
chap. 2. and 1. and 2. Phillip and Mary Chap. 10.) yea, and it lies not in the
whole Parliaments power to punish any man, for any crimes which they shall call
treasons, but what is clearly declared, and fully expressed to be treason by
the statute the 25 Edward 3 Chap. a as appears by 1 H. 4 Chap 10. and the 1 M.
Chap 1. Or for breach of the peace, although it be in affronting, beating or
wounding of any Parliament man, ( for that is expressly ta be tried in the Kings
Bench. 5 H 4 Chap. 6. and 11 H. 6 Chap. 11) Ye although a sheriff by law, is
to pay 100 l. to the King, and to suffer a Years Imprisonment, etc. without
Bail or mainprise; for every false return of a Knight of the Shire, that he
makes, yet by Law, neither Houses are to be Judges in this very business, so
immediately concerning the House of Commons, but it shall be examined and tried
before the Justices of Assizes in the Sessions of Assise, 8. H. 6. Chap. 7. and
23. H. 6. Chap. 15. yea the Parl. or the House of Commons, are not to punish
those that will not pay them their wages; for their service done in the Parl
but the refusers are to be punished by the legal administrators of the Law in
the ordinarte Courts of Justice, 23. H. 6, Chap. 11.

Now Sir, if the Parliament, or the two Houses either conjoined or divided,
cannot exercise executive Justice in these things so nighly concerning
themselves, much less in things more remote, as my case is, who if I were
guilty of the thing laid unto my Charge, yet they are only and alone tryable
and punishable at the Common Law, and not in an arbitrary uncertain way in
either or both Houses, the rules of which certainly no man in heaven or earth
knows; and says that worthiest of English Lawyers Sir Edward Cook, in the
Proem to the third part of his Institutes: It is a miserable servitude, or
slavery, where the Law is uncertain or unknown.

And I know, you know, it is a received Maxim in Law, that the Parliament is
not to meddle with judging or punishing that which appertains and belongs to the
Common Law, but my pretended crimes have their punishments appointed by the
Common Law, and are there only to be tried and punished, and therefore in the
least belongs not unto the Parliaments Cognizance or Jurisdiction: Nay, the
Parliament men themselves, for Treason, Felony and breach of the Peace, are not
privileged in the least from trials at Common Law, as appears by the fourth
part Institutes, fol. 25. and the Lords and Commons confess the same in their
Declarations, 1. part page 48. 278. The Common Law of England, which is right
reason (or as Sir Edward Cook styles it, the absolute perfection of reason, 2
part Instit. fol. 179.) hates all partiality or faction in trials, which would
unavoydably be, if the Lawmakers should in any case be the Law-executioners;
and besides the legal benefit of final appeals to the high Court of Parliament,
(which I judge in Law to be the whole and entire Parliament and not a single
House) would be hereby totally destroyed; for if they should be empowered by
Law to be Executers of it, and should (as it is possible they may) do me wrong
and injustice, I am thereby, by power, destroyed with out remedy, which the Law
abhors; and therefore the wisdom and reason of the Law is such to betrust
Judges that rationally are liable to an account in full Parliament, and them
only to be sole Executors and Dispensers of the Law betwixt party and party;
and not to betrust the whole Parliament, or any part of it, with the executing
of the Laws, but only to betrust them, as their fittest work, with a power to
repeal those Laws that are amiss, and to establish and make better in their
places. But the Laws, while they remain Laws and unrepealed, are as binding by
Law to themselves, as the meanest men in England, and they have no privilege of
exemption from them, saving in freedom of speech within their respective
Houses, ( for which they have an act of Parliament to indempnifie them, as
appears by the 4. H. 8. chapter 8.) and freedom from arrests for them and their
servants etc. during the sitting of Parliament, which the Law supposes not to
be long; much less seven years, (which is a destruction to our fundamental
rights, viz. Annual Parliaments (or at least Annual Elections) as appears by
the 4. Edw. 3. cha. 14. and 36. Ed. 3. chapter 10. both which are confirmed this
present Parliament by the triennial act in (16. Car. Rex) and yet if any
Parliament-mans servant be imprisoned, the House of Commons themselves by Law
cannot deliver him, but it must be by a Writ out of Chancery, and the member
must make oath, that the party for whom the Writ of privilege is prayed for,
was his servant at the time of the arrest made; all which appears in the Case
of one Mr Hall, the 22. of Feb. 18. Eliz. whose servant being arrested and
imprisoned, a Committee of the House reported to the House, they could find no
presidents for the delivery of him, but in the way before mentioned, whereupon
Mr Hall was appointed by the House to go to the Lord Keeper, and to do
accordingly.

And if they cannot deliver one that belongs to themselves, and privileged by
the Law of Parliament, (but not by the known and declared Law of the Land) nor
punish him themselves, that in the execution of the Common Law of England broke
their privileges, much less in Reason and Justice can they commit or release
one that is far remote from them, and does not by privilege belong unto them,
the last of which is my present case; and therefore no color in Law has the
House of Commons to commit me to prison.

And as for the House of Lords, the Petition of Right expressly says, That no
man ought to be adjudged to death etc. but by the established Laws of the Land;
and the express established Law of the Land is, That no Freeman shall be taken,
or imprisoned, or be deseised of his freehold, or liberties, or free customs,
or be outlawed, or exiled, nor condemned, or any otherwise destroyed, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, viz a Jury of his Equals, of the same
neighborhood where the crime is committed (being brought in to answer by due
process of Law, by Indictment, Presentment, or Writ original according to the
course of Common Law) but the Lords are none of my Peers or Equals, and
therefore are none of my legal Judges, nor have not the least Jurisdiction (in
any case whatsoever) in the world over me.

And though they should have a thousand presidents, to show they have exercised
Jurisdiction in the like case of mine, they are worth nothing, because they are
all and every of them against the 29 Chap. of Magna Charta; and are therefore
expressly declared by the Statute that abolished the Star Chamber, 17. Car. Rex,
this present Parliament, to be null and void in Law; and to be holden for
Errors and false Judgments. And as for presidents against the Lords and Commons
Jurisdiction in my particular case, one president against them is of more
consequence then a thousand for them, and the reason is evident, because, as
Sir Edward Cook often declares, all Courts of Judicature are bottomed upon the
Law of the Land: and it cannot be supposed that any Court can be miscognizant
or ignorant of its proper Jurisdiction. And for the Lords, they have confessed
in the 4. of Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. 2. in the case of Sir Simon De Berisford, that
it is against the Law for Peers to try Commoners, and have promised and enacted
(or at least ordained) that they neither shall, nor will do the like again,
though that occasion were superlative, viz. about the absolute murder of King
Edward the second. And

Secondly, although the Mayor etc. of the Corporation of Cambridg were, by the
Kings Writ out of Chancery, summoned before King Richard the second in full
Parliament, and there impeached of horrible Treason, committed and acted in
levying War against their sovereign Lord and King, and being expressly within
the Statute of Treasons made in the 25 of Edward the 3. Cha. 2. And though they
surrendered up the Charters of Cambridg in open Parliament, unto the will and
pleasure of the King, as forfeited into his hands by their Treason and
Rebellion, yet as to the point of Treason they by their Council expressly
pleaded, that the King and his Lords assembled in Parliament had no Cognizance
or Jurisdiction there to meddle with Treasons committed by them, and says the
Record, (which under the Register or Record Keepers hand of the Tower I have to
show unto your Honor, if you please to have it read) they alleged diverse
reasons therefore, and the King and the Lords by their silence allowed of their
plea as good in Law, and let them go without any punishment there, for their
notorious Treasons, as appears Rot. Parl. 5. Rich. 2. membrana: 9. number.
45.58, 59. which is supposed in reason they would never have done, if their own
consciences and knowledge had not told them, that by Law they had not the least
Jurisdiction in the world over Commoners in any case whatsoever: For if not in
Treason the highest, then much less in misdemeanors the inferiorest (which is
the most that ever they laid to my charge.)

And if the King and Lords have not Jurisdiction over Commoners, much less the
Lords without the King, and much less that House of Lords that has laid the
King, their fountain of power and honor, aside, as unfit to be addressed unto
any more, (and yet have not essentially or avowedly altered the Government of
the Kingdom;) seeing by their Writ of summons and all their own Declarations,
they own nor challenge no power unto themselves but what they derive from him,
and therefore by their own principles, and by the Law it self, they have
unpowered themselves and totally overthrown and destroyed their Jurisdiction,
and now cannot legally or rationally be called a Court of Justice or a House of
Parliament in any sense, as clearly appears by the 4 part Instit. chapt. High
Court of Parliament fo. 1.366.46. the King being in Law, as Sir Edward Cook
there declares, the head, the beginning, and the ending of the Parliament; and
in reason it is impossible, where there is no primitive, there should be any
derivative: and therefore I do positively conclude, that the Lords have both by
Law and Reason unpowered themselves, and destroyed their House from being a
House in any sense, and therefore have not the least shadow or color of
Jurisdiction over me, or any Commoner of England.

And besides I find in the time of this present Parliament many Presidents of
the House of Commons, in putting out their extraordinary and necessitated power
to redeem and rescue the Commons of England out of the devouring paws of the
Lords illegal and usurped Here Judge Bacon interrupted me, and told me they
could not suffer the Lords to be arraigned before them in that manner that I
did, and therefore pressed me to cease all such expressions, unto which I
replied, Mr Justice Bacon I cannot make my legal defense for my self, unless I
speak against the non-Jurisdiction of the Lords, but to show my respect to you,
I shall avoid all harsh words as much as the weightiness of my business will
suffer; and therefore Mr Justice Bacon, I humbly entreat you I may be suffered
to go on, and then when I have done, pass your Judgment upon my defense; so I
went on.
Jurisdiction over them, as appears, First in Colonel Edward King of
Lincolnshire, committed by the Lords to the Fleet, by the power and interest of
his then professed adversary the Lord Willoughby of Parham, and upon his
appeal to the House of Commons, in high affront to the Lords pretended
Jurisdiction, they released him out of the Fleet about the year 1644.

Secondly Captain Macy belonging to Colonel Manwaring of the City of London,
being upon his guard at the Works, seized upon diverse letters of the Scotch
Commissioners, and broke them open, about which the Commissioners grievously
complained to the Lords, who thereupon clapped the said Captain by the heels in
the Fleet, and my self with diverse others being Solicitors for the Captain to
the House of Commons, they honorably to him, and in high contempt of the Lords
usurpations delivered him out of prison about the year 1645. and were upon
debate to give him a large sum of money for his unjust sufferings.

Thirdly, upon the Lords committing and censuring of me, I appealed to the
House of Commons, and they received my Appeal, and ordered me my liberty De die
in diem, to follow my Appeal, which in my understanding, is in Law a
supersedias both to their Commitment and Judgment.

Fourthly, Mr Richard Overton, who affronted the Lords as much as any man that
ever came before them, and protested to their faces against their Jurisdiction
over Commoners, and appealed to the House of Commons for Justice against them,
and after that appealed to all the Commons of England, and particularly to the
General and the whole Army; and yet notwithstanding the Lords approved of his
protestation etc. against them, by delivering him by their special order out of
the prison of Newgate, without overruling him, or punishing him, or his
stooping to them.

Fifthly, his Wife and his brother Thomas Overton, walking in some measure in
his steps, were justified therein by the House of Commons, in receiving their
Appeals; yea and by the Lords themselves, by delivering them without any
punishment or judgment out of prison, and without any their stooping or
submitting to them. Sixthly, these very proceedings were the case of Mr William
Larner Bookseller, his brother and maid; so that laying all the premises
together, it is undeniably evident, that the present House of Lords have not
the least Jurisdiction in the world over me or the meanest Commoner of England
in any case whatsoever; (for if not in Treason the highest, much less in
Misdemeanors the lowest); and therefore all their fines upon Here I was
necessitated, by reason of the Judges often falling foul upon me, to express my
self in general words, in this manner, and therefore all their fines upon any
of the Commons of England, for not obeying their Warrants or Orders, in order
to trials before them, and refusing to kneel at their Bat in contempt of their
Jurisdiction, are illegal, and null and void in Law, and all those Goalers,
Officers or Ministers, that put them in execution, are subject in Law to make
the party molested satisfaction for their wrongful molestation.
Sir John Maynard, Sir John Gayer, Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, and
Alderman Bunce, for refusing to kneel at their Bar, are illegal, and void and
null in law and reason both, for all the Lords proceedings with them from first
to last, are coram non Judice, and the Lieutenant of the Tower etc. liable at
Law to make them satisfaction for his unwarrantable executing of their illegal
and unbinding Orders and Warrants upon them: And indeed, to speak the truth of
the arbitrary and tyrannical proceedings of the House of Lords, they are so
illegal and irrational, Here again, the Judges interrupted me, and told me,
they must not hear such language of the Lords, and therefore pressed me to keep
close to my exceptions against the return, or else they could not let me go on;
so after I had expostulated it pretty well with them, and being in an extreme
longing desire to come to the main pinch of the business, very well knowing I
had a smooth, but yet a sharp sting for them in the conclusion; I told them at
their commands I would at present so far obey them, as skip over part of my
matter, and did it to the next line where you shall find this mark
that to set them up in the way they have lately gone in is to pull down all
the Judicatures of the Kingdom, and to destroy all the Laws of the Land ( in
the destruction of which there is a perfect levelling of meum and tuum which is
totolly overthrown thereby) and it is also a re-edifying of an arbitrary,
tyrannical, unlimited and unbounded Government (worse then Empsons and Dudleys,
Straffords or Canterburies, for which yet they all lost their lives) many
stories higher then ever the Star Chamber, High Commission, or Council Table
were, (which yet were arbitrary enough, as appears by the Acts made 17. Car.
Rex, for abolishing them) and indeed it behooves all the rich men of England
well to look about them in reference to the Lords: For if a company of men, by
virtue of their being made Peers by the King or his will and prerogative, may
at their pleasure and wills, without all shadow of Law or Justice, fine one
Commoner of England more then he either is or ever was worth ( as they have
done me, upon whom they have set a fine of 4000 l.) by the same rule of right
reason and Justice, they may, at their pleasures, rob all the rich men of
England, by Fines, of all that ever they are worth; yea, and by the same reason
and justice, share it and divide it amongst themselves, and so have better
places abundantly of it then ever the Earl of Dorset had, by being a privy
Counselor and Judge of the Star Chamber, which yet, if some that well knew him,
belie him not, was worth many thousand pounds, per annum, to him in an
underhand way; and besides, if the Lords can persevere, and hold on, as they
have lately begun, the King was very unwise to call a Parliament, and of, and
from them to seek for subsidies, seeing the workmanship of his own hands, (the
Lords, by virtue of their having his prerogative stamp upon them,) is able to
fine by their wills, a Commoner of England more then he is worth, and therefore
may much more legally fine all the Commoners of England at their pleasure, a
quarter, half; three quarters, or all they are worth, and so fill the Kings (or
their own) Cofers at their pleasure full, and get in to them all the money of
England; therefore let rich men look about them in this particular, and in a
second regard also, more dangerous then this; forasmuch as it concerns life,
let all men, I say, look well about them, for I am confident of this, that I
suffer so much Barbarism from Cromwell, and his Creatures, who are not willing
to come to a trial with me, for the Leiutenant of the Tower has already denied
me the benefit of the Law of England, in not obeying my first Habeas Corpus,
and would not suffer me without fresh struggling to come to a legal trial, and
thereby have before the sun convicted themselves of wickedness and unrighteous
dealing with me, for says Christ, John 3.20. Every one that does evil hates
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved or
discovered; I say, I am confident I suffer so much from Cromwell etc. for
opposing and throwing down the Lords Tyranny, which he did, and still (is
evident) he does intend to make the arbitrary (yet seeming legal) ax to chop
off the head of every man in England, he has a mind to destroy any otherwise
then by wilful murder, as he did Richard Arnal at Ware: and having been under
God, the chief Instrument to break him of that damnable and wicked design, he
and his Creatures, therefore are as mad at me as so many mad men, etc. Although
they have done so much already in destroying the Law, and setting up Arbitrary
Tyranny, that I will make it good with my life, diverse of them, viz. of the
House of Lords, etc. better deserve Tower hill, therefore, then ever Srafford
did; but what a company of foolish, silly Creatures are Cromwell, and his
confederate Grandees, who would pretend to give those Commoners of England a
trial according to Law and Justice,
whose lives they would take away by a trial before the Lords, Here I began,
and said, Sir, what an errational thing is it for the Lords to go about at
their bar to try Commoners for their lives, when as men that know the Law, etc.
when as men that know the Law of England, fully knows, that if the present
Lords were a true House of Lords, (as before I have fully proved they are not)
yet they were not able legally to try one of themselves, for though the body of
their House (in case they were twelve or eighteen, and under they cannot be)
should be in the nature of a grand Jury, and petty Jury, and so the Judges of
matter of Fact, yet they must have a Judge of matter of Law too, and that must
be a Lord high Steward, which they neither have, nor are able legally to make,
and therefore have no color of power in Law to try one of themselves, much
less a Commoner, that is none of their Peer or equal, whom the Law has again
and again expressly prohibited them to meddle with; but enough for the Lords at
present, and now two things more distinctly for the House of Commons.

First, admit, they had a Jurisdiction in executing the Law, (which I have
before already fully proved they have not) yet all Courts of Justice
established by Law in England, are bound and tied to Judge no man but by
witnesses, sworn according to the Law, they being the evidence to the Jury and
Judge, 3. part instit. fol. 163. But they never put Masterson, my accuser, to
his oath, in his Information he delivered against me, (although he were but a
single informer, never any man of all the large company besides himself
appearing against me,) and therefore no shadow or color for the House of
Commons to adjudg or condemn me to prison thereupon, seeing no man whatsoever
can be condemned by any Court in England without witnesses, sworn against him
according to Law; but if he had delivered what he did deliver against me upon
his oath, it had been never the legaller, because they have no power, nor never
had to administer an oath, and therefore cannot by the Law of England in the
least pretend any Jurisdiction over me in cases Criminal, or any power at all
to commit me to prison; for where the Court has no authority to hold plea of
the Cause, there all proceedings are Coram non Judice, and there perjury
(though Masterson had sworn never so falsely) cannot be committed; and so
against all reason, a man is left at liberty to say without fear of punishment
what he please, because it being not in a Judicial Proceeding, no perjury can
be committed by Law; and that the House of Commons has no power to administer
an oath is evident, in that the Law gives them none, nor they never practiced
it; and therefore, if they would now put it in use, they cannot legally of
themselves now begin to do it: For as learned Cook says in his Chapter of
perjury, 3. part. instit. fol. 165. An oath is an affirmation or denial of any
thing lawful and honest, before one or more, that have authority to give the
same for advancement of truth and right, calling Almighty God, the searcher of
all hearts, to witness that his Testimony is true, so that (says he) an oath
is so sacred, and so deeply concerning the Consciences of Christian men, as the
same cannot be administered to any, unless the same be allowed by the Common
Law, or by some Act of Parliament; neither can any oath (says he) allowed by
the Common Law, or by Act of Parliament, be altered, but by Act of Parliament,
no nor a new oath raised, and therefore he declares it to be a high contempt of
the Law of England, for any man to administer an oath without warrant of Law,
and to be punished by fine and imprisonment, and of all And here I skipped
seven or eight lines to this mark
oaths in use in England: This oath of Confirmation, for deciding and ending of
Controversies, is the only and alone warrantable oath by the Law of God, Mat.
5.34, 35, 36, 37. and Heb. 6.16, 17. James 5.12. And as for other oaths, I know
no use in the world of them, for those men that do not love things that are
excellent, for the excellency inherent in them, will never love nor honor them
for oaths sake.) But the House of Commons wanting a legal power to administer
an oath, it is a clear demonstration and proof, that they have no power or
Jurisdiction at all in Law, to decide Controversies betwixt a man and his
neighbor, especially in times of peace, when all the ordinary Courts of
Justice are open, and therefore have no shadow or color in Law to adjudg or
commit any man that is not a Member of them to prison.

And in But all this president to avoid disputes I skipt over, for the Judges
pressed that the House of Commons owned the Lords Jurisdiction in some cases, to
which I answered, I owned it as well as they, and told them I was willing to
give the Lords as much Jurisdiction without dispute as they desired, to Judge,
condemn and destroy one another, so they would not meddle with me, nor my
fellow Commoners: and I was confident, if the Lords distinctly, as a single
House, had any Jurisdiction at all in Law, it was but over themselves, and as
much of which as they please to take, I am willing without dispute to grant
them.
the second place, That the House of Commons have no judgment or Jurisdiction
by Law, clearly appears by their own confession in the roll of Parlialiament,
in the 1. H. 4. Membr. 14. Number. 79. which this present April, I had under Mr.
William Riley, the Record-Keepers hand, which at the Bar I am ready to produce,
and which thus in English verbatim, follows.

The third day of November the Commons made their Protestation, in manner, as
they made it at the beginning of the Parliament, and over and above declare to
the King, That forasmuch as the Judgment of Parliament belongs only to the
King, and to the Lords, and not to the Commons, unless it please the King, of
his grace especially showed them, that the said Judgment was for their ease,
and no record shall be made in Parliament against the said Commons, that they
are, or shall be, parties to any judgments given, or to be given hereafter in
Parliament. To which was answered, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, by the
Kings command, that the said Commons shall be Petitioners and Demanders, and
that the King, and the Lords, at all times, have had, and shall have by right
the Judgment in Parliament; in manner, as the said Commons have showed, unless
it be in Statute affairs, or in grants and subsidies, or in such things and
affairs for common profit of the Kings Realms, the King will have their
especial advice and assent, and that this Order be kept in all times to come.
And so much at present for the 2d essential of a warrant.

And now I come to give a touch, and but a touch only upon the third ingredient
to make a mittimus lawful, and that is, that it be under hand and seal,
expressing the office and place of him which makes it, unless the party be
committed in the sight of the Judge, sitting in open Court, but there is no seal
to mine, and therefore it is illegal, for I was not in the view of my pretended
Judges when they committed me.

But Mr. Justice Bacon, I come to the fourth thing, upon which, at present, as
one of the principal essentials, I shall stifflly stand, which is, That the
warrants of my Commitments, both from Lords and Commons now returned before you
are illegal, there being nothing but generals laid unto my charge by them,
which is no charge nor crime in Law; and therefore, both my warrants wanting a
legal and a particular cause in them, there is no color in Law to keep my body
in prison by virtue of them. Now to prove that Generals are no crimes nor
charges in Law, though the daily and continual practices of all the Courts of
Justice in England prove it, yet for illustration sake. I shall crave leave to
alledg some legal Authorities. And in the First place, I shall begin with the
Judgment of Sir Edward Cook upon the Statute of breaking of prisons, made 1
Ed. 2. who in his 2. part institutes fo. 591. expressly says, seeing the weight
of this business touching this point, to make an escape either in the party or
in the Gealours Felony depends upon the lawfulness of the Mittimus, it will
be necessary to say somewhat hereof. First, it must be in writing, in the name,
and under the seal of him that makes the same, expressing his Office, place,
and authority; by force whereof he makes the Mittimus, and it is to be directed
to the Jailer, or Keeper of the Goal or Prison. Secondly, it must contain the
cause (as it expressly appears by this Act, 25. Ed. 3. Coran. 134. and 32. Ed.
3. Coram. 248. and 9. Ed. 4. fol. 52.
unless the cause for which he was taken, etc.) but not so certainly as an
indictment ought, and yet with such convenient certainty, as it may appear
judicially, that the offense requires such a judgment; as for High Treason, to
wit, AGAINST THE PERSON OF OUR LORD THE KING; or for the counterfetting of the
money of our Lord the King, or for petty Treason; namely, for the death of such
a one, being his Master, or for Felony to wit, for the death of such a one,
etc. or for blurgary, or robbery, etc. or for Felony; for stealing of a horse,
etc. or the like, so as it may in such a generality appear judicially, that
the offense required such a judgment, and he there further goes on and gives
diverse arguments and reasons, and scites abundance of law authorities to prove,
that a particular cause, ought by Law to be expressed in every Mittimus or
Warrant of Commitment.

My second proof to prove generals, are no charge in Law, is the deliberate
and resolved opinion of all the Judges of England in the 3, year of King
James, (which was a time of full peace; wherein the law had its free current,
without the threats of Marciall or the checks of Prerogative arbitrary power,
and therefore the Judgment is of more weight) who in their answer to the 22.
object, on or article of Archbishop Bancroft, and to the whole Clergy of
England, has those very words, we do not, neither will we in any wise impugn
the Ecclesiastical authority in any thing that appertains unto it, but if
any by the Ecclesiastical authority, commit any man to prison, upon complaint
unto us that he is imprisoned without just cause, we are to send to have the
body, and to be certified the cause, and if they will not certify unto us the
particular cause, but generally without expressing any particular cause whereby
it may appear unto as to be matter of ecclesiastical cognizance, and his
imprisonment be just then we do and ought to deliver him and this (say the
Judges) is the Clergies ^ault and not ours, and although some of us have dealt
with them to make some such particular Certificate to us, whereby we may be
able to judge upon it as by Law they ought to do, yet they will by no means do
it, and therefore their error is the cause of the thing they complain of, and
no fault in us, for if we see not a just cause of the parties imprisonment by
them, then we ought and are bound by Oath to deliver him, and suitable to this
is their answer to the Clergies 21. Article, which Articles and answers are
recorded in 2. part instit. fo. 614.615.616. My 3. proof to prove that
Generals are no crimes in Law, is out of the 4. part instit. fo. 39. where the
Lord Cook expressly says, That a man by law cannot be attainted of
High Treason, unless the offense be in Law high treason (for where there is no
law there can be no transgression, Romans 4.15.) he ought not to be attainted by
general words of high treason by authority of Parliament (as sometime has
been used) but the high treason ought to be specially expressed, seeing that
the Court of Parliament is the highest and most honourablest Court of Justice,
and ought (as has been said) to give example to inferior Courts. And besides,
all this seems to me, to be clearly and evidently held forth by those 2.
notable statutes, viz. The Petition of Right, 3. Car. Rex, and the Act that
abolished the Star Chamber in 17. Car. Rex, So that from all that has been
said to this 4. head alone, I am confident, I may in Law challenge my liberty
and freedom from your honors hands without bail, as my undoubted and
unquestionable right by Law, and which you neither can, nor ought by Law to
deny unto me, seeing that by both the Warrants of my Commitments, I am rendered
a just and an innocent man, there being by them not the least pretense of a
legal crim: laid unto my Charge, for Generals is (as is already fully proved)
no Charge nor crimes in Law; And also has been so adjudged and declared by the
present two Houses of Parliament, as if it were requisite I could
particuler^^se fully unto you, and 3. instances at present, I shall only give
you, viz. the 5. Members, and the Lord Kimbolton, and the Lord Major
Pennington, and the late 11. Members, whose cases you may read 1 part. Book
Decler. page 38. 77. 201. 845. but being I am here principally to plead Law,
and not Ordinances, I shall forbear to enlarge my self thereupon, and yet
before I conclude, shall with your Honors leave, speak a few words, to the
fifth and last ingredient to make a Mittimus lawful.

Viz. That it have a legal conclusion, in these words, and him safely to
keep, until he be delivered by due course of Law, and not for 7. years, nor
until the party committing does further order, which legal conclusion is
wanting in both my Commitments, and therefore illegal.

Which most desperate Co^mitments being illegal in all the 5 essentialls, I
may call and do call them impoysoned Arrows, shot through the principal
vital of Englands liberty; (but here both the Judges interrupted me to the
purpose, and would not let me go on with my Retorick, so that I was
necessitated for leare I should not be suffered to plead my conclusion, which I
looked upon to be the strength of all my work, and therefore was forced to skip
over diverse leaves to the objection,) and the chief authors of them not
deserving, to be named or styled the patrons of their Country, no not so much
as well wishers to the liberties thereof, for here is Law, equity, and Justice
dethroned, and absolute will, or blind lust challinging the proper imperial
seat of England, the Commitments draws the black line over the name of
Englands Freedom, yea, the line of confusion upon the Kingdom, if the
Parliament, or both Houses, shall thus actually avow, that they are to govern
loose without the restraint of any laws (mocking the Kingdom thereby, in
making Judges to execute the Law) yea, and absolved from all Laws of
government, as though it were in their power to dispose of the persons of all
the people of England at there will and pleasure, the granting or challenging
of which, can be no less, then the absolute distroying of all the mutual
relations and dependancy in a Kingdom, or common wealth, yea, and the levelling
of all terms of destinction betwixt ruler and ruled, yea hereby the very
foundation of property of meum and tuum is totally overturned, and no man can
call any thing he possesses his own; for my person is nearer to me then my
Estate, and he that at his will may dispose of my person, may much more at his
will and pleasure dispose of my Estate, And therefore Mr. Justice Bacon this
manner of imprisoning, is no better then a two edged sword, whereby the
liberties of England is mortally wounded, if not actually cut in pieces, and
the Prime Authors of these Commitments in the eye of God, and all rational
men, deserve the highest and exempliariest, of punishments, in thus subverting
the very bases and foundations of government, and so unavoydably imbroyling the
Kingdom a new in Wars, to preserve themselves from total vassellage or
destruction; especially, considering that they themselves have done these
things, after they themselves have chopped off the heads of Straford and
Canterbury for the very same things: and therefore by the strength of reason
(if there were no other law in being) they deserve their own executed
punishment. Again, the Law never instituted a Goal for punishment and
destruction, but for a place of safe keeping of a criminal person, that could
find no better bail, where he ought to be kept and entreated with all
humanity, civillity and respect, till he be brought to a speedy trial; all
Goales in England by Law being to be delivered 3. times a year at least, or
more oftener if need require. 1 part instit. lib. 3. chapter 7. Sect. 438. fo.
260. and 2. part. instit. fo. 42.43.115.186.189.315. and 3. E. 1. chapter 25.
But I have been almost two years in prison, and never to this hour had any
legal Crime laid unto my Charge, nor cannot be suffered to come to a legal
Trial, though to my extraordinary expenses, toil, hazard, and trouble, I have
endeavored it withal my might; but cannot be admitted to have any benifit of
the law which I do aver is the highest of tyranny, being kept in Goal in a
languishing condition worse then anysuddaine death, being ever dying and yet
not dead.

And therefore I do positively aver, that the Arbitratiness of the
Conclusions of my Commitmants, is that which strikes the Fatal Stroke through
the heart Root of Freedom, and Justice; yea it overturnes overturnes the
Foundations of the Kingdom, this very sivgle act, if drawn into president
has a seminall virtue in it, whereby is contained in its self, all the
distinct species of injustice, whereof the Sun was ever yet spectator.

Yes, this arbitrary Commitment does Ipse facto enervate, yea evanuate, and
null all established laws of the land, and renders all rowles and records, no
better then waist papers, fit for nothing but to light Tobacco Pipes; for to
what purpose serves Magna Charta, the Petition of right, and other wholesome
Laws; which say, no man shall be imprisoned, past upon etc. or any other ways
destroyed, but by the Lawful Judgment of his equals, or by due process of
Law, when as the rule to punish supposed or real transgressors, shall be men's
wills and lusts, as in my case by my Commitments, etc. it is, so that if 500.
men shall assume and arrogate to themselves the absolute dominion over the
people of the Land, then it may be England shall have 500. distixct lusts unto
which they must conform their actions.

And sure I am, that the dealings of the Lords and Commons with me,
demonstrated by their orders of committments, flows not from any power given
them, either by the Law of the Laud, nor from the Indentures betwixt them and
their chusers, no nor yet from any word or clause in the Writ of there summons
or Elections; and therefore fourthly, it must flow from there CROOKED IVSTS,
DEPRAVED WILLS, and ARBITRARY PLEASVRES, by which with naked faces they
declare themselves to be limited by no boundary, unaccountable and obnoxious to
no censures for any possible abuse whatsoever that can becommitted by them, for
by these committments they evidently declare there is no rule whereby to
measure the rectitude or obliquitie, justice or injustice of their Government
and actions, and by consequence they are under an impossibility to render an
account of their ways and doings (and so by consequence, the people of England
are in the absolutest road way of perfect slavery that is upon the earth) this
the Parliament, or the Lords and Commons would have the World to believe they
abhord in the King, as appears by there last declaration against him, in which
they show the reasons of their votes not to make or to receive, any addresses
to, or from him, for in Page 12, they s^y the King has laid a fit foundation
for all tyranny, by that most destructive maxim of his, viz. that he owes no
account of his actions to any but to God alone, but by the warrants of my
co^mitments it seems this wicked and heathenish Maxim, is Judged by the makers
thereof not to be to sweet a morsel for their own Pallets, though in their
said declaration they judge it to sweet for the Kings, and therefore to
conclude this point if this honorable Court of Justice, the Judges whereof are
sworn to Judge according to the Law, and not lust, will nor pleasure, will
Judge these arbitrary Committments of mine to be legal, then I make my humble
desire unto you the Judges thereof, that you would cosen and deceive the
people of the Kingdom no longer, by assuming unto your selves the name of
Judges of the Law, but rather translate your Titles into the name of Judges of
lust, will and pleasure, that so the people may expect the legal
administration of the Law, no longer from you: and so I have done with the
Fifth, and last ingredient to a legal Mittimus. Now Mr. Justice Bacon, seeing
it is objected both by you, and Mr. Justice Roll, that my Commitment from the
Lords, is rather a Sentence, Judgment, or Decree, hen a bare Mittimus, and
therefore being a judgment by the Lords, a higher Court, for 7. years
imprisonment; I cannot be delivered by this Court, which being inferior to it,
cannot reverse it, nor be Judges of it.

To which Mr. Justice Bacon, I answer, First, I do not seek unto you at
present for reversement of my Sentence, which is 4000. l. fine, and perpetual
disfranchisement of the Liberties of an Englishman, as well as seven years
imprisonment: But I come unto you as Judges of the Law (who are sworn
impartially to do me Law and Justice, notwithstanding any command whatsoever,
by any whatsoever to the contrary,) for my personal liberty, which is my
undoubted right by Law, for any thing that judicially appears before you, upon
the Warrants of my commitments. For I have already fully proved unto you, there
is not legally the least crime in the world laid unto my charge, and therefore
no rules in Law for you to send me back again to prison.

But secondly, I answer, that I have already proved the Lords are none of my
legal Judges, and therefore all their proceedings with me from first to last,
are little non judici, Yea, even their Sentence and Commitment it self, for
being it is against the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, (it is void and null in Law)
which expressly says, That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be
dissesed of his Freehould, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be Outlawed, or
exiled, or any otherwise destroyed, nor past upon, nor condemned by the lawful
judgment of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, which Law of the Land is
expounded by the Statute of the 25. Ed. 3.4. and 37. Ed. 3.18. and Sir Edward
Goke in his 2. part instit. fo. 50.51. to be by due Process of Law, viz: That
none shall be taken and past upon. etc. by Petition or suggestion made to our
Lord the King, or to his Counsel, undesse it be by indictment, or presentment
of good and lawful men, where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by Writ
original at the Common Law, being brought in to answer by due Processes,
according to the common and old Law of the Land, all which etc. is confirmed
by the Statute that abolished the Star Chamber, this present Parliament, 17.
C. R. and all Acts, Ordinances, Orders, Judgments and Decrees, made contrary
thereunto, or in diminution thereof, are thereby declared, ipso facto, to be
null, and void in Law, and are to be holden for errors and false judgments,
which totally bars and overthtowes all Presidents whatsoever to the contrary,
yea although the Lords had a million of them. (And excellent to this purpose,
is Sir Edward Cooks Commentary upon the 3. Ed. 1. chap. 15 but especially, his
Commentary upon these words, viz. Or Commandment of the King, First, faith he,
the King being a body politic, cannot command but by matter of Record; for
the King commands, and the Law commands, are all one, for the King must command
by matter of record according unto the Law. Secondly, When any Judicial Act,
is by Act of Parliament referred to the King, it is understood to be done in
some Court of Justice, according to the Law. And the opinion of Gascoine,
Chief Justice, is notable in this point, that the King has committed all his
power judicall to diverse Courts, some in one Court, some in another, etc. and
because some Courts, as the Kings Bench, are Coram Rege, and some coram
Justiciariis, therefore the Act says, by the commandernent of the King, or his
Justices.

Hussy Chief Justice reported, that Sir John Markham said to King Ed. 4. that
the King could not arrest any man for suspicion of Treason, or Felony, as any
of his Subjects might, because if the King did wrong, the party could not have
his action: if the King command me to arrest a man, and accordingly I do
arrest him, he shall have his action of false imprisonment against me, albeit
he was in the Kings presence; resolved by the whole Court in 16. H. 6. which
authority might be a good warrant to defend his said opinion to Ed. 4.

The words of the Statute of the 1 R. 2. chap. 12. are, unless it be by the
Writ, or other commandment of the King; and it was resolved by all the Judges
of England, that the King cannot do it by any commandment, but by Writ, or by
order, or Rule of some of his Courts of Justice, where the cause depends.

And says Bracton, the King can do nothing, but what he can do by Law; So as
(says the Lord Cook) the command of the King, is as much as to say, as by the
Kings Courts of justice; for all matters of Judicature, and proceedings in Law,
are distributed to the Courts of Justice, and the King does judge by his
Justices, 8 H. 4. fol. 19. and 24. H. 8. chap. 12. and regularly no man ought
to be attached by his body, but either by process of Law, that is, (as has been
said, by the Kings Writs, or by Indidctment, or lawful warrant, as by many
Acts of Parliament is manifestly inacted and declared, which are but
expositions of Magna Charta, and all Statutes made contrary to Magna Charta,
which is Lex terrae, from the making whereof until 42 Ed. 3. are declared and
inacted to be void, and therefore if this Act of Westminster 1. concerning the
extrajudiciall commandment of the King be against Magna Charta, it is void,
and all resolutions of Judges concerning the commandment of the King, are to
be understood of judicial proceedings, a part insti. fo. 186.187.)

Therefore Mr. Justice Bacon, it is to no purpose for you to tell me, I am
committed by a higher Court, and therefore you cannot legally deliver me, for
I aver unto you, and have already sufficiently proved it, that I am
commitmitted contrary to Law and Justice, and therefore you being Judges of the
Law, and not of Presidents, grounded upon will and pleasure; You are to take
notice of nothing but Law, and therefore I demand and require my liberty at
your hands, as my undoubted right and due by Law, which you can neither in
justice, honor, nor conscience deny unto me.

But admit the Lords to be a superior Court of justice to the Kings Bench in
some cases, yet if they walk beyond their bounds and limits set them by the
Law, and meddle with that which by Law they have no Jurisdiction of, in that
case they are no Court of Justice, either to you or me, but a company of
despisers and contemners of the Law; all whose actions and decrees made and
done in such cases, are but mere affronts unto the Law, and unvalid and
unbinding, either to you, or me, or any other man in England; in disobedience
to which, they by Law are not capable of a contempt or affront, nor cannot
legally punish any in such a case, either with fine or imprisonment, as for
instance.

First, if a court of SESSIONS, (which is a Court in many cases by Law)
questions me for my Freehould, and I give them contemptuous words for meddling
with that which they have no Jurisdiction of, they by Law can neither fine nor
imprison me therefore.

Secondly, the same holds good in the COMMON PLEAS, which is an unquestionable
administrative Court of Justice in diverse cases, yet if they go about to hold
plea of murder before them, if the party refuse to answer them, It is in Law
no contempt of the Court, And if the Court shall therefore fine and imprison
him, it is illegal, erroneous, and unbinding, because in Law they have no
Jurisdiction of such cases.

Thirdly, and pertinent to this purpose is BAGGS CASE, in the 11. Part of Cooks
Reports, who being summoned before the Mayer of Plimoth. in open Court called
him cozening Knave, and bade him come kiss, etc. For which the Mayor
Disfranchised him, and it was resolved in Law, that the the Disfranchisment was
illegal, and the reason of is was, because it was not according to Law, for
that the Mayor in Law had no power to do it.

Fourthly, suitable to this is the complaint of ARCHBISHOP BANCROFT, and the
Judges answer to it, which said Archbishop in his 22. Article to the Lords of
the Privy Counsel, in the 3. of King James, complains against the Judges of
the Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall, for affronting the actions,
proceedings, and Censures of the High Commission Court, which was erected by
Act of Parliament, viz. 1 Eliz. and had power by King James his Letters Patents
to Fine, and IMPRISON, and yet as he complains, (as you may read 2 Part.
instit. fo. 615. and 4 Part. instit. fol. 335.) The Judges were grown to that
innovating humor of late, that whereas certain lewd persons, (two for example)
one for notorious Adultery, and other intolerable contempts, and another for
abusing of a Bishop of this Kingdom, by threatening speeches, and sundry
railing terms, no way to be endured, were thereupon fined and imprisoned by
the High Commissioners, till they should enter into bonds to perform further
orders of the said Court, the one was delivered by HABEAS CORPUS out of the
Kings Bench, and the other by a WRIT out of the Common Pleas, and sundry other
prohibition have been likewise awarded to His Majesty's said Commissioners upon
these suggestions, that they had no authority to fine or imprison any man, etc.

Which practices and doings the Judges in their answers thereunto, justify to
be legal, and no more then that which they are bound unto by their Oath, for
that the high Commission had gone beyond the legal power of their
jurisdiction, having no power by law to fine and imprison in those cases; and
therefore, the Law, being the surest Sanctuary, that a man can take, and the
strongest fortress to protect the weakest of all, it ought not to be denied to
the meanest man that demands it, against the greatest seeming legal oppressor,
that act of violence or wrong, being most hateful of all others, when it is
done by uncontinuance of justice, and therefore that man which legally
endeavors deliverance from it, ought from the judges of the Law by Magna
Charta, to have it freely without sale, fully without any denial, and speedily
without delay, in which regard the aforesaid Judges, did not only justify
their forementioned legal practice, but also fall very foul upon the
Archbishop etc. for taxing the Judges and Justice of the Kingdom, confidently
aver^ing, that for less scandalls then his, etc. in taxing the Justice of the
Kindow, diverse have been severely punished, And Sir Edward Cook in the 4 part
of his institutes, Chap. of the high Commission Court, in causes
Ecclesiastical, fo. 331.332.333.334 335. instances diverse others, that for
notable Ecclesiastical crimes, were fined and imprisoned by the high
Commissioners, and upon demanding their right from the Judges of the Courts of
Justice in Weslminster Hall, they were relieved and released by them, by the
strength of those nerves and sinews of the Law Prohibitions and Habeas
Corpusses.

But above all the rest that he there mensions, John Simpsons case in the 42.
Eliz. is the most remarkable to my purpose, which Simpson being accused for
committing adultery with the Wife of Edward Fuste (over which case by Law the
high Commissioners had Jurisdiction) whereupon the high Commissioners issued
out there warrent to Richard Butler Constable of Aldrington in the County of
Northamton, for attaching and arresting of the body of the said Simpson, which
in Law is an imprisonment upon the attachment of his body, and the Constable
takes on William Johnson servant of the said FVSTE to assist him in the serving
of his Warrant which warrrant the Coxstable served upon him and read it unto
him, notwithstanding the Said SIMPSON resisted him, and in his own dofence
(showed him) slew the the said Johnson, that came in aid of the said
Constables, for which he was as a wilful murderer, Committed to Northampton
Goal, and indicted before the Judge by the coroners inquest of wilful murder,
supposeing the said Warrant to Lawful, but the matter being very mighty, the
Justices of assise thought not good to proceed against him at those assizes but
deferred it till the next assizes, at what time after this long time of
deliberation, and upon conference with other judges of the law it was resolved,
that the statute of the 1 Eliz. gave no power to the high commissioners to make
any warrant to arrest the body of Simpson in that case, but that they ought to
have proceeded by citation, And therefore going beyond there legal power
(although by the Queens letters patents, express authority is given to the
high comissioners to send for the body of any offender, etc.) Simpson in
killing the said JOHNSON, had committed no wilful murder, but only defended
himself and his liberties, and so it was found by the Jury, and he acquitted
of murder.

From all which I observe, first, that all Judges of all Courts of Justice in
England, are bound toact within the compass of there jurisdiction given them
by Law.

2 I observe that the Judges of any Court going beyond their legal
Jurisdiction, may, and ought by Law to be resisted, which resistance is no
contempt of the law, not punishable by it.

3 That the Judges of the Law, are bound in duty and concience by Law to judge
all causes that comes before them according to Law, which both the single order
of the Lords, and the single order of the Commons, is inferior, or in
subordination unto, as well as the royal letters pattents of ^^e King or
Queen, which yet those Noble Judges according to Law, threw behind their backs,
and acquitted the said SIMPSON of Murder, inkilling of IONHSON in his doing
actions in pursuance, and by virtue of the authority of the said Letters
Pattents, And therefore much more ought you to acquit and set my body at
liberty without any more ado from the Lords 7. years imprisonment, being
their imprisonment of me, though grounded upon their decree or Judgment, is
contrary to the express declared and constant received fundamental Laws of
England, and though diverse men in former ages, have been so sottish or
fearful, to part with their legal Liberties to the Lords, and have stooped
unto their Judgments, Orders and Decrees, yet that is no prejudice or
hinderance unto me, from the enjoyment of mine, who now demands them at your
hands as my right by Law.

4. And lastly, seeing as is before undeniably proved, that the King (the
Major) is the primitive, and the Lords (the Minor) are but the derivative and
seeing it is before also fully proved, that the Letters Pattents of the King,
the primative, is not to be set in compitition with the Law, it will strongly
and undeniably follow, that the orders of the single Lords, who are but the
derivitive, cannot keep me in prison contrary to the Law; but that they ought
by you without any further delay, being illegal in themselves to be judged so
by you, as well as the King or Queens Letters Patents, were by your
predecessors, and my body by you to be set at liberty, though it has
seemingly affronted their orders, as well as the life of the said SIMPSON, was
saved by your predecessors, although he had slain the said JOHNSON in affront
of their superiors Letters Patents, and not to necessitate me for my relief
and preservation to SIMPSONS remedy, which though bloody in it self, yet is
justifiable by Law and reason, by which I may defend my liberties and life,
against all those that in the executing of urjust illegal orders and decries
would rob me of them and if in my own defense to save my life, I be
necessitated and compelled to destroy him or them, that without Law would keep
me in prison, and so destroy me by famine, or by sickness etc. his life be
upon his own score, for in such a case I am free from his Blood, and therefore
Mr. Justice Bacon to wind up all, I shall conclude in the words of learned Sir
Edward Cook in his epilogue to the 4 part of this institutes which I read thur.

And you honorable and reverent Judges that do sit in the high tribunals and
courts or s^ates of Justice, fear not to do right to all, and to deliver your
oppinions Justly according to the Laws: for fear is nothing but a betraying of
the succors that reason should afford. And if you shall sincerely execute
Justice, be assured of three things.

First, though some may malign you, yet God will give you his blessing.

Secondly, that though thereby you may offend great men and favorites, yet you
shall have the favorable kindness of the Almighty, and be his favorites,

And lastly, that in so doing, against all scandalous complaints, and
pragmaticall devises against you, God will defend you as with a shield; for the
Lord will give a blessing unto the righteous, and with his favorable kindness
he will defend him as with a shield.

And now dear Sir, having done with my set speech, being often as before I
declare, interrupted by both the Judges, and compelled to skip over diverse
remarkable things in it, as I have before also noted and declared, which in my
judgment was not fairly not justly done of the Judges unto me, who ought to
have given me freedom of speech, As the Lords in 1641. did give me, and the
Commons in Ian. last, as you May read in my Whip for the Lords, page 10. 11.
19.
and then to have judged what I said; so as soon as I had done with a conge
made unto them both, (though I confess I spoke most commonly to Mr. Justice
Bacon, because I judged him to be the little; or the senior) I said now Sir, I
have done, and shall submit what I have said and pleaded unto your Judgments
and Consciences, desiring that if you conceive the business to be of that
weight, that it requires any more debate, that you will take the time of 2. or
3. seriously to consider of it: whereupon Judge Bacon asked me, if I had any
counsel to maintain what I had said, and I told him no, neither did I need
any; for I was able enough my self to do it, and did offer him not only in Law,
but with my life to make it good; professing unto him, that I was very
consident, that Lawyer was not in England, that durst, or would say, one
quarter of that for me, that now before them I had said for my self, because my
adversaries were transcendantly pocent, who by their wills and pleasures, had
in some kind destroyed men of more power and greatness, then all the Lawyers
at the Bar; and therefore Sir, though I am acquainted with some Lawyers, that
sometimes plead at this Bar. yet peradventure, my respects and obligations may
be such unto them, that it cannot stand with honor, justice, or conscience,
for me to desire them to plead my cause, seeing I am confident, they cannot do
it with safety, and for me to expect that from them, or put that upon them,
that in mine own conscience I do verily believe will be their ruin in their
practice and lively hoods, when I am not able in any reasonable manner to
requite them, I should in my own thoughts, render my self the basest and
unworthiess of men.

Whereupon Mr. Justice Bacon, begun to speak and to make a kind of reply or
answer, unto diverse of the things I had infisted upon, and told me, that Sir
Edward Cook, in the 4. Part of his instituts, whom he did see I had very much
studied, says, That no inferior Court could meddle to question Judgments of
Parliament, and after a pretty large speech, told me, I was committed upon a
centence from a Superior Court, whose judgments by Law, they neither were
able, nor could control, and therefore must of necessity remand me back
again, and after he had done, I replied, Sir, it is true, the Judgments of
Parliament is not to be questioned by inferior Courts, always provided, they
meddle with that, which by Law appertains to the Judgment of the Parliament,
which the executing of Laws, in the Original Judgeing and desiding of
deferences does not the least; And besides, Mr. Justice Bacon, you do not, I
hope, in Law Judge the Lords House singly, or the House of Commons single, to
be the Parliament; true it is sir, several statutes in Queen Elizabeth's time,
as the 27. Chap. 8. and 31. chapter 1. provides, That if any find himself agreeved
by false judgments in the inferior Courts, he shall, if he please, by a Writ
of Error, sue in the high Court of Parliament (which I cannot believe in Law is
meant the Lords House And it is the most irrational thing in the world, to
say, that legally no Law can be binding, but that which is made by the consent
of the King, Lords and Commons; and yet to prefor a single judgment of the
Lords, made without all form, shadow, color or pretense of Law; above all
the Acts of Parliament made for 3. or 400. years together, for this I will
offer to all the Lawyers in England, and challeng them, to show me one Statute,
or a piece of a Statute, to justify the Lords proceedings against me in Law,
and I will be willing to lose my head, and to be cut in ten thousand pieces;
and besides, it is most irrational for the Lords, who never pertended to any
power, but what they derived from the King, to immagine or go about to make the
world believe, that they can by their wills destroy all the Laws of England,
(as in their dealing with me they have done) when the King their fountain of
power, can do no Judicial action, but by his Courts of Justice; and that in
the legal method, manner, or process of the Law (although by Law a thousand
times more is given and instated into him, then unto all the Lords of England)
and for the truth of this, see the 2. part inst. f. 168, 186. 187). yea, if the
King imprison me illegally by his own Warrant, either in matter or form, I
have my remedy against him at law, as appears by the Act that abolished the
Star Chamber; and therefore, it is the height of erationally, to conceive, or
say, that the Lords will, shall be Lord Paramount, above the will of the King,
their Fountain and Creator, and the power of the Law, which is above Him, from
whom they derive all they have, or can pretend unto; and I am sure the law
tells me, that in the Courts of Justice, which is established and bounded by
the law, and is administered, adjudged, and executed by sundry Judges and
Ministers of the Law, is betrusted a full and ample power, for trial of
property of lands and goods, and for the conservation of the people of this
Realm in peace and quietness; but I am sure by the Judges remitting of me back
to prison there is a failer of Justice (which the Law abhors) and an
insufficiency in the Law to deliver me from destruction, by lust, will and
pleasure, and therefore without dispute slaves are the people of Eng. in the
highest and slaves they must continue, if they spedily rouse not up their
spirits and stand stiffly for their rights.
single) for the further and due examination of the said judgment, in such
manner, as is used in erroneous judgments in the Court of Kings Bench; but the
law gives not the Parliament, much less the single House of Lords, the least
cognizance in the world, originally to meddle with any thing betwixt party and
party, and if they do, I am sure by the law in force at this day, it is little
non judicii; but the Lords originally summoned me to their Bar, be for any
charge exhibited, or any indictment proferred, or any visible complanant or
prosecutor appearing, and their high commission and Span^sh I^ quisition-like,
examined me upon interrogatories, and so committed me to prison, for which they
have no shadow of ground in law: Whereupon Mr. Justice Roll stepped up, and
confirmed that which his Brother Bacon had already said, telling me, that the
Chancery, and the Court of Admirals proceedings were diverse from those
statutes I had alleged, as well as the proceedings in Parliament were, and
yet were Lex terrae, and it is positively (said he) the law of the Land, that
an inferior court as ours is, cannot reverse the judgment of a superior
Court, as the Lords are, which we must of necessity do, if we should release
you, which we cannot do if we would, without meddling with the merit of the
cause from the beginning, and then the way ought to be by writ of Error, which
said he will not lie in this Court, in a Judgment given in the Lords House; and
therefore you must rest content, and it had been well for you, you had pleaded
these things before the Lords in your plea there aaginst their jurisdiction;
Sir, said I, I did so, and they sent me to prison therefore, and not only so,
but in Newgate close imprisoned me therefore, and would not suffer my; wife to
come into the Prison yard, so much as to speak with me; I also appealed to the
House of Commons: and solely put my self upon their Justice and Judgment, but
I sound them, for almost these two years together deaf, both unto Justice, Law
and reason; and now as my last legal refuge, I come to you, after I have been
almost two years in Prison for nothing, as clearly appears by the whole
return, which only consists in generals, and generals are no crim^ in Law;
therefore Sir, J beseech you, tell me whether the Law of England be so
imperfect, that it has provided no remedy, to preserve a man from destruction,
by lust, will and pleasure, but if it have not, then Sir, I must ingenuously
tell you, so much am I an Englishman, and free from the principals of slavery,
that though I have suffered, and undergone with some kind of patience, almost
two years imprisonment, without any cause, but only by the power of lust,
will, and pleasure, that I profess before you both, and this whole auditory,
that were I this day put to my choice, I had rather choose to combat one by
one, with 20. of the stoutest men that steps upon English ground, though I were
sure to be cut in a thousand pieces thereby, then willingly to be Captived in
Prison, two years longer, by the power of Lust, will and pleasure, without the
hopes of any remedy but from those that tyrannize over me, FOR TO BE A SLAVE
IS BELOW ME, or any man that is a man, but if this be good Law which you,
declare unto me then, perfect slaves are we indeed.

Again Sir, is for that Law of Parliament you talk of, I had thought England
had had but one Law to be governd by, and hat that had bin a visible and a
declared Law, and not a Law in men's breasts, not to be known till they please
to declare it, and then when they do, it shall every day cross it self, and
ebb and slow according to success. Sir, this is no Law at all, and therefore,
here can be no transgression against it, but if you mean a Law in being, but
yet kept so close in holes and corners that none can come to see it, or read
it, but only the executors of it, this is as bad as no Law at all, and as good
living in Turkey, as under such an unknown Law: But Sir, to lay aside all these
dubious disputes about Jurisdiction, and Parliament Laws, and Laws in the
ordinary Courts of Justice; and suppose the Lords have a power of Jurisdiction
in the present case to sentence me, if really I had committed a crime, and
suppose (but no more) that you are an inferior Court, and cannot legally
reverse or take cognizance of their Judgments, yet I desire to keep you close
to my return, which show, clearly, that I am imprisoned for nothing, and
thereby rondred an innocent and just man, and therefore I demand positively
your judgments in that, whether it be so or no; And secondly, whether the Law
has not provided a remedy for me, and for my deliverance from under any power
in England, in case I be imprisoned by them for nothing; unto which, as I
remember, both the Judges spoke to it in the foregoing manner, and if I wrong
them not (which I would be very leath to do) in the conclusion of their
spaeches, both of them ingenuonsly confessed, that by my return it did appear.
I was imprisoned without any crime in law, laid unto my charge, but yet being
committed by a superior Court the Lords, and that upon a sentence they could
not in Law relieve me. Whereupon I earnestly pressed to be heard but a few
words more, which was granted, and I very soberly said, Mr. Justice Bacon, I
have been forth in service to fight for the Laws and Liberties of England,
against those men that the Parliament made me and diverse others believe, would
have destroyed them, and I was I confess, very zealous to press others to do
as I did; But Sir, had it then been told me by those that set me at work, or
had I in my own breast believed i^, that the issus of all our fightings should
have been contured in making the people of the Kingdom slaves, or that all our
fighting should have contributed to nothing so much, as to enable a company of
men sitting here at Westminster, called LORDS and COMMONS, arbytrarily by their
lusts, wills, and pleasures, to have reigned and ruled over us, I would have
been so far from killing of Cavaseers, that I would rather with my own hand;
have been my own executioner, then to have murdered men to satisfy the lusts
of others: But seeing it is as it is, and that I have been so grossly mistaken
in these men's promises, oaths, Declarations, and engagements, which now they
judge as nothing, but have throwns them all behind their backs, I shall recant
my error in believing of them, and persuading others to do i^, and shall
desire to be settled in that which is truth, which is now to believe them
noemore, and instead of being zealous to provoke the People to stand up for
there Laws at their commands, I shall be very sorry for that error or mistake,
or I clearly see thore is none in England of any more strength then a piece of
soft wax, nor the People by there great Lordly promises, were never intended
other then to be Vassels, and slave, Yea the most miserablist of slaves, b^ing
first in sabjection to a Statute Law, and if they transgress that, then the
Judges of the Law are ready to distroy both life, and Estate therefore;
secondly, to a Law of Ordinances, and if they transgesse that which is
sufficiently contradicttory in it self, then they shall by one Arbitrary
Committee, or other hazard, the loss^ of all they have, with out any witnesses
sworn against them, or any Jury pinnelld, or it may be any complaint in
writting preferrd against them, but they shall be distroyed by the will, and
descration of the Committes, for such proceedings contrary to the fundamental
Law of the Land, both Dudley and E^son Privy Cou^cellers, were hanged, though
they had an Act of Parliament to autherize their doings, as appears 2. part.
insti. fo. 51.3. part insti. fo. 2^8. and 4. part. insti. fo. 41.196.197.198.
but yet if a man be never so observiant of both the Law, and Parliament
Ordinances, yet thirdly, Parliament Lords and Commons have a Law paramount
above them both, and which as pleasure shall null them both, and neither of
them shall be any protection unto you, and that it their law of will, lust and
pleasure, more exercised and put in use by them,, then both the former; so that
of necessi^ie slaves in the highest are all Englishmen, now being under 3.
distinct Laws for their destruction; but can enjoy the benefit of never a one,
for their preservation, and therefore for the Parliament to make Judges of the
Law, to executed, is but a mooking and cheating of the people; for they have
left them none to execute, but have superseded it every line, with the Law of
their lusts, wills, and pleasures, for all their lying promises in all their
Declarations to the contrary, and therefore all ye true hatted Englishmen,
awake, awake, and look well about before the midnight of slavery sease upon you.
and therefore Sir, I shall now convert all my zeal, to press all the Commons
of England out of all the Counties thereof, to hasten up to Westminster to the
Lords House, and there at their door susser the Lordn to bore them through
their cares as their Vass is and slaves, being heir actions clearly and daily
declare, they never intended them any freedom, Law, or Justice, and absolutely
it is a vain thing, and time merely lost from their hands to expect any; so
Judge Roll, concluded and said they were upon their Oaths, and as Judges of
the Law, they could do no other bat remand me to prison again, unto which
ipaciently stooped, and came away, but had much ados to get out of the Hall, by
reason of the extraordinary crowde.

And the next day sending to see what was entered in the book about me, the
Clarke or Regester sents me a paper in these words.

Monday after five weeks of Easter in the 24. of King Charles. Tower of
London.
John Lilburne Gentleman brought here into the Court upon an Habeas Corpus, by
Robert Titchburne Esquire, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, and the return
of the said Habeas Corpus, being read, he being committed by the Lords and
Commons in this Parliament of England assembled, it is ordered that he shall be
remitted.

O superlative Justice, was ever any man committed or remanded to prison
before? by those Judges that in open Court declare he has been already almost
2. years in prison for nothing? and now also they have no crime to lay to his
charge, which is my case; but to draw to a conclusion, I desire to fulfill my
promise, and give you a sight, of the return which thus follows.

J Robert Titchbourne Esquire, Keeper of the Tower of London, according to a
shore Writ of our Lord the King, to this scedule annexed, certify, That John
Lilbourne Gentleman, in the said Writ mentioned, was committed, and is detained
in my custody, by virtue of an Order made the eleveth day of July, 1646 by the
Lords in the present Parliament of England, assembled, and then sitting, the
tenor and scope of which Order follows in these words.

Die Sabbati undecimo Iulii. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parl. assembled, That John Lilburn (being sentenced by
this House) shall for his high contempt and misdemeanour done to this high
Court, according to the said sentence, stand committed to the Tower of London,
for the space of 7. years next after the date hereof. And that the Lioutenant
of the said Tower of London, his deputy or deputies are to keep him in safe
custody accordingly; And that he do take care that the said L. C. John. Lilburn
do neither contrive, publish, or sptead any seditious or libellous Pamph lets,
against both or either Houses of Parliament.

John Brawne, Cler. Parl.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London, his Deputy or Deputies.
And further I certify our Lord the King, that afterward, to wit, upon the 18.
day of Ian. 1647. It was ordained by the Commons in the said Parl. assembled,
as follows in these words. Die Martis 18. Ian. 1647. Resolved etc. That the
Licutenant of the Tower be hereby required to bring up to the Bar of this
House, to morrow morning at nine of the Clock L. Coll. John Lilburne, his
Prisoner.

Hen. Elsynge, Clar. Parl. D. Com.

By virtue of which, I the said Rob: Tichbourn the said John Lilbourn brought
up to the laid House of Commons in the said Parl assembled, by wh^^^ afterward,
the said John Lilburne was again committed, to wit, upon the 19. day of Jan.
1647. to my custody, and in like manner is detained by virtue of an order made
by the said Commons in Parliament assembled, the tenor of which order
follows in these words.

By virtue of an Order of the House of Common, these are to require you to
receive from the Sergeant at Arms, or his Debutie. the body of L. Col John
Lilbourne, into the Tower of London, and him there to detain in safe Custody,
as your Prisoner, in Order to his trial according to Law, be being committed
for treasonable and seditions practices against the state, and for so doing,
this shall be your warrant.

Dated Jan. 19. 1647. Will. Lenthall Sp^^^^^.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London.
The said John Lilburn is also detained in my Custody, by virtue of another
Order made by the said Commons in the said Parl, assembled, the tenor of which
Order follovveth inthese words Die Martis 18 April. 1648. Resolved, etc that
the 4. Aldermen of London, Col Lilburne for John May and, do continue in the
Tovvervv thout being removed from thence.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. C.
These are the causes of the keeping and detaining the said John Lilburne in my
enstody, whose body before our Lord the King, at the day and place in the said
writ contained, I have ready, as by the said writ is commanded

Robert Titchburne Keeper of the Tovver of Lonodn.


So dear friend, with my service presented to you, I rest, yours faithfully,
John Lilburne.
Tower the 15. of May. 1648.
FINIS.

