THE JUST MAN'S JUSTIFICATION: OR A Letter by way of Plea in Bar;
Written by L. Col. John Lilburne. to the Honrble Justice Reeves, one of the
Justices of the Commonwealths Courts, commonly called Common Pleas
Wherein the sinister and indirect practices of Col. Edward King against L. Col
Lilburne, are discovered.

1. In getting him cast into prison for many weeks together, without
prosecuting any charge against him.

2. In arresting him upon a groundless action of two thousand pound in the
Court of Common Pleas; thereby to evade and take off L. C. Lilburns testimony
to the charge of high Treason given in against Col. King, and now depending
before the Honorable House of Commons hereunto annexed.

In which Letter is fully asserted and proved that this cause is only tryable
in Parliament, and not in any subordinate Court of justice whatsoever.

The second Edition, with diverse Additions presented as a necessary Apology by
the Author, to all the Commons of England, but especially to the Private
Soldiers of his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, August 1647.
Levit. 19.15 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. Lam. 4.9. They that be slain
with the sword are better then they that be slain with hunger, for these pine
away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field.
SIR,
HAving lately taken upon my self that boldness to speak with you as you are
one of the public Judges of the Kingdom, about an honest poor man that was
unjustly and without any legal authority cast into prison, and finding a very
courteous, fair and rational carriage from your Honor toward me at that
time, imboldneth me the more at this time (being extraordinarily necessitated
thereunto) to write a letter to you in my own behalf. I being upon the
fourteenth of April last arrested at Westminster, upon an action of Trespass,
by the Bayliffes thereof, at the suit of an unjust and troublesome man,
commonly called Colonel Edward King; and the Bayliffes pretended it was for so
many thousand pounds (although I am confident that I never was six pence in his
debt in my life) that they must have extraordinary Bail for my appearance.

So that I was forced to give them two housekeepers in Westminster, and one
stranger, or else in their merciless hands I must remain, although I was very
hard following of my business to perfection with the Parliament, which has
stuck there almost six years, to my extraordinary cost, charge and loss of
time, and although I am confident that it is as just a cause as any is in the
world, and has so been adjudged by both Houses of Parliament, as in this
enclosed printed relation of the trial and Judgment of it before the House of
Lords the 13. of February. 1645. you may please to read.

I must ingenuously confess that it did somewhat trouble me to be arrested in
that manner, having never before in my life been arrested to my remembrance,
and I was the more troubled in regard that my Ordinance of 2000 l. for my
reparation, which lately passed in the Lords house, was depending in the house
of Commons. and I was afraid that it might there stick, if I were diverted
from following it, and I did not know but this arrest might do it, being of
purpose for that end, as I have just cause to believe.

And being in a longing expectation for the Term, to see my Antagonists
Declaration, I found in it, that it is an Action of Trespass for 2000. l.
pretending that I said in October last, that Col. King was a Traitor, and I
would prove him one and for taking away his good name which I scarce believe he
ever had in his life, and considering with my self what to do, I was resolved
to make a Plea at the Bar of the Common Pleas (where you are the eldest, and
chiefest Judge) that Col. King and I, being both Soldiers, were in that
condition to be governed by the Laws martial which were published with the
stamp of Parliamentary Authority by the Generals thereof: And he having
committed many grievous crimes against the Letter and true mean^ng of them, I
complained to the Earl of Manchester thereof, being both his General and
mine; and at the same time, diverse Gentlemen of the Committee of Lincoln, as
Mr. Archer, etc. having Articles of a very high nature against him, pressed my
Lord to a trial of him at a Council of War, and at the very same time, the
Major, Aldermen and Town-Cleark of Boston, came to Lincoln to my Lord, with
Articles of a superlative nature against King their Governor, but could not
get my Lord to let us enjoy justice at a Council of War, according to all
our expectations, and as of right we ought to have had, which at present saved
his head upon his shoulders, although he found cause to casheere him of most or
all his great and profitable commands.

Yet notwithstanding others endeavored to try whether justice could be had
against him in Parliament, and for that end, in August 1644. Mr. Mussenden, Mr.
Wolley and diverse others of the Committee of Lincoln, did exhibit Articles of
a very high nature to the House of Commons against him, and to speak their own
words in their 4th. Article, they say.

That when he was last before Newarke, he sent for a Captain who kept
Crowland. Viz. Capt. Coney.
who obeyed his command, yet sent word to him of the danger that that town was
in, and therefore desired his second pleasure, which was that he should march
who accordingly did, the Gentlemen of the Country, fearing the enemy procured
Major Ireton N^w Commissary General ^reton with Sir Thomas Fairfax.
to send 100. Musketeers to keep Crowland, which he hearing of, took ill, that
any without order from him should come into his liberties, and commanded them
to be gone, who accordingly departed, the enemy presently surprised the town,
and those few that he had left in it, by which means he betrayed the town unto
the enemy, which was not regained without much charge, hazard, and loss Which
blood I say lies upon his head, and for which in justice he ought to be hanged.
of many men's lives.

And in the 12th. Article, they plainly accuse him for betraying the
Parliaments Garrison of Grantham, these Articles with the rest, having there
hung ever since without a final determination, King knowing that I was a maine
witness against him, in diverse of the things laid to his charge, and bearing a
malignant and inveterate malice against me, for opposing him in his unjust and
unwarrantable actions, (while I was his Major, and for discovering of them, and
often complaining of him to the Earl of Manchester, and Lievt. Genesis Cromwell,
etc. to be revenged of me, did upon the 19th. day of July 1645. plot, contrive,
and by lying and false suggestions to some Members of the House of Commons, See
Dr. Bastwicks defense against me, page 8. and my printed Epistle about that
business, daited July, 25. 1645.
caused me to be committed as a prisoner, and as a prisoner, by virtue of that
his unjust procurement, I lay till the 14 of October, 1645. to my extraordinary
charge and damage, yea, and to the hazard of my life, as I could easily,
truly and undeniably demonstrate, but at present read my book called Innocence
and truth justified, page 29. 30. 31, 32.

And yet neither he nor any man for him ever prosecuted any charge against me,
for although I lay so long, yet was I delivered before ever I knew truly and
legally wherefore I was imprisonned, as appears by the following Copy of my
releasement.

Die Martis 14 October, 1645.
MR. Recorder acquainted the House, that two Sessions were now passed, since
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn was removed to Newgate, and had continued a prisoner
there, and that no information or other charge had been yet brought against
him, and at this last Sessions he humbly desired either to be tried or to be
discharged, and it is thereupon resolved upon the question, that Liev. Col.
Lilburne be forthwith discharged from his imprisonment.

To the Keeper of Newgate or his Deputy.
Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

And that King was the isntrumental cause of my imprisonment, appears clearly
to me, by what I find recorded by his good friend, and my grand enemy Mr.
Prinne, in the latter end of the 6th. page of his book, entitled the Liar
Confounded, and by what I find recorded under Kings hand in the 8th. page of
his co-partner, Dr. Bastwicks book, written against my self, for although Dr.
Bastwick be now my bitter Enemy, and his hand be with Kings to the information
which Dr. Bastwick there says was put into the House of Commons against me:
yet I am apt to think that King was the Ringleader in it, because at that
time there was no visible nor professed breach of friendship betwixt Dr.
Bastwick and my self:

Upon which provocation by King, it might be, and I do believe it to be true,
that I might be free in my discourse at several times of King, and the
forementioned charge of Treason given into the House of Commons against him,
and I am very confident it will be made good by sufficient proofs and
witnesses, according to the rules of War, when it there comes to a trial,
but do not own the words specified by him in every particular.

Therefore I conceive it unjust, irrational, and Anti-Parliamentary, for an
inferior and subordinate Court, as the Court of Common Pleas is to meddle with
this business, it being now dependent in Parliament, the supreme Court, and
unjudged there as yet, although the prosecutors are ready at their utmost
peril to prove their charge against him.

Therefore my Lord, in my apprehension, Kings former malice manifested about
my commitment, and his present bringing me before you, are mere evasions and
tricks to terrify me and all others from prosecuting him in Parliament, and
also (under favor) your meddling with it in your Court, it being still
depending in Parliament, and not by them referred to you, is an incroachment
upon their Privileges, and I am the rather confirmed in this opinion, when I
seriously read over Mr. Prinnes Book, called the doom of Cowardice and
Treachery,, he being Colonel Kings very good friend and Councellor, and
therefore his words in this case are of the more weight and authority Titus
1.12. being a professed adversary to me, who citing the Rolls of Parliament of
the 1. R. 2. number. 38. 39. 40 in his 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 pages, which contains the
case of Cominy and Weston, has these observations and inferences from them, in
the 7 page thereof:

That it is to be remembered, that Jeffery Martin Clearke of the Crown made this
very Record, and delivered it thus written in this present Roll, with his own
hand, therefore says he, from this memorable Record, I shall only observe
these few particulars.

1. That the surrender of Towns or Castles to the Enemy, through Cowardice or
Treachery, is properly examinable and tryable only in Parliament. It being a
detryment to the whole Kingdom, and so fit to be determined by the
representative Body of the Kingdom,

2. That the Cowardly delivering up of any Town or Castle by the Governor
thereof, to the Enemy, is a Capital offense, deserves death, and likewise the
loss of it through his negligence or default.

3. That every Governor, who takes upon him the custody of any Fort or Town,
is obliged in point of Trust, and duty under Pain of DEATH to defend it to the
utmost extremity.

4. That the concurrent consent of a Council of War or Soldiers, to render
up a Town to the Enemy before utmost extremity, for the saving of the Houses,
Lives and Goods of the Soldiers or Inhabitants, is no justify excuse at all to
exten^a^e such a Governors dishonorable Surrender and offense.

5. That those who are accused of such an unworthy Surrender of any Town or
Castle ought to be apprehended and kept in safe custody, till their trials be
past, and not suffered to go at large.

6. That a Governor giving timely notice of the Enemies approach, of the
weakness of the Garrison his suing for timely said, and repulsing of the
Enemy for a season, will no ways excuse his surrender of a Town or Castle,
unless he bold it out to the utmost extremity, or Surrender it by the consent
of those, who entrusted him with the Custody thereof.

7. That the violent Battery of the Walls, or drayning of the Dykes of any
Castle or City, or any breach made in them by the Enemy (though extraordinary
powerful) are no sufficient causes or excuses for any Governor to Surrender
them upon composition to the Enemy, while there is sufficient victuals, men
or ammunition to defend them; And that they must in no wise be surrendered,
without consent of those who put in the Governor till the greatest part of the
Soldiers be slain, the victuals or ammunition quite spent, and all hopes of
relief dispaired of utterly upon good grounds.

Which is clear (says he) by the case of Weston, who made a better defense of
the Castle of Outhrewick with 38. men only, against more then 8000. Enemies,
(who besiedged, assaulted, battered it for 6. days together, with nine great
Cannons and other Engines, and pleaded far more in his defense of his
surrender of it, then many now can do, for surrendering of Towns and Castles
of far greater importance, then this Castle was, and yet for all this Weston in
full Parliament was adjudged to death for it.

Thus far the words of an adversary to me, and Kings especial friend and
councellor, and therefore of the more weight and authority. Titus 1.12, 13.

Therefore my Lord, laying all these things together, as 1. Col. King and I
being both Soldiers under one General, namely the Earl of Manchester, who was
authorized by Parliament to govern his Army by Martial Law, which ^aw was
plainly printed by the same Authority, and openly published to the view of
every Commander, Officer and Soldiers, for transgressing against which
Articles, many in a m^rciall way have lost their lives, and no other visible
Rule that I knew off, was to be the Rule and Judge of ^u^ actions, or offenses,
but that Law, unto the power and authority of which, both Col. King and my
self did voluntarily stoop, and therefore (as I humbly conceive) we are not to
be tried by the Rules of the Common Law (which I think no man in the world
fully and truly knows) for our actions committed in our Soldier condition,
which is the true cause betwixt him and me. 2. I did my duty according to the
trust reposed in me, by the State legal and representative, and by my General
from whom I had my commission, and according to the private command of
Lieutenant General Cromwell, which was to be faithful in my place, and to
complain, either of Col. King, or whomsoever I groundedly knew, did any actions
that tended to the ruin of Salus Populi, the safety of the People, or the
State universal, and he promised me upon his honor and Reputation, Both at
Sleford and elsewhere.
that he would do the best he could to have justice done, which is ^he very
life of all societies or Common wealths, and that without which the people
cannot be happy or safe; yea, and he gave me the reason, wherefore he so
earnestly tied me to it, which was because our General with his Army was to
march out of Lincoln shi^e, and that country being lately won out of the
hands of the Cavaliers, there being very few of that Country it that time that
desired Command under the General, (therefore says he) we are necessitated to
make use of Col. King, and to make him governor of Boston and Holland, upon
whom he looked then as an active popular man, who promised to do mighty things
for the good of that Country, and the public.

But in regard diverse of the chief men of Boston do mislike him, I have
therefore (says he) in his behalf engaged my self to them for him, that he
shall be faithful, just and honest toward them, and therefore in regard I
have no large experience of the man, and of his temper, I principally look
upon thee Lilburne and thy Lieutenant Colonel, John Bury by name, whose
faithfulness I can rest upon, and for both of whom I have used my interest, to
place on purpose with him, that so if he should break out to the dishonor of
my engagement, and the detriment of the public, I may from time to time be
sure to know of it from you that so it may be prevented before it be past
remedy.

But King, being puffed up with his command, took upon him an absolute, regal
tyrannical authority over all his Officers, but especially those that were
betrusted in Commission as well as himself, and to do his chief actions by
the rule of his own will without their privytie or advice, something like
diverse of the present Grandees in the Army who by their late actions declare
they have forgot their solemn agreement made at Newmarket, which tended to the
ruin of all that were under him, and consequently of that whole country, he
having treacherously lost Crowland, and Boston put in extreme danger, by his
absolute wilfulness, if not treachery, the making known whereof, with his
carriages at Newarke Seige etc. cost me in sending posts to the Earl of
Manchester, and Leivtenant General Cromwell, then, in or about Camebridge, I
am very confident, 20. or 30. l. which so madded him, that he imprisoned Major
Rogers for daring to go and complain against him. I being in those straights
in regard of the charge I had taken upon me, I durst not stir my self, till
all was clear, without fear or danger of an enemy, he having already by the
Law of his own Will cashiered his Leivtenant Colonel without ground or cause,
and endeavored the appa^ent destruction of Capt Camebridge and all the honest,
zealous, and conscientious men, under his command, which to me was an ill Omen
of his intentions.

Therefore I say, so soon as I durst leave my charge, I posted away to
Bedford, where I found my General, and Leivtenant General Cromwell, and told
them both fully of Kings carriage, and that he commanded his forces to march
forward and backward, where, and when he pleased, without the advice,
aprobation and consent of his Field Officers etc. who were to engage their
lives a thousand times more then himself, in managing the designs he set them
about, and that the Committee of Lincolnsheire had paid him diverse thousands of
pounds, to pay his Officers and Soldiers at Newarke Seidge, but I could not
hear that he paid one penny to any Officer there, and for my own part I am
sure I could not get a penny from him, (yet lying base Mr. Prynn in one of his
late books lyingly charge me with being accountable to the State for above
2000.l. received of him see my answer to his charge in the last end of my book
called The resolved man's resolution,) although I am confident I took as much
pains both night and day, and hazarded my person as freely, and as often as
any Major at that Leaguer did.

So likewise, although the Country sent in great store of provision for his
Regiment gratis, yet he and his under Sutlers, made both my self and others of
his Officers and Soldiers, pay ready money for a great part of it, to their
extraordinary discontent, provoking them thereby to mutiny And so full was be
of arrogance pride and contention, (contesting with all, or most of the chief
Commanders there) that Sir John Meldrum told me, that he kindled such a fire of
contention amongst them that he durst scarce call a Council of War to consult
how to manage their buysines, being there continually in contestation with my
Lord Willoughby, Col, Rossiter, Sir Miles Hubbard, Sir, John Paragraffe and
diverse of the Lincoln Committtee etc. which did so trouble and distract the old
Knight Sir John Meldrum, our Commander in chief, that he knew not well what to
do, when Prince Rupert came upon us, by reason of our own distactions among our
selves.

And I dare confidently aver it upon my conscience, that he (namely King)
was one of the greatest instruments of our overthrow and ruin, and therefore
if Thomas Earl of Lancaster, (Mr. Prynne in the 2. page of the foresaid book
records ( was proclaimed a Traitor, by the whole Army in the 12. year of
King Edward the second; for departing in discontent from the Army, at the Siege
of Barwick, by means whereof it was not taken, and the Seige raised, then I
desire to know what Colonel King deserves, who at the Seige of Newark carried
himself so, that he did raise discontents, and little better then mutinies, by
means whereof the siege was not only raised, but the whole Army in a manner
destroyed, to the extraordinay danger of the whole Kingdom.

I also told my Lord that after the articles of agreement was concluded,
Colonel King commanded (and in a manner forced me) contrary to the agreement,
to march away his Regiment in a hostill manner, with their arms, etc. by
means of which we were set upon by their horse, and forcibly disarmed, which
did also occasion the plundering of us, as violaters of our Covenant and
contract; to the disparagement of the whole Army, yea, and the Parliament it
self, and to the extreme hazard and danger of abundance of our lives; yet King
was so honest, and valiant, that as soon as he saw the storm fall upon us, he
fairly left us, and shifted for himself, without being plundered as we were*
at which bout I lost well nigh a 100 l. being plundered from the crown of my
head to the sole of my foot, and forced over hedge and ditch in by ways for
the safety of my life to march almost ten miles without a hat, or Perewig
(having by cru^ll sickness lately lost my heir in Oxford Prison) britches, or
doublet, boots, or shoes.

I further told him, that the Town of Boston had been in extreme danger, for
after Lincoln was discerted, and Ruperts forces possessed of it, and daily
news brought into Boston, that Rupert would assault it on both sides the
river; I moved Colonel King, that seeing the arms of his own Regiment etc.
was lost, and he in no possibility to defend the Town of himself at the
present, that therefore (the Town being of that consequence, that if it should
be lost, the Enemy might presently make it, the absolutest strong Town in
England for themselves) that he would forthwith send to Colonel ^alton, then
Governor of Linne, to entreat him to lend him at his great need and strait^,
or 500 men to defend the Town, till such time that he could get his own
Regi^en^ again together which he absolutely refused, and told me plainly that
he would never send for another to command and affront him in his own
Jurisdiction, which the Linne men would do, (he said) if they come, at which I
being exceedingly troubled, that he should prefer his own domination before
the preservation of so considerable a Town and Garrison, it made me believe he
in intended to betray it, which I told to Captain Camebridge, now in Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Army.

Whereupon I went to Mr. Major, then as I remember, at Alderman Tilsons, and
told them both, with some others, that their Town was in extraordinary danger
to be lost and they all undone, if they did not look about them presently, and
told them all the discourse I had had with their unjust oppressing Governor,
and told them I conceived all was not right, and therefore I judged my self
bound in duty and conscience both before God and man, to tell them what I
apprehended of things, and how near their danger and ruin was at hand, and if
they would not help to save themselves according to the Law of Nature, their
ruin be upon themselves; they desiring of me to let them know, what I would
advise them to, I told them my advise was* for as many of them to go with me
to Colonel King once again, as they thought fit, and let us jointly press
him to send to Linne for men, and if he would not do it, that then we might
do it without him.

Upon which, we went, and at first found him obstinate till (as I remember)
Alderman Tilson told him that if he would not Join with them, they would write
to the Governor without him) upon which he was drawn to subscribe, but my
Lord of Manchester and the Governor of Line, or some others in authority;
being mindful of us in our straites, had ordered Col Waltons Major, Major
Franckling, a stout and gallant man, with about 400. men, to come by sea to us,
and as I remember, his orders were, that he should secure Boston; upon the
arival of whom, Col. King immediately commanded them out of the Town, to go and
besiedge Crowland which a little before by treachery of his own absolute
wilful negligence, he had given up unto the declared Traitors and professed
enemies of the state and Kingdom.

Of which as soon as I fully understood, I went to Major Frankling, and
desired to see his Order by virtue of which he came to Boston, and told him how
things stood with us, and in what temper I conceived my Colonel to be, and
therefore entreated him to be sensible of the trust reposed in him, and of his
own Honor, and reputation, professing unto him that if he at the command of
Col. King marched away with all his men considering his orders, and the
condition which the Town was in, I should look upon it as a mere design betwixt
him and Col King to betray the Town indeed, telling him how weak and
unfortified the Town was in a manner all round about, being in diverse places
easy for a man with a Pike staff to leap over it, and therefore there was no
way in the eye of reason to preserve it, seeing the Enemies intention (as we
heard) was to fall upon it, unless his men stayed in it, or at least the major
part of them.

Whereupon he went to Col. King, and (as I remember) in Alderman Tilsons Hill,
debated with him his positive command, and with much ado prevailed that
himself and a great part of his Soldiers should stay to defend the Town, and
my self being left by Col. King, with the consent of the Major and Aldermen,
to take care of the town I went to Major Frankling, and desired him to go with
me to Collonell King, to know what Ammunition he had in his Magazine, who
assured us upon his reputation that he had a hundred barrels of powder, and all
things fitting besides, and therefore bid us take no care for Ammunition, and
being very busy in sending away men, Guns etc, to the intended leaguer of
Crowland.

I did not go to the Magazine, to see whether he had told us truth or no, he
having taken a quantity of powder with him, and another sent him, he sends his
warrant to the Magazine keeper, for ten barrels more, not signifying one word
of his mind to me, who was then be trusted with the Town, upon the receipt of
which old Mr. Coney the Magazine keeper, came and told me that he had received
an order from the Collonell, to send him ten barrels of powder, and says he
what shall I do, for there is but ten barrels in all in the Magazine:

At the hearing of which I stood amazed, and told him it could not be possible,
for (said I) such a day I went to the Colonel with Major Frankling, and he did
assure us that he had 100 barrels in store, but Mr. Coney assured me that there
was not one more then 10. the which if we send to him, there is none to keep
their guards (says he) I asked him, if there were not a private store house
for powder, and he told me none at all, then we began to reckon how many
barrels were gone out, since he assured Mayor Frankling and my self that he
had a 100. in store, and all that both the Magazine Keeper, and my self could
reckon, with those 10. in his hands, and all he had since that day delivered
out, was, as I remember, ^4 or 26.

Whereupon I went to Alderman T^lsons, and asked him whether the Mayor,
himself, and the rest of his brethren, had not a private Magazine, and he told
me no, but asked me wherefore I demanded such a question of him, whereupon I
told him all the story, at which he stood amazed, and from him I went to Col.
Kings wife, and desired to know of of her, whether she knew of any private
Magazine of powder that her husband had, and she told me no.

Then I told her all the business, and said to her, that I wondered her
Husband should assure Mayor Frankl^ng and my self, that he had 100. barrels of
powder, when he had but 28. and that he should send for all that he had left
out of the Garrison assuring her that if the ten barrels he had sent for*
should be sent him, we should not have one left in the Magazine to defend the
Town with, being then in expectation of the Enemy to assault us, I told her
for my part I could not pick out the English of it; which I desired the Earl
of Manchester seriously to consider of, who seemed then to be very much
affected with it.

And I being by the General sent post to London to the Committee of both
Kingdoms about his marching to take Lincoln again, and from thence to march
to York; to join with the Scots; I in the third place ceased not to put that
(which lay upon me as a duty) forwards, as soon as an opportunity served and
renewed my complaint against him at Lincoln, and desired it might receive a
fair hearing before the General and a Counsel of War, and Mr, Archer and
others of the Committee of Lincoln, drew up a very heinous charge against
King, and labored hard for a trial; and in the third place, the Major and
Aldermen, and Town Clerk of Boston, came to Lincoln with their Articles
against him, which were home enough, and to my knowledge pressed Leiu. General
Crumwell, to use all his interest in my Lord, that they might be admitted to
make them good, before him, and a Counsel of War, but we could not all
prevail, the reason of which I am not able to render, unless it were, that
his two Chaplins, Lee, and Garter, prevailed with the Earls two Cha^lins, Me
Ash, and Good, to cast a Scotch-clergy mist over their Lords eyes, that he
should not be able to see any deformity in Colonel King, but this I dare
confi^ently say, if there we had, had fair play, and justice impertially, King
had as surely dyed, as ever Malifactor in England did; and to use the words
once again of his own bosom friend, and Counselor, Mr. Prinne in page the 6
of the fore cited book, If the late Baron of Graystock who was a Lord, and one
of the Pears of the Realm, and had taken upon him safety to keep to the
aforesaid Granfather (King of England) the Town of Barwick: The said Barron
perceiving afterward, that the said Granfather, addressed himself to ride into
France, the said Barron (without command of the said Granfather) committed the
said Barwick to a valiant Esquire Robert Deogle, a Leiv. to the said Barron,
for to keep safe the own of Barwic to the said Grandfather, and the said went
as an horse man to the said parts of France, to the said Granfather, and there
remained in his company. During which time an assault of war, was made upon the
said Town of Barwick, by the said Scots, and the said Robert, as Leiv. to the
said Barron, valiently defended the same, and at last by such forceable
assaults, the said Town was taken upon the said Robert, and two of the sons of
the said Robert slain in the defense of the same, notwithstanding that the said
Barron himself, had taken upon him the safeguard of the said Town, to the said
Granfather, and departed without command of the said Granfather, and the said
Town of Barwick lost, in the absence of the said Barron, he being in the
company of the said Granfather, in the parts of France, as aforesaid, It was
adjudged in Parliament, before his Pears, that the said Town was lost in
default of the said Barron, and for this cause he had judgment of life and
member, and that he should forfeit all that he had.

I say if this Lord, deserved to dye who left a deputy so manfully to defend
the Town and also was himself with the King in the service, much more C. King
merely in reference to Crowland singly, who being Governer thereof, and having
placed Captain Cony therein as his Deputy, with a company of men, sent for him
in a bravado humor to Newarke, when he had no urgent necessity for him,
unless it were that the world might see the bravery of his Regiment, which by
his argumentation amounted to about 1400, when Cap. Cony certified him, that
the Town being generally Malignant, etc. would be in great danger by the
Beaverkers of being lost if he should come away, yet notwithstanding King sent
to him again, and did command him away, and put in a guard of slender and
unsafe men, which presaged a loss of it to the Committee residing in Holland,
upon which they acquainted Commissary General Ireton, then Deputy Governor of
the I Will of Ely, and earnestly entreated him to send a strong guard to preserve
and keep it, and he accordingly sent (as I remember) Captain Underwood, a
stout man, with about 100. Soldiers etc. of which when King heard, he was
exceeding mad, and did write a most imperious bitter Letter, (yet as I believe
in the hands of Commissary General Ireton) to command them out of his
jurisdiction whereupon they were necessitated to depart, and leave Crowland to
his own slender and treacherous guard, by means of which, within a little
while after the Enemy had advantage to surprise that Town without opposition,
or difficulty, and did it, So that to speak in the words of the Articles
remaining in Parliament against him, he betrayed that Town, which was not
regained without much hazard and loss the expense of a great deal of
treasure, and many men's lives; the blood of all which lies upon his head, for
the loss of which alone (besides his treachery both to the State universal
and representative) he ought to dye without mercy, by the Moral and
undispensable Law of God, made long before that ever the Jews were a Nation,
or had any cerimoniall Law given unto them, which law is expressed in Genesis 9.5,
6 where God spaking to Noah and his sons, says thus, And surely your blood of
your lives will I require: at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at
the hand of every man: and at the hand of every man's brother will I require the
life of man.

Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image
of God made he man, read Rev. 13.10. But King, though his own hands did not
murder the Soldiers that lost their lives in taking it in again, yet he was
the true fountain and cause wherefore their blood was shed, Deuteronomy. 22.8. Judge.
9.24.2. Sam. 12.9. having apparently, by his wilfulness and treachery, lost
the Town; and therefore wilful blood being upon his head, he ought to make a
legal satisfaction, and expiation by his own blood: I wish with all my soul
the Parliament (your Lordship, and all the rest of the Judges of this Kingdom)
would seriously consider and ponder upon this unrepealable law of God, that so
wilful murderers and blood-thirsty men might not escape the hands of Justice;
and so bring wrath from God upon the whole Kingdom, Genesis 41.10, 11.12. Deu.
19.10. Psalm. 106.38. Jer. 7 5, 6. and 19.3, 4. Lament. 4.13, 14. Hos. 4.1, 2,
3. Joel 3 19. Hab. 2.8. which cannot be expiated but by the blood of him that
shed it, Number. 35.33. Deu. 19.12, 13. 2 Samuel 4.11, 12. 1 Kings 2.5, 6.31.32, 33.
and 21.19. and 22, 34, 35.37, 38. and 2 Kings 9.7, 8, 9, 10 26.33.36.37. and
char. 24.2.3, 4. but especially that you would think upon the grand murderers
of England (for by this imperciall Law of God there is no exemption of Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barrons, Judges, Parliament men, or Gentlemen, more
then of Fishermen, Cobblers, Tinkers, and Chimney- Sweepers) upon whose
shoulders all the innocent blood that has in such abundance been shed in this
Kingdom, etc. lies, for which reckoning I am sure the score is not acquitted
in the account of God, nor ought it not to be in the account of man, For if the
innocent and righteousness of one Abel, cried so loud for vengance in the
ears of God, against Cain, that God cursed him and all he went about, Genesis
4.9, 10, 11. How much more will the blood of thousands, and ten thousands of
innocent persons, that has been lately shed in England, cry loud in the ears
of God, for wrath and vengance against those that have been the true fountain
and cause of it, for shed it is, and upon sombody the guilt of it lies; and
therefore it is but a folly and madness, for the King, Parliament, or People,
to talk of peace, till inquisition be made for Englands innocent blood, and
Justice done upon the guilty, and wilful sheders of it, for besides the Law of
God in Genesis 9. he says plainly, Numb. 35.31. That there shall be no
satisfaction taken for the life of a murderer, but that he shall surely be put
to death, and in verse 33. God declares that the shedding innocent blood
defiles and polluteth a land, and that, that cannot be cleansed of the blood
that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it, and for the
innocent blood that Manasseth shed in Jerusalem (although a King) God sent
bands of the Caldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites to destroy Judah, and
remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseth their King, and for
the innocent blood that he had shed, (which the text says) The Lord would not
pardon, 2 Kings 24.2, 3, 4. Yea, and because Saul (though a King) slew some of
the Gebonites contrary to the Covenant made with them, God sent a famine upon
all Israel for three years, for that very innocent blood shed by the King, and
there was no expiation or satisfaction to be made therefore, but by the blood
of him that had shed it; and therefore because he himself was dead and his
blood could not be had, seven of his sons (of his own blood) must and was
hanged up to make satisfaction: therefore 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 3, 4. to the 9

My L^^^, the u^^^fferable provocation of Collonell King, forces me to present
these lines unto you, and I doubt not, but these will tend to his long deserved
ruin; and therefore to speak in the words of his friend Mr. Prine, "in a case
of the like nature; it is the just hand of God, many times so far to dementate
the very wisest politicians" as to make themselves the principal contrivers of
their own infamy and ruin: for his Knavery, lying in a hole as it were, now he
has by his "arresting me, and bringing me before your Lordship (who I conceive
have nothing to do with the business, being it is dependant in Parliament the
supreme Court of the Kingdom) necessitated me to publish the whole state of
the business betwixt him and me to the view of the world, because at your
Bar I cannot make plea at large to the whole body of the Articles, but must
be tied up, And although King be guilty of Treason according to Ordinance of
Parliament and by Articles of war established by them, yet according to Law,
cannot be said to be guilty of Treason for violating of them.
as I am told, to a single plea, that is to say, to plead either guilty, or not
guilty, unto which I cannot without snares yield unto, besides I must, as I am
told, plead at your Bar by Serjeons at Law, none of which I know, and
therefore will not trust them, come ruin and destruction, and what ever will
of me, Again, my Lord, I must there be tried by a Jury that neither knows me,
nor I them, nor knows any of Kings habituated knavery, nor unerstands any
thing of Martial Law, the only rule to try him and me in this case, and that
which is worst of all, they are chosen (as I am told) by the under Sheriff, of
which kind of creatures I never heard any great commendations of their
honesty, but have heard of much juggling and packing betwixt them and such kind
of crafty and large conscioned fellows, as my Adversary King the Lawyer is.
Again, my Lord that which is the greatest mischief of all, and the opressing
bondage of England ever since the Norman yoke is this, I must be tried before
you by a Law (called the common Law) that I know not, nor I think no man else,
neither do I know where to find it or read it, and how I can in such a case be
punished by it, I know not: For, my Lord, I have been with diverse Lawyers about
this very business, and I cannot find two of them of one mind, or that can
plainly describ unto me what is the way of your goings, so that I profess I am
in the dark amongs briers and thorns, and fast in the trap by the heels, and
enemies round about me ready to destroy me, if I be not very wary with my
tongue, and which way to get out, or how, or to whom to call to for help I know
not, for such an unfathomable gulf have I by a little search found, the Law
practices in Westminster Hall to be, that seriously I think there is neither
end nor bottom of them, so many uncertainties, formalities, puntillo's, and
that which is worse, all the entryes and proceedings in Latin, a language I
understand not, nor one of a thousand of my native country men, so that my
Lord, when I read the Scripture, and the House of Commons late unparaleld
Declaration, it makes me think that the practices in the Courts at Westminster
Hall flow not from God nor his Law, nor the law of Nature and reason, no nor
yet from the understanding of any righteous, just, or honest men, but from the
Devil, and the will of Tyrants, and oppressors. for,

First my Lord, the House of Commons declaration April 17. 1646. tells me, that
their inventions are not to change the ancient frame of Government, the safty
and weal of the people, a most Goulden saying) but J am sure it cannot be i^
the peoples safety, nor wealfare, to have their lives, liberties, and estates,
judged by a "Law, the entrings and proceedings of which are in Latin, and so
without their understanding the^r cases in Heathen Greek or Pedlers French,
and so beyond their knowledge, and many of their rules in the orracle of Judges
breasts, whose judgments many times have been destructive to the lives
liberties and estates, of all the free men of England, witness there late
Judgment in shipmoney etc. neither are such practizes agreeable to the Ancient
constitutions of the Kingdom.

And secondly when God gives his Law unto the sons of men, he does it
plainly, without ambiguous terms, and in their own language, as first for
Adam, the law God give him was plain and short, with a declared penalty
annexed unto, Genesis 2 16.17. and the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of
every tree of the Garden thou may freely eat. But of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. And his law in the 9. of Genesis about
murder is as plain as this, for who so shedeth man's blood (says he) by man
shall his blood be shed, for in the Image of God made he man; and so likewise
when God comes to give a law unto the Isralites as a nation, (yea; and that law
which we call the Morrall law, and observe as binding to us to this day.) he
does it in plain words, without ambiguous or doubtful terms, short and in
their own tongue Exo. 20. and that the people might be at a certainty, Moses
as his Minister, and officer, writ, and read it in the audience of the people,
unto which they gave their consent, Exo. 24.3, 4.7. and after that God writ
them himself with his finger, and delivered them to Moses, that so the people
might be taught them, Exo 24.21. and 31 and chap. 34. yea, and in this
plainness, was the Law; God gave unto them, which he did not only barely make,
and so let the people go seek them where they could find them, but he also
with Majesty, proclaims them openly and as if that were not enough, that so
they might know the Law, and not in the least plead ignorance of it, Moses
declares it to them again, and again, Deuteronomy. 5. and chap. 6. and chap. 9. and
11. Yea and commands them to teach their Children, and to speak of them, when
they sit in their house, and when they go abroad, and when they lie down and
rise up, yea and that they should write them upon the posts of their houses,
and upon their gates, Deuteronomy. 11.19.20. yea and that they should write them very
plain, Deuteronomy. 27.8 and the reason is because the just God has done, and will
do just and righteous things, and will not be so unjust as to punish men for
transgressing a law they know not, and therefore says Moses to Israel in the
behalf of the just God, and his law, Its not hidden from thee, neither is it
far off, it is not in heaven, that thou should say who shall go up for us
to heaven, and bring it unto us that we may hear it, and and do it; neither is
it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for us,
and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it, but the word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart that thou may do it, (so says
he) I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evil, Deuteronomy.
30.11, 12, 13, 14.19. yea and that the generations to come, might not think
that God dealt hardly with them, in exacting obedience from them, who lived not
in Moses days to hear the Law so solemnly published, he delivers as a
standing Law (in future generations) unto the Priests, Elders, and people, that
at the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in
the feast of Tabernacles: When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord
thy God, in the place which he shall choose: Thou shall read this Law before
all Israel in their hearing. Gather the people together, men and women, and
children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and
that they learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words
of this law: And that their Children which have not known any thing, may hear
and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as you live, Deuteronomy. 31.9, 10.11,
12.13. So we see how just and exact God is to the people, in giving them a
short, plain and easy to be understood Law, in their own tongue, and not in
the language of strangers and what care he takes to have it published and
taught unto the people, before he requires obedience to it, or punishes them
for violation of it.

But if we will but impartially read our English histories, we shall clearly
find, that the tedious, unknown, and impossible to be understood, common law
practices in Westminster Hall, came in by the will of a Tyrant, namely William
the Conqueror, who by his sword conquered this Kingdom, and professed he had
it from none but God and his sword Daniel fo. 42. who subdued their honest and
just law ( Speed fol. 424) commonly called the law of Edward the Confessor, and
as Daniel says, fol. 44 set up new terms, new constitutions, new forms of
pleas, new offices, and Courts, and that whereas says he fol. 46. before the
causes of the kingdom were determined in every Shire, and by the Law of King
Edward se. all matters in question should upon especial penalty, without
further deferment, be finally decided in their Gemote or conventions held
monthly in every hundred, he ordained, that four times in the year for
certain days, the same business should be determined in such places as he
would appoint, where he constituted Judges to attend for that purpose, and
others from whom, as from the bosom of the Prince, all litigators should have
justice, and from whom was no appeal, and made his Judges (says Martin in his
history fol. 5.) follow his Court upon all removes, which tired out the English
Nation, with extraordinary troubles, and excessive charges in the prosecution
of their suiths in Law, and says he fol. 4, he also enacted, and established
strait and severe Laws, and published them in his own language Which was
French.
(as all the practices of the Law, and all petitions and business of the Court
were) by means whereof many (who were of great estate, and of much worth)
through ignorance did transgress, and their smallest offenses, were great
enough to entitle the Conqueror to the land, and riches which they did
possess: all which he seized on and took from them without remorse.

And although the agrieved Lords, and sad people of England, humbly petitioned
him, that according to his oath (twice formerly taken) that he would restore
them the Laws of St Edward, under which they were born and bred, and not add
unto all the rest of their misery, to deliver them up to be judged by a
strange Law they understood not, whose importunity so far prevailed with him,
that he took his oath the third time, to preserve their Laws, and liberties,
but like a perjured Tyrant, never observed any of his oaths, and the same
(says Daniel fol. 43. did Henry the first, Henry the second, and King John,
etc. and yet notwithstanding there followed (says he) a great innovation, both
in the Laws and Government of England, so that this seems rather to be done to
acquit the People, with the show of the continuation of their ancient Customs
and Liberties, then that they enjoyed them in effect. For the little
conformity between them of former times and these that followed upon this
change of State, and though there may be some veins issuing from former
originalls, yet the maine stream of our Common law, with the practice thereof,
flowed out of Normandy, notwithstanding all objections can be made to the
contrary, and therefore J say it came from the Will of a Tyrant and an
Oppressor.

But it may be objected that the law it self, is not now either in French or
Latin, and therefore not so bad as you would make it.

I shall answer in the words of Daniel, fol. 251. That it is true, upon the
Petition of the Commons to Edward the third, he caused pleas which before were
in French, to be made in English, that the Subjects might understand the Law by
which he holds what he has, and is to know what he does, a blessed act, and
worthy so great a King; if he could thereby have rendered the same also
perspicuous, it had been a work of eternal honor, but such (says he) it is
the late of Law, that in wha^ language soever it speaks, it never speaks pain
but is wrapped up in such difficu^ties and mysteries, as all professions or
proficate) as it gives more affliction to the people, then it does remedy, and
therefore when Magna Charta, after many bloody Battle, and the purchase of many
hundred thousand of Pounds, was obtained and confirmed by Edward the first, in
the 25 year of his reign, diverse Patrons of their Country, as Sir Edward Cook
in his Proem before the second part of his J^stitutes, declares, that after the
making of Magna Charta, etc. diverse learned men in the Laws (that I may use
the words of the Record) kept Schools of the Law in the City of London and
taught such as resorted to them, the Laws of the Rea^m^ taking their
foundation from Magna Charta and Charta de Forresta, which King Edward the
second sought to impeach, and therefore in the 19. year of his Reign, by his
Writ, commanded the Major and Sheriffs of London, to suppress all such
Schools, under great penalties, (such enemies are oppressors to the peoples
knowledge and understanding of their laws and liberties, that so they may rule
by their wills and pleasures, for the impugning and infringing of which etc
this wicked and lewd King was disthroned, at the doing of which, he confessed,
that he had been misguided, and done many things whereof now (too late) he
repented, which if he were to govern again he would become a new man and was
most sorrowful to have offended the State, as it should thus utterly reject
him, but yet gave them thanks that they were so gracious unto him, as to
eldest his elde son for King, Speed fol. 666.

And Henry the third, in the 38, year of his Reign confirmed the great
Charter. which notwithstanding he continually broke them, and fetched over the
Poictonians by the advice of his evil Council, to over awe his people, and
anniholate their liberties, wherefore his Nobles, etc. sent him express word,
that unless he would amend his doings, they would expel him and his evil
Counselors out of the land, and dea^ for the creation of a new King, Daniel,
Fol. 154

But I desire not to be misunderstood, for in the harshnesse of my expressions
against the Common law, I put (as I conceive) a clear distinction of it, from
the Statute law, which though there be many faults in it, as I could easily
show, yet I desire not here to say any greater evil of it, then that the 14
28, 29 Chap. of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the late act for
abolishing the Star Chamber, are gallant laws, and the best I can find in the
whole volluminous book of Statutes, but in my apprehension, they fall far
short, in a sufficiently providing for that which lately the Honorable house
of Commons says is the end of all Government, the safety and weal of the
people, for in my judgment, they do not possitively and legally hold out a
sufficient security to hedge about, to keep in peace, and to preserve the
splendour, and glory of that underived Majesty and King-ship, that inherently
resides in the People, or the state universal, (the representation or
derivation of which, is formally and legally in the state Elector
representative and none else, (whose actions ought all to tend to that end)
against encroachments, usurpations, and violence of all its creatures, officers
and Ministers, in the number of which are Kings and Dukes themselves, from whom
and for whom they have all their power and authority, as the executions of
their will and mind, for their good and benefit, and to whom they are
accountable for the faithful discharge of that trust reposed in them, as not
only Scripture, but nature and reason, does fully prove, yea, and our own
writers, especially the late Observator, and Mr. Prynn, in his Soverain power
of Parliaments and Kingdoms, printed by special authority from the House of
Commons, August 2. 1643.

2. Although Magna Charta, be commonly called the English man's inheritance,
because it is the best in that kind he has, and which was purchased with so
much brave English blood, and money, by our fore fathers, before they could
wring it out of the hands of their tiranicall Kings, (successors of William the
Conqueror) as I have largely elsewhere clearly manifested, yet alas in my
apprehention, it falls short of Edward the confessors Laws, which the
Conqueror robbed England of, and in stead of them, set up the dictates of his
own will, whose Norman rules, and pactizes to this day yet remains in the
administrations of the Common Law at Westminster Hall, by reason of their
tediousness ambiguities, unceartainties, the entryes in Lattine ( as bad as
the French) because it is not our own tongue, their forcing men to plead by
Lawyers, and not permitting themselves to plead their own causes, their
compelling of persons to come from all places of the Kingdom, to seek for
justice at Westminster, which is such an iron Norman Yoke, with fangs and teeth
in it, that if we were free in every particular else, that our hearts can think
of, yet were we slaves by this alone, the burden of which singly, will pirce
and gall our shouldiers, and make us bow and stoop to the ground, ready to be
made a prey, not only by great men, but even by every cunning sharking knave,
and therefore it is no wonder that Mr. Glyn the present Recorder of London, and
the rest of his jangling contentious tribe of Lawyers in the House of Commons,
were lately such bitter enemies against the great Petition of the honest plain
Citizens of London (which Petition you may read in my printed Epistle of the
31. May 1647. to Col. Hen. Martin page 29, 31, 32, 33 34, 35.) as they were,
that nothing would serve their turns but to have it burnt by the hands of the
hangman, seeing it honestly desires the remedy of the aforesaid grand evils,
which if it should be, down goes the Lawyers wicked trade, which principally
consists in setting the people together by the ears each with other, whose
jangling deviding practizes are as suitable to the peace of a well governed
Commonwealth, as Gunpouder and Brimstone is to quench a fire.

O therefore that your Lordship would desire and solicit our honorable
Parliament according to the late Declaration forever to anihilate this Norman
innovation and reduce us back to that part of the ancient frame of government
in this Kingdoms before the Conquerers days, and that we may have all causes
and differences decided in the County, or Hundred, where they are committed, or
do arise, without any appeal but to a Parliament, and that they may monthly be
judged by twelve men, free of and honest condition chosen by themselves, with
their grave or chief Officer amongst themselves, and that they may be tied by a
pennall law without oaths to judge every man's cause aright, without Fear,
Favor, or affection, and then farewell jangling Lawyers, the wildfire,
destroyers, and bane of all just, rational, and right governed Commonwealths;
and for faciliating of this work, and the prevention of fraud, I shall only
make use of Mr. John Cooks words a Lawyer of Grayes Inn, in the 66. page of his
late published book called a vindication of the Professors, and profession of
the Law, where he prescribes a^ready remedy against frauds, which is that there
might be a public Office in every County: to register all Leases made for any
lands, and all bonds and Contracts of any value, for (says he) it is a hard
matter to find out all Recognizances. Judgments, extents, and other charges,
and two chargeable for the Subject, that for 12. d. or some such small matter,
might know in whom the interest of land remains, and what encumbrances lie
upon it, and every estate or charge not entered, there to be void in law, and
that the country have the choosing of the Registers in their respective Counties
once a year, upon a fixed day, and that they have plain rules and
limitations, made by the authority of Parliament, and severe penalty inacted
for the transgressing them, which penalty is the only way to keep them in awe,
and to do impartial justice and right.

My Lord, I hope you will not be offended at me for my plainness, especially
if you consider the necessities laid upon me, for I profess really, I am not
able to imagine any other remedy for my preservation but this, having had my
Petition about this business, above a month in diverse of my friends hands in
the House of Commons, but cannot get it read.

And having contested above this 7. years, with all sorts and kind of persons
that would destroy me, and having often been in the field, among Bullets and
Swords to maintain the common liberties and freedoms of England against all the declared trayterly oppugners thereof, and having by the goodness of, God
escaped many dangers and deaths, and being in my own apprehension ready to be
ruinated and destroyed, by a weapon inferior to a Tailors Bodkin, (namely) a
Formallitie, or Puntillo in the Law, it has rouzed up my spirit, to charge it
with a Soldiers pure resolution, in a new and unwonted manner, being
necessitated to cast all care behind me, and say unto my self, that as
hitherto I have not lived by any man's favor and grace, so, for my own safety,
I will now be afraid of no man's indignation or displeasure, cost what it will,
and if I perish, I perish, down right honesty and plain dealing being to me
the best policy, knowing that uprightness begits boldness.

2. If your Lordship, or any other great man, be moved with choler or
indignation against me, (as I desire you may not) and shall, endeavor to do
me a mischief, for this my plain dealing, I hope I shall be kept out of danger
by the authority of the Parliaments own Declaration, but especially by those
words of theirs, in their exhortation to men to take their Covenant, which are
thus.

And as for those Clergy men. who pretend, that they (above all others) cannot
Covenant to extirpate Episcopal Government, because they have (as they say)
taken a solemn oath to obey the Bishops. in licitis and honestis, they can tell
and if they please, that they that have sworn obedience to the Law of the
Land, are not thereby prohibited from endeavoring by all lawful means the
abolition of those Laws, when they prove inconvenient or mischievous etc.

And I am confident, that if I fall in^o the hands of those that made the
Covenant, (who are the fittest interpreters of it) I shall do well enough; But
from the Sect of the Adamites Alderman Adams was then Lord Major, and a chief
promoter of the Cities damnable and wicked Remonstrance.
that would have no man live in England that are honester then themselves, and
from the late London Remonstrance that would have all men disfranchised
(although never so honest) that are not of their minds and judgments, and who
do and would rob the representative body of all the Commons of England, of
their Legislative power, and from the executi^ners of strange and unknown
Laws, which destroy and undo men, (though never so upright) by forma^lities
and puntillo's, good Lord d^liver

From my house in Halfe-moon Alley in Petty-France, near Bishops Gate London
June 6. 1646. Your Lordships Servant, and a true bred Englishman, John Lilburne.

The forementioned Petition thus follows,
To the Right Honorable, the Representive Body of the Commons of England: Jn
Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of Liev. Col. John Lilburne.
Shows,
THat upon the difference betwixt the King, and Parliament, the Commons of
England, for the defense and preservation of their laws and just liberties, by
authority of Parliament were necessitated to take up Arms, for the suppression
of the jorces raised by the King. In this war against the Parliament, the
Forces raised in the Eastern Associtation, were committed and entrusted under
the command of the Earl of Manchester Who was since impeached of Treason, by
L. G. C. for being false to his trust, and had undoubtedly lost his head
therefore, if L. G. C. had followed it as he should.
as Major General there, from whom your Petitioner had a Commission to be
Major to Col. King, and particular instructions and private directions, from
Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, to take and give unto them, or one of them, (upon all
occasions) information, and intelligence, of the state and condition of
Lincolnshire, under the command of the said Col King, and of the carriage and
behavior of the said Col. King, toward the Country and Solderie, and how he
discharged his place and trust. Which your petitioner with all faithfulness
and diligence did accordingly, to his extraordinary expenses, not neglecting
any advantage or opportunity, which might further the public service, or
discover the designs of the enemy, or the said Col. Kings miscarriage and
neglect of his trust and duty the said Col King taking upon him an unlimitted
and unwarantable power destructive to the trust reposed in him.

That upon your Petitioners discovery and making known both unto the Exarle
and Liev. Gen, Cromwell, (according to his instrustion and trust reposed in
him) the malignancy, insolences, and unfaithfullnesse of the said Col. King,
to the Sat, in the neglect of his charge, and his bad usage of the Country, to
the great dis^service of the Parliament, and danger of the loss loss of the
whole country, (Crowland being by him betrayed unto the enemy) and was not
regained without great charge and hazard, yea and the loss of many men's
lives, the said Col. King was there upon discharged, and put out of all his
commands and offices, (being then very many Viz. Col. of Horse, C. of Dragoons,
C. of Foot, Governor of Boston and the parts of Holland, governor of the City
of Lincoln and the county thereof. Besides he had a power in himself to levy
money, which he did at his pleasure, and disposed of it at his pleasure to
whom he pleased.
and profitable) but was not brought to trial for his said offenses, at a
Council of War, which your Petitioner and others much endeavored to have
done. Whereupon Mr. Mussenden. Mr. Wolley, and diverse others (Gentlemen of
quallity) of the Committee of Lincoln, in August, 1644. exhibited to this
Honorable House, several Articles, (since printed) a Copy whereof is
hereunto annexed, against the said Col. King, thereby charging him with
several Treasons, Insolences, setting up and exercising an Arbitrary,
exorbitant, and unlimitted power, over the country and Soldiery, with many
other insolences, and foul misdemeanors, all which are yet depending before
this Honorable house, and not yet determined, being some of them, for or
concerning the loss and surrender of Towns to the enemy, through his
treachery or negligence, and so the offense Capital, and properly examinable,
and only tryable in Parliament, as appears Rot. Parl. 1. Rich. 2. Number. 38
39.40. Rot. Parl. 7. Rich. 2. Numb. 17.22.

Now the said Col. King, being privy to his own guiltiness, and well knowing
your Petitioner to be a principal witness for the proof of diverse of the said
Articles, out of his malice and wickedness to your Petitioner, upon a
groundless complaint, and untrue surmises, made by him to this Honorable
House, in July last, procured your petitioner by Vote of this House to be
committed to the custody of the Serjant at arms attending this honorable house
Se before Page 5.
your Petitioner being thence removed to Newgate, but he, nor any other never
prosecuted any charge against him, and after he had laid about 13. weeks
there, he was discharged of his imprisonment by order of thio^^se See my
printed Letter of the 25. July, 1645. and Innocence and truth justified, p. 31.
32 33. 34.
and knows not to this very day wherefore he was committed.

And the said Col. King, the more to vex and unjustly trouble your Petitioner
and to the end to take away his testimony, and deter others from appearing
against the said Col. King, upon his trial upon the said Articles, a little
before Easter Term last* caused your Petitioner to be arrested at his own
suite, upon an action of 2000. l. for pretended words aleadging by his
Declaration, That your Petitioner should have said that the said Col. King was
a trayter, and he gives forth in speeches, he will undoubtedly recover the same
against your Petitioner, and thereby utterly ruin him, and is indeed very
likely to do the same, by these his sinister practizes, if by this Honorable
House, your Petitioner be not relieved and protected, according to justice and
equity.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly desires this Honorable House Will be
pleased, in regard your Petitioner has not done or said any thing against the
said Col. King but what will be proved when he shall be brought to Trial
before this honorable House upon the said Articles and Charge; ( and for that
your Petitioner cannot at Law give any Plea in Bar, or justification of the
words pretended to be spoken by him, until the said Col. King be either
convicted or acquitted upon his Trial, upon the said Articles and charge) to
give Order, and direction to the said Col King, and to the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas, ( where the Action depends) to surcease, and no
further proceed upon the said Action of 2000 l. against your Petitioner. And
for the good and satisfaction of the Kingdom, and the freeing and vindication
of your Petitioners integrity and faithfulness in what he has said or done
touching the premises, to bring the said Col. King to trial (in a
Parliamentary way) that so he may receive c^ndign^ punishment for the injuries
and wrongs he has done, and wherewith he is charged in the said Articles.

John Lilburne.
And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
Articles ^xhibitted against Col. Edward King, for his insolences and
misdemenors in the County of Lin^oln, to the Honorable House of Commons in
August 1644. by Mr. Mussenden, Mr. W Ie^, and diver wh^re of the Committee of
Lincoln.
Imprimis, that to the great discouragement of the County, he does openly
declare, his sl^ghting of men's good affection to the Parliaments service, by
expressing that he ^a^ieth not that men should do the Parliament service
voluntarily, but that he would by his power force them to serve.

2 That he does pay those great sums of money raised by him out of the
County, only to whom he pleases, against all equity and justice,
notwithstanding the Lord of Manchesters O^der to the contrary,

3 That he has publicly declared his slighting the Ordinances of Parliament,
and done very many tiranicall and arbitrary actions, by imprisoning diverse
persons at his pleasure, and exacting great sums of money, at such time when
necessity could be no plea, with many other particulars,

4 When he was before N^wark he sent for a Captain viz. Captain Cony.
who kept Crowland, who obeyed his command, yet sent word to him of the danger
that town was in, and therefore d^sired his second pleasure, which was that he
^ould march who accordingly did the Gentlemen of the Country fearing the
enemy, procured Major Ireton Now Commissary Ireton.
to send a 100 Musketeers to keep Crowland, which he hearing of took ill that
without order from him any should come into his liberties, and commanded them
to be gone, who accordingly departed, the enemy presently surprised the town,
and those few that he had left in it, by which means he betrayed the town unto
the enemy, which was not regained without much charge, hazard, and loss of
many men's lives.

5. That he gives protections for securing both person and goods, to those who
are professed enemies to the Parliament.

6. That he imployeth such Officers as, are altogether unfit for the Countries
service.

7. That he does most grossly and unworthily affront and abuse the well-affected
Gentry of the Country,

8. That he does encourage desperate Malignants, and animateth them against the
well-affected,

9. That he and his officers have imprisoned men, well-affected to the
Par^iament and caused their houses, chests, trunks, etc. to be searched for
pewter, brass, and linning, and threatened that they would make it cost one of
them his whole estate, and that one of his officers would not take three
hun-pounds for his own satisfaction.

10. That at the siedg before Newark such provision as the Country had
voluntarily and freely sent in to Col. Kings quarters at Winthrop, for the
maintenance of the soldiers, his officers would not deliver without money,
although they had not pay, to the extreme oppression and discouragement of the
Country.

11. That he sent three warrants to Cap Bushy at Tattershall, to take away a
great quantety of wool which was bought by Mr. Rawson one of the Committee, and
paid for with his own money, and so the said Rawson is likely to lose his
estate, although he has been a sufferer both for Church and com-wealth this
twenty years, and has made him a malignant, both in his words and letters, as
much as in him did lie.

12. That when the enemy took Grantham, they being beaten from one part of the
town, wheeled about to fall upon the other side, at a place called the
Spittlegate, which Major Savil being then Major of the town perceiving,
commanded Col. King, being then Capr. of a Company there to march with his
Company to defend that place, Col. King answered, that he scorned to be
commanded by him, and rather then he would be commanded by him, he would take
his company and let the enemy into the town, and he delayed so long before he
would go, that the enemy was entered at the said port, before he came thither,
by which means he betrayed that town.

13, That when Comm^ssary James had brought in certain sheep from a malignant
for the relief of the siedge at Newark, being then in great want, Col. King
caused the said sheep to be restored to the malignant, and told the Commisary,
that he deserved to be hanged, with diverse other threatening reviling speeches,
notwithstanding he had order from Sir John Meldrum and the Committee for the
taking of them.

14. That Col. King having promised the Lord of Manchester to raise a great
number of Horse and Foot the said Col. King, as did appear, not knowing how to
raise so great a number, did to the great discouragement of the Country, take
this course, in the first place he cashiered Major Syler, and with him three
hundred Volentiers, which served on their own charge, who with the townsmen
had always defended the town of Boston, that he might press them to serve
under him for pay; And secondly, he did sieze upon, and detain, four or five
of the foot Companies belonging to the Lord Willoughby, and did cashiere some
of the Captains, because they refused to forsake my Lord and to serve under
him.

15. That the troops of Colonel Cromwell, which were lost at Coleby and
Waddington were treacherously or ignorantly betrayed by Colonel King.

16. That to the great discouragment of the Country, he does oppose and
quarrel, with such as have been most serviceable to the Country, and such in
whom the power of Religion is most eminent (viz) L. G. Cromwell, Mr. Ram and
others, and that he imprisoned diverse other very Godly men, and that for
exercising the very power of Godliness, which he did in a very scornful and
vile manner, and still continues an utter enemy to such men as namely L. C.
Berry, Major Lilburne, Capt. Cambridge, and others.

17. That to the great discontent and discouragement of the Country, he and his
Officers did quarrel with, and flight the Committee at Lincoln, which was
settled by ordinance of Parl who were men of the best estates, quality and
integrity, and such as were especially commanded to serve the Country, and
publicly vilifying them and their actions, and assuming their power without
any authority.

18 That before this war began, he was an open and publck persecuter and
scoffer of religious men.

19 That he is a man of a turbulant and factious spirit, of mean condition and
estate for so absolute a command, that he has received vast sumes of money,
amounting to about 20000l. much of which he has levied in an illegal and
obscure way, and issued out accordingly, for which it is desired he may give a
speedy account, and likewise of the rest of his actions.

20. That in a factious and seditious manner, he did employ some Agents to
deliver blue ribbonds to such as would stand for him, and show themselves his
friends, to the great terror, and discontent of the Country, and the harzard
of raising a dangerous mutiny.

21. That he kept about 20. men to wait on him, whom he called his life guard, to
whom he gave extraordinary pay though they were exempted from all duty, except
it were to wait upon him and advance his reputation and awe and affright the
Country.

22. That he did awe and gain the Country wholly after him, and that he might
with better color domineere, falsely styling himself Lieutenant General of
the County of Lincoln.

To his much honored friends the Council of Adjutators.
Honored and faithful Gentlemen,
HAving this day received a message, by Lieutenant Chillington, and one more as
coming from your selves, to desire me safely to state my cause to you, that so
too morrow at the grand Council of the Army, you might be able clearly to
express your results about it, and desires to the Parliament upon it. In
brief the case is thus, after my deliverance out of Oxford Castle, I was made
Major by Lievt. Genesis Crumw^ll means to Col. Edward King, in Lincolneshire, who
several ways betrayed his trust, and did diverse such actions, that he
deserved, by the Articles of war and Ordinance of Parliament, to loose his
life: of which I according to my duty, and the trust reposed in me, complained
to my then General the Earl of Manchester, and Lievt. Genesis Crumwell, and with
indefatigable pains for diverse months together, spent good store of my own
money about it, but could not from the hands of my then General obtain one
dram of effective justice upon Col. King, saying the lose of his great and many
commands, although the Committee of Lincolnshire, and the Magistrates of
Boston, and Lievt. G. Crumwell were all prosecutors as well as my self.

Whereupon in August 1644 Mr. Mussenden and Mr. Wolley, and diverse of the
Committee of Lincoln preferred a formal impeachment of high treason according
to Ordinance of Parliament, and the rules of War, to the House of Commons
containing 22. Articles against the aforesaid Col Edward King, which they
caused to be printed, and which I reprinted at the latter end of my Epistle to
Judge Reeves, da^ted June 6. 1646 in the 4. and ^2. Articles of which they
possitively accuse him, for traitorously betraying Crowland, and Grantham into
the hands of the Cavieleers, then professed enemies (in Arms) to the
Pa^li^ment, and my self being an active prosecuter of King, to bring him to a
trial in the House of Commons, upon the said impeachment, by way of revenge,
he confederates with D. Bastwick then bitter against me, for my constant
activitie against the persecuting Presbyterian Government, and upon the 12 of
July 1645. jointly with him sends Which said lying and false paper, you may
read in the 8. p. of Bastwicks most abusive printed defense against me, of the
9. of August, 1645. and in the 6. page of Pryns base and lying book called the
Liar confounded.
in unto the Speaker or some other of the House of Commons, a most lying false
malicious paper, under their hands against Col. Ir^ton, Mr. Hawlins and my
self, about 60000. l. that then was said to be sent to Oxford by the Speaker,
information of which was that day in the morning given into a Committee of the
house of Commons, by 3. Citiz^ns of London, viz Mr. Pr^tty, Mr. Rawson, and Mr.
Worly, whereupon about 8. or 9 a clock at night by the Speakers means in the
House of Commons, contrary to all equity, law, justice and conscience without
either knowing my accuser or accusation, or so much as being called into their
House, though then at their door, to speak one word for my self, voted by
the House into the custody of the Sergeant at Arms, Which Order you may read
in the 13 page of my answer to Pryn, called Jnnocency and truth justified,
dated in December. 1645.
and as prisoner without any more ado I remained with his man Knight till the
9. of August, 1645 at which time corrupt Mr. Lawrence Whittaker, and the rest
of the Committee of Examination, most illegally contrary to all law, committed
me to Newgate prison, for refusing to answer to their unjust Interrogatories
concerning my self, Which illegal order you may also read in the 17. page of
the aforesaid Innoceny, etc.
and my foresaid malicious enemies by their powerful interest, prevailed with
the house of Commons upon the 26. of August 1645. to make an express Order to
try me at Newgate Sessions, Which mal^cious order you may likewise read in the
30. page of the aforesaid Innocence and Truth justified.
before Mr. Glyn Recorder of London, my professed enemy, and who as I was told
had threatened my utter destruction, and in all likelihood I had hanged for it,
if God had not enabled me fully and effectually to have staited my cas^ with my
pen, which I presented in print to the wo^ld And which by the Author of
Englands Birthright is reprinted at the beginning of that not able book.
and my ^ury, before they passed upon me, which as I was told gave them such
ample satisfaction, that they would not meddle with me, and so by spec^a^l
order of the House of Commons, of the 14. of October 1645. I was freely
discharged Which discharge you man read in the 35. page of Innocence and truth
justied.
without being ever charged by any man all that time, legally with the least
crime in the world, the whole story of my then unjust usage you may fully read
in my book called Innocence and truth justified, being ignorant to this very
hour of the true or declared cause wherefore I was so committed and tossed and
tumbled by the House of Commons, saving but for what I find in Bastwicks and
Pryns abusive books, mentioned before in the Mergent. And being at liberty, I
followed my Star Chamber business, then depending in the House of Commons, and
with much ado, as you may read in the 67 72. pages of Innocence and truth
justified got it from thence transmitted to the Lords, before whose bar, upon
the 13. of Feb. 1645. I had with my council Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr. John Cook, a
fair and just hearing, upon which they made an effectual and legal Decree,
Which Decree you may read in the latter end of my relation of my Counsels plea
before the Lords the 13. Feb. 1645.
for the destroying and annihillating of that most illegal and bloody sentence
past against me in the Star Chamber in Anno. 1637. and within a few days after
decreed me 2000. l. for my damages or reparations, and transmitted an
Ordinance down to the house of Commons, for inabling me to receive the money,
in which House that Ordinance has laid do^ (...) ever since.

But Col King knowing I was the chiefest man he was in danger of, judged
himself not safe, nor long lived, if I should gi^ that money, which would
enable me with vigor and strength to prosecute him, which he kn^w well enough
I would do, therefore to divert me, and to be revenged of me, he most
maliciously and causelessly upon the 14. of April 1646. contrary to the just
priveledge of Parliament, and the common law of See Vox Plebis, page 23 24.
England, caused me at Westminster as I was following my business, then
depending before the House, by whom I ought therefore in justice to have been
protected against him* by the Bayliffe thereof, to be arrested into the court
of common Pleas, in an action^ or trespass for 2000. l. pretending that I in
October before had said, Col King was a Traitor, and I would prove him one,
whereupon I clapped in my petition to the House of Commons, to desire them to
appoint a time according to justice and reason, for the bringing the said Col.
King to a trial in a Parliamentary way upon the said impeachment depending
before them being ready thereupon to justify any thing I had said of the said
King, desiring according to reason, equity and justice, they by order would
suspend the determination of the said Kings action of 2000. l. in the Common
Pleas, till in a Parliamentary way he was upon his said impeachment, either
condemned, or justified, and I improved, all the interest I had in the world,
both in Lievt. Genesis Crumwell, then (sitting in the House,) and all the rest of
my friends I had there, but could not so much as get it read, a reasonable
answer of which Which Petition is printed at the latter end of my Epistle to
Judge Reeves, which you may read in the 20. 21. page of the 2. Edition of it,
foregoing this relation.
had kept of all my present sorrows, and down to Oxford Leager with L. G.
Crumwell J went, to see, if with C Ireton and other of my friends there, I
could do any thing to s^ave of a trial at Common law, till the trial in
Parliament was over, but my journey was to no purpose saving vexation to my
self so left in the suds by L. G. Crumwell, who first engaged me in it, and
promised to stand to me. So up to London I came, and to variety of Council I
went, from all of whom I did understand, that by the strength of the Common law
I must put in no other Plea, then either guilty or not guilty, and likewise
that the Common Law took no notice of Ordinances or Articles of War, nor of
any thing called treason, but what was done against the King: by which argument
Col. King, in the betraying of Grantham and Crowland to the Kings party, had
done that which was justifiable and not punishable, which was more then I knew
before, so that in this extraordinary transcendent strait to save my self from
being condemned by a Judge, whose power flows merely from an Ordinance of
Parliament, in 2000. l. for no other crime, but for the faithful endeavoring
to discharge my duty to the Parliament, in endavouring the punishment of one
professedly under the Parliaments jurisdiction for violating and transgressing
their Ordinances, unto which he himself stooped and sub^i^ted, I was of
necessity forced and constrained when all other just and rational ways and
means failed me, to pen my plea my self, and in print direct it to the Judge,
and called it the just man's justification, now with the whole relation of my
present suffering in the hands of Mr. Saxby. In the pening of which I was
necessitated to touch upon the Earl of Manchesters b^s^, unjust and unworthy
dealings with me.

And the Earl of Manchester being my professed and implacable enemy, (who
formerly would have hanged me for being over quick in taking Thickell Castle)
for my so deeply engaging with L.G. Crumwell, in his charge of treason and
breach of trust, given into the House of Commons against he said long ^^nce
deserving, to be beheaded Earl of Manchester, and for which I am sure ^e
injustice, long since fully deserved to loose his head, For a Member yet
sitting in the House of Commons, with in a day or two after Mr. Lile made the
report of ^his examination of that business to the house, told me that in his
judgment, the charge against Strafford, com^^^mely, was but a toy to it, and
not (...) quarter so punctually and fully proved.
took the advantage (being then speaker of the House of Peers) to revenge
himself of me, and as I have no other cause to think, procured an order in the
House of Lords, of the 10. June, 1646. contrary to the known and declared law
of England, contained in Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, and in Sir
Edward Cooks exposition of Magna Charta, page, 28. 29. 46. 50. printed by two
special Orders of this present House of Commons, for the summoning me a
prisoner, to answer a criminal charge at the Lords Bar, (who by law are none
of my judges, as their Predicessors do upon Record in full and open Parliament
ingeniously confess. See their confession in the ^ase of Sir Simon de
Berisford, printed in the 18, 19. pages of my book, called the Oppressed man's
oppressions declared. See also Regal tyranny, page 43, 44, 45. 72 73, 74, 75,
76. 86. 96. 97 and Vox Plebis page 39 40, 4^. See Judge I^nk as printed
Declaration.
And although for gratitude sake to them for their forementioned justice, I
obeyed their warrant and appeared at their Bar, yet in the manner of their
proceedings with me they outstript the known rules of the law of England, and
neither gave me a charge either ve^ball or in writing, nor never produced
either accuser or witness, but by their Speaker the Earl of Manchester my
declared enemy, most inquisi^ion and ^tar-Chamber like, pressed me to answer to
Interrogatories against my self, which I with all respect and ^oderation told
them, was against the tenor of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, which
practice they themselves had deeply condemned in the Star Cham^er, but the 13.
Feb. before in my own case, as by their Decree fully appears, and given me
2000. l. damages, against them, for proceeding with me in that very way, and I
told them, I hoped they would not now build up, what the other day (in my own
case) they had destroyed, but no withstanding my foresaid malicious adversary
the Earl of Manchester, pressed me again and again, possitively to answer
his illegal Interrogatories, See my relation of all the proceedings then in my
book called the last man's justification, dated from Newgate in June, 1646.
and being for my refusal likely in my own thoughts to go to prison, I was
necessitated out of that duty I owe to my self and my Country, to deliver in a
paper at their bar under my hand and Seal, containing a Protest against their
jurisdiction over me, in the case then in controversy betwixt us, and an
appeal to the House of Commons, (in the justification of which I will live and
dye, stand or fall) my legal Peers and Equals, for protection, justice and
right, against their illegal usurpations, for which very paper and nothing
else, they committed me to Newgate Prison, As appears by their warrant printed
in the book last named page in which book you may also read in my Protest.
against the Lords, and my appeal to the House of Commons.
from whence upon the 16. of June 1646. I sent to the House of Commons, my
legal and formal Appeal, which they received, read, approved of, and
committed it to the special examination and trial of a select Committee,
whereof Mr. Henry Martin had the Chair, who has failed ever since to make my
report unto the house, though two several times he fully examined all my
business. But in regard the bearer is in have and I cannot well for want of
time at the present, particularly state the rest that has past I have enclosed
for your information a copy of my wives large petition, presented to the House
about September last Which Petition you may read in the 73. 74. 75. 76. pages
of Regal tyranny, etc. (...) also in my own book called Londons Liberty page
and at the last end of the outcryes of oppressed Commons.
which fully states my case to that present, being of my own drawing up for
her, upon which I had a new and very full hearing upon the 6 of November 1646
before Mr. Henry Martin, which you may at large read in my book called an
Annotamy of the Lords tyranny, who yet never made my report, the want of which,
is that (...) that causes the continuance of my afflictions, it having been my
longing and pressing de^^re^ ever since to receive their determination, either
to my condemnation or justification.

My earnest and most pressing, and most ^ust desire to you therefore is, to
improve your utmost interest to get the house of Commons, without any further
delay, to command and order Mr. Ma^tin (who in a late letter to me possitively
tells me, he has since he heard my cause proffered to make my report twenty
times, but the house would not hear him, to mak^ the report of my cause to
them. And that upon the report they would adjudge my cause either to my Just
^^ation or condemnation, (i^ being all one to me in a manner which it be, so it
be but adjudged, that so I may thereby know what to trust to) for favor,
mercy, pity, or compassi^^, I crave none from them, but only the benefit of
Law, and unspotted justice, and if I have transgressed the Law, let them punish
me to the utmost puntil^o of it, but if I have done nothing but what is just,
legal, and honest (as I am sure I have not) in this contest with the usu^ping
and incroaching house of Lords, in maintaining my own just, legal, and
heriditary libertie^, and the liberties of all my fellow Commons of E^gland,
which the wicked Lords themselves, have often sworn before God and the World,
to maintane, and inviably to preserve,) I require imediatly without further
delay, honorably to be delivered, with just and ample reparations, But in case
this cannot presently be done, I desire you to importune your honest General
to t^ke my own engagement or reasonable security, and to give me my liberty to
follow my own business, my self (which is now likely to be destroyed by the
unworthy and unjust tempo^^z^ng and ^^d^ng of some of your great ones, with the
unjust and tyrannical House of Lords) which in ^ust (...), honor no^ honesty
he cannot deny unto me, being I am now his prisoner, as he is Constable of the
Tower of London, and seeing that for above this 14. months together I cannot
obtain one dram of iust^ce nor right from the hands of the Parliament houses
at Westminster, though I have not left any hazzardous or just means
unattempted, by all the friends and interest I have in England, either in City
or Country, but am never the better, but am now likely I and mine to be
murdered and destroyed by the blood thirsty cruelty of the House of Peers, and
the wilful and unjustifiable negl^gence of the ad^^tirated House of Commons;
and by the causeless malice of some great ones in your Army, and in this case
you and your General cannot but in justice, honor and consceience afford me
sp^edy rel^efe especially considering your own often printed Declarations to
vindicate the Subjects libertys, and to relieve the oppressed, which I am fully
informed both your General and your selves are willing to do, and therefore I
pray you send me the names of all or the chief obstructers of my just
deliverance by your General, that so I may discover them to the whole
Kingdom, to be a company of ^ug^ers and Apostatized Lordlings, which by Gods
assistance I am resolved speedily to do to the purpose, although they be never
so great, and although I perish and be destroyed for so doing.
for all my unjust, and illegal barbarous sufferings by them; without doing of
which by the house of Commons, (for all the Lords greatness and present
pretended desembling goodness,) they do not do me nor the Kingdom cons^rned
on me, effectual justice and right.

So with my heartiest and truest love and service presented, to you all,
desiring God to direct you to keep close inviably to your solemn and just
engagement and to act vigorously, and resolvedly to the utmost of your power,
in the ways of unbiased justice and honesty, to the speedy and effectual
settlement of all the just interests of England, and to the crushing of all
Tyranicall usurpations, especially in the pre^ant tyranizing unjust house of
Lords, and to the setting of a brand o^ eternal and everlasting infamy to
future generations, upon all those, though never so great and gilded that
visibly and evidently already have improved their power, interest, and
machavill policies, ^^violate, infrindg, and crample under their feet, your
most excellent just and solemn engagement made, agreed unto, and generally
subscribed, a^ New Market, 5 of July 1647. And to req^i^e all your unwearied
pains and labor of love manifested for the just deliverance of me etc. seven
told into you^ own bosoms in this World, and that which is to come, and so I
bid you fa^^ (...) and rest.

Yours very much obliged to serve you the earnestly cries out to you for your
just (...) without which he is likely to perrish, John Lilburn^
From my most unjust and most illegal Captivity in the Tower of London this
27. of August. 1647.

