A LETTER OF Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburns, written to Mr. John Price of
Colemanstreet London, (and a Member of Mr. John Goodwins Congregation) the 31.
of March 1651. about the harsh and unequal dealing that his Uncle Mr. George
Lilburn, and several others of his Family finds from the hands of Sir ARTHUR
HASLERIG.
Unto which is annexed Mr. John Price his Answer thereunto.
Mr. Price,
HAving for some certain weeks by past, been out of the City in the North, at
my coming home, I met with a reproachful caluminons pamphlet, without any
Authors name to it, entitled Musgrave muzled, or The mouth of Iniquity
stopped, Printed by John Meacock of London: and inquiring as diligently after
the Author of it, as posibly I can; I am confidently informed, that it came to
the Press in your handwriting, and that your self in person were at the
Printing house, to look after the correcting of it, and that you are the
Author of it: And finding my self and some of my night relations, somewhat
d^eply concerned in it; I have been at some pains in the perusal of it, and it
may be, have some thoughts, to deal with it as it deserves: but least any
reflection upon slender grounds should be upon you; I judged it but the part of
a man, that has but either a gra^^ of honesty, or a dram of metal in him, to
write these few lines unto you, and to desire of you, if you please within 3.
days after the date hereof, to let me receive 2 or 3 lines from you, for the
disavowing of it to be yours, or else in the failer thereof, I shall take it
for granted it is yours; and further if you own it, to avoid any further paper
jangling, I shall if you please, give you a meeting face to face, with a few
friends of yours and mine; where I doubt not but in every circumstance fully to
clear up unto you, that my Father Mr. Richard Lilburn, and my Uncle Mr. George
Lilburn, have been as faithful Servants, hearty, as zealous, and as honest unto
the Parliament of England, and the true interest of the Nation of England, both
before the wars in the Kings prerogative time, and from the first day of the
late wars, to this very hour, as any two Committeemen employed by the Parl.
in any County whatsoever, in the whole Nation of England; and never did, either
jointly or dividedly in the whole progress of their Committee actions, or any
other actions, any one single act, that in the strictest sense comes within the
compass of the Ordinance of sequestration; and that they both have been great
losers, and not in the least gainers by the wars and troubles of the Nation;
and that they have neither jointly nor dividedly done any one action in all
their public employments, or by any color thereof, that justly deserves to
have them, or either of them branded, as cozeners and cheaters of the State of
great sums of money, as Sir Arthur Hazlerig has taxed them, or the one of them
to be in the Speakers Chamber of late, before diverse Members there: and also at
Haberdashers-Hall, openly and several times; and although most unjustly he has
sequestered the one of them, and endeavored the destruction of them both, and
their whole posterity; and has also strongly endeavored to root them out, for
having a name or being in the County, where they have received their first
breath, and have had their most constant abode: And that Sir Arthur himself is
the man of all them three, guiltiest of every particular thing he charge upon
them. All which (if you decline a fair and friendly meeting, as is before
desired) I give you hereby authority to acquaint Sir Arthur, that if he please
to procure an Order from the Parliament, I will meet him at the open bar of
their House, upon equal, fair and just terms; and in the behalf of my Father
and Uncle George, or either of them, I will meet him face to face, and will
hazard my life and estate, as far as by Law any pretended crimes against them
are capable of punishment, to justify and make good by credible witnesses,
appearing viva voce at the bar of the Parliament, at the entire charges of
him or them, that they shall judge the offender and guilty party: provided his
person and estate may be declared to be as liable to repair wrongs done to the
State and us, (I mean the parties aforesaid) as ours may be to repair wrongs
done to the State or him: and I think this is fair and honest, especially
considering he has ten times my interest in the Parliament. And that you may a
little know, I speak not at random; I must let you know, I lost diverse hundreds
of pounds about 3. years ago, that in probability I might have enjoyed, had
not the malice of a North Country Parliament man been, who made use of a
charge of delinquency, then prefered against my Uncle, to be revenged of me
his Nephew, to my loss and detriment of about 5 or 600 l. that I might justly
have expected to have possessed; of which being acquainted, by my faithful and
never to be forgotten friend Col. Rigby, I hastened down to the Country, and
told my Uncle of it, and all the circumstances of it; and further protested to
him, his crimes should not be my ruin; and therefore if he would not endeavor
to bring his business to a final trial, that thereby he might be cleared, I
would become prosecutor in the States behalf, to bring him to his deserts; but
if he knew himself clear, and would endeavor his justification by a final
Trial, I would venture my life and estate with him, and become his Agent to
manage his business for him: upon which I dug into the very bottom of all
he was charged with, and came to the Committee of Durham, and before Sir
Arthur; and the then Committee, opened his case, and pressed for a set day of
hearing; which Sir Arthur and the Committee granted, and caused the Order to be
sent to Shadford, his prosecutor, a Delinquent in both the first and second
war, or one of them, (I do aver it at my peril, engaging to make it good: now
Sir Arthurs High Sherief of the County of Durham, whose heart failing him, and
his Conscience telling him my Uncle was an honest man, and free from all his
false accusations; for he pretended my Unckles power was so great in that
Country, his witnesses durst not speak the truth against my Uncle; whereupon
with my Unckles consent, I moved, that seeing the Gentleman had a Brother
sitting in Parliament (viz. Mr. John Blaxston) and my Uncle had none, that
therefore in regard he might not doubt of fair play, I desired all things
betwixt them, by that Commit might be transmitted to Parliament, which the
Committee with Sir Arthur unanimously ordered; but after the Order was drawn by
Isaac Gilpin their Clark then sitting amongst them, according to all their
desires, and openly read: the prosecutor Shadford whispered Sir Arthur; upon
which he took the Order, and turned him to the window, and of his own accord
blotted out all those lines and words that ordered the transmission; and in
their steads with his own hand interlined so many lines and words, as made the
Order to amount to thus much in effect, That if George Lilburn would forgive
Thomas Shadford, Tho Shadford should forgive George Lilburn, and prosecute him
no further; of which I cried shame, and thereupon Sir Arthur was overruled by
the Committee, and the case transmitted to the House of Commons, where by
reason of Mr. Blaxstones greatness, my Unckles Petition could not procure a
hearing, till he was fain to print a Remonstrance against Mr. Blaxstone and
Shadford etc. and delivered it at the House door; upon which it was eferred to
the Northern Committee, where Sir Arthur got the Chair in the Speakers Chamber;
where were present sometimes 12. 16. and more Members of the then House of
Commons; and Major John Wildman and my self being my Unckles Council to manage
his business for him: in the opening of my Unckles cause, I paid Sir Arthur and
his unwarrantable dealing in his carriage a Durham to the full, to his face,
before the whole Committee; and Mr. Blaxstone had so much of it there, that I
have heard it credibly said, with very grief he went home discontented, that he
could not have his will of my Uncle; and after that, never stirred out of his
Chamber, till he was carried to his grave: and my Uncle in the conclusion, by
that very Committee, was honorably acquitted, and commanded to go home; some
of them promising him to take care of his report to the House, which being not
yet made, Sir Arthur and his Agents the last year, (pending the said report, to
the high dishonor of the Parliament,) sequestered him for those very things
then charged upon him out of malice, that his Son Thomas Lilburn had so much
honesty, as to be the Countries Agent to complain above a year ago to General
Fairfax, etc. at White Hall, of either Sir Arthur, or some of his Officers,
detaining from the Soldiers, great store of their billet money; for want of
which they were connived at to take free billet of the Country, contrary to an
Act of Parliament.

And now Sir, upon the forementioned Engagement to my Uncle, I have lately and
seriously and deliberately dug into the bottom of my Unckles business, that
now he is by Sir Arthur troubled, and endeavored to be destroyed for; and upon
my Conscience and life as in the sight of God, I speak it, I judge them al so
just and honest, as that I judge my self bound in duty before God and man, to
discharge my foresaid Engagement to him, and to venture my life and estate for
his just preservation, and if I perish, I perish; but if God please to in^ble
him to follow my advise, I doub^ not but Sir Arthur shall purchase all the
ground he gets of him, by Inches, and sweat for it two: so as a friend, in a
friendly way, I expect your speedy answer, and rest

Yours more then ever you were mine, JOHN LILBURN.
From my House without Ludgate, at the end of the Old Baily, this 31. of March,
1651.
For Mr. John Price in Colemanstreete, a Member of Mr. John Goodwins
Congregation, in London.
Mr. Price.
I Must confess, I am now as hardly induced to appear again in Print, as ever I
was to do any thing in my life; and if any other way in my judgment besides
printing, might have preserved my Family from that fatal and causeless ruin
Sir Arthur Haslerig intends, and has visibly acted toward them, I should
rather now have lost a piece of one of my fingers, then thus publicly to have
spoken; but when I seriously consider that story that I have often heard, That
the laying of the knite to the Fathers throat, caused the dumb Child in a
miraculous way to strain it self, and to cry out for help to save its likely to
be destroyed Father I am provoked and compelled to say to my self; and shall I
(though lately resolved in my self, by never so much printing silence) hold my
peace, when as I visibly and apparently see (at least to my understanding) not
only the knife as it were laid to the throat of my Father, but even to the very
essence and being of his Family, (and that for no other crime appearing to me,
but only because they dare be Englishmen, to stand to maintain their own
rights, and will not be Sir Arthur Haslerigs Vassals and slaves, to do what
ever he pleases?) O God forbid that I should live to that day, to be guilty of
that gross baseness; and therefore have I throne fear aside, once again to
appear to the world; yet with this resolution, to spread before my eyes in my
writing, both those Acts of Parliament about treason, of the 14. of May, and
the 17. of July 1649. upon which at my late Trial at Guild Hall, I was
arraigned, and which is printed in the 86. 87. 88. 89. and 90. pages of that
Book, called Lieut. Col. John Lilburns Trial; with the constant looking upon
which, I hope my pen will be kept from any pretended slip, failings, or
distaste toward the State, or the supreme Authority the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England; and therefore this being premised, I must acquaint
you (with an intent that the world may know it) that after I had sent you the
Copy of the foregoing letter by a friend, on purpose to deliver it to your own
hands; but you being gone out, he left it as he told me with your wife. And
hearing nothing from you till the time prefixed in my letter was expired, I
repaired to your house, and had a pretty large discourse with you; but could
not in the least find by you, that you were willing to embrace or forward any
of those just things I had proposed to you in my foregoing letter; but for
answer to it referred me to yours, you had lately sent to my house; which at my
coming home I found, the Copy of which thus follows.

To Mr. John Lilburn, at his house without Lud-gate, these present.
SIR,
I Have lately received a letter from you, importing something concerning Sir
Arthur Haslerig and my self. As for Sir Arthur, I presume him a Gentleman of
that honor and Conscience, as that he is able to give a rational account,
touching whatsoever he is chargeable withal, either by your self, or any
others. As for my self and the Author of the book you speak of, though I
presume my self capable to give satisfaction in a direct answer; yet I have
learned so much from your self and others, as never to respond unto questions
of that kind; and therefore shall leave you to your liberty, how you please to
deal with

Your better friend then you presume, JOHN PRICE.
April 3. 1651.
Mr. Price,
I Hope you and Sir Arthur judge your cause so honest, that you will abhor
and detest to suppress either this, or an after answer to your forenamed Book,
(for yours by your letter I judge it is) or to endeavor to punish the
dispersers thereof, especially considering you are like to meet with fairer
adversaries then your self, that dare set their names to what they do, which it
seems you nor Sir Arthurs former Champions durst not; and I promise you, for my
part, I shall own and avow before the Parliament it self, what I about this
business shall do; but if you do punish the publishers, and suppress the things
themselves; let me tell you, it will to the eyes of all rational men, argue
your guilt: therefore in hopes you will be somewhat like men, till the answer
to your Book come, take this in good part, with the abstract of the depositions
taken in my Unckles case, before the said Committee of Parliament; where Sir
Arthur was Chairman, as is before declared: the Copy of which as they come to
me, taken from the hands of Mr. Nicholas Mould, Clarke to the foresaid
Committee of Parliament for the Norther Association, thus follows.

The Abstract of the cause between Mr. Tho. Shadforth, and Mr. George Lilburn,
referred to the Honorable Committee for the Northern Association, to be
examined by Order of the House, the 5. of March, 1648.
IMprimis, two Warrants were produced, directed to the chief Constables of the
County of Durham, and dated at Newcastle September. 12. 1642. Commanding them to
furnish the Earl of Newcastle with Horses, to carry Ammunition for the Kings
service; and unto these was subscribed George Lilburn, and a seal was set to
them by the name, as the Seal of George Lilburn.

George Lilburn being examined, and asked whether the name of George Lilburn
subscribed to those warrants produced, and the Seal set to them as his, were
his Hand and Seal; he answered that he knew not that it was his Hand and Seal,
saying his Hand and Seal had been diverse times counterfeited, as he could prove.

For proof that the Warrants were signed and sealed by George Lilburn, Mr.
Martin Foster was examined as a witness, who says, That he was a Captain in
the Kings service, under the Earl of Newcastle, and that he saw (as he
thinks) about six years since, about the latter end of November, a Warrant
for promoting the Kings service, signed George Lilburn; but whether it were his
hand or his Seal, he knows not.

Mr. Foster further says, That he knew one Chilton was in Col. Hiltons
Regiment, under the E. of Newcastle, and that he came into the Regiment before
they marched out of the Bishopr. of Durham, which was after the Battle at
Yareham, against Sir Hugh Cholmley, as he takes it, about Febr. 1642. And that
he believes that the said Chilton served for Mr. George Lilburn, because
Chilton made an answer for George Lilburn, when the list of the names of those
which were charged with Arms in that County, was called over; but he further
says, that he heard that George Lilburn was in prison by the Earl of
Newcastles forces, at the time of the raising Col. Hiltons Regiment.

Mr. Shadforth being the prosecutor, examined for information, but not as a
witness, says, that he saw not George Lilburn sign or seal the Warrants
produced, dated the 12. of September. 1642. but says, that George Lilburn did
acknowledge voluntarily in the presence of Francis Wren, and others of the
Committee of sequestrations at Durham, who were then sitting as a Committee,
that he did sign and seal the aforesaid Warrants; saying, that when he signed
them, he would have signed 20. more of the like nature, if they had been then
offered unto him; for that he was then under a kind of restraint.

In the defense of George Lilburn Esquire against the charge exhibited against him
by Mr. Thomas Shadforth.

CAptain Robert Sharp examined, says, That about the 12. of September. 1642. he
was at the Townhouse in Newcastle, where he saw sitting Sir Will. Carnaby, Sir
Tho. Liddle junior, and Mr. Liddle Justices of the Peace, who sent twice for M.
George Lilburn, who came not, and thereupon a motion was made, that the said
George Lilburn should be sent for by Command; and at the third time the said
George Lilburn came to the said Townhouse, whether by Command or not, he
knows not; but being come, he was thrust back by the shoulders,
disrespectively, and the Kings Soldiers being at that time within 20. yards of
the place, where Mr. Lilburn was thus used: the said Rob. Sharp was afraid that
they would keep Mr. Lilburn prisoner, and also apprehend him, and so he fled
out of Town; for that he knew Mr. Lilburn was well affected to the Parliament,
and that the Kings forces had a List of all that were well-affected in that
County.

Mr. Robert Carr examined says, That he met George Lilburn at Newcastle in
1642. when the E. of Newcastle was raising forces for the King, the particular
time he remembers not. And the said George Lilburn did at Sir Thomas Riddles
door, in the Close at New^castle, complain to him the said Carr, that he was in
a sad condition; because Bishopric Gentlemen would force him against his
Conscience to sign a Warrant, and saying further, that he thought he should be
sent to prison, and all that he had should be lost; and the said Carre heard at
that time, Sir Tho. Riddles man told the said George Lilburn, that his Master
required him to come to him.

Mr. Henry Lever examined says, That George Lilburn in August 1642. met him at
Newcastle, when the E of Newcastle was raising forces against the Parliament;
and that the said George Lilburn was then very solicitous to oppose those
forces, saying, he would rather die in a halter, then join with those forces
against the Parliament. And the said Lever says, that they then resolved that
George Lilburn should go to Scotland for help for the well-affected.

Mr. Robert Carr, Mr. George Gray, and Mr. Hen. Lever say, That in October. 1642.
the said George Lilburn went to Edinburgh to Mr. Pickering, Agent in Scotland
for the Parliament of England, to implore him to acquaint the Parliament with
the sad condition of the North, and to desire help for the well-affected from
the South, which Mr. Pickering promised to do for them.

Mr John Smart, and Mr. Gilbert Marshall examined severally say, That Mr.
George Lilburn in October. 1642. at the meeting of the Country, to put the
Commission of Array in execution, did oppose it, saying, the Parliament did
declare it to be illegal and they; further say, That Mr. George Lilburn had
been then imprisoned for his affections to the Parliament, if he had not fled
out of Durham privately.

Mr. Robert Sharp, Mr. Rob. Carr, Mr. Henry Lever, Mr. Gilbert Marshall, and
Thomas Chilton say, That George Lilburn was about the 11. of November 1642. for
his affection to the Parliament, taken prisoner by one of the Earl of
Newcastles Colonels, and was barbarously used, forced to go on foot, pinioned
with ropes, arm to arm, with some other well-affected men through the dirt,
after the Carriages from Durham to York Gate House, having neither fire nor
bed, meat nor drink, for 3. days and 3. nights, and that the said George
Lilburn was afterward removed and imprisoned for above 6 months in
York-Castle, where he was sometimes in the Dungeon, sometimes in the common
Goal. And Martin Foster says, he saw the said George Lilburn Prisoner in
York, in the Kings forces in August 1643.

Mr. John Smart, and Mr. Robert Sharp, examined say, That in their hearing the
said George Lilburn during his imprisonment, was very often above ten times
solicited by Mr. Raphe Hambleton, to give any small matter to the assistance of
the E. of Newcastle, either a Horse or the like, and his enlargement should be
procured; but the said George Lilburn refused always, saying, he had rather
rot in prison then give any thing to that service.

Thomas Chilton examined, being the party mentioned in the Charge to serve for
George Lilburn, in Col. Hiltons Regiment, against the Parliamen, says, That he
never did bear Arms for George Lilburn against the Parliament, neither did the
said George Lilburn ever desire him so to do. And Mr. George Gray, Mr. John
Smart, and the said Thomas Chilton, said that Col. Hiltons Regiment begun to be
raised about the beginning of December. 1642. And Mr. George Gray relates from
the said Col. Hiltons mouth, that the Commission of the said Col. Hilton to
raise his Regiment, bore date the 24. of December. And they all say, that the
said George Lilburn was a prisoner before that time.

Mr. Gilbert Marshall, Mr. Henry Lever, Mr. George Gray, Mr. Robert Sharp,
examined say. That they having lived in the same Country with the said George
Lilburn, have always observed, that the said George Lilburn has been from the
first to the last, faithful and active for the Parliaments service, and one of
the chiefest incouragers of the well-affected in that Country.

Mr. Price,
PEradventure you may wonder, why in these lines to you I say nothing of Mr.
Musgrave, so much reported and calumniated in your Book: truly it is, because
he is of parts, resolution and ability sufficient to answer for himself; and by
what I have heard from him, will rationally and fully do it in his own time;
only as it may be, you may wonder at me for that: so give me leave to wonder at
Sir Arthur Haslerig, that he has lien still all this while, and never
endeavored to take his remedy at Law against Mr. Musgrave, for writing his
Book against him; seeing Sir Arthur has an express Order from the Honorable
the Council of State, to enable him so to do; for truly I and many others can
render no reason for Sir Arthurs silence in that particular, unless it be the
guilt of Sir Arthurs own Conscience, which tell him Musgrave will, if
questioned, justify and fully prove all or the chiefest part of that which he
has said; which I do verily believe in my very heart, he will very fully be
able to do: for as much as I have often heard him say, he can, and desires
nothing in the World more, then to come to a legal trial, or test. So bidding
you adieu at the present, I rest,

A faithful Englishman, JOHN LILBURN.
From my House this 7. of April 1651.
FINIS.

