The Innocent Man's first Proffer. OR, The Proposition of Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilburne, Prerogative Prisoner, in the Tower of London, made unto his
present Adversaries, and to the whole Nation of England, October. 20. 1649.
For William Hevenningham Esquire. of Hevenningham, in Suffolk, these Present.
HAVING sometimes the opportunity to discourse with you, there appeared that in
you unto me, that gives me encouragement to pick you out above all men that
now remain sitting in your House, to write a few Lines unto, in as moderate a
way, as my Condition and my Provocations will permit me: I have now within a
very few days been seven Mo^neths a Prisoner, the Legallity or Illegality of
which I shall not now discourse, having already of late said ^o much in my own
Defense See my Salva Liberate sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower in
September last, and my Discourse with Master Prideaux, Entitled, Strength out
of Weakenes^^.
grounded upon the Law, your own Declarations, and the Armies; which with
other things (it seems) has occasioned your House to pass a special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, to Try me; which whether such a special
Commission, made by never so unquestionable an Authority, be not contrary to
the Petition of Right (which you have so often sworn, and particularly
Declared to maintain inviolably) I shall for brevities sake not now dispute;
only give me leave (and I hope without any offense) to put you in mind of that
excellent and Printed Argument (in speeches and passages of Parliament 1640.
1641. page 409, 410, 411, to 417*) of Master Hides, your quondam fellow-Member,
before the Lords in Parliament, as the then Mouth of the Commons-House, in
April 1641, upon the special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, that was
exercised in the five Northern Counties at York, in which argument, besides
many excellent and observable passages about the midst of it he Interrogates
and says: What has the good Northern people done, that they only must be
disfranch^zed of all their Privileges by Magna Charta and the Petition of
Right, for to what purpose serve these Statutes if they may be fined and
imprisoned without Law, according to the discretion of the said Commissioners
(of special Oyer and Terminer) what have they done? that they and they alone,
of all the People of this (then) happy I sland, must be disinherited of their
birth right, of their Inheritance?

I sh^^l at present make no application for my self, only I shall add a few
more of his Lines toward the conclusion of hi^ Argument in page 415, which I
hope cannot be offensive, being spoke by him that was so eminently Authorized
thereunto* where he says to the Lords:

Truly my Lords, these vexed, w^rne, People of the North, are not suitors to
you^ Lordships to regulate this Court (of special Oyer and Terminer) or to
refo^me the Judges of it, but for exti^pa^ing th^se Judges, and the utter
abolishing this Court; They are of Catoes mind, who would not submit to Caesar
for his life; saying* he would not be beholding to a Tyrant for Injustice;
for, it was Injustice in him to take upon him to save a man's life, over whom
he had no Power. Which Court of special Oyer and Terminer was absolutely and
totally abolished by that excellent Act that abolished the Star Chamber being
the 17 of the late King an. 1641.

But Sir, If it shall be objected against me that you are necessitated to take
such an extraordinary course with me, as a special Commission of Oyer and
Terminer is, because I will not own your authority: Yea, and i^ I so continue,
to deal with me as you dealt with the late King. Unto which at present I
answer, First, the Kings Case and mine is different, for he refused to answer
to his Charge principally out of ^his consideration, Because he had inherent
in him an old received Principle (as appears in his Answer to the Petition of
Right anno 1627 and in many of his Declarations made since the beginning of the
late Wars, and by his Speeches at his Death, by virtue of which, he judged
himself as not liable o^ capable of being Judged by any Power on Earth, but
only by God alone: And as being in any sense, not in the least, for any Action
he did (though in it self never so vile) subject to the punishing part of the
Law.

Now, for my part, I ^oe not in the least, refuse to be tried out of that
consideration, for I acknowledge my self but a bare Englishman, subject to the
Laws thereof, as well in the Penal as in the Directive part of them, unto the
ordinary rule of which, with all my heart, I am willing to stoop, and wish my
adversaries would do the same, and then I believe the Controversy would not
long last betwixt us.

But seeing betwixt my Adversaries and my self there is a difference about the
Legallitie and Justices of Power, which in some late printed Papers and popular
Discourses, is made use of against me, as though I had a self conviction in
my own Conscience, of my own guilt, and therefore to avoid, as much as in me
lies, a Trial.

To ^ake off which, and to lay my self, and my Adversaries nakedly, and fully
open to the Judgment and Censure of all ingenious and rational men in
England. I do hereby, under my Hand and Seal (for that end it may be showed
to your House) Proffer you, beside what I lately Proffered Mr. Prideaux, which
is contained in the 18, and 19, pages of the substance of that Discourse now in
Print, and here enclosed; That I am willing and ready, if they please, to
choose one of your own twelve Judges, that sit in one of the three public
Courts at Westminster, and all or any of my Adversaries shall choose which of
the eleven remaining they please, and I will freely and voluntarily, Obliege
and b^nd my self under my hand and Seal before witnesses, to stand to their
final and absolute determination (upon ^he P^^nciples of Law) for all
differences betwix them (or any of them) and me, although it reach to
bannishmen^, loss of Estate, Limb, or Life, so my adversaries will do the
like:

Provided, the hearing may be open, public, and free, indifferently for both
parties, and that the Judges give their Judgment in writing under their hands,
with their reasons for their so doing to every point of their Judgment. And,

Provided I may for my own benefit, use, or advantage; choose two* friends,
freely to take, as well as their pens will enable them, all that passes, pro
and con, without danger to their Persons, Liberties or Estates; or without
hazard of having their papers (by force or Authority) taken from them; and
this I think is as fair as any rational man under Heaven can desire, and
which I cannot believe you can judge to the contrary, especial^y considering it
is so consonant to that righteous Rule of the Son of God (Jesus Christ)
contained in the Scripture (the volumne of truth) viz. to do as you would be
done to, which is the sum of both the Law and Gospel, and of all
righteousness amongst men.

And I hope this is so fair, that those that most thirst after my blood
cannot, nor will not refuse it. But to make it more f^i^e if they judge it
inconvenient to fix upon two of your own Judges (who in Interest are
positively engaged against me) I will be content they shall choose one
Sch^^ller, commonly called a Clergy man, and I will choose another, or a
Citizen, or a Countreyman (which they please) and I will do the like.

So with my humble service presented to you, craving pardon for my boldness in
troubling you, with whom I have had so little face to face acquaintance,
earnestly entreating your utmost Interest speedily in acquainting your house
herewith, in the publiquest manner you can: I commit you to the Lord my God, my
protector and preserver, and rest,

Yours (desirous particularly to be engaged to serve You) JOHN LILBURNE.
From my Captivity, and Bodily- Bondage in the Tower of London, October. 20.
1649. Courteous Reader,
SInce I sent the foregoing Epistle, I understand that Wednesday next being the
24. of October. 1649. is positively resolved by my Adversaries, to be the day of
my Trial, and therefore I cannot choose but publish this in print, and because
a late Pamphlet-scribler, and pretended vindicator of S. Arth Haslerig, said to
be Mr. Thomas May, the Council of States Pentioner, renders me in his late
false and lying book to be an Atheist, a denier of God and the Scripture, and
given up to all Licesiousnesse, and an absolute Confederate with Prince
Charles, to set up his absolute Will and Prerogative in this Nation; and
therefore not knowing whether my Life will be mine so long till I am able to
publish a Vindication at large, against his base calumniations, I shall desire
you to take this at present, and if I die before more come, let the constant
Series of my Actions and Writings be my future testators) That if to believe
constantly all that is contained in the Law and the Gospel, and to have
confident hope of the Resurrection of the Dead and the Life to come, and
particularly of my own, and to live Conscientiously in all good Conscience, as
in the sight of that God that searches and knows the hearts of all the sons
of Men, both before God and Men, be sufficient cause to be judged an Atheist,
etc. then I am one. And if to oppose, with all my might and strength, all
Interests whatsoever, that would set up a single man, or more, to rule and
govern by Will and Pleasure, without bounds, limits, check or control, be
sufficient grounds to be judged a Cavaliere, and for Prince Charles, then must
I Ingenuously confess I am such a Cavaliere, etc. and I hope so to die, for
which I bless God I am ready and fitted, let it be by what butcherly hands it
will.




