To every individual Member of the Honorable House of COMMONS: The Humble
Remembrance of Lieutenant Col. JOHN LILBURN.
Honored Sir, September 4. 1648.
VOuchasafe to take notice and seriously to consider, That the first week this
present Parliament sat, which is now almost full eight years ago, I presented
a humble Petition to the House of Commons, for justice and right against the
cruel Judges of the high Commission Court, and the Starchamber, and I had the
honor (the same day it was presented) to be one of the first prisoners in
England that was set at liberty by this Parliament, and also received a speedy,
full, fair and canded proceeding, in the hearing and examining of my
tyrannical sufferings; but by reason of multiplicity of public business,
etc. I have not as yet been able to attain to the full end of my legal and
just expectation and right, viz. Reparations for my long, sad and tormenting
sufferings, by the foresaid unjust and unrighteous Judges.

Be pleased also favorably to take notice, That upon the first of August last
there was an humble Petition presented to the Honorable House of Commons,
subscribed by many thousands of honest Citizens etc. humbly to desire you to
put me in the full possession of all your by past just Votes about my foresaid
sufferings: upon reading and debating of which Petition, as inanswer to that
particular of it, your House were pleased to make this ensuing Order.

Die Martis 1. Augusti. 1648.
Lord Carre, Sir John Maynard, Sir Peter Went worth, Col. Bossell, Col. Ludlow,
M. Copley, M, Holland.
IT is referred to this Committee or any five of them, to consider how Col.
John Lilburne may have such satisfaction and allowance for his sufferings and
losses, as was formerly intended him by this House.

Henry Elsing. Cler. Dom. Com.

unto which said Committee at there first sitting I presented a Petition; the
Copy of which thus follows.

To the Honorable the Committee of the House of Commons appointed to consider
of Lievt. Col. Lilburns business in reference to the Starchamber.
The humble Petition of Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn,
SHOWS,
THat besides your Petitioners sufferings by reason of his banishment into the
low Countries, he was I committed by D. Lamb, Gwin, Aylet, 1637. and afterward
had 3 years imprisonment in the common Jail of the Fleet; being whipped from
Fleet-bridge to Westminster, and enduring the cruel torment of above 500
stripes with knotted Cords: afterward being set in the Pillory for the space
of two hours; and by James Ingram Deputy Warden of the Fleet, gagged, tearing
his Jaws almost in pieces, without Order: which sentence was given by Lord
Keeper Coventry, Earl of Manchester Lord privy Seal; Lord Newburgh, Sir Henry
Vane Senior: Lord Chief Justice Brampston, and Judge Jones. And after the
barbarous execution of this sentence, being April 18. 1638. The said Lord
Coventry, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London, Earl of Manchester,
Earl of Arrundell, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Cottington, Lord Newburgh,
Secretary Cook, and Windebanke, passed another sentence in effect for the
Starving of your petitioner, and for the tormenting of him with Irons upon both
hands and legs night and day; and by keeping him close in the common Jail of
the Fleet from the speech of any of his friends; all which was executed with
the greatest cruelty that could be, for the space of almost three years
together, to the apparent hazard of his life, both by starving him, which was
with all art and industry several ways attempted, and also by several
assaults made upon him by the said Wardens, men (instigated thereunto by the
said deputy Warden, to the mayming and wounding him, whereby to this day he is
totally deprived of the use of two of his fingers: All which with much more too
tedious to be hear inserted, was fully proved by sufficient witnesses, before a
Committee of your House, whereof M. Francis Rouse had the Chair, upon whose
report made May 4. 1641, Your House Voted, That the sentence in the
Star Chamber given against the said John Lilburne, and all the proceedings
there upon was illegal, and against the liberty of the Subject, and also
bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous and tyrannical; and that he ought to have
good reparations therefore, which Votes (by reason of multiplicity of business
in your House) cost your Petitioner some years of importunate and chargeable
attendance to git them transmitted to the Lords, which was obtained in Febr.
1645. The 13. day of which Month your Petitioners whole cause was effectually
opened at the Lords Bar, by his learned Council M. Bradshaw and M. John
Cook; and there every particular again proved upon Oath by testimony of people
of very good quality, whereupon they concurred in all things with the House of
Commons, saving in the matter of reparation; but upon the delivery of a true
narrative, the Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, which your Petitioner with his
own hands in the same month delivered unto every individual Lord) they made a
further decree that your petitioner should have 2000 li reparations out of the
estates of the said Lord Cottington, Sir Francis Windebank and James Ingram,
for the reasons alleged in an Ordinance which they passed in April 1646. and
transmitted to your House, where it has lain dormant eversince, and is now
referred to the consideration of this honorable Committee,

Now forasmuch as by the judicial Laws of God, which are the pure laws of
right reason, he that wilfully hurts his neighbor, is bound to the
performance of these five things. First, If it be a blemish or wound, like for
like, or to redeem it with money, thereby to satisfy him for his wound.
Secondly, For his pain and torment. Thirdly, For the healing. Fourthly, For his
loss of time in his calling. Fifthly, For the shame and disgrace; all which are
to be considered according to the quaility of the person damnified: which
reparations are to be paid out of the best of the goods of him that damnified
him, and that without delay.

And as the Law of God, so the Laws of this Nation, does abhor and has
severely punished (above all persons) Judges manytimes with the loss of their
lives and estates, who under color of Law, have violated their Oaths, and
destroyed the lives, liberties, and properties of the People whom by law they
should have preserved: as may be instanced by the 44 Judges and Justices hanged
in one year, by King Alfred; diverse of them for less crimes then has been
done in this case of your petitioner: As may be read in the Law book, called
the Mirror of Justice, translated and reprinted this very Parliament: and by
Justice Thorpe in Edw. the thirds time, who was destroyed for the violation of
his Oath, for taking small sums of money in causes depending before him: as
appears in Cooks Institutes.

And by the Lord Chief Justice Trisillian, etc. who in full Parliament, in
Rich. the seconds time, was attached as a Traitor, in the forenoon, and had his
throat cut at Tyburne in the afternoon, because he had given it under his hand
that the King might create unto himself at his pleasure another rule to walk by
then the Law of the Land prescribes him: as appears by the Parliament Records
in the Tower, and by many of your own Declarations.

Now for as much as your petitioners sufferings has been unparralled, and his
prejudice sustained thereby altogether unrepairable; having lost his limbs,
etc. And forasmuch as by the Law of God, nature and Nations, reparations for
hurts and damages received, ought to be satisfied as far as may be in all
persons, though done by accident and not intentionally, and though through
ignorance: much more when the persons offending, did it knowingly and on
purpose in the face, nay, in the spite of the fundamental Laws of the Laud,
which they were sworn to preserve: And for that the reparations in the said
Ordinance assigned does scarce amount to what your petitioner spent in his
three years sad captivity, and his now almost eight years chargable attendance,
in suing for it, besides the loss of a rich and profitable Trade for eleven
years together; and his wounds, torments, smart and disgrace sustained by his
said tyrannical sentences.

He therefore humbly prays the favor and justice of this honorable Committee
for some considerable augmentation of his said reparations, and the rather,
because his fellow sufferer Doctor Bastwick had 4000 li. reparations allotted
him, whose sufferings (he submissively conceives) was nothing nigh so great,
in torment, pain and shame as your Petitioners) And forasmuch as the now Lord
Coventry, son and heir to the foresaid Lord Coventry, has walked in his
Fathers Steps, in enmity to the Laws, Liberties and freedom of the Nation; by
being in arms at the beginning of the wars against the Parliament, and made
his peace with the Earl of Essex for a small matter, and has since diserted
the Kingdom, living in France privately, receiving the profits of a vast
estate which his Father left him. And forasmuch as his said Father (the late
Lord Coventry) was the activest man in the infringing the Laws and liberties
of the Nation; although a Lawyer and Judge, sitting on the supreme seat of
Justice, and a person (as is groundedly c^nceived) who got a great estate by
corruption) and particularly a man that principally passed, as chief Judge of
the Court; both the aforesaid sentences against your Petitioner: And inregard
the estates of the said Lord Cottington, and Sir Francis Windebank, by
subsequent orders of both Houses upon urgent occasions are much entangled and
altered from the condition they were in, in 1646. when the Lords ordered your
Petitioner 2000 Maskes out of them, and for that the estate of James Ingram
cannot be found nor at present come by. Your Petitioner therefore most humbly
prays, That the greatest part, if not all your Petitioners reparations may be
fixed upon the said now Lord Coventries estate, to be immediately paid your
Petitioner; or else that his Rents, and the profits of his woods, and goods may
be seized in the respective Counties where they lie, for the satisfying
thereof; that your Petitioner may no longer run the hazard of ruin to him and
his, by tedious delays, having already contracted the debts of many hundreds
of pounds, occasioned by the chargable prosecution hereof: And that if you
shall think of conjoyning any other with him, That it may be principally the
Judges of the Law; who ought to have been Pilots and guides unto the rest of
the Judges of that Court, who were Lords, and persons not knowing the Law.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. John Lilburne.

After the reading of which they entered into a serious debate of the whole
business, and thereupon passed several Votes to be the heads of an Ordinance
to be drawn up and reported to the House, by the Right honorable the Lord
Carre, Chairman to the said Committee, who accordingly reported the
proceedings and votes of the said Committee to your House, who approved of the
said Votes, and Ordered an Ordinance to be presented to the House consonant
thereunto, which was accordingly done by the Lord Carre, which Ordinance has
been once read in your House: The Copy of which thus follows.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the raising
of three thousand pounds, out of the real Estate of the late Thomas Lord
Coventry; late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, for and toward the
reparation and damages of John Lilburne, Gent. which he sustained by ver^ue and
color of two Sentences given and made against him, in the late Court of
Starchamber: the one the 13. of February, 1637. and the other the 18. of April,
1638.
WHereas the cause of John Lilburn, Gent. concerning two Sentences pronounced
against him in the late Court of Starchamber, 13. Febr. 13. Car. Regis, and 18.
April, 14. Car. Regis. (which were Voted the 4. May, 1641. by the House of
Commons to be Illegal, and against the liberty of the Subject, and also
bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous, and tyrannical,) were transmitted from the
said House of Commons, unto the House of Lords; who thereupon, by one Order or
decree by them made, 13. Febru. 1645. Adjudged and Declared the said
proceedings of the said Starchamber, against the said John Lilburn, to be
Illegal, and most unjust, and against the liberty of the Subject, and Law of
the Land, and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon Record, etc. And by
another Order or Decree, made by them the said Lords, the the 5. March, 1645.
they assigned to be paid unto the said John Lilburn, the sum of two thousand
pounds, for his reparations; and the said House of Peers then fixed that sum
upon the estates real, and personal, of Francis Lord Cottington, Sir Francis
Windebanck, and James Ingram, late Deputy Warden of the Fleet: and afterward
for the present levying thereof, with allowance of Interest, in case of
obstruction, while the same should be in levying, and of such part as should
not be forthwith levied; The said House of Peers did cause an Ordinance to be
drawn up, and passed the same in their House, the 27. April, 1646. and
afterward transmitted the same to the House of Commons, for their concurrence;
with whom it yet depends. And for as much as since that transmition, all, or
the greatest part, of the estates of the said Lord Cottington, and Sir Francis
Windebanck, is since by both Houses disposed of to other uses, and the estate
of the said James Ingram, is so small and weak, and so entangled with former
encumbrances, that it can afford little or no part unto the said John Lilburn,
of the said reparation. And for that the said late Lord Coventry, was the
principal Judge; and chief Actor, in the giving of both the said Illegal
Sentences, in the said Court of Starchamber; and for the barbarous inflicting
of punishments thereupon:

Therefore, and for satisfaction of the said two thousand pounds, and for the
increase of reparation unto the said John Lilburne for his extraordinary
wrongs, sufferings and losses thereby sustained, and the long time hitherto
elapsed without any satisfaction. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament
do ordain, And be it hereby ordained by the said Lords and Commons and by
Authority of the same, That the said John Lilburne shall have and receive the
sum of three thousand pounds, out of all, or any the Mannours, Mesuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof he the said late Thomas Lord
Coventry, or any other person or persons to or for his use, or in trust for
him, was or were seized in see-simple or see-raile or other wise, at the time
of the said sentences or decrees or of either of them, in the said late Court
of Star Chamber, or fince within the Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales,
any Order or Ordinance heretofore made by either or both Houses of Parliament
for the employment of the estate of the said late Thomas Lord Coventry to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. And for the more speedy levying of
the said sum of three thousand pounds, It is further Ordered and Ordained,
That the several and respective Sheriffs, of the several and respective
Counties, within England and Wales, wherein any of the said Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments do lie, shall forthwith upon sight, and by virtue of this
Ordinance cause an inquisition to be made, and taken by the oaths of twelve or
more Iawfull men, where the same lands do lie, and what the same are and do
contain, and of the clear yearly value thereof, over and above all charges and
re-prises; and after such inquisition so made and taken, the said several and
respective Sheriffs, shall deliver unto the said John Lilburn true copies in
Parchment of the same inquisitions by them taken, and shall then also deliver
unto the said John Lilburne the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which
shall be so comprised or mentioned in the said inquisitions. To have and to
hold, to him the said John Lilburne and his assigns without impeachment of
wast; and until he shall have received out of the issues and profits thereof
(to be estimated according to the yearly valews contained in the said
inquisitions) the said sum of three thousand pounds; together with all
reasonable charges and expenses to be sustained from henceforth for obtaining
the said sum of three thousand pounds: And all and every the said several
and respective Sheriffs, and all other person and persons whatsoever that shall
any ways act or assist in obedience to this Ordinance, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, shall be therefore defended and kept harmless by
the authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Be pleased further to take notice, That after the foresaid Ordinanance, was
once read it came to a debate in your House for to be read the second time,
which was carried in the negative by majority of voices; and I cannot but
apprehend that there were diverse in the House unsatisfied in the Ordinance it
self, in regard the House was divided upon the debate and Vote, which I cannot
but apprehend must flow from one of these two considerations.

Frist, Either because that the whole reparations is fixed upon the Lord
Coventries estate singly, who had many copartners in the sentences, and who
also it may be supposed has explated his crime by his death. Or else secondly,
Because in some men's thoughts, some of my late actions have (or are) been so
evil in themselves that they may seem to them to over balance the merrits of
all my ancient sufferings.

To the first of which, besides the reasons contained in the foregoing
Petition, I humbly crave leave to offer these unto your juditious consideration.

First, I have by almost eight years dear-bought experience, found the interest
of some of my forementioned potent Judges (who yet fit in both Houses of
Parliament) to be too strong for me to grapple with (and the only cause in my
apprehension that has all this while kept me from my own) and the refore my own
interest (which compels me strongly to endeavor by all just ways and means to
attain to my just end reparations) necessiates me as much as I can to wave the
fixing upon them.

Secondly, I continually find amongst the greatest part of my Judges an
apprehention in their own spirits, that in conscience and equity there ought to
be favor showed to those of my Star Chamber Judges that have joined with the
Parliament and Kingdom, rather then to those that have fought and contested
against them both and that seeing the later are able enough in estates to make
satisfaction, it ought in conscience and equity soly to lie upon their heads;
and I being not to guide or command my Judges, but rather to be in this guided
and commanded by them, and to acquiese in their reasons they give me,
especially when my own understanding tells me they most conduce to the obtaining
my main end, which is justice in the possessing of my own. Now these things
considered, and conjoined to the reasons laid down in my foregoing Petition, I
submissively conceive, as things now stand, in Law, equity and conscience, no
juster object can be found for you to fix my reparations upon then the real
estate (wherever it is to be found) of the late Thomas Lord Coventry, who was
the principal actor in this bloody tragidy: and who was not less eminent in
cruelty then in place, being Judge of the highest seat of mercy, the Chancery,
which ought to abate the edge of the Law, when it is too keen: Now for the
chief Judge of mercy to degenerate into a savage cauelty, not heard of amongst
the barbarians, nor to be read of in the histories of the bloodyest
persecutors, how trancendently heinous and punishable is it?

And though he be dead, yet justice lives; and whatsoever is become of him, his
estate ought to make satisfaction, according to the rule of his own court of
Star Chamber, he that suffers not in his body, must suffer in his purse. And
therefore I may justly expect my reparations out of his real estate that he was
possessor of at his death, where ever I can now find it; whether it be in the
possession of the present Lord Coventry, or others; and you may there as
righteous judges fix it for these reasons;

First, Because the said Tho. late Lord Coventries real estate, in equity, if
not in the eye of the Common law, ought to satisfy his debts, though dead;
though now it be in the possession of the present Lord Coventry etc. and in
reason and conscience there is at least as much equity that it should repair
injuries, especially of so high a nature as mine is of; and the rather, if it
be considered that the late Lordkeeper Coventry had, besides his real estate, a
very considerable personal estate at his death; which I desire not to meddle
with, although it be descended to his heirs etc.

Secondly, Because the estate now in the hands of the son and heir, etc. of
the late Lord Keeper Coventry descended from him, and was in the hands of the
said late Lord Keeper Coventry himself, at the time and some years after his
passing the forementioned two illegal and barbarous sentences against me. Now
in case I could have enjoyed the benefit of the Law then, or immediately after
they were passed against me, I might by an action of the case have had at Law
satisfactory damages out of his estate: And if there was any Law or equity for
reparations to be given me out of his estate then, the equity and justice of
the case is nothing altered by the said late Lord Coventries desease, and
bequest of the same estate to the present Lord Coventry his Son or others

Thirdly, because the late Lord keeper Coventries, passing such sentences as he
did against me, was (as may appear by the Votes of your own House, made in the
case, 4. May, 1641.) a subversion of the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions
of the Land, and in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, that was adjudged
Treason: And in the case of Treason, the Law does dis-inherit and dis-franchise
all the posterity of any one adjudged guilty thereof; therefore my reparations
for transcendent injuries, done in such an extraordinary case, out of the
estate of the Father, though it be descended to the Son, or Sons, etc. is no
injury to them in equity nor conscience: neither do I conceive, that in case
this Parliament should impose a Fine of ten-times as much as my reparations
amounts unto, out of the aforesaid late Lord Coventries vast estate, to be paid
to the public pur^e of the Kingdom, for the satisfaction of the public
Justice thereof, and the expiation of his notorious and suparlative crimes,
could not in the least, in equity, reason and conscience, be esteemed unjust in
the eye of any impartial, righteous, or just man in England; And so much in
Answer to the first Objection.

And now with all respect to the Just Honor of Parliament, a word or two to
the second: which is, That it may be in some Parliament Men's thoughts, the evil
of some of my late actions, may way down the merit and desert of all my ancient
sufferings; and therefore to quit scores with me, without passing my Ordinance
for Star chamber reparation is to large Justice in the strictness of Justice
for me?

To which with all modesty and respect, I Answer:

Admit my late actions were as vilde, and as punishable, as by the worst of my
enemies can be supposed to be, yet there can be no Justice in quiting scores
with me therefore; and the reason is, because that were not only to punish me
for good actions done, which my sufferings against the Starchamber was, and was
almost eight-years ago so adjudged by your own Votes: but it were also to
acquit and gratify the guilty and obnoxious, which the present Lord ( Coventry
upon your own principles) is, as well as his Father was: and the Spirit of
truth says, To justify the wicked, and to condemn the Righteous is both, an
abomination in the sight of God.

Secondly, I answer: It is not now seasonable for me to justify my self, but
rather to entreat you to do me Justice and right, in passing my present
Ordinance without any more delay, for my reparations; wherein I have deserved
well, by your own often and ancient confessions, before ever you had any
pretense to fix upon me, or lay unto my charge; and when you have so done, if
for any subsequent actions, any of you be offended at me; I will put you in
sufficient and good Security to answer the Law, without interceding for mercy
or compassion: But O if you be men of gallantry, Justice, honesty, or
conscience, punish not my poor and afflicted Wife, and tender Babes, for my
pretended transgressions, by exposing them to famish, or eat one another, by
keeping my own from me, which should preserve them alive, voted unto me by your
selves, almost eight years ago; and when you have done; do your pleasure with
me, even whatsoever seems good in your eyes: rather then expose me to see my
dearest Consort, and the tender offspring of our wombs, to perish before my
eyes; which I must ingeniously confess, the strength of duty, and natural
indeared affections, will not enable me to behold, with patience and silence:
So desiring God to direct your hearts, now at the last, to do just and
righteous things to me, and the Kingdom, for just and righteous ends. I take
leave, in sincerity, to subscribe my self,

From the Tower of London this 4. September. 1648. Yours, to the last drop of my
heart blood, either you be Gods, or your Countries) JOHN LILBURN.

Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness:

2 Peter, 3.13.
FINIS.

