The Reasons of Lieu Col. Lilbournes sending his Letter to Mr. Prin, humbly
presented to the Honorable Committee of Examinations.
Making my appearance (upon Summons) before this Honorable Committee, To
Answer, to the Complaint of Mr. Prin, for publishing in Print a Letter which I
had sent unto him.

And having upon demand, acknowledged the publishing thereof, I humbly
entreated that I might have the favor, to render the Reasons of my so doing:
which you were pleased to grant, and to enjoin me to bring them in writing; For
which I esteem my self farther obliged unto this Honorable Committee.

Unto whose grave Considerations I humbly present my said Reasons as follows.

Wherein I humbly entreat I may not appear arrogant or vainglorious, though I
enlarge my self in Relation of my own condition and actions, it being a
necessity enforced upon me by my accuser Mr. Prinne.

MAy it please You then to remember, and seriously to consider, the manifold
afflictions I suffered for many years under the tyrannical power of the
Bishops, and Star Chamber: having for defense of the common and just Freedom
of this Nation, in opposition to the Oath Ex Officio, and other exorbitances in
things civil and religious; suffered a most cruel and reproachful sentence,
and had at least 200 stripes: and after that a most noisome and painful close
imprisonment, and ten weeks lying in Irons; being in continual and real
danger of my life by attempts of secret poison, open violence, and famishing,
to the extreme impairing of my health long after my deliverance.

That this Parliament (the hope of the oppressed) no sooner sat, but as being
most sensible of grievances of that nature, they made it their principal work
(as most acceptable unto God) to deliver the Captives, and to set the oppressed
free, especially those that had been oppressed for Conscience sake: Amongst
whom (which I shall never forget) this Honorable Parliament were pleased to
take me into their first and most compassionate thoughts; and delivered me out
of all my troubles.

And as this their tender compassion wrought in all sorts of conscientious
people a thankful acknowledgement of their piety and goodness toward tender
consciences, so more especially in me as I was a more large partaker of their
immediate goodness; insomuch that I with thousands more were instantly ready
on all occasions to adventure our lives in defense of so just, and pious an
Authority: which we frequently and successefully testified at Westminster in
the most dangerous and doubtful times, to the terror of their enemies.

Nor did our affections or gratitude cool within us; but as the necessities of
the Parliament increased, and the malice of their enemies introducing new; we
forsook all that was dear unto us, and voluntarily betook our selves to Arms in
their just defense. And first at Kienton Field gave proof of our Constancy and
Resolution: Secondly, at Brainsford, where for 5 or 6 hours such a fight was
maintained with a handful of men against the Kings Army, as gave check to
their fury, and time to further provision, and made way to a fair and great
opportunity for the Parliaments party, as has been seen since the war. In
which action many precious friends lost their lives; and wherein it was my lot
to be taken prisoner: in which condition I suffered so many reproachful scoffs
from both great and small in that Army, the insolences, inhumane revilings,
and unheard usages that villainy could invent, and malice inflict, until I was
brought to Oxford: where after I had, through the assistance of God, withstood
the temptations of 4 Lords making the largest offers of profit and honor, if I
would forsake the Parliaments service, and serve the King: I was instantly
thrown into Irons, threatened with death; and arraigned before Judge Heath in a
most reproachful and irksome manner (in all which I bless God I stood firm
and unshaken in my faith, and thankfulness to the Honorable Although I lost by
my lying in prison 6 or 700 l. in my estate that I left at London.
Parliament) expecting no other then a shameful death: And then also was not
the Parliament unmindfull of me their Servant and Soldier; but made an Order
in my behalf that restrained the malice of their proceeding toward me, and
exchanged me I most thankfully acknowledge upon odds; and in my return I
received a large supply and real encouragement from my Honored Lord General
Essex.

All which endeared me still farther to do them the best service I was able;
whereupon I engaged my self under the Right Honorable my Lord of Manchester in
his Northern expeditions; wherein, what service so performed in taking of Sir
Fra. Wortleys Garrison, and Tickell Castle, as also how I succored my wounded
Soldiers, being wounded my self; and my self disbursed almost 30 l. to cure
them, when we had neither Surgeon nor money from the State: and how I have
behaved my self all along in that war I wish might be testified by my most
worthy Lieutenant General Cromwell, who was a daily witness of my actions For
which Service there is about 600 l. owing me.
.

And when opportunity gave leave I resolved to visit my friends at Westminster
and London, expecting a joyful and cheerful entertainment, and good
acceptance both of my self and all other the like conscientious persons; as
being well assured that neither I nor they had ever shamed our selves either by
treachery, covetousness, plundering or mutiny, etc. But to my exceeding grief
and astonishment, I found a very sad and frowning countenance from most of
those that formerly had had us in great and good esteem; I found all sorts of
conscientious people, excepting one sort only, altogether discountenanced and
discouraged; and as toward others, so also toward my self: the City being
filled with daily relations of strange and very hard usage toward them in all
quarters; as that some upon pretense of law had been violently carried before
Magistrates for not hearing Common Prayer, and though known to be neither
Papists nor Malignants, have been sent to prisons and common Jayls, Bail being
refused many, access of friends denied, also the benefit of writing, kept
amongst thieves and murderers; not plancks to lie upon, nor food allowed;
wives, children, and families perishing by such occasions. The like hard usage
for meeting together in private houses to worship God: Some have been Indicted
and adjudged to be banished, or not obeying to be hanged to death, upon
Statutes made in the Prelaticall times of ignorance, superstition, and
persecution; which was hoped would have abolished with the Bishops.

That others had been as hardly dealt withal upon pretense of Authority of
Parliament, as violently surprised and affrighted, many dragged before Officers
and Magistrates, and thence hurried to prison, and used as aforesaid: others
set in the stocks, excluded garrison Towns, thrust from their habitations,
threatened with banishment out of Counties, examined Ex Officio against
themselves and dearest friends, and imprisoned for refusing to answer.

That the Covenant was as earnestly pressed upon tender consciences, though their
faithfulness were no whit doubtful, as upon Neutrals and Malignants, and
refusing because of some expressions, put from offices of trust and public
employments.

That rude ignorant people frequently took boldness to break and spoil their
houses, threatening to fire them, and to stone the people to death; that some
had been beaten and sore bruised; one had been killed in the place where he was
worshipping God: and many women so abused as they miscarried of their children;
All which usages so full of hazard and mischief to good men, can be testified
by witnesses.

These and the like Discourses, may it please this Honorable Committee, being
the hourly complaints of a faithful religious people, ever dear and precious
to my affections, for their unfeigned zeal to God, and sincerity to the
Parliament, made very sad and deep impressions upon my spirit: so as
considering with my self whence so great evils should again arise (the
Bishops, High Commission, and Star Chamber being all suppressed) the
Parliament having ever showed good respect toward them, as having had their
real and cordial assistance in the most doubtful times: I concluded within
my self, that they were the issues of sundry invective and provoking language
divulged both from the Pulpit and Press. Wherein I found none to exceed or to
come near unto my old fellow-sufferer Mr. Prinne, from whom I least expected
such bitter expressions, yea so bitter, that truly when I considered them, and
rightly apprehended the dangers thereof, I was so far from wondering, at the
miserable sufferings of conscientious people, that I rather wondered that any of
us walked the streets in safety. For though the power of God force him to
confess in the first page of his Epistle to the Parliament, in his book
entitled, Truth triumphing over Falsehood, that we, for the most part are
really cordial in our affections, actions to the Parliament and Church of
England (for which, and for our piety we are (as he says) to be highly
honored) yet immediately after he endeavors to make us, our actions and
tenants to be destructive to the very fundamental power and being of
Parliaments, and as bad or worse then the Popish Gunpowder-plot to blow up the
Authority of this high Court, in all succeeding ages. Being confident (as he
says) that no age, nor History can ever parallel us in the least measure, the
very malignant Prelates and Anti-parliamentary Cavaliers being not so bad as
we. And a little after says, that we contemn and despite Authority and all
humane power whatsoever. And in his Epistle to the Reader, page the second, he
says, that we are destructive to all Christian and humane societies, and bring
in mere confusion and flat Atheism amongst the people. And a little after
says, that we dissolve all relations, subordinations, and humane society it
self, being as bad as the Popish Monks, Hermites, Anchorites, Nuns, and
Jesuits, with infinite other most desperate, monstrous, provoking, unjust, and
unsufferable expressions which all his books are filled full of. In all which
there appeared to my understanding so unchristian a spirit, and tending so much
to the prejudice and utter destruction of a most faithful, precious, godly
people; and being conscientious of my own integrity and uprightness, and also
of all the rest of my friends that are as Soldiers in your service, being
pressed above measure in my very conscience by all the premised reasons and
motives, I could do no less then what I did, both in duty toward God, in love
to my (poor, afflicted, despised, yet innocent) brethren, and to my native
Country, then endeavor to take off those vile, inhumane, unsufferable
scandals he labored to cast upon us, tending so much to our utter ruin and
destruction, and the damage of the Parliament and Kingdom.

Also I was moved to write my Letter to Mr. Prinne, not only because of his
bitter, invective, slanderous language; but because he not only endeavors to
insence the Parliament and people of England against my self, and all such as
I am in the Army and elsewhere, but likewise eagerly presses them to destroy
us, and cut us off. Epistle to the Parliament, page 5, and at the conclusion of
his book entitled, Independency examined, etc. there he presses the cutting
us of ^y the Sword: yea, and in the conclusion of his Full Reply, he presses
the Parliament upon pain of contracting the guilt of highest perjury to execute
wrath and vengeance upon us, by means of all which he became, as I conceived,
guilty of being an Incendiary betwixt the Parliament and their faithful
friends and Servants; which actions and practices of his tended to no better
end but to the utmost of his ability, at least to make us to be slighted and
contemned (of those that formerly had honored us, and given us no small cause
to love and honor them) that we a faithful, conscientious, and considerable
party in the Army and Kingdom might be dis-ingaged; which endeavor of his to
cause them to lay down their Arms, I conceived would be an advantage to none
but the common Enemy, but a great disadvantage and loss to the Parliament and
Commonwealth.

The serious consideration of which, exceedingly pressed me out of that real
love I bear to my Country, in a few lines to Mr. Prinne, to discover unto him
his unworthy and uncharitable dealing toward those he falsely calumniateth; and
the great dis-service his bloody lines is likely to do to the whole Kingdom in
general. In dividing the affections of those that formerly were one, till such
bitter dividing spirits as his kindled a blazing fire of discord and dissension
amongst us.

Now I appeal to every true hearted Englishmen that desires a speedy end of
these wars, of what evil consequence it would be to the Parliament and
Kingdom, to have so faithful and considerable a party as Mr. Prinne
calumniateth, and reproacheth as bad if not worse then ever the Bishop of
Canterbury did, should be causlesly cut off with the Sword, or be dis-ingaged
by his means (especially seeing the Kingdoms necessities is such that they
stand in need of the help of forrainers) of all which people whom he
reproacheth as Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, I am confident he is not
able to tax any one of them with unfaithfulness to the Parliament, nor with
cowardlinesse, or any other baseness in the Service. And for my part I
profess, I know not one of that generation in England that ever drew his Sword
one hour for the King or his party against the Parliament and theirs: and if
Mr. Prinne know any, I desire him to declare it.

Now most Noble and worthy Senators, is it not a sad thing that it should be a
crime in that man who being sensible of these bloody, unchristian and dividing
practices in Mr. Prinne, used means to inform him thereof, and endeavored by
a free debate with him (which I offered him in my letter) to convince and
reclaim him from making further progress in incensing Magistracy against those
that are faithful and successful instruments of their preservation, to leave
the public Service as in the prelaticall time for oppression of conscience, in
so much as I could not forbear.

These are the Reasons which moved me to send my Letter to Mr. Prinne, which I
humbly offer and submit to the grave Judgment of this Honorable Committee,
being resolved that no provocations from any man shall slack my wonted
faithfulness to my distressed Country.

Besides the foresaid afflictions of the poor Saints, others increase daily;
as that of Mr. Knowles, who being lately at a meeting with a company of
Christians, and being preaching the Word of God, had diverse Bullets shot at him
out of a Crosse-bowe, of purpose to slay him: the party is since apprehended.

John Lilburne Lieut. Coll.
Printed 13. June. 1645.
Acts 13.8. and 16.19, 20, 21, 22. and 17.5, 6, 7. and 19.23, 24, 25. and
21.27, 28. But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the
City on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them
out to the people. And when they found them not, they drew Jason, and certain
brethren unto the Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the world
upside down, are come hither also, whom Jason has received, and these do all
contrary to the Decree of Caesar, saying, that there is another King, one Jesus.

Act. 28.22. But we desire to hear of thee what thou think: for as
concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.


FINIS.

