A Salva Liberate, Sent to Collonell FRANCIS WEST Leiutenant of the TOWER of
LONDON, on Friday the fourteenth of September 1649. by Leiutenant Collonell
John Lilburne, unjustly, and illegally imprisoned, in the said Tower, ever
since the 28. of March, 1649. Occasioned by the receipt of a Verbal Command
(which in Law is nothing, nor signefies nothing) whereby the said Leiut. was
seemingly authorized, to carry the said John Lilburne before Mr. Prideaux the
nicknamed, and falsely so called Attorney General on Friday 14. Sept. 1649
SIR.
BEtwixt eight and nine a clock last night you sent your servant to me, who
desired me in your name to come and speak with you, which I accordingly did,
and you told me to his effect, That you being out of Town in your absence the
Attorney General had sent to you: to bring me up to him to the Temple in the
morning by eight a clock, which you thought good to acquaint me with; and to
know of me whether I would go or no, and you would go with me your self.

Vnto-which I answered to this effect, Alas, Sir, go with you? I must, for I
know, if I refuse, you can compel me by your Guards and therefore I must*
nolens, volens go, which I would not do, were I rationably able to resiist you;
but being I am not I shall go, but this I must tell you aforehand, that I know
no such man as Mr. Attorney General, neither when I come before him shall I so
much as put off my hatt unto him, or give him any reverence or respect; but
slight him, and contemn him with the greatest scorn I can imagine. And
withal I gave unto you a new book of mine not then published to the view of
the world, though the cheifest part of it was penned many weeks ago, which I
read to Sir Arthur Has^eriggs one Leiut. Collonell Paul Hobson, at his Inn at
the Bull in Bishopsgate-streete diverse weeks ago, entitled, A preparative to
an Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Has^erigge, for his several ways attempting
to murder and by base plots, conspiracyes, and false witness to take away the
life of Leiut. Col John Lilburn. Which book I entreated you seriously to read,
because there was something in it which did a little concern you. And in the
way as I came from you, I was musing upon the frame of a Salva Liberate to
send to you, in the nature of my quondam fellow prisoners. Sir John Minard,
Alderman Adams, Alderman Langham, and Alderman Bunch, their Salva Liberate in
the Case of the House of Lords unjust dealing with them in summoning them up to
their Bar, which they sent to your late predecessor Col. Tichburne, whose
said Salva's are Recorded in Sit John Maynards Case truly stated, entitled,
The Laws subversion. page 36. 37. and in the Aldermans printed and excilent
Petition presented to the Lords, 25. of April 1649. But before I got up into
my Chamber, I came back and told you, I had forgot to demand of you a sight of
the VVarrant by virtue of which you were to carry me up, and you told me, you
had received none in writing, but only there was sent unto you a verbal
command, unto which I answered, That was higher then the Kings own practices,
and was so vissibly imperious, and arbitrary, that I could not but scorn to be
such a scounderill as to stoop unto, or obey any such command, although I
apparently hazarded my life in resisting of it, and therefore told you, if you
would have me go upon them terms, you should carry me by the neck and heels,
for I would find no legs to go; but if you would produce unto me a written
warrant, which had some more face of legal Majestracy in it then verbal
commands, and according to my Right and Privilege let me read it, I would go
with you either by land or water as you pleased; because I was in no capacity
to resist you, although I then told you I judged a paper warrant (although in
words never so formal) coming from any pretended power or Authority in England
now vissible, to be altogether illegal, because the intruding General Fairfax
and his forces, had broak and annhilated all the formal and Legal Magestracy,
of England yea the very Parliament it self, and by his will and sword (absolute
conqueror like) had most tyrannically erected and set up, and imposed upon the
free people of this Nation, a Juncto ^o Mock powersitting at Westminster, whom
he and his associates call a Parliament; who like so many Armed thieves, and
robbers upon the highway, assume a power by their own will most traterously to
do what they like; yea, and to fill the land with their mock, or pretended
Magestrates, amongst the number of which is the pretended Atturnney General,
in perfect opposition of whom, to the utmost of my might, power and strength, I
am resolved by Gods gracious assistance, to spend my blood, and all that in the
world is dear unto me, supposing him not really and substantially worth the
name of an English Freeman, that in some measure in this particular is not of
my mind.

But upon my foregoing Answer to you, you were pleased to tell me, upon a
verbal command you would not force me; but you would acquaint the Atturny
General with my Answer which I entreated you to do, conceiving your practice
therein abundantly every way more safe for your self, then to execute verbal
commands, as is legally illustrarted in the 16. page of my forementioned book I
gave unto your hands.

And Sir, accidentally, seeing you betwixt 11. and 12. a clock to day, I
desired to know if you heard any more of the business, and you showed me a
pretended warrant the Copy of which thus, follows.

These are to will and requite you to bring before me at my Chamber in the
Inner Temple, this present day at 3. of the clock in the afternoon, the body
of Col. John Lilburne, to answer to all such matters as shall be objected
against him, and hereof you are not to fail. Given under my hand this 14. day
of Sept. 1649.

To Francis West Esquire. Leiutenant of the Tower of London. Edmond Prideaux.
Which said pretended warrant is not only illegal in him that makes it, who
is no Attorney General either in Law, or Reason; but if he were Attorney
General, I am sure he has no power in Law to send his warrant for me, or any
man in England, to answer to all such things as shall be objected against me,
and therefore I am constrained, to inform you hereby, that my person ought not
to be hurried to and fro, or disturbed at the pleasure of any man, neither can
I yield obedience to the commands of any which are not just and Legal; and
therefore in case you disturb me by such an illegal warrant, I doubt not but
though I should in a sudden perish (which as to this life, I do herby acquaint
you, I shortly expect) but some well wisher to Englands Freedoms, will
hereafter call you to a strict account for your illegal dealings with me; for
I must let you know hereby, I cannot voluntarily go to the Inner Temple to the
pretended Attorney General, but shall suffer you to carry me if you shall send
force which I cannot resist; And be-cause I know not whether ever I shall have
opportunity to write another line, by reason of the blody unsatiable rage of my
tyrannical adversaries after the last drop of my blood.

I can not choose but acquaint you, that I have long since drawn, and published
my plea against the present power, in my 2. Edition of my book of the 8 of June
1649. entitled, The Legal Fundamental Liberties of the people of England,
revived, asserted, and vindicated, which you may in an especial manner read in
the 43. 44. 45. to the 59. page which by the strength of the Lord. God
Omnipotent, my large experienced, help in time of need I will seal with the
last drop of my blood: so being in Post have by reason of the shortness of
time that I have had knowledge of your pretended warrant, I rest,

As much a Christian and an Englishman as ever,

From my Chamber in the Tower of London this 14. of Sept. 1649. JOHN LILBVRNE.



