THE Oppressed Man's Oppressions declared: OR, An Epistle written by Lieut. Col.
JOHN LILBURN, Prerogative-prisoner (by the illegal and arbitrary Authority of
the House of Lords) in the Tower of London, to Col. Francis West, Lieutenant
thereof: In which the oppressing cruelty of all the Gaolers of England is
declared, and particularly the Lieutenants of the Tower* As also, there is
thrown unto Tho. Edwards, the Author of the 3. Vlcerous Gangraenes, a bone or
two to pick: In which also, diverse other things are handled, of special
concernment to the present times.
Prove. 21.7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse
to do judgment.

Prove. 21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgment, and chap. 29.10. The
blood-thirsty hate the upright but the just seek his soul.


SIR,
IT is the saying of the Spirit of GOD, in the 12. Prove. 10. That a righteous
m^n regards the life of his Beast, but the tender mercies of the wicked are
cruel. How far your actions, and carriages with me, that am more then a Beast,
have been point blank contrary to the first part of that divine Sentence, but
consonant to the conclusion of it; is very easy to demonstrate with Pen and
Ink, to the ^ew of the World; and as facill to your face, before any competent
Judges to justify and prove: And this is the Theme I have chosen a little to
insist upon at this present time: but being resolved, to be as concise as I
may, I shall not now make any ample repetition of your harsh dealing with me at
the first; in divorcing me by the Law of your own Will from my Wife, and
getting the Lords to make an Order to bear you out in it after you had done it;
and, that I should speak with none of my friends, but in the presence and
hearing of my Keeper, etc. Which cruel Order, merely obtained and got by your
solicitation, the Reader may read in the 35. p. of Vox Plebis. Therefore, in
regard that the Author of that book has pretty well discovered your cruel and
illegal dealing with me, at my first coming to the Tower, especially in the 45,
46 47, 48, 49, pages thereof: And the Author of the said book, called Regal
tyranny discovered, in the 48, 49, pages, And my self has pretty well laid it
open in the 16, 17, 18, 20. pages of my printed Relation before the Committee
of the honorable house of Commons, November. 6. 1646: called An Anatomy of the
Lords tyranny, to which I refer the Reader, and in regard you are not ashamed
of your cruel and illegal carriages toward me, but persevere in them (as
though you would justify one tyranny, with backing it with continual acts of
tyranny) I shall therefore go on as effectually and punctually as I can, more
fully to anatomise you, and your unjust, illegal, cruel, and unrighteous
dealing with me, and for matter of fact, shall say nothing to your charge, but
what I will justify before any legal Authority in England.

But in the first place, I desire to let you understand, that I am a freeborn
Englishman, and have lived a legal man thereof all my days, being never yet
convicted of any attempt or design undertaken, or countenanced by me, that did
tend to the subversion of the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions thereof; but
have always sided with the Parl. it self, who has pretended nothing so much,
as the preservatio^ of the laws, liberties, and Fundamental Freedoms of
England, and the peace and tranquillity of the people; as you may read in their
own Declarations, 1 part col. D^^. page 172, 195, 214, 281, 342, 464, 498, 663,
666, 673, 750. for the preservation of which, I have constantly, courageously,
and as freely advetured my life, as any of themselves, what ever he be: And
therefore in every particular, have just and grounded cause to expect the utmost
privilege and benefit that the Law of England will afford any man whatever,
that is under the obedience and subjection thereof: Nay moreover, having to do
with those men as my Judges, that made all or the most of these Declarations,
and who have also declared, it lies not in their power to inslave or invasalize
the people, being trusted for their good, not for their mischief, to provide
for their weal, but not for their woe, 1 part Col. dec. page 150. 214. 266.
267. 494. 497. 636. 659. 660. 694. 696. and who in these and other of their own
Declarations, imprecate and pray that the wrath and vengeance of Heaven and
Earth may fall upon them, and theirs, when they cease actually to perform what
verbally they there declare, unto which I say AMEN: And there they protest,
vow, and swear, they will maintain the fundamental Laws, and Liberties of the
people, and therefore in that tespect, you cannot groundedly in the least,
think, that I should Issacar-like stoop willingly unto any other burdens,
impositions, or Commands laid upon me, by you, or any other whatsoever, that
are not warrantable and justifiable by the fundamental Laws of the Land, and
whether your practices have been so with me, I will compare them to the Law,
and leave every rational man to judge.

First I do not find any Law that makes Prisons, places of execution,
punishment, or torment, but only places of safe custody: for, the Law of
England (as Sir Edward Cook in the second part of his institutes fol. 28.
excellently declares) is a Law of mercy, (yet as he then said, so I much more
say now) it is now turned into a mere shadow, which is the most we now enjoy
of it) and therefore as the author of the late book, called Liberty vindicated
against Slavery, very well says p. 7. from Sir Ed. Cook in the 1. part of his
instit. f. 260. that by Law, prisons are ordained not for destruction, but for
securing of man's persons, until they be brought forth unto due and speedy
trial, (for being in prison, they are under the most especial protection of
the Law, and the most tender care thereof) and are therefore to be humanly,
courteously, and in all Civility, ordered and used; otherwise Goalers are not
Keepers, but tormentors and executioners of men untryed, and uncondemned, but
this were not (salvo custodire) to keep men in safety, weich the Law implies
(and is all it requires) but (destruere) to destroy before the time, which the
Law abhors and detests, yea and that prisoners (though never so notorious in
their crimes) may be the more honestly and carefully provided for, and the
better and more civilly used, and to the end, that Goalers and Keepers of
prisons, should not have any color or excuse, for exacting any thing from
prisoners, (under what color or pretense soever, whether the same be called
fees, or Chamber-rent) who are in custody of the Law: It is provided, and
declared by the Law, that all Prisons and Goales what ever, be the Kings, for
the public good, and therefore are to be repaid and furnished as prisons at
the common Charge, see Cook on the 1. E. 2. Statutum de frangentibus prisonum,
in his 2. part institutes fol. 589. and on the 26. Chap. of Magna Charta fol.
74. Ibem, and on the statute of Westminster.

The first Chap. 26. fol. 209. 210. Ibem.

Yea and the Law takes care that in case the prisoner when he is in prison,
have no means of his own to live upon, that then by the public he is to be
maintained, 14. Eliz. 5.21. James 28. Vox Plebis, page 57. for a freeman of
England (as I am) is not brought to prison to be starved with cold, or hunger,
but to the end justice upon him may be done: The prison, at most, in Law, is
but a safe preserver, but not a distroyer of the prisoner, who with all
convenient speed according to Law, is to come to his trial, and either
according unto Law to be condemned, or else to be delivered in convenient time
without delay, 4 E. 3. 2. See my answer to Mr. Pryn, called Innocence and Truth
justified, page 32. who by Law is never to remain in prison above 6. months
at most, for Goal deliveries are by the 4. E. 3. 2. to be kept and made 3.
times a year, which is once in four months, and oftener if need shall be.

And as the author of Vox Plebis page 55. says, out of Stamf. pl. Cor. f. 30.
Imprisonment by Law, is (neither ought to be) no more then a bare restraint of
Liberty, without those illegal distinctions, of close and open imprisonment,
and therefore Bracton fo. 18. says, that if a Jailer keep his prisoner more
close then of right he ought, whereof the prisoner dies, this is felony in
the Jailer

And Horn, in the mirror of Justice page 288. says that it is an abusion of
the Law that prisoners are put into Irons, or other pain, before they are
attainted. And page 34. 36. he reckons the sterving of prisoners by famine, to
be among the crimes of homicide in a Jailer.

And we find in the 3. E. 3. Fitz. H. Tit. pl. Cor. 295. that it was felony
at Common Law, in Goalers to compel their prisoners by hard imprisonment to
become approvers, whereby to get their goods: which Law is since confirmed by
the statute of 14. E. 3. Chap. 10. with some enlargement; as to under keepers
of prisons, and the penalty of the Law, and that Goalers having done this, have
been hanged for it, you may read 3. E. 3. 8. Northampton, Fitzh. pl. Cor. 295.
and elsewhere, but this for a taste to them.

In the second place, I will tell you what the Law says about Goalers Fees.
The mirror of Justice page 28^. tells us, that it is an abusion of the Law,
that prisoners or others for them, pay any thing for their entries into the
Goal, or for their goings out: this is the Common Law; there is no fee at all
due to any Goalers whatsoever by the common Law. See what the Statutes say. The
statute of Westminster 1. Chap. 26. being the 3. E. 1. 26. says, that no
Sheriff, nor other the Kings Officer, take any reward to do his Office, but
shall be paid of that which they take of the King, and he that so does shall
yield twice as much, and shall be punished at the Kings pleasure, under which
word Officer, is concluded Jailer, Coronor, etc. so Sir Edward Cook 2. part
institutes fol. 209. Stamf. pl. Cor. 49. nay, by the statute of 4. E. 3 10.
Goalers are to receive thieves, and fellons, taking nothing by way of fees for
the receipt of them, so odious is this extortion of Goalers, that very thieves
and fellons are exempt from payment of fees. It is true, that by an incroaching
statute upon our liberties, made in the 23. H. 6. 10. there is a fee given to
the Jailer to be paid him by his prisoner, but yet it is very small, the words
of the statute are these; nor that any of the said Officers and Ministers by
occasion or under colors of their Office, shall take any other thing by them,
nor by any other person to their use, profit, or avail of any person by them
or any of them to be arrested, or attached, nor of any other of them for the
omitting of any arrest or attachment to be made by their body, or of any person
by them or of any of them, by force or color of their Office, arrested or
attached for fine, fee, suit of prison, mainprise, letting to bail, or showing
any ease for favor to any such person so arrested, or to be arrested for their
reward or profit, but such as follow; that is to say, for the Sheriff 20. d
the Bayliffe which makes the arrest or attachment 4. d and the Jailer, if the
prisoner be committed to his ward, four pence; and that the Sheriff,
under-Sheriffe, Sheriffs Clerk, Steward, or Bayliffe of Franchise, Servant, or
Bayliffe, or Coroner, shall not take any thing by color of his office by him
nor by any other person to his use of any person for the making of any return
or pannell, and for the copy of any panel, but 4. d

And it follows in the same Statute, that all Sheriffs, under-Sheriffes,
Clerks, Bayliffes, Goalers, Coroners, Stewards, Bayliffes of Franchises, or any
other Officers or Ministers, which do contrary to this Ordinance in any point
of the same, shall lose to the party in this behalf indammaged or grieved, his
treble damages, and shall forfeit the sum of 40. l at every time they or any
of them do the contrary thereof in any point of the same, whereas the King
shall have the one half to be employed in the use of the house, and in no
otherwise, and the party that shall sue, the other half.

But (as Sir Edward Cook well observes, on the 25. chap. of Magna Charta, 2.
part Institut. fol. 74.) after the rule of the Common Law was altered, and that
the Sheriff, Coroner, Jailer, and other the Kings Ministers, might in some
case take of the subject; it is not credible what extortions and oppressions
have hereupon ensued. So dangerous a thing it is, to shake or alter any of the
Rules or Fundamental points of the Common Law, which in truth are the main
Pillars and Supporters of the Fabric of the Commonwealth, as elsewhere I
have noted more at large viz. fol. 51, 210, 249. ibim. see the Preface to the
4. part of his Reports and the 4, part of his Institutes* cap. of the High
Court of Parliament, f. 41.

Now sir, having laid this sure foundation, I will assume the boldness, to
compare your dealings with me, to the forementioned rules that the Law
prescribes you: And first to matter of usage, you know very well, you of your
own head at first kept my wife from me, and made me a close prisoner, as in the
forementioned books, page ^ is truly declared.

And then secondly, although you could not but know that by the Lords, etc. in
the Star Chamber, I, for about four years together before this Parliament,
under-went a great destruction by them, both in my body, goods, and trade: and
since this Parliament, have spent many hundred pounds to obtain my just
reparations (besides other great loss I have had) yet have not got a penny,
and being a younger brother, and in Land have not 6. d incoming in the year;
and being robbed of my trade, calling, and livelihood, by the
Merchant-Monopolizers: so that I could not with freedom transport one Cloth
into the Low Countries, to get any livelihood thereby: all which, above a year
ago, I was necessitated publicly to declare, in answer to William Pryns lies
and falsehoods, in my book called Innocence and Truth justified, which there you
may read, especially in page 39, 43, 47, 48, 62, 65, 75. and how being
committed to your custody in the Tower, the chargeablest Prison this day in all
England; and where I am denied the just and legal usage and allowance that the
King himself used to allow all prisoners committed to this place, although
those that had great estates of their own, into their own hands and possession,
whose allowance was to find them diet, lodging, and pay their fees, Vox Plebis,
p. 50, 56. 57.

Nay, when I came in, and desired you, that I might have my diet from my wife
out of the town, which I did for two reasons.

First, for safety, having heard much of sir Thomas Overburies being poisoned
when he was a prisoner in the Tower.

Secondly, for the saving of money, which stood me much upon; but you
absolutely denied me that legal and just privilege, and tied me either to
fast, or have my diet from the Cooks in the Tower.

Thirdly, being thus committed to this extraordinary chargeable expensive
place, and being in so mean a condition, as I must ingeniously confess I was,
you took in the third place, the ready way to sterve and destroy me; and of
your own head, ordered your Warders to take the names and places of habitation,
of all those that came to see me, or speak with me, a destructive bugbear to
any captived prisoner, which the Law of England does not in the least authorize
and enable you to do: but this was not all, but in the fourth place, my
friends, though they gave their names, were by your Warders, set on by your
self (for upon your score, I must, and do lay it all) exceedingly in words
abused, and diverse of them turned away, and not suffered to come and speak with
me: O bloody and cruel man! what is this else, but an absolute Declaration of
your resolved intention, to destroy me in my imprisonment under your custody?
which the Law abhors: but if for the sake of the Law, or for my sake, you will
not square your dealings with me, according to the known and declared law of
the kingdom, then for your own sake, I desire you to remember your
Predecessor, Sir Gervase Elmayes, who was indicted by the name of Jailer of
the Tower of London, and hanged upon Tower Hill, for consenting to the
poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, Vox Plebis, page 48.

In the fifth place, seeing by all the forementioned ways and means you
could not scare all my friends from me, and so by consequence, destroy me.

Then you devise another way, and set one of your old Mastive dogs upon me, to
bait and to worry me with lies, reproaches, and calumniations: and for that
end, printed and published a most base and scandalous book against me, thereby
to make me odious to all men whatsoever, that would believe that book, which
was published against me at such a time; when by your self, my hands were fast
tied behind my back, being kept by your order very strictly from Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and so in a condition unable publicly to vindicate my self, and much
importunity was I forced to use to your self, before I could obtain leave from
you to answer it, and necessitated to tie my self by promise to such and such
conditions: and amongst the rest, that you should read it all over, before it
was published: And I, for my part, performed my promise, and was necessitated
to give the original into your hands, in such haste, that I could not take a
Copy of it: out of whose hands, I could not get it, til I was in some respect
necessitated to an arbitration: and being not able to do what I would for my
own vindication, I was in a manner compelled by you to be content with what I
could do, which was to accept a submission from him for my wounded, rent, and
torn reputation by him: although, if I could have accomplished what I desire, I
should first have published my answer to his lies: and then if he had had a
mi^^ put it to arbitration, but necessity has no other Law but a stooping to
it: but I was in hope, that I should have found so much candor and ingenuity in
you, and your Agent, old John White, a^ that I should not have had the like
abuse^ from you after that arbitration, that I had before it, from you both*
but in regard that he at the ga^^, as my friends inform me, does not cease in
his rancour and venim against me; I must be necessitated to publish my answer
to him; especially, seeing as I conceive, Those. Edwards the cankered Gangrena
(...) joy^^^ in confederacy with him: But ^o this, pr^^^^^, I shall (...) with
the inserting of his recantation, or acknowledgment, and refer the Reader for
a full relation of that arbitration, to the 59, 60, 61, 62, 63* pages of my
late book, called Londons Liberty in Chains discovered; the aforesaid
acknowledgment thus follows:

I John White, one of the Warders of the Tower of London, do acknowledge, that
I have unjustly wronged Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, in, and by writing, and
publishing in print, in such sort as I did; that he was the Writer, Author, or
Contriver of a book, called Liberty vindicated against Slavery, and of a
printed letter thereunto annexed; and of a Book or Treatise, called An Alarm
to the House of Lords: for all which, and for the unjust and scandalous matters
and language alleged and used by me, in my said book, reflecting upon the
said Lieut. Col. Lilburn, I am heartily sorry: and in testimony thereof, I have
hereunto subscribed my hand the 8. day of October, 1646.

John White.
Subscribed, pronounced, and accepted, the 9. Day of October, 1646. in the
presence of us, John Strangewayes. Lewis Dyves. John Glanvil. William Morton.
Henry Vaughan. Knights.

Christopher Comport, Warder in the Tower.


Sixthly, after all this, by means of my wifes Petition, which was delivered
to the house of Commons 23. September. 1646 and which you may read in the last
mentioned book. pap. 65, 66, 67, 68 etc. by means of which, there was a
Committee of the honorable house of Commons appointed, to hear and receive my
complaint against the Lords, and the 6. of November. 1646. was the last time I
was before the Committee; where I had an opportunity, in part, to declare unto
them, your illegal dealing with me: which Declaration, you may read in the 17,
18, 20. pages of that relation, now in print; and I must confess unto you, I
did think that you durst not have run the hazard of persevering in your
illegal dealings with me: but in regard you do, it clearly demonstrates unto
me, that you judge the streams of Justice so muddy and corrupted (by the
interest and power of your Lords, and their factions, who would have no other
rule, but their own base and corrupt wills to walk by, and therefore lay the
rule of the Law and Justice aside) that they will never run clear, nor purely
again, to punish such transgressors as you are.

But that you may know (although I have had exceeding hard measure, in being so
long delayed in the making of my report) that I am not out of hopes, nor in
despair, I give you this fresh charge, and tell you, that after I had done
with the Committee, your next illegal design that you executed upon me, was,
that my friends could not pass your guard, unless my keeper were there
present to conduct them unto me; by means of which, some of them have been
forced to come four several times, before they could find him at the Gate; and
others have been forced to stay, and sit in the guard an hour, and sometimes
two, expecting his coming; without whose presence, they could not have access
to me; and diverse of them in the time of their stay at the Guard, examined
whether they be not Independe^ts, or no; and whether they never preached in
Tubs, or no: And if they answer crosly to the questions, as well they may, then
they are fallen upon, and both they and I in words exceedingly abused: and I am
told, that an old tall man in black, with a great staff in his hand, is not
wanting to play his part, which I judge to be Mr. White.

Now sir, is not this the height of illegality, cruelty, tyranny, and
bloud-thirstinesse in you, thus to deal with me; indevouring thereby strongly
to scare away all my friends from me? For, who in so many difficulties and
abuses would come to visit a man, unless he bore a very great affection to
him: the which, if he do, the continual meeting with these base and
unwarrantable affronts, in conclusion will make him weary.

And truly sir, let me tell you, this is not to use me with civility, and
humanity in my imprisonment, as the Law requires I should: but this is to
torment, punish, and destroy me, which, the Law, and all just and honest men
abhor and detest.

In the 7. place, being in the condition that I am in, and being guilty of no
legal crime in the world; unless it be for being over honest and zealous for
the preservation of the just and public Liberties of the Kingdom; I know no
reason, why I may not enjoy the utmost privilege and liberty in the Tower,
that any prisoner in it does enjoy: yet notwithstanding, not many weeks ago, I
was but going with a fellow-prisoner in the path that leads to the
Record-office; and coming back to my Lodging under the Gate, that is just
against the Traitors Gate, I met your pretended-Gentleman-Goaler, and
immediately Mr. Comport, my Landlord and Keeper, came and delivered a message
from you to me, which was to this effect: That Mr. Lieutenant did understand,
that I was beyond the Ring; but it was his pleasure, that J should forbear to
go any more beyond it: Unto which, I replied, Landlord, I had only thought,
that to go beyond the Ring, had been for a man when he came to it, to have
turned on the right hand, and so to have gone, as if he would have gone out at
the Gate, which I did not in the least: for I turned on the left hand with one
of my fellow prisoners, and walked in the path that goes to his Chamber, and
diverse other Chambers of my fellow prisoners, which path they do and may walk
in every day in the week, and every hour in the day. And therefore, tell your
Master from me, I shall not obey his order, for I have as good right to enjoy
any privilege within the Tower, as any prisoner in it: and therefore will walk
that way again, seeing all my fellow prisoners enjoy the same liberty.

In the 8. place, the other night there being a friend with me about 6 or 7 a
clock at night, I walked out of my chamber with him; which is a privilege that
all my fellow prisoners enjoy: and he having a candle and lanthorn in his hand,
passing under Cole-Harbour Gate, I was roughly and suddenly demanded whither I
went? And I replied, along with my friend, to conduct him as far as my
liberty would extend (which was down to the Ring, which is, as I conceive, at
least three or foursore yards, on this side of the gate where your guard
stands) I was replied unto in these words, Sir, you shall not go: At which,
looking well about me (it being very dark) to see who it was, that was so
malipert, I perceived it to be your self (who had with you, as I conceived,
some of your Warders) unto which I replied: Truly sir, I do not like the word
shall; it is but unhansome language, to tell me, I shall not go.

No sir, I say (said you) you shall not go; for you ought not to stir out of
your chamber after candels are lighted.

Truly sir (said I) I know no such order. Unto which, you replied, Well, then
sir, I now give you such an order: and I bid you give it to those that would
obey it; for I would not: and I gave you the reason of it; which was, that I
was a freeborn Englishman, a Kingdom that pretends (at least) to be governed
by Law, and not by Will, and I am not to be subject unto those orders in my
imprisonment, that have no other Warrant, but the Goalers Will. Neither will I
willingly be subject in the Tower unto any other orders, but what are consonant
and agreeable to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Unto which you replied; Sir, you shall obey my orders, and I will make you.

Sir, said I, I will not obey your orders; nor you shall not make me: And I
tell you to your face, I scorn both you and your orders, and that I value you
not, the paring of my nail,

Unto which, you replied, Sir, I will make you; for I will lock you fast
enough in your chamber: And I bid you do your worst, that either you could, or
durst do, I cared not a straw for you: But I bad you take notice of this, by
the way; that if you locked me up by the power of your own unbinding will, and
did not make your doors very strong, I would make work for your Carpenters, by
breaking them into as many pieces as I could.

You replied, you would make them up again. And I told you, I would break them
again.

You told me, you ordering us to keep our Chambers after candle was lighted,
was for your own security.

I shall now take liberty, to return you a more full answer to this, then I did
before to you, which is this; That I for my part, for all the gold in London,
would not give just cause to be counted so base and unworthy, to do upon
deliberation that action, that I would not justify to the death: But if I
should in the least, step aside, I should contract unto my self that guilt,
which I am confident, all the enemies I have in England, are not able in the
least to fix upon me: For, I understand by the Law of this Kingdom, that he
that is committed to prison for Felony, or Treason; although really and truly
he be guilty of neither, yet if he break prison, and be taken again, he shall
dye like a Fellon or Traitor that is legally convicted, 1. E. 2. de
frangentibus prisonam. See Cooks 2. part. instit. fol. 590, 591. For his
slight, in the eye of the Law, argues guiltiness.

And besides, my friend and I had a horn Lanthorn and Candle, which put all out
of suspicion of going out in the dark.

But thirdly, what ground have you, upon any pretense what ever framed by your
self, to lock me up in my chamber, as soon as candels are lighted, seeing I am
in a moated and double-walled Prison, where you have not only a Train-bond, but
also great store of your Warders to secure me?

And therefore, I tell you plainly, I shall never condescend to be locked up
sooner then that convenient hour of 8. a clock, the accustomed hour of the
place, which is much sooner then they are in other prisons, that I have been in.

Fourthly, if under pretense of your security, I should give way for you to
confine or lock me up in my chamber at candlelight, which then was before five
a clock, may not you as well and as groundedly upon the same pretense (if you
please to say it is for your security) keep me locked up in my chamber till 12.
a clock; yea, the whole day, if you please: And if I should suffer this in the
least, what am I less then traitorous to my self, and to my liberties, to
give you a power by your own mere will, to make and impose a Law upon me,
whenever you shall please to say that its for your security; when the Law
provides and enjoynes you no more, but to keep me in safe custody within your
prison, and to use me and all that come to me, civillie, and with all
humanity, and leaves me not in the least to your will, but only in some
extraordinary cases, as in doing or offering violence to the Jailer, or
Goalers, or to my fellow prisoners, to the apparent breach of the peace of the
prison: and yet in this, the Law is extraordinary tender of the prisoners
safety: but none of this I have not in the least done, either to you, or the
poorest boy belonging to you, not by Gods assistance will not: but yet on the
contrary, before you shall make me a slave to your will, you shall have the
heart-bloud out of my body.

Now in the last place, I will compare the fees taken and demanded in the Tower
with those the Law gives; and what they are, you may fully read before.

Now, by the Author of Vox Plebis, who to me seems to be a knowing man in
the practices of the Lieutenants of the Tower, who in his 48 49. pages, says,
That there is demanded for the admittance of an Earl 100. l for a Baron 80. l
for a Knight and Baronet 70. l, for a Baronet 60. l for a Knight 50. l and for
an Esquire 40. pound, and 30. s a week of every prisoner for liberty to buy and
dress his own diet, and 10. s 15. s 20. s per week, for their Chamber-rent,
and of some more.

For Sir Richard Gurney sometimes Lord Mayor of London, and now prisoner in the
Tower, has paid as I have heard him aver it 3. l a week for his chamber-rent;
and in the time of a Predecessor of yours, dieted 3 weeks at the Lieutenants
table; for which he had the impudency to demand of him for it 25. l per week.
o horrible and monstrous extortion and oppression: and yet this is not all, for
the last mentioned euthor in his 48. page says, There is a new erected Office,
and an intruded Officer, called the Gentleman Jailer, one Yates, a busy
fellow, who pretends to a fee of 50. s to be paid him, at the going away of
every prisoner, page 51. ibim.

But yet this is not all: for in p. 49. of the late printed book called Regal
Tyranny discovered, he says, that the Gentleman Porter demands for his fee 5.
l and a man's upper garment: 40. s to the Warders, 10. s to the Lieutenants
Clarke, 10. s to the Minister; and diverse of my fellow prisoners tell me, that
their Keepers have and do demand of them, either their diet, or 5. s a week,
for locking them up at night in their Chamber, and opening their chamber-dores.

O horrible and monstrous injustice, oppression, and cruelty, to demand and
take these fees; whereas, by Law, there is not one farthing taken of all these
fees due to be paid by the prisoner, but one bare great at most, and that given
away by an oppressing and incroaching law upon our ancient and just liberties,
as is before truly observed.

And yet prisoners are detained in prison by your will, after they are legally
discharged, because they will not pay these undue and unjust fees, which at
this very day is Sir Henry Andersons case, and has formerly been others; as
the Author of Vox Plebis truly observes: although the arrantest Rogue and Thief
that ever breathed, had, or has, as true a right to any purse that ever he
did, or shall take from an honest man upon the highway by force and violence,
as you or any other has to any of the forementioned fees. O ye proud and
impudent man, that dare assume unto your self of your own head, more then a
regal power, to levy and raise money by the law of your own will, upon the free
people of England.

Sir, let me tell you, this very thing was one of those things, that was the
Earl of Straffords great Crimes, for which he paid very dear; and it is not
impossible, but you and others that use it, may pay as dear for it in
conclusion: therefore, look to it, and think of it.

And if you please to read the Petition of Right, made by the Lords and Commons
unto this King, in the 3. of his Reign, you shall find in the beginning of it,
they show him that by the statute of the 34. E. 1. called Statutum de tallagio
non concedendo; that no tallage or aid shall be laid or levied by the King or
his Heirs in this Realm, without the good will and assent of the Archbishops.
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights Burgesses, and other the freemen of the
Commonalty of this Realm, and by authority of Parliament holden in the 25. E.
3. it is declared, and enacted; that from thence-forth no person should be
compelled to make any Loanes to the King against his will; because such Loanes
were against reason, and the franchise of the Land, and by other Laws of this
Realm, (viz 1. E. 3 6. 11. R. 2. 9. 1. R. 3. 2.) it is provided; That none
shall be charged by any charge or imposition, called a benevolence, nor by such
like charge by which the statutes beforementioned, and other the good laws
and statutes of this Realm, your subjects have inherited this freedom; that
they should not be compelled to contribute to any tax, tallage, aid, or other
like charge, not set by common consent in Parliament. All which, the King
confirms.

And by the statute made this present Parliament, that abolished Ship Money;
All and a very the particulars, prayed or desired in the said Petition of
Right, shall from henceforth be put in execution accordingly, and shall be
firmly and strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are
prayed and expressed: yea, in this very statute it is declared and enacted to
be against Law, for his Majesty upon any pretense what ever, to levy money of
the people of England, without common consent in Parliament.

And truly sir, let me tell you without fear or flattery, that if your great
Masters the Lords, and the true prerogative-friends of the house of Commons,
had any true and real intentions to preserve the Fundamental Laws and
Liberties of England, or had any time to spare (to punish those that justly and
groundedly infringe them, and do, as much as in them lies, to destroy them)
from their weighty employment, of dividing great and vast sums of the
Commonwealths money amongst themselves, without either doing justice and right
in the like nature to any man breathing, unless it be themselves, or some of
their sons, kinsmen, or near friends; whose principles, are to serve their ends
to the breadth of a hair in all they enjoin them; they would scorn to give
cause to be reputed so base and unworthy as they are, to deny the King the
power (unto whom ever and anon, they give such glorious and transcendent titles
unto) to levy and raise money without common consent in Parliament; when they
allow every paltery Jailer in England to do it at his pleasure; yea, and for
any thing I can perceive abet and countenance him in it: for they will not, nor
have not done, all this long Parliament, any man any effectual Justice against
them that have complained of them, but every man is crushed, and in a manner
destroyed, that meddles any thing to the purpose with them.

I pray sir, tell me, whether this be to keep the Solemn League and Covenant
(which now is made a cloak for all kind of knavery and villainy) which they and
you took with your hands lifted up to the most high God, and swore to maintain
the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: But this I dare boldly
tell you, you never intended it, as by your practices, appears.

But sir, in the second place, I should desire to know of you, the reason why
Jaylors are so impudent and oppressive as they are, and go so scot-free from
punishment (though often complained of) as they do.

Truly, for my part, I am not able to render any more probable one then this;
That it may be some powerful Parliament Man, or men, are sharers with them in
their profits (for as gross, if not groser things, are commonly reported, yea
printed of some of them: See the 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, etc. pages of the
forementioned book, called Regal Tyranny discovered) and therefore must, and
do improve their interest and power, to protect them in their knaveries and
oppressions. For, within these few days, I was talking with an understanding
knowing Gentleman, that came to visit me; and he told me, he durst venture his
life to make it evident to any rational man in the world; that there is one
Jailer about this City, that makes of his Prison above 20000, l a year, and
commits all manner of villainies, and yet no Justice can be had against him,
though he has often and powerfully been complained against to the Parliament
it self, where he said, he had more favor, countenance, and protection, then
the honest man that complained of him; yea, more then them all, put all in one.

Now sir, in the last place, I come to acquaint you, what moneys I have paid,
since I came to the Tower for my Chamber-rent only; the 10. of July last I came
hither, and you sent me to the Lodging where I am, with extraordinary strict
and severe command upon my Keeper, who within certain days after I came to
him, demanded chamber-rent of me at a great deal higher rate then I pay, and I
told him necessity had no law; and I therefore desired him to ask me
reasonably, and he should see what I would say to him: So at last, he asked me
15. s a week, I told him I knew well the laws of all Prisons in England and
15. s a week was a great deal of money for bare Lodging; but in regard it was
with me, as it was, conditionally that he for his part would use me, and those
my friends that should come to to see me, with civilitie and humanity, I would
give him 15. s a week, and find my own linen besides, protesting unto him,
that the first time he used me, or any that came to see me, churlishly, I would
not pay him one penny more of money; and I must ingenuously confess, I have no
cause in the least to complain of the man in point of civilitie, nor he of me
in performing my promise: for I have paid him, though it has been with some
straights to me, betwixt 20. and 30. l which I am now able no longer to pay.

And therefore I desire you, according to your duty which by law you are bound
unto, to provide me a prison gratis: for I profess unto you, no more rent I
can, nor will pay, though it cost me a dungeon (or as bad) for my pains. And
truly, Sir, I shall deal ingeniously with you, and give you the true reason
wherefore I condescended to pay chamber-rent at first, and have done it so
long; It was because I had extraordinary potent adversaries to deal withal,
viz. the House of Lords, or Peers, as they are called, who had pretty-well
managed their dealings with me like tyrants, in keeping very strictly my
friends from me, and also pen, ink, and paper, that so I was debarred of all
ability in the world, to publish to the view of the whole kingdom, my own
innocence, and their inhumane and barbarous tyranny, which they knew well
enough I would do, if I had not been debarred of all means to do it, and
then fell upon me, and transcendently sentenced me to pay 4000. l etc. and
illegally and unjustly entered notorious crimes against me in their records. And
you know I told you at my first coming to the Tower, I was refreshed at the
hopes of my being freed from my close imprisonment; but your falling so heavily
upon me as you did, struck me to the heart and made me believe it was possible
I might have been destroyed before I should have an opportunity publicly to
clear my own unspotted innocence in reference to the Lords, and to anatomize
their tyranny; both of which my soul thirsted after: and therefore if I had
been able, I would have purchased an opportunity to have done it, though it had
cost me 20. l a week. And-truly, Sir, I have done my do, and in despite of all
the Lords, published, and truly and faithfully stated my cause to the view of
the whole Kingdom. First, in my Wives Petition, delivered by her to the House
of Commons, Septem. 23. 1646. which I penned and framed my self without the
help or assistance of any Lawyer in England. And secondly, in my Book called,
Londons Liberty in Chains discovered. And thirdly, twice before the Committee
of the Honorable House of Commons. The last discourse of which I published to
the view of all the Commons of England, and called it, An Anatomy of the Lords
tyranny. And besides, some of my friends, or well-wishers have done it
excellent well for me, in those two notable Discourses called, Vox Plebis, and,
Regal Tyranny discovered, which will live when I am dead; and be (I hope) as
good as winding-sheets unto the Lords; and therefore I am now ready for a
Dungeon, or Irons, or Death it self, or any torture or torment that their
malice can inflict upon me; and seeing that I cannot by any means I can use,
get my report made to the House of Commons, and so enjoy justice and right at
their hands, (which I beg not of them as a Boon, but challenge of them as my due
and right) by reason of the Lords, and the rest of their Prerogative
Copartners influence into the House Commons, to divert them from the great
affairs of the Kingdom, in doing justice and right unto the oppressed, and
putting them upon making Laws, Edicts, and Declarations, to persecute and
destroy the generation of the righteous, and so bring the wrath and vengeance
of heaven and earth upon them and theirs: ( Read Mr. Thomas Goodwins Sermon
preached before them Feb. 25. 1645. called, The great Interest of States and
Kingdoms) and also lay a great blot of reproach upon them by all the rational
men in the world, for endeavoring to destroy a generation of peaceable and
quiet-minded men, that have contributed all they had and have in the world, for
their preservation; and by whose undaunted valor and bloodshed, as principal
instruments they enjoy liberty at this day, to sit in the House of Commons, and
to be what they are. (Sure I am, the Spirit of God says, That he that
rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his House, Prove. 17.13.)
And yet for any thing I can perceive, the best reward is intended these men
from those they have done so much for, is ruin and destruction, that so that
Antichristian office and function of Priesthood, newly transformed into a
pretended godly and reformed Presbyter, may again be established, although by
the second Article of the Covenant (now more magnified by the sons of
darkness add blindness, then the Book of God) they have expressly sworn to
root up that Function by the roots. The words of the Covenant are, That we
shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all
other Ecclesiastical officers depending on that Hierarchy) superstition,
heresy, schism, prephaneness, etc. Mark the sentence, And all other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy. In the number of which
are those pretended reformed presbyter-Ministers, that either sit in the
Assembly, or are in any other place in the Kingdom, that officiate by virtue of
their Ordination, which they had from the Bishops, or any, by virtue of their
Authority. And I will maintain it with my life, that he is a forsworn man
(whether he be Parliamentman or other) that has taken the Covenant, and does
contribute any of his assistance, to maintain, preserve, and uphold that
Ordination of the Presbyterian Ministers, that they received from the Bishops;
or punish, any man for writing preaching, or speaking against it, or any other
ways endeavoring the destruction or extirpation thereof. For the express
words of the Covenant are, that we must endeavor the extirpation of all
Officers (without exception) depending on that Hierarchy; part of which, all
the forementioned Ministers are, being ordained Priests and Deacons by the
Bishops, and have no other Ordination to this very day, but what they had fro
them. But if they shall say, they were ordained by them not as Bishops, but as
Presbyters; I answer, This is a simple foppish distinction: For as well may the
Bishops say, They were not ordained by the Pope, or his Bishops, quatenus as
Pope or Bishops* but quatenus as Presbyter, or Presbyters, and so are in every
particular as lawful Ministers as any of these men that have their ordination
from them, and yet have endeavored to draw the whole Kingdom into a Covenant
sinfully to extirpate them that are Christ's Ministers upon their own
Principles, as really, truly, and formally, as any of themselves. But in the
second place, if they were ordained Presbyters by the Bishops, not as Bishops,
but as Presbyters, then are these present reformed Ministers less then
Presbyters. For the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 7. v. 7. says, Without all
contradiction, the less is blessed of the better, or greater. And I desire the
learned Presbyters to show me one example in all the New Testament, that ever
any Officer ordained another Officer in the same Office and Function that he
himself was in. Thirdly, I desire to know of these reformed Presbyterian
Ministers, that seeing as they themselves confess, the Bishops Office and
Function was and is Antichristian, how is it possible their Ministerial
Function, or Ordination, can be Christian, that like a stream flowed from them
the fountain? Sure I am, Job demands this question; Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? And by the same Spirit of God he answers; Not one, Job.
14.4. And James interrogates, saying, Does a Fountain send forth at the same
place, sweet water and bitter? Or can the Fig Tree, my brethren, bear
Olive-berries? either a Vine; Figs? Therefore in a positive negation he
concludes, that no Fountain can both yield salt water and fresh.

And therefore seeing THOMAS THE GANGRENA, the Rabshakeh Champion of the new
sprung-up Sect in England of Presbyters, who may more truly and properly, be
called Schismatickes, then any of those he so brands; for they have separated
from their Ghostly Fathers the Bishops, and yet are glad to hold their
ordination, and are therefore schismatic.

And therefore seeing in his last GANGRENA he has fallen so point blank upon
me, for no other cause but for standing for the Fundamental Laws of England;
which, if he had not an absolute desire to be notoriously forsworn, he might
know his Covenant binds him to do the same. But seeing he there plays the
simple man to fight with his own shadow, and does not in the least meddle, for
any thing I can perceive (by so much as I have read of his Book, which, so near
as I could find, was every place where I was mentioned) with the Statutes and
other Legal Authorities, as I cite in my wives petition, and elsewhere, to
prove, That all the Commoners of England ought in all criminal cases to be
tried by their Peers, that is, Equals; and that the House of Lords, in the
least, are not the Peers of Commoners: And therefore seeing seemingly by that
ulcerous book, he has given me something to answer that concerns me, I will
really and substantially give him something to answer, that in good earnest
concerns him, and all the rest of his bloody-minded pretended reformed
fellow-Clergy Presbyters; that lying, deceitful, forsworn, and bloody Sect, of
whom it is true that the Prophet said of the Prophets of old, That they make
the people to err, and bite with their teeth, and cry peace; and he that
puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him, Micah 3.5.
And that at present I have to put to him to answer, shall be certain Arguments
which I made when I was close prisoner in irons in the Fleet, against the then
Episcopal Ministers of the Church of England, and will serve in every
particular, against the present Presbyteriall Ministers, and you shall find
them thus laid down in the 23. page of my Book called, An Answer to 9.
Arguments written by T. B. and printed at London 1645.

First, Thtt every lawful Pastor, Bishop, Minister, or Officer in the visible
Church of Christ, ought to have a lawful call, and be lawfully chosen into his
Office, before he can be a true Officer in the Church of Christ, Acts 1.23, 24,
25. and 6.3.5, 6. and 14.23. Gal. 1.1. Heb. 5.4.

But the Ministers and Officers in the Church of England, (as well Presbyterian
as Episcopal) have not a lawful call, neither are lawfully chosen to be
officers in the Church of Christ. See the Book of Ordination of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, as also the Directory, and compare them with the
Scripture.

Therefore all your Ministers are false and Antichristian Officers. Rev. 9.3.
and 13.2. and 16.13.

Secondly, the doing of those actions that belong to the execution of an
Office, does not prove a man to be a lawful Officer, but a lawful power
instating him into his Office. Acts. 8.4.11.19.20. and 18.24, 25, 26. 1 Cor.
14.29, 30, 31. 1 Pet. 4.10.

But all the Ministers in the Church of England have nothing to prove the
lawfulness of their standing in the Ministry, but the actions of a Minister,
and are not in the least able to prove that they are instated into their
Ministry by virtue of a lawful power and authority.

Therefore they are no true Ministers of Christ, but false and Antichristian
Ministers of Antichrist.

Thirdly, again in the third place upon your own grounds I frame this Argument.

Those that by their Ministry do not accomplish the same ends, that the
Ministry of the Apostles did, are no true Ministers.

But the Ministers of the Church of England do not accomplish the same ends by
their Ministry, that the Ministry of the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 11.2.

Therefore your Ministers are no true Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But Gangrena one word more at present to you, seeing in the 217.218. pages of
your late 3. Gangrena, you fall so exceeding heavy upon me, and my honest
Camerade Mr. Overton, and say that these 2. audacious men, their dareing books
shall escape without exemplary punishment, and instead thereof be countenanced
and set free, I do as a Minister pronouncae (but I say it is as one of Satan's)
that the plague of God will fall upon the heads of those that are the cause of
it.

Come Antagonist, let us come to a period; for I hope, for all your malice you
are not yet so far gone beyond your self as to desire to have me hanged or
killed, and then condemned and adjudged, and therefore I will make you 2. fair
propositions.

First, (in reference to the Lords whose Goliath and Rabshaca-like Champion you
are) that if you please to join with me in a desire to both Houses, I will so
far go below my self, and my present appeal now in the House of Commons,
(always provided it may be no prejudice to the benefit I justly expect from my
said appeal) and join with you in this desire, that there may be by both
Houses, a proportionable number thereof, mutually by themselves chosen out, to
set openly, and publicly in the painted Chamber, where I will against you by
the established Laws of this Land, maintain against you and all the Lawyers
you can bring, this position (which is absolutely the contest betwixt the Lords
and me) THAT THE LORDS AS A HOUSE OF PEERS, HAS NO JVRISDISCTION AT ALL OVER
ANY COMMONER IN ENGLAND, IN ANY CRIMINAL CASE WHATSOEVER, and if you will, I
will wholly as in reference to the contest betwixt you and me, stand to the
vote, and abide the judgment and sentence of that very Committee, whose vote
upon the forementioned terms, if you will tie your self, I will tie my
self, either actively to execute, or passively to suffer and undergo it.

In the second place, because so far as I am able to understand your meaning,
in your forementioned pages, you would have me dealt withal, as the Earl of
Strafford, and the Bishop of Canterbury was, for endeavoring (as you say) with
so much violence, the overthrow of the three Estates, and the Laws of the
Kingdom, and in the stead of the fundamental Government and constitution of
this Kingdom, to set up an Vtopian Anarchy of the promiscuous multitude and
the lusts and uncertain fancies of weak people, for Laws and Rules.

Now in regard of the distractions of the Kingdom which are many, and that
they might not be made wider by new books from either of us, I shall be very
willing for peace and quiets sake, to join with you in a Petition to the House
of Commons, to appoint a select Committee publicly to examine all things that
are a miss in your books and mine, and to punish either, or both, according
to Law and Justice without partiality, and I appeal to all rational men in
the world, whether I have not offered fair or no.

But in regard I know not whether you will embrace my proffer, I shall speak a
little more for my self, and reduce all to these three heads.

First, whether the Lords have by the known Law of the Land any jurisdiction of
the Commons, or no?

Secondly, whether in the Parliaments own public declarations in Mr. Prinns
sovereign power of Parliaments, and in the Assemblies exhortation to the
solemn legal Covenant, and other Presbyterian books, licenced by public
authority, and others sold without control, there be no more said to justify
and maintain, that which Gangrena calls Vtopian Anarchy, then in any books
whatsoever published by these he calls Sectaries.

Thirdly, whether or no that out of my own words, in my book, called
INNOCENCE AND TRVTH JVSTIFIED, there can any thing be drawn to justify the
Lords in that which now I condemn them in? as Gangrena affirms, page 157, 158.

For the first, see what the ninth Chapter of Magna Charta says.

No freeman shall he taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his free hold, or
Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
judgment of his PEERS, or by the Law of the Land.

See the 3. of E. 1. chapter 6. And that no City, Borough, or Town, nor any man be
amerced wiithout reasonable cause, and according to the quantity of his
trespass, 9. H. 3. 14. that is to say, every free man, saving his freehold, a
Merchant saving his Merchandise, a villain saving his waynage, and that by his
or their Peers.

Now here is the express Law of the Land against the Lords jurisdiction over
Commons in criminal cases.

Now in the second place, let us see what one of the ablest expositors of the
Law that ever writ in England, says, of this very thing* and that is Sir
Edward Cook, in his exposition of Magna Charta 2. part institutes, which book
is published by two special orders of the present House of Commons, as in the
last page thereof you may read: who, in his expounding the 14 Chapter of Magna
Charta, p. 28. says, Peers signifies, Equals, and page 29. he says, the
general division of persons by the Law of England, is either one that is
noble, and in respect of his nobility, of the Lords House in Parliament; or one
of the Commons of the Realms, and in respect thereof, of the House of Commons
in Parliament, and as there be diverse degrees of Nobility, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barrons, and yet all of them are
comprehended within this word, PARES; so of the Commons of the Realm, there be
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, and Burgesses of several
degrees, and yet all of them of the COMMONS of the Realm, and as every of the
Nobles is one Peer to another, though he be of a several degree, so is it of
the Commons; and as it has been said of men, so does it hold of Noble-women,
either by birth, or by marriage, but see hereof Chap. 29.

And in Chap. 29 page 46. Ibim: he says, no man shall be disseised, that is,
put out of ^eison, or dispossessed of his freehold (that is) Lands, or
livelihood, or his liberties, or free Customs, that is, of such franchises, and
freedoms, and free Customs, as belong to him by his birthright, unless it be
by lawful judgment, that is, verdict of his equals (that is men of his own
condition) or by the Law of the Land, (that is, to speak it once for all) by
the due course, and process of Law.

No man shall be in any sort destroyed, (to destroy id est; what was first
built and made, wholly to overthrow and pull down) unless it be by the
verdict of his equals, or according to the Law of the Land.

And so says he is the sentence (neither will we pass upon him) to be
understood, but by the judgment of his Peers, that is equals, or according to
the Law of the Land, see him page 48. upon this sentence, per judicium Parium
suorum, and page 50. he says it was inacted that the Lords and Peers of the
Realm should not give judgment upon any but their Peers: and cites, Rot. Parl.
4. E. 3. nu. 6. but making inquiry at the Record-Office in the Tower, I had
this which follows, from under the hand of Mr. William Colet the Record-Keeper.

Out of the Roll of the Parliament of the fourth year of Edward the third
THE FIRST ROLL.
Records and Remembrances of those things which were done in the Parliament
summoned at Westminster, on Monday next after the Feast of Saint Katherine, in
the year of the reign of King Edward the third, from the Conquest, the
fourth, delivered into the Chancery, by Henry de Edenstone Clerk of the
Parliament.

THese are the Treasons, Felonies, Wickedensses, The judgment of Roger de
Mortimer.
done to our Lord the King, and his people, by Roger de Mortimer, and others of
his confederacy. First of all, whereas it was ordained at the Parliament of
our Lord the King, which was held next after his coronation at Westminster,
that four Bishops, four Earls, and six Barons, should abide near the King
for to counsel him; so always that there may be four of them, viz. one
Bishop, one Earl, and two Barons, at the least. And that no great business be
done without their assent, and that each of them should answer for his deeds,
during his time. After which Parliament, the said Roger Mortimer, (not having
regard to the said assent) took upon himself Royal power, and the government
of the Realm, and encroacht upon the State of the King, and ousted, and caused
to be ousted, and placed Officers in the Kings House and elsewhere throughout
the Realm at his pleasure, of such which were of his mind, and placed John
Wyard and others over the King, to espy his actions and sayings; so that our
Lord the King was in such manner environed of such, as that he would not do
any thing at his pleasure, but was as a man which is kept in Ward.

Also whereas the Father of our LORD the KING, was at Kenilworth, by ordinance
and assent of the Peers of the Land, there to stay at his pleasure for to be
served as becomes such a Lord, the said Roger, by Royal power taken unto
himself, did not permit him to have any money at his will; and ordered that
he was sent to Barkly Castle, where, by him and his, he was traitorously and
falsely murdered and slain.

But that which is to my purpose, is Roll the second, being the judgment of
Sir Simon de Bereford, which verbatim follows thus.

THE SECOND ROLL.
ALso, in the same Parliament, our Lord the King did charge the said Earls and
Barons, to give right and lawful judgment, as appertained to Simon de
Bereford, Knight, who was aiding and counselling the said Roger de Mortimer in
all the treasons, felonies, and wickednesses, for the which, the foresaid Roger
so was awarded and adjudged to death, as it is a known and notorious thing to
the said Peers, as to that which the King intends.

The which Earls, Barons, and Peers, came before our Lord the King in the
same Parliament, and said all with one voice, that the foresaid Simon was not
their Peer, wherefore they were not bound to judge him as a Peer of the Land.

But because it is a notorious thing, and known to all, that the aforesaid
Simon was aiding and counselling the said Roger in all the treasons, felonies,
and wickednesses abovesaid, (the which things are an usurpation of Royal
power, Murder of the Liege Lord, and destruction of Blood-Royall) and that he
was also guilty of diverse other felonies and robberies, and a principal
maintainer of robbers, and felons: the said Earls, Barons, and Peers did
award and judge, as Judges of Parliament by the assent of the KING the same
Parliament, that the said Simon as a traitor, and enemy of the Realm, be drawn
and hanged. And thereupon it was commanded to the Martial, to do execution of
the said judgment. The which execution was done and performed the Monday next
after the Feast of St. Thomas the Apostle.

In the same Roll.
And it is assented and agreed by our Lord the King, Agreement not to be drawn
into example.
and all the Grandees in a full Parliament, that albeit the said Peers, as
Judges of Parliament, took upon them in the presence of our Lord the King, to
make and give the said judgment by the assent of the King, upon some of them
which were not their Peers, and that by reason of the murder of the Liege
Lord, and destruction of him which was so new of the Blood-Royall, and son of
the King; that therefore the said Peers which now are, or the Peers which
shall be for the time to come, be not bound or charged to give judgment upon
others then upon their Peers, nor shall do it: (But let the Peers of the
Land have power) but of that for ever they be discharged and acquit, and that
the aforesaid judgment now given, be not drawn into example, or consequent for
the time to come, by which the said Peers may be charged hereafter, to judge
others then their Peers against the Law of the Land, if any such case happen,
which God defend.

Agrees with the Record, WILLIAM COLET.

It is the saying of the spirit of God Eccle. 4.9.12. two are better than one,
and a threefold cord is not easily broken, so that to prove my position true
for all the Rabshaca Language of Gangrena, I have first the fundamental Law
point blank on my side, and 2. the Judgment of one of the ablest Lawyers that
ever writ in England and his Judgment authorized (as good and sound) by the
present House of Commons, to be published to the view of the whole Kingdom,
and 3. the Lords own confession, for if you mark well, the 2. last lines, of
the forecited record, you shall find, they ingeniously confess and declare,
that it it against the Law of the Land, for them to judge a Commoner, and for
further confirmation of this, read Vox Plebis page 18. 19. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42. 44. 45. But if the Vlcerous Gangrena please to read a late printed
book, called Regal Tyranny discovered, he shall find that the author of that
Book, in his 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 86. pages, lays down many strong arguments to
prove, That the House of Lords have no Legislative power at all. And in his 94,
95, 96, 97. pages, he declares and proves, That before Will. the Conqueror
subdued the rights and privileges of Parliaments, the King and the Commons
held and kept Parliaments without temporal Lords, Bishops, or Abbots. The two
last of which, he proves, had as true and as good a right to sit in Parliament,
as any of the present Lords now sitting at Westminster, either now have, or
ever had.

For the second thing, which is, Whether or no there be not in the present
Parliaments Declarations, and in the Assemblies exhortation to take the
Covenant, and in Mr. Prynnes Sovereign power of Parliaments, and other
Presbyterian books publicly licenced, and others sold without control, as
much, if not more, said, to set up, or maintain that which Gangrena calls
Vtopian Anarchy, then in any Book what ever published by those he calls
Sectaries: And I aver it positively, There is, and shall join issue with
Gangrena to prove it in every particular. Therefore let him publish an exact
Catalogue of any of our Positions, when he pleases, and I doubt not, but to
make it evident, that it cannot justly by them be counted any vice in us, to
tread in their steps, especially seeing they have accounted them so full of
piety, truth and honesty; as they have done.

Now first, for the Parliaments Declarations, read but the Kings answers to
them, and you shall easily see he lays it as deeply to their charge of
endeavoring to set up Anarchy, as Gangrena does either to mine or Mr. Overtons;
yea, and instances the particulars, and tells them plainly, The Arguments they
use against him, will very well in time serve the people to turn against
themselves.

And as for Mr. Prynnes Sovereign power of Parliaments, I never read more of
that Doctrine (in any Book in all my life) that Gangrena so much condemns in
me, etc. then in that very Book, which is licenced by Mr. White, a member of
the House of Commons, and in his days as stiff a Presbyterian as Gangrena
himself. See his 1. part Sover. page 5, 7, 8, 9, 19, 26, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37.
But especially 42, 43, 44, 47, 57, 92. And 2. part, page 41, 42, 43, 44 45, 46.
and 73 74 75, 76 and 3. part. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 61, 62, 63, 64,
65. and 131, 132, 133.

And 4. part, page 10, 11, 15, 16. See his Appendix there, unto page 1, 2, 3,
4, 5* and 11: 12. 13, etc.

Besides these, see the first and second part of the Observations; Maxims
unfolded; the case of Ship Money briefly discoursed; A new Plea for the
Parliament; A fuller Answer to a Treatise, written by Dr. Fern, with diverse
others.

Now for the third thing, which is the triumph Gangrena makes in his 3 part
Gangrena, page 158. which is, that in my book, (called Innocence and Truth
justified, which I published the last year, 1645.) I give that to the Lords,
which now I in 1646. in many wicked Pamplets would take away from them: such
new light, says he, has the success of the new model; and the recruit of
the house of Commons brought to the Sectaries: Well I will the man stand to
this? if he will, then I desire the impartial Reader to judge betwixt us, and
turn to the 11, 12, 36 37, 74. pages of that book: in which pages, is contained
all that any way makes to his purpose; or else turn to the 157 page of his
book, and see, if in all my words there quoted by him, there is any thing that
carries the shadow of giving that to the Lords, that now I would take from
them; for there I am a reasoning with Mr. Pryn, or the house of Commons, not
upon my principles, but their own.

And therefore, I say, a Committee of the house of Commons, is not the whole
Parliament; no, nor the whole house of Commons it self, according to their own
principles, which is the only clause he can fix upon.

And good Mr. Gangrena, is it not as just, and as man-like in me, if I be set
upon, by you, when I have no better weapons to cudgel you with, then your own,
to take them from you, and knock your pate, as to make use of my own proper
weapons, to cut you soundly, or any other man that shall assault me to the
hazard of my Being; and this is just my case, that you count such a disgrace
unto me.

But say you there, I have owned their legislative power, and their judicative
power over Commons: Therefore, you draw an inference to condemn me from mine
own practice. Alas man! may not I lawfully seek or receive a good turn from the
hands of any man; and yet as lawfully do my best, to refuse a mischief from him?

But secondly, I answer, what though the 4. of May, 1641. I stooped to a trial
at the Lords Bar, upon an impeachment against me, by the King, does that ever
the more justify their Authority, or declare me to be mutable and unstable?
No, not in the least; for you cannot but know the saying of that most excellent
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 13.11. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put
away childish things. So say I to you; five or six years ago, I knew nothing
but the Lords Jurisdiction was as much more above the House of Commons (over
Commons) as their Robes and Grandeur in which they sat was above them;
especially, seeing at all Conferences betwixt both Houses, I see the members of
the house of Commons stand bare before the Lords: for which action I now see no
ground for, especially having of late read so many books which discourse upon
the Lords jurisdiction, which was upon this ground about a month or six weeks.

A Gentleman, a Member of the house of Commons, and one that I believe, wishes
me well, bid me look to my self; for to his knowledge, there was a design
amongst some of the Lords (the grounds of reasons of which, he then told me) to
clap me by the heels, and to fall so heavy upon me, as to crush me in pieces,
or else make me at least an example, to terrify others, that they should not
dare to stand for their Rights.

And being thus forewarned, I was half armed, which made me discourse upon
every opportunity with any that I thought knew any thing of the Lords
Jurisdiction, and I found by a general concurrence, that the 29. Chap. of
Magna Charta, was expressly against the Lords Jurisdiction over Commoners in all
criminal cases: And upon that ground I protested against them: and then upon
further inquiry I found Sir Edward Cooks Judgment expressly against them, and
is before recited: which book, Mr. Gangraena, I must tell you, is published
since my first trial before the Lords, and was not publicly in being when I
then stooped unto their Jurisdiction; and then coming prisoner to the Tower,
one of my fellow prisoners very honestly told me of the forementioned Record
of Sir Simon de Bereford, which presently with all speed under M Colets hand I
got out of the Record-Office:

All which just and legal authorities and testimony makes me so stiff
against the Lords, as I am; and I hope I shall continue to the death against
them in the thing in question betwixt us, as unmovable as a brazen Wall, come
hanging, come burning, or cutting in pieces, or starving, or the worst that all
their malice, and the ulcerous Gangrena Priests put together can inflict: For
all that I principally care for, is to see if the thing I engage in, be just;
and if my conscience upon solid and mature deliberation, tell me it is, I will
by the strength of God, if once I be engaged in it, either go through with it,
or die in the midst of it, though there be not one man in the world absolutely
of my mind, to back me in it.

But lastly, admit in former times, I had been as absolute a Pleader for the
Lords Jurisdiction over Commons, as now I am against them.

Yet truly, a man of Mr. Gangraenaes coat, is the unfittest man in the Kingdom
to reprove me for it: For his Tribe, I mean of Priests and Deacons, those
little toes of Antichrist, now called reformed Presbyters, are such a
Weathercock, unstable generation of wavering minded men, as the like are not
in the whole Kingdom.

For their Predecessors in Henry the 8. days, were first for the Pope* and
all his Drudgeries, and then for the King and his new Religion, and then 3. in
his time, returned to rheir vomit again: and then 4. in Edward the 6. days,
became by his Proclamation godly reformed Protestants: and then 5. in Queen
Mary's days, by the authority of her and her Parliament (which Parliament, I
do aver it, and will maintain, had as true a ground to set up compulsive
Popery, as this present Parliament has to set up compulsive Presbytery) became
for the generality of them bloody and persecuting Papists: And then 6. by the
Authority of Queen Elizabeth and her Parliament (who had no power at all, no
more then this present Parliament, to wrest the Scepter of Christ out of his
hands, and usurpedly to assume the Legislative Power of Christ, to make Laws
to govern the Consciences of his people; which they have nothing at all to do
with, He having made perfect, complete, and unchangeable, Laws himself, Esa
9.6, 7, and 33.20, 22. Acts 1.3. and 3.22, 23. and 20.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. Heb. 3 2, 3, 6) became again a Generation of pure and reformed
Protestants, and have so continued to this present Parliament: But now like a
company of notorious forsworn men (who will be of any Religion in the world, so
it carry along with it profit and power) after they have for the generality of
them, taken and sworn six or seven Oaths, that the Bishops were the only true
Church Government, and that they would be true to them to the death.

Yet have now turned the 7th time, and engaged the Parliament and Kingdom in an
impossible-to-be-kept oath and Covenant, to root up their ghostly Fathers the
Bishops as Antichristian, from whom, as Ministers they received their Life and
Being.

Yea, and now the 8th. time have turned and fallen from that Covenant and Oath,
by which they made all swear that took it; not only to root out Bishops, but
all Officers whatsoever that depend upon them: in the number of which, are all
themselves, having no other ordination to their Ministry, but what they had
from them, and so are properly, really, and truly dependents upon them; and yet
now of late have by themselves and instruments, as it were forced the House of
Commons to pass a vote, to declare themselves all forsworn, that had a finger
in that vote, and so a people not fit to be trusted: For, by their late Vote,
no man what ever must preach and declare Jesus Christ; but he that is ordained;
that is to say, unless they be depending on the Bishops by Ordination, or else
on the Presbyters, who are no Presbyters, unless they depend on the Bishops
for their Ordination; for they have no other: and what is this else, but to
punish every one that shall truly endeavor the true and real performance of
the Covenant? Truly, we have lived to a fine forsworn age, that men must be
punished, and made incapable to bear any office in the Kingdom, if they will
not take the Covenant.

And then if they do take it, it shall be as bad, if they will not forswear
themselves every moment of time, that the Assembly shall judge it convenient, and
the house of Commons vote it.

And truly, there is in my judgment a good stalking-horse for this practice in
the Assembly of Dry-vines ( alias Divines, Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. Esa 44.52.)
Exhortation to take the Covenant, in these words, and if yet there should any
oath be found, into which any Ministers or others have entered, not warranted by
the Laws of God and the Land, in this case, they must teach themselves and
others, that such Oaths call for, rapentance, not particularly in them; that is
to say, that neither the Covenant, nor any other Oath whatsoever, that they
have before, or hereafter shall take, binds them any longer then the time that
they please to say it, is not warrantable by the Laws of God, and the Land,
and so by this Synodian Doctrine, a man may take a hundred Oaths in a day, and
not be bound by any of them, if he please.

Besides, I would fain know, if by the Parliaments so eager pressing of the
Covenant, they do not press the hastening of many of their own destructions:
For by the Covenant every man that takes it, is bound thereby to maintain and
preserve the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, with us every day trodden under
foot, by some of the members of both Houses arbitrary practices, not only
toward Cavaliers, (for which they have some color by pleading necessity) but
also toward those of their own party, that have as freely and uprightly
adventured their lives to preserve the laws and liberties of the Kingdom, as
any of themselves: for justice and right effectually they have scarce done to
any man that is a suitor to them. And therefore I here challenge all the Members
of both Houses, from the first day of their sitting to this present hour, to
instance me, that man in England, that is none of themselves, nor dependence
upon themselves, that they have done effectual justice to, though they have
had thousands of Petitioners and Complainants for grand grievances before the
Parliament; some of which have, to my knowledge, even spent themselves with
prosecuting their business before them, and run themselves many hundred pounds
thick into debt to manage their business before them, and yet to this hour
not one penny the better; and yet they can find time enough since I came
prisoner to the Tower, to share about 200000. l of the Commonwealths money
amongst themselves, as may clearly be particularized by their own news books
licenced by one of their own Clerks. O horrible and tyrannical wickedness!
Was a Parliament in England ever called for that end, as to rob and poll the
poor common people, and to force those that have scarce bread to put in their
mouths, to pay excise, and other taxations, or else to rob and plunder them of
all they have, and then share it amongst the members of both houses; as 10000.
l to one man, 6000. l to another, 5000. l etc. to another, and this many times
to those that never hazarded their lives for the Weal-publique; no, nor some of
the^ never intended, I am confident of it, good to the generality of the
people; but that they should be as absolutely their vassals and slaves (if not
more) as ever they were the Kings. O thou righteus and powerful Judge of
Heaven and Earth that of all the base things in the world, hate and abhorrest
dissemblers and hypocrites. Jer. 7.9, 10, 11 12. to 16. Matthew. 23, deal with
these the greatest of Dissemblers thy self, who like so many bloody and cruel
men, have engaged this poor Kingdom in a bloody and cruel war, pretendedly for
the preservation of their laws and liberties; when as God knows by a constant
series of actions, they declare they never truly and really intended any such
thing, but merely by the blood and treasure of the people, to make themselves
tyrannical Lords and Masters over them: So that for my part, if I should take
the Covenant, I protest it before the God of Heaven and Earth, without fear or
dread of any man breathing, I should judge it my duty, and that I were bound
unto it in duty, in conscience, by virtue of my oath, to do my utmost to
prosecute even to the death, with my sword in my hand, every member of both
houses, that should visibly engage in the destruction of the fundamental Laws
and Liberties of England, and prosecute them with as much zeal, as ever any of
them prosecuted the King: for tyranny, is tyranny, exercised by whom soever;
yea, though it be by members of Parliament, as well as by the King, and they
themselves have taught us by their Declarations and practices, that tyranny is
resistable; and therefore, their Arguments against the King, may very well
serve against themselves, if speedily they turn not over a new leaf: for what
is tyranny, but to admit no rule to govern by, but their own wills? 1 part col.
declar. page 284, 694.

But Tho: Gangrana, one word more to you; your threatening to write a book
against liberty of Conscience, and toleration of Religion: I pray let me ask
you this question, if the Magistrate, quatenus as Magistrate, be Judge of the
Conscience, and thereby is endowed with a power to punish all men that he
judges, conceives, or confidently believes, are erroneous and heretical;
or, because in Religion he differs from the magisterial Religion in the place
where he lives; Then I pray tell me, whether all Magistrates, quatenus as
Magistrates, have not the very same power? And if so, then does it not
undeniably follow, that Queen Mary and her Parliament did just in her days, in
making a law to burn those Heretics, that dissented from her established
Religion? who were as gross in their tenants in the then present Magistrates
eyes, as any of your Sectaries tenants are now in the present Magistrates eyes,
and if you, and your bloody-brethren of the Clergy-Presbytery, shall engage the
present Parliament and Magistracy, to prosecute the Saints and people of God,
under pretense of heretical Opinions, I will upon the hazard of my life
justify and prove it against you, and the present Parliament, that you and
they thereby justify Q. Mary in murdering and burning the Saints in her days;
yea, and all the bloudy-persecuting Roman Emperors, that caused to be murdered
thousands of the Saints, for bearing witness to the testimony of Jesus; yea,
and all the persecutions of the Jews, against Christ and his Apostles; yea,
and the putting them to death, and so bring upon your own heads all the
righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the days of righteous Abel, to this
present day, Mat. 23.29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35. which I warrant you will bring
wrath and vengeance enough upon you.

Now Mr. Lieutenant, a few words more to you, and so conclude; I desire you in
the next place, not only to provide me gratis, a prison-Lodging, for I can pay
Chamber-rent no longer; but also to provide me my diet, according to the
custom of the place; for you cannot but know, and if you do not, I now tell
you that the King was always so noble and just, as to do it to all the
Prisoners he committed to this place, of what quality soever: of the truth of
which, Who as I have lately heard, confessed he spent his Maj. 1500. l while
he was a prisoner here.
Col. Long, Col. Hollis, and Mr. Seldom, etc. now members of the house of
Commons, can inform you; and how that themselves, when they were the Kings
prisoners here in the 3. of His Reign (for speaking and acting freely in the
Parliament) were maintained by the King, according to their qualities, though
some of them had great estates of their own, in their own possessions and
enjoyments; and now, as the newes-books tell me, are voted 5000. l a piece, for
their then illegal sufferings.

And Sir, the Lords who committed me hither, have in a great measure the Kings
Revenue in their hands at their dispose; and therefore, I expect, now I seek
for it, they shall be as just as their Master (whom they have so much condemned
for injustice) and provide for me, according to my quality. And, Sir, I must
tell you, that I am very confident I have as many noble qualities in me, and as
much of a man in every respect, as any of those that sent me hither; (For
Titles of Honor, without Honesty and Justice, are no excellenter then a gold
ring in a Swines snout;) Yea, and have given as large a declaration of it to
the view of the world, as any of them, what ever, has done. And therefore,
Sir, if they shall deny me this piece of justice and equity, I will, by Gods
assistance, tell them as well of it, as ever they were told in their lives.

But, Sir, in the third place, if this fail me, I desire you to speak to them
to allow me interest for my two thousand pounds, (it being scarce twice so much
as I have spent since I first became a suitor for it,) that they the last year
decreed me, for my illegal, bloody, barbarous, and inhumane sufferings by the
Star Chamber; which, I dare confidently say, were more tormenting then all the
sufferings of the abovementioned Gentlemen, and their copartners. (See my
printed Relation of it made at the Lords Bar 13. Feb. 1645.) For which, as I
understand, there is 50000. l reparations voted them by the House of Commons,)
that so I may have something of my own to live upon. For without some of the
three forementioned things be done for me; I must either perish, or run
exceedingly into debt, which, I profess, I am very loath to to do: or lastly,
live upon the alms of my friends, which, I confess, is not pleasant unto me.
And besides, the freest horse, or horses in the world, with continual riding,
may not only be wearied, but also jaded and tired.

But if they will not yield that I shall have my lodging gratis, and my diet
found by them, nor interest for my many years expected, and long-looked-for
2000. l that last year they decreed me; nor the remainder of my just Arrears,
(which yet is diverse hundreds of pounds, that I faithfully, valiantly, and
dearly earned with the loss of my blood) to maintain and keep me alive, and my
wife and small children.

Then, as my last request, I entreat from you, to desire them to call me out to
a legal trial, and by the law of the Kingdom, (but not their arbitrary wills)
either to be justified or condemned. And here, under my hand, I profess, I
crave nor desire, neither mercy nor favor at their hands, but bid defiance to
all the adversaries I I have in England, both great and small, to do the worst
their malice can unto me; always provided, I may have a legal trial, by my
Peers, my Equals, men of my own condition; according to the just, established,
unrepealed, fundamental law of the Land, contained in Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right: And truly, Sir, if upon these terms they will not call me
out, but resolve to keep me here still, I will, by Gods assistance, before many
months be expired, give them cause (with a witness) to call me out: for here,
if I can help it, I will not be destroyed with a languishing death, though it
cost me hewing to pieces, as small as flesh to the pot. For if it had not been
that my report has lain so long dormant in the hands of Col. Henry Martin, the
glory of his Age amongst Parliament men, for a lover of his Country; whose
credit and reputation I ingeniously confess, I should be very loath in the
least (if I could avoid it) to bespatter.

But in regard by all the means and friends I can use to him, I cannot get him
to make my report; though I desire nothing at his hands but a bare endeavor of
the discharge of his duty, to quit himself of it, let the issue be good or
bad, all is one to me, so it were but done, or endeavored to be done: I had
long since made a formal appeal to the people, but in regard of my constant
hard usage both from diverse Lords and Commons, and their Jaylors, and other
instruments, and the many unresistable prickings forward of my own spirit,
which presses me rather to hazard the undergoing of Sampsons portion, Judge.
16.21. then to be forced to degenerate from the principles of Reason (the King
or chief of all Creatures) into the habit of a bruit beast, and so to live a
slave or vassal under any power under the Cope of Heaven, whether Regal or
Parliamentary or what ever it be.

And therefore, having now with a long deliberated deliberation, committed my
wife and children to the tuition, care, and protection of a powerful God, whom,
for above these ten years, I have feelingly, and sensibly known as my God in
Jesus Christ; who with a mighty protection, and preservation has been with me
in six troubles, and in seven, and from the very day of my public Contest
with the Bishops; has enabled me to carry my life in my hands, and to have it
always in a readiness, to lay it down in a quarter of an hours warning,
knowing that he has in store for me a mansion of eternal glory.

All these things considered, I am now determined, by the strength of God, if I
speedily have not that Justice, which the Law of England affords me, which is
all I crave, or stand in need of, no longer to wait upon the destructive
seasons of prudentiall men: but forthwith to make a formal Appeal to all the
Commons of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and set my credit
upon the tenters to get money to print 20000. of them, and send them gratis to
all the Counties thereof: the ingredients of which shall be filled with the
Parliaments own Declarations and Arguments against the King, turned upon
themselves, and their present practice, and with a little Narrative of my
Star Chamber tyrannical sufferings; and those I have there to complain of, are
first Dr. Lamb, Guin, and Aliot, for committing me. And 2. Lord Keeper
Coventry, Lord Privie-Seal Manchester (that corruptest of men, whose unworthy
Son, is now, and has been for some years, the chief Prosecutor of my ruin,
for no other cause, but that I have been honest, valiant, and faithful, in
discharging the trust reposed in me, which he himself was not) my L. Newburgh,
old Sir Henry Vane (a man as full of guilt, as any is in England, whose
baseness and unworthiness I shall anatomize to the purpose) the L. chief
Justice Bramston, and Judge Jones, who sentenced me to the Pillory, and to be
whipped, etc. And then 3. Canterbury, Coventry, Manchester, Bishop of London, E.
of Arundel, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Cottington, L. Newburgh, Secretary Cook,
and Windebanke, who sentenced me to ly in irons, and to be starved in the
prison of the Fleet; With a short Narrative of my usage by Lords and Commons
this present Parliament; and conclude with a Declaration of what is the end,
wherefore Parliaments by law ought and should be called which is, to redress
mischiefs and grievances, etc. but not to increase them, 4. E. 3. 14. and 36.
E. 3. 10. to provide for the peoples weal, but not for their woe, Book Declar.
1. part. page 150. and yet notwithstanding all the trust reposed in them, and
all the Protestations they have in their public Declarations, made,
faithfully, without any private aims, or ends of their own, to discharge it:
And notwithstanding all the blood and money, that has been shed, and spent at
their beck and commands, I would fain have any of them to instance me any one
Act or Ordinance, since the wars begun, that they have done or made, that is
for the universal good of the Commons of England, who have born the burden of
the day. Sure I am, they have made several Ordinances to establish Monopolies
against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and thereby have robbed freemen
of their trades and liveli-hoods, that at their command have been abroad a
fighting for maintaining the Law; and in practice, annihilated Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right: So that a man (though of their own Party) may
perish, if committed by a Parliament Man, or Parliament men, hefore he can get
the Judges to grant an Habeas Corpus, to bring him and his cause up to their
Bar, there to receive a trial (secundum legem terrae) that is according to the
Law of the Land, although the Judges be sworn by their oaths to do it.

So Sir, desiring you seriously to consider of the premises, which I could not
conveniently send you, but in print, I rest

Your abused Prisoner, who is resolved to turn all the stones in England, that
lie in his way, but he will have right and justice against you, JOHN LILBURN,
semper idem.
From my illegal and chargeable captivity in Cole-harbour in the Tower of
London, this 30 Jan. 1646.
FINIS.

