IONAHS Cry out of the Whales belly: Or, Certain Epistles writ by Lieu. Coll.
John Lilburne, unto Lieu. General Cromwell, and Mr. John Goodwin: Complaining
of the tyranny of the Houses of Lords and Commons at Westminster; and the
unworthy dealing of diverse (of those with him that are called) his Friends.
Jonah. 2.2, 3, 4. I cried, by reason of mine affliction, unto the Lord, and he
heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.

For thou had cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed over me.

Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy
holy Temple.

Jer. 20 10, 11, 12. For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side.
Report, say they, and we will report it: all my familiars watched for my
halting, saying, peradventure he will be intised, and we shall prevail against
him, and we shall take our revenge on him.

But the Lord is with me, as a mighty terrible one: therefore my persecuters
shall stumble, and they shall not prevail, they shall be greatly ashamed, for
they shall not prosper, their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.

But, O Lord of hosts, that triest the righteous, and see the raines and the
heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee I have opened my cause.

Micah. 7.5. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide.

Esaias 63.9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them, in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them.

TO THE MAN WHOM GOD HAS honored, and will further honor, if he continue
honoring him, Lieu. General Cromwell at his house in Drury Lane, near the
red-Lion this present.
Much honored Sir,
IT is the saying of the wise man, That he that rewards evil for good, evil
shall never depart from his house, the justness of which divine sentence
engraven in nature, has even engaged moral Heathens to a grateful
acknowledgement of favors received, and has been a sufficient obligation
conscientiously to ty them, to acts of retribution to those for whom they have
received them; and therefore (not only below a Christian, but a very moral
Heathen, and Pagan should I judge my self if I should be forgetful of your
seasonable favors, much more if I should return contrary effects unto you,
which with all thankfulness I must acknowledge, took compassion ^^ me in my
bonds and chains even when I was at deaths door, and was principally
isntrumental in delivering me from the very gates of death, in Anno 1640. and
setting me free from the long and heavy Tyranny of the Bishops and Starchamber,
even at that time when I was almost spent, which to me is so large an
Obligation that I think while I live it will be engraven upon my heart as with
the point of a Diamond, many particular respects since then, I must ingeniously
confess I have caus^ to take notice of from you; and one large one of late
since I came into present capti^ies, which was for that large token you sent
me, for which now in writing I return you many thanks.

Sir I dare not now by way of boasting take upon me to enumerate my hazardous
actions, which has flowed from the truth of my affections to you in doing you
real and faithful service, in maintaining the honor of your person, and your
just interest, which was all the retrabution, that I in my poor condition,
could answer all your kindenesses with, and truly if I be not mistaken I think
I have been faithful, cordial, hearty, sincere and hazardious, in dischaging
my engaged affection and duty to you, and the more high has my thoughts been
toward you, for that I have apprehended in you, in your service abroad, an
affectionate, cordial, and free hearted spirit to the poor people of God:
unto whom in times by past you have been as a Sanctuary, and hiding place, and
God has honored you sufficiently for it, not only in giving you extraordinary
large ^oome in the affections of thousands, and ten thousands of his chosen
ones, but in hanging upon your ba^k the glory of all their atcheivements, by
means of which you have been made mighty and great, formidable and dreadful
in the eyes of the great ones of the world, and truly my self and all others
of my mind that I could speak with, have looked upon you as the most absolute
single hearted great man in England, untainted or unbiased with ends of your
own. But dear Sir, give him leave that presumes to say and that without
flatery, he honors you as he does his own life and being, that looking as a
dilligent spectator upon your actions and carriages, for this many months
together, It has struck him into an amase, and filled his spirit as full of
boylings and turmoylings as ever Jeremiahs was, when he said thy word is within
me like a burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I am weary with forbearing,
and I could not stay Jer. 20.9. and truly Sir I was in pains and travel how
to behave my self toward you, and feign I would have writ my mind freely and
plainly unto you, but truly unto my own shame I must really acknowledge, I
have been like Jonah who fled from the presence of God and the Errand he had to
employ him upon. Jonah, 1.3. etc. and I have withstood those many pricking
motitions, which I believe flowed from his spirit, and have either too much
preferred my own ends, or my base carnal reasons, before the Dictates of God,
but now am not able for all the world to forbear any longer, being lately
forced, nolens volens, without rest or sleep, most seriously to meditate upon
these following sayings of God, Exodus 23.6.7.8. Thou shall not wrest the
judgment of the poor in his cause. Keep thee far from a false matter, and
the innocent and the righteous slay thou not: For I will not justify the
wicked. Thou shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth
the words of the righteous. O dear Cromwell, the Lord open thy eyes, and make
thy heart sensible of those snares that are laid for thee in that vote of the
House of Commons of two thousand five hundred pounds per annum.

And Deuteronomy. 16.19. God says expressly, Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou
shall not respect persons, neither take a gift: For a gift does blind the eyes
of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. And truly being very
fearful and jealous in my own soul, that some of my true friends, with whom I
have talked of your self very freely of late, should shortly hit me in the
teeth by reason of my silence to you, and too justly upbrayd me with that
saying of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 20 verse, 29. Presents and gifts bl^nd the eyes
of the wise, and stop his mouth that he cannot reprove. And therefore, Sir,
give me leave to say unto you in the wards of Job, chap 32.21, 22. Let me not,
pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me give flattering titles unto
man, for I know not to give flatering titles; in so doing my maker would soon
take me away. Now deer Sir, knowing that you cannot but know, that it is a
saying of the Spirit of God, That faithful are the wounds of a Friend, but
deceitful are the k^sses of an Enemy. I come now downright to unbowell my mind
unto you and truly to tell you, that in my thoughts I look upon the redeemed
ones of Jesus Christ in England, in as low and sad a condition, almost as the
Jews were in the third of Esther, when Haman upon this false suggestion to K
Hashuerosh, [That there is a certain people scattered abroad, and dispersed
amongst the people in all the provinces of the Kingdom, and their laws are
diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings laws, therefore it is not
for the Kings profit to suffer them] had obtained a Decree to destroy them all;
and therefore as poor Mordicai in the bitterness of his spirit in the fourth
chapter, said unto Queen Esther, so say I to thee, thou great man Cromwell,
Think not with thyself, that thou shall escape in the Parliament House, more
then all the rest of the Lambs poor despised redeemed ones, and therefore, O
Cromwell, if thou altogether hold thy peace, (or stoppest or underminest as
thou do, our and the Armies petitions) at this time then shall enlargement
and deliverance arise to us poor afflicted ones, (that have hithertoo doted
too much upon thee, O Cromwell) from another place then from you silken
Independents, the broken reeds of Egypt in the House and Army) but thou and thy
Fathers House shall be destroyed: but who knows whether thou art come out of
thy sickness, and to such a height in the kingdom, for such a time as this*

And therefore if thou will pluck up thy resolutions, like a man that will
persevere to be a man for God, and go on bravely in the fear and name of God,
and say with Esther, If I perish I perish; but if thou would not, know that
here before God I arraigne thee at his dreadful Bar, and there accuse thee
of delusions and fair words, deceitfully, for betraying us, our wives and
children into the Haman-like tyrannical clutches of Ho^^is and Stapleton (both
now impeached): and the rest of that bloody and devouring faction, that has
designed us to utter ruin and destruction, and this land and kingdom to
vassalage and slavery against whom we are sufficiently able to persevere our
selves, if it were nor for thee, O Cromwell, that art led by the nose by two
unworthy covetous earthwormes, Vain and St. John (I mean young Sir Henry
Vain, and Solicitor St. John) whose baseness I sufficiently anatomized unto
thee in thy bed above a year ago in Colonel Mountagues house in the Pears, as
thou can not but very well remember, and which I am resolved to the purpose
shortly to print. See the last page of the Outcries of the oppressed Commons,
and the Resolved man's Resolution. p. 6. 7, 8 9, 10.
O Cromwell, I am informed this day by an Officer out of the Army, and by
another knowing man yesterday, that came a purpose to me out of the Army, That
you and your Agents are likely to dash in pieces the hopes of our outward
preservation, Their petition to the House, and will not suffer them to petition
till they have laid down their Arms, because forsooth you have engaged to the
House they shall lay down their Arms whenever they shall command them,
although I say no credit can be given to the Houses Oaths and engagements, to
make good what they have promised. And if this be true, as I am too much afraid
it is; then I say, Accursed be the day that ever you had that influence among
them; and accursed be the day that ever the House of Commons bribed you with a
vote of 2500. l. per annum, to betray and destroy us. Sir, I am jealous over
you with the hight of godly jealousy, that you like Ephesus have forsaken your
first love and zeal Which is very probable: for Peter to save himself
forswore and denied his Master, Matthew. 26.72.73. yea, and for fear played also
the hypocrite and dissembler, for which Paul reproved, and blamed him to his
face, Galat. 2.
, for which I am most heartily sorry, and should be very glad I were mistaken,
and upon manifestation of which from you, I should very gladly cry you peccavi
for my present heat: But Sir, if these Army news be true, I must bid you for
ever Farewell, and must hereby declare my self an avowed enemy to your
selfe-pecuniary interest, and all your copartners, and shall with more zeal
bend all my abilities against you all, and unmask you to my friends, then my
adversaries the tyrannical and arbitrary Lords, do the worst you can to my
throat, which you used jestingly to say, you would cut so soon as ever I fell
out with you.

Sir, I have but a life to lose, and know that to die to me is gain, being now
crucifi^d to the world and it to me, and being now sufficiently able to trust
God with my Wife and Children; but by the strength of God I am resolved Sampson
like, to sell my life at as dear a rate as I can, to my Philistine
Adversaries, that shall either by force without law, endeavor to destroy me, or
by treachery to undo me. And if the Army do disband before they petition, I,
and all such as I am, must truly lay the whole blame upon you, and truly
declare the House of Commons bribe Cromwell to betray the liberties of England
into their tyrannical fingers Sir, is it not the Generals Commission to
preserve the laws and liberties of England? And how can he and those with him,
without being esteemed by all men (that are not bribed, or prefer their own
base interest before the common safety) the basest of men, to lay down their
Arms upon any conditions in the world, before they see the laws and
universal well known liberties of England firmly settled; especially seeing, as
I will undertake publicly, and I hope shortly to prove, the Parliament
tyrannizeth ten times more over us then ever the King did See my printed
Epistle to Colonel Martin, of the 31. of May, 1647. page 6, 7, 8, 36, 37, 38,
and 48, 49, to 56. And see the first part of the justification of the Kings
Government against the Parliament, page 3, 4, 5, to the end. And Mr. Richard
Overtons Appeal, dated July 1647.
: and I will maintain it, that by the law of this Kingdom, it is ten times
easier to prove it lawful for us to take up Arms against them in the ways
they now go, then it was for them to take up Arms when they did, against the
King. And I profess I would do it, if I were rationably able to do it to
morrow. For, if, as they have often said, That tyranny be resistable, then it
is resistable in a Parliament as well as a King. Sir, I am not mad, nor out of
my wits, but full of apprehensions of slavish consequences, reason and zeal,
and should be glad it could speedily and justly be cooled by you, before it
flame too high, which you will further understand I have grounded cause to make
it, if you seriously read and ponder this enclosed Letter sent to Mr. John
Goodwin, which with this, I have sent by the gravest, wisest, and fittest
messenger I could think of, and though a Feminine, yet of a gallant and true
masculine Spirit.

And so I commit you to the wisest disposing of our wise God, and shall rest
till I hear from you.

From my soule-contented captivity in the Tower of London, for the Laws and
liberties of England, against the tyranny of the house of Lords, and their
associates, Lords would be, this 25 March, 16^7. Yours in much jealousy of
you, John Lilburne.

To his much honored and much respected friend, Mr. John Goodwin, at his House
in Swan-Alley, in Colemanstreet, these.
Honored and worthy Sir,
I Am necessitated to write a few lines unto you, about a business that does
very much concern me, but in the first place, I desire to make my engaged
acknowledgement unto you, and your congregation for your large kindesses
manifested unto me in this my present imprisonment in supplying my necessities:
in which particular I must ingeniously confess I am more obliged to you
singly, then to all the Congregations in and about London, and yet
notwithstanding, have in some other things just cause to think my self more
injured by some of your congregation then by all the avowed and professed
adversaries I have in England; for against them I have a defense, but against a
secret adversary (being a pretended friend) I have none, but am thereby subject
to an unapprehended destruction. That which I have to lay to the charge of some
of your members, is, That they have improved all their power, interest, and
ability, to hinder all effectual means (whatsoever) that tended to procure my
deliverance from a tyrannical captivity, and not only mine, but all the rest
of my afflicted fellow-Commoners that are in the same affliction with me, (as
Mr Richard Overton, his wife and brother, Mr. John Musgrave, Mr. Larners
servant, etc.) for besides what they have done in London to crush all Petitions
that tended to my just deliverance, they have improved their interest to
destroy the Petition of Buckingham shire, and Hartford Shire, which was
principally intended for the good of the prerogative Prisoners, my self, Mr.
Overton, etc. for upon Monday last Lieut. Collonell Sadler came to the
Randevous at Saint Albones, and therein the name of diverse knowing men of Mr.
John Goodwines Congregation, improved all his interest utterly to destroy the
Petitioner, so that what he did then, and Mr. Fe^ke an Independent Minister,
who lives at or about Hartford, who being lately at London, brought down such
discouraging news, that some of eminent quality of the Petitioners told me in
these words, That if it had not been for the base, unworthy, undermining
dealing of some of Mr. John Goodwins Congregation, they had had a thousand
subscriptions for an hundred they have now, and a thousand to have come in
person with the Petitioner for every hundred they had.

Sir, I cannot but stand amazed to think with my self, what should be the
ground and reason of these men's preposterous actings, point blanke destructive
to the welfare of every honest man in the Kingdom, and particularly the
destruction of Who has never been out of the clutches of tyrants this ten
years, who have several times made me spend my self to my very shirt.
me and my poor distressed Family and truly in my own thoughts, I think I could
easily fix upon those worldly wise prudentiall men in the Parliament, The chief
of which I conceived to be you and Sir Hen. Van^ and Soliciter St. John, whose
aims I conceived are to be Lord Treasurer and Lord Keeper, or if they miss of
the titles, yet to enjoy the power and profit thereof, or else to be as near
it as may be.
that set them at work on purpose to keep the people from seeking for their
own liberties and freedoms, that so they may not be disturbed in the
enjoyment of their great and rich places, which I am afraid they prise above
the welfare of all the godly men in England, and the Laws, liberties and
freedoms thereof for all their great and g^lded professions, and truly as much
cause have I administered to me, particularly and publicly to fall foul upon
them, and their proud, imperious, unjust; and self interests, as they
underhand have fallen upon me, my liberty and welfare, but by reason of those
many engagements, by which I stand obliged to your self, for your so stout and
deep engagement for the public welfare of all those that thirst after either
morrall, or religious righteousness: I could do no less but write these lines
unto you, before I put my necessitated resolution unto real action, and
earnestly to entreat you to spare so much time from your weighty emploiments,
as to do me the favor to let me speak a few words with you, and if you
please to bring Mr. Price along with you

So with my truest respect presented to you, I commit you to the protection of
the most High, and rest,

Your true and real friend to serve you, JO. LILBVRNE
From the Tower this 13. of Feb. 1646.
A second letter to Leiu. General Cromwell, to press home the former.
Honored Sir;
I writ a large letter to you of late, and by the bearer of it I received a
verbal answer from you, and by an other friend of Bristow at a distance I
understood a little from you, but neither of them satisfactory to me, nor any
thing else that I have lately heard from you, or any of your over wise friends,
that are not able to trust God with three half pen^e; so that my spirit is as
high as it was when I last writ to you, and altogether unsatisfied. But in
regard my soul earnes toward you I cannot but once again by this true friend
write two lines unto you, to tell you that I cannot sit still though I die for
it, and see you that are reputed honest conscientious men be the betrayers and
destroyers of your poor native Country, and the laws and liberties thereof
For while you sit in the House in silence, and publish nothing to the public
view, of your dislike of the base things that are continually Acted in the
House, you are in the sight of men approvers of them all, yea, and treacherous
betrayers of your Friends and Country. Who think all is well, because that you
are reputed honest men sit there, and they see nothing of your dislike of any
thing done there, and therefore are subject to be held asleep with security
till destruction be even at their doors, and ready to seal upon them, whereas
if ye played the faithful watchmen to your native Country as you ought to do,
to warn them betimes of the danger they are in, by the tyrannical treacherous
vilians amongst you, they would easily be awakned and provide for their own
safety, by the speedy destruction of those that would destroy them which is but
just and reasonable. 1 part book Declarations page 150.




I can now say no more at present, but that I was yours, and still am Englands
Cordial Friend,

John Lilburne.
April 10. 1647.
For the Honorable Lieutenant General CROMWELL, this present at St. Albons.
Honored Sir,
NOthing indears my heart so much to any man, or men in the world, as honesty,
integrity, and justice: the contrary of which makes me abhor those in whom I
find it, although never so great and potent Sir, I shall without much
complement, return you many and hearty thanks for your active pains, and upon
those representations I have of your present courage, I do assure you I would
willingly be a Pioneer with you, and hazard, if I had them, a million of lives
for you: But never was I so afraid of all mine enemies, as of diverse of those
great ones I have looked upon as your chieife Counselors. Sir, your delay has
given extraordinary heart to your adversaries (who under hand make large
preparations against you) and unexpressible sadding of spirit to all your
cordial friends, insomuch that I for my part, have even despaired of any good
from you: the which has not in the least quenched my resolutions, but more
fully fixed me with magnanimity flowing from the God of valor and courage, to
die upon my own and my old principles: I am very confident that if you delay a
few days longer, you unavoidably involve thi^ k^ngdome in a large effusion of
blood For your adversaries in Parliament being so false and faithless, as by
their constant actions they have declared themselves to be, they will give you
good words, and their faith and promises, to lull you asleep, that so underhand
in the time of your Treaty, they may themselves to be able to cut your throats;
which is the daily work they secretly go about: And then have at you with a
vengeance.
. What I have to beg and entreat of you as for my life, is First, immediately
to march with a Declaration of peace and love to the body of the City; the
doing of which will enable your friends here, I confidently hope, to do your
work for you in sequestring the ^^. Members. As for justice at present you nor
any (...) cannot expect it. For the Judges at Westminste H^^l by Law are no
Judges See the 27 H. 8. 2^. and (...) Ordinance of Parliament by law can take
away ^o (...) life, I am sure of it. See the 2 part. instit. fol. 41 48. and ^
part. fol. 22. and 4. part. fol. 23 25. 48 ^0 (...) Declaration. But if you
should say, it is but just that an Ordinance should take away the lives of
those that have made them take away the lives of others, yet I say the most of
the members are so guilty, that they will never condemn thee.

The second thing I beg of you, is, That with all candor you endeavor to
understand the King, and let him understand you, and deal with him as becomes
honest men that play above board, and do their actions as in the sight of God,
for the good of all. I have in th^s particular fully by word of mouth,
communicated my mind to Tim Trevers, to be communicated to you: And this if I
were with you, upon my life I durst dispare against you all, that as things
stand, both in point of policy, honesty, and conscience, you must apply to the
King, without which the peace of the Kingdom can never be settled: and by
Parliament having so tyrannized, that they are grown as hateful to just man,
as the Devil. And do confidently believe he will grant any thing that is
rational, that you or the Kingdom can desire at his hands, for their future
good, security and preservation.

Now one thing I shall prop^und to your consideration, That you be not deceived
by your Scout-master general, Watson who I am apt confidently to believe, will
never honestly and uprightly adventure the ^aking of his finger either for God,
his Country, or the Army, further then he may be thereby of the stronger side,
and be a gainer. As for Dr. Stanes, whatever you think of him, I aver he is a
iuggling knave, the which I told you above two years ago at Ilchester, and I
will justify it, and am confident, will deceive you in the day of trial. And
as for Nath Rich, you your self know him to be a iuggling paltry base fellow:
Remember what you told him to his face in his own Chambers in Fleetstreet
before me and my wife, and two more, at the time Manchesters treason was upon
examination. And besides, his own Captain Lieutenant in my chamber, some weeks
since, showed me such letters of his to him, under his own hand, that gives me
cause to judge him fully to be a iuggling, dissembling, treacherous,
He^-hearted base fellow, which I desire you and all the honest men in the Army
to beware of, as of a plague and pest. And if he shall find himself
aggrieved at it, I say, tell him I will to his teeth, with my sword in my hand
in any ground in England, justify what I say And this I say to you, that it is
but just and fit that those that pretend to be reformers, reform first at
home, lest they render them ridiculous to all that setiously look upon their
actions.
,

Sir, in the way of justice, and single-hearted righteousness, in the midst of
all miseries, I am

22. June, 1647, Yours until death, John Lilburne.
The Bearer by word of mouth has from me more to say to you.



For Lieutenant General Cromwell this with speed, present at Wickham.
Honored Sir,
MY thoughts about the procedings of some of your great ones in the Army, have
been exceedingly perplexed, which has set my brains upon an unwearied study,
which in an Epistle would be too large to express unto you, only I cannot
(for former engagements sake, and the common good) but acquaint you with the
(...) of them before I print them.

You cannot but know that you several times, in a forcible manner kept me in
Manchesters Army, when I would (for that baseness and treachery acted there)
have deserted it, and have betaken my self to travels; Remember our discourse
at Banbury, etc.

And you know when he and you came to contest, I stood close to you, and to
truth and Justice then on your side, without fear or double ends: Although
both Watson, your Scoutmaster General, and Stains your Muster-master
General, with Coll. Not. Rich, your darling, played the paltry Knaves, and
jugled with you, of which in part you complained before me and my wife, to Rich
his face, in your own chamber at Dillinghams house, and called him before us,
base Rascal, and cowardly and perfidious fellow, with much more I very well
remember.

You cannot but know that all my present sorrows are come upon me by
Manchesters means and his creatures, for my zeal to truth and justice,
against him and all his treacherous confederates, who had (as I conceive) ear
now got the gallows, if you had followed him with as much vigor and strength
as you should, and I was made believe you would. But you plucked your head out
of the Accursed be the vote of the House of Commons, which voted you 2500 l
per annum, which vote and nothing else has kept Manchesters head upon his
shoulders.
collar, and I was catched in the briars, and have been exposed to a thousand
deaths by my imprisonment, etc. most illegally, barbarously and tyrannically,
and the House of Commons would do me no justice; though I turned (I think) as
many stones to procure it, as any man whatsoever in England could. But was
betrayed and unworthily disserted, both by your self, Henry Martin, Read my
late Epistle to him, page 1, 2, 3. 4, 5, 6, etc. now in Print. Dated 31. of
May. 1647
and all my friends there, whose actions to me are nothing else but
declara^ions of your self seekings, without purely eyeing either Trust or
Justice: for which God undoubtedly will lash and scurge you. And when I saw
that they wou^d not hear, regard, or receive, but burnt, or slighted all
those just Petitions; I set underhand on foot, for Justice and my liberty, I
applied my self vagarously unto the honest blades, the private Soldiers, I
mean, of the Army, though I have nothing to speak of your gallant General
(to me in a manner a stranger) but praises.

And when by much indust^y with much of position from your self and others of
your fellow Grandees in the Army, I had been isntrumental with the expense of
a great deal of money* and with all the interest and industry I had in the
world; acted both night and day to settle the Soldiers in a complete and just
posture, by their faithful agitators chosen out by common consent from amongst
themselves, as resolute, s^^, and just instruments to effect my Liberty, to
give a check to tyranny, and settle the peace and justice of the Kingdom, not
looking for any good at all from your self, and the rest of your fellow great
ones, that truly in my apprehension are transendently degenerated, and have
bought and sold, (and intend visibly more fully to do it) the Laws, Liberties
and Justice of the Kingdom for your own ends and greatnesses, which opinion is
every day confirmed and strengthened in me, in that you have not only done it
already, but go on still and intend more fully to do it, in that in a manner
you have robbed, by your unjust subtlety, and shifting tricks the honest and
gallant agitators, of all their power and authority, and solely placed (...) in
a thing called a Counsel of War, or rather a Cabenet Junio of seven or eight
proud self ended fellows, that so you may without control make up your own
ends; for I know your practices of old, which I am credibly informed is lately
renewed, and the chiefest of them before mentioned, whom I etc. have experience
sufficiently of, are as base as base can be; And will sell Christ, their
Country, friends, relations, and a good conscience for a little money or
worldly honor. And yet some of them must be the chief and only men to place
and displace all Officers in the Army.

And the aforesaid two general Officers were as I am confidently informed from
a good hand moved for by your self at a Council of War, to be the mannagers
of the charge against the eleven Members, although your self, I dare aver it,
believes, That put them both together, they have not so much courage as to
encounter with a Wesell or a Poulecat, much less with such sons of Anak, as
the eleven Members are, and I am sure both of them put together has not so
much honesty, as will fill a Tailors thimble, much less so much as will make
them deny their lives, liberties and interests; which of necessity they must
have that resolutely and faithfully undertake that employment, yet, as I am
told, they had been the men, if your wise son Ireton had not been apprehensive
that the Council of war had lost all their brains at their departure.

Sir, in short, what I hear not once, twice, thrice, nor a dozen times from
you has so perplexed my spirit, and filled me with amazement, that thereby I
must as a faithful plain dealer tell you, that I am necessitated wholly to
withdraw my present good thoughts from you and others with you, and must and
will print my conceptions to the view of the world, that so you may delude, and
destroy honest simple hearted, plain dealing men no longer, cost it what it
will, I value it not, being necessitively compelled either to remove every
stone that lies in my way, that hinders me, from obtaining my just ends,
Justice and my just liberty; or else to power out my bowels upon them with
lifting them, and I sufficiently hear of the Jeeres, plottings and
contrivings, of your favorites against me and all such as I am.

Therefore do you and they look to your selves as well as you can, for the
uttermost of my strength and interest shall speedily be amongst you publicly,
unless you speedily and effectually, without complement take some speedy
course, that I face to face may speak my mind to your self, of which I desire
a positive and satisfactory answer within four days at the farthest: I desire
no favor from Lords or Commons etc. but if I have transgressed the Law: let me
fully be punished by the Law, And by the Law of this Kingdom (which by all your
oaths you your self have sworn to maintain) there ought to be Jail
deliveries three times a year, and more oftener if need required, 4. Ed. 3. 2.
see the oppressed man's expressions declared. page 3. and 4. part. Iustit. cap.
30. page 168. 169. And all this is for that end, that the prisoner may have
(according to the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, and the Kings Coronation oath)
speedy Justice, and not be destroyed by a long lingering imprisonment, which the
Law abhorres, and therefore the late impeached members in their own case,
lately in their petition to the House, tells them, That delays of Justice is
equally forbidden with the denial of Justice, and yet I have above a whole
year been imprisoned by the Lords, and can come to no trial, though I have
with earnestness sought it, neither have I any accusation or crime laid unto
my charge, or so much as any witness or informer to appear against me, to the
transcendent violation of all the laws of the land, and contrary to all Rules
of proceedings in the way of Justice, as the foresaid petitioners aver, who
although they be impeached of treason in the highest nature, and the
particulars of their impeachment declared, and prosecuters with witnesses upon
oath ready avowedly to make it good, yet are they suffered to walk at liberty
by the Parliament, contrary to the declared and known law of the land, and the
universal practice of the laws of the Kingdom in all Ages; yea and their own
in the case of the Earl of Strafford, Bishop of Canterbury, Judge Battlet,
with many others, who they required and caused immediately to be secured and
imprisoned upon a general impeachment, without declaring any particulars in
the least. O brave judging Parliament, who have forgot to be just, and visibly
mind and practice nothing but playing at Hocus Pocus, and the protecting of
treason, cheating, knavery and roguery in each other, for which they deserve
the most transcendent punishment that ever amongst men was inflicted upon
Villains, Tyrants, and Traitors, to their trust.
but not destroyed in prison without and against Law, which if I can help it, I
will not be without a witness; or if I have done no evil, which my
adversaries declare I have not, in that as yet they have laid nothing to my
charge: then I require immediately to be delivered with just reparations, and
this I know lies in your power to effect in three days if you please* And so
desiring the God of Council to direct you, I rest,

From my causeless captivity in the Tower of London, this first of July, 1647.
Your true friend in the ways of Justice and Truth till death, John Lilburne.

I shall conclude with the Copy of a letter I sent Lieutenant General
Cromwell into the West, December. 9. 1645.
Dear and Honorable Sir:
THe endearednesse of my affections toward You, for those excellencies that I
have seen in you, and for those real respects that I have enjoyed from you
(but especially in that God has honored you and counted you worthy to be a
Patron to his people) ties me to have high and honorable thoughts of you, and
by how much the more my esteem is of you, by so much the more do I judge it my
duty to speak my mind freely and plainly to you (although in the eye of the
world, yea by thousands of degrees below you) and I hope you will make no other
constructions of my words, then that they are the clear demonstrations of the
cordial affections of a real, plain and single hearted friend of yours, who
you very well know was never skillful in the wicked art of flattery, colloging
or d^ssimulation.

From my Brother have I by two letters received an invitation (as coming from
your self) to come down into the Army, but I beseech you give me leave to
inform you that the foyles, affronts, and undermining usages that I met with
(not from you but others of more quality then honesty, when I was last in the
Army, has stuck in my stomach ever since, and could never yet be disgested by
me and though I do protest, I highly honor your self, and could willingly (if
I know my own heart) lay down my life for you, your honor and reputation, as
soon as for my father that begot me, or the dearest friend I have upon the
face of the earth: Yet so deep impression has the dealings with my self, and
others of my dear friends, that I have taken notice of both before that time,
and since, (from one and the same parties) taken upon my spirit that I have
many times, and still do in a manner scorn to take employment under those
persons, where the son or sons of Machevell has such sway, power, and
authority, by advice, policies and counsels, as the party or parties that I
know abused me has in your Army, and give me leave without passion, to tell
you, that I say you your self harbor in your breast a Snake or Snakes, although
you will not know it, you, and I say, there are those that have no small
influence into you, that if the wheel of honor and profit shall turn round
every day in the week, they are able to carry themselves so that they shall be
no losers by it, yea, and are able (and have principals to do it) to give the
t^^est words in the world to you, or any other honest man they deal with, when
they intend to cut your throat, and supplant and undermine you, and this I am
able to make good: Sir you may remember what you used to say, That it was the
greatest honor and glory that my Lord of Manchester ever had in the world,
that he was a Commander of so many of Gods people: and give me leave to say
the same to you, and also give me leave to tell you, that, that which lost my
Lords estimation amongst Gods people was the harkning to the evil advice of
those that had as specious pretenses as those I mean above you, and I wish
that your harkning to theirs may not eclips (though I hope it will never lose)
that respect that flows from Gods people toward you: Sir I run not at random,
but speak upon grounds from something lately come unto my knowledge and
observation, and I have now discharged my duty and my conscience, take it as
you please, and when you and I meet I shall clearly lay down my grounds unto
you, if you please to give me leave, which I shall take for a greater honor,
then if I had been one in the new Model of Dukes and Barons, lately so made by
vote; for my part I will not take upon me now to give you advice, but shall
leave you to the wise Counselor of all his, who tells me honesty is the best
policy, and uprightnes begets bouldnes, neither have I any thing now to desire
of you for my self, or any of my friends, being resolved by the goodness of
God patiently to be content with my portion, though it be but bread and water,
with the enjoiment of the cordial affections of the simple and contemned people
of God, and rather here hazard my self in seeking for justice and right which
is my due, then to go abroad to venture my life again in fighting I know not
wherefore, as I have done hitherto, unless it be to set up tyranny, violence,
injustice, and all manner and kind of baseness. So craving pardon for my
boldness (and it may be too plain lines) I commit you to the protection of the
most High, with as much sincerity and uprightness as I do my own soul.

And shall ever remain, London this 9. December. 1645. Your faithful, plain and
truth-telling friend and servant, John Lilburne.

The Postscript.
It may be diverse may demand to know the reason wherefore I write, and caused
to be printed, the foregoing Epistles; unto whom at present I return this
answer, That because the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax, is not now an Army
acting by a Commission, either from the King, or the two Houses: for although
they were raised by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled at
Westminster, for the defense of the King and Parliament, the true Protestant
Religion (not the Scotch, Jewish, Antichristian inslaving Presbytery) and the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom (not the Arbitrary wills of the Houses) as
appears by the Ordinance of the 15. Feb. 1644. 2. part. book Declar. fol. 599.
which positively commands Sir Thomas Fairfax from time to time, to submit to,
and obey all such orders and directions as he shall receive from both Houses of
Parliament, or from the Committee of both Kingdoms. Yet now he and his Army
apprehending and believing, that the wicked and swaying Faction in both Houses,
would destroy them, and inslave the whole Kingdom, do not only dispute the
two Houses orders and commands, but also positively disobey them, as unjust,
tyrannical, and unrighteous: And being now thereby dissolved into the
original law of Nature, hold their swords in their hands for their own
preservation and safety, which both Nature, and the two Houses practices and
See the ^. part. bo, declar p. 44. 93, 94, 150, 202, 205, 307, 382, 277, 269,
279, 446, 496, 637, 690, 700, 7^7, 722, 723, 726, 728
Declarations teaches them to do, and justifies them in, and now act according
to the principles of Saifety, flowing from Nature, Reason, and Justice, agreed
on by common consent and mutual agreement amongst themselves; in which every
individual private Soldier, whether, Horse or Foot, ought freely to have
their vote, to choose the transactors of their affairs, or else in the fight of
God, and all rational men, are discharged from obeying, stooping, or
submitting to what is done by them

And that they do now act upon the foresaid Principles, is clear by their
printed engagement of the 5. of July 1647. called, A solemn engagement of the
Army under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, read, assented
unto, and subscribed by all Officers and Soldiers of the several Regiments at
the general Randezvouz near Newmarket, In which agreement, or solemn
engagement, they say, That the Soldiers of this Army (finding themselves so
stopped (as before they there declare) in their due and regular way of making
known their just grievances, and desires to, and by their Officers) were
enforced to an unusual (but in that case necessary) way of correspondencie and
agreement amongst themselves, to choose out of the several Troops and
Companies, several men, and those out of their whole number, to choose two or
more for each Regiment, to act in the name and behalf of the whole Souldery of
the respective Regiments, Troops, and Companies.

And a little fu^ther they express themselves thus: We the Officers and
Soldiers of several Regiments hereafter named, are now met at a general
Rendezvous, have subsubscribed unto the said solemn engagement, and do hereby
declare, agree, and promise, to and with each other, and to and with the
Parliament, and Kingdom, as follows.

First, that we shall cheerfully and readily disband, etc. having first such
satisfaction and security in these things, as shall be agreed unto BY A
COUNCIL TO CONSIST OF THOSE GENERAL OFFIGERS OF THE ARMY (who have concurred
with the Army in the premises) WITH TWO COMMISSION OFFICERS, AND TWO SOVLDIERS
TO BE CHOSEN FOR EACH REGIMENT, who have concurred, and shall concur with us
in the premises, and in this agreement. And by the Major part of such of them
who shall meet in Council for that purpose, when they shall be thereunto
called by the General. Secondly, that without such satisfaction and security
as aforesaid, we shall not willingly disband nor divide, nor suffer our selves
to be disbanded or divided.

So that by these words in their agreement, you see the foresaid position
proved, that they act by mutual consent, or agreement. Now to have this
agreement, or solemn engagement invaded or broken, either by the subtilty,
fraud, or power of the Officers, and a power assumed by themselves, to act all
their chief business contrary to this Agreement, is an action that merits a
kicking (if not worse) out of the Army, to all those Officers (be they what
they will be) that were chief actors and contrivers of it.

For the most Divellish, subtle, undermining and destroying way that can be
taken by the greatest haters of the Army, Stapleton, Hollis, or the Assembly,
to destroy and overthrow them, and to have their wills not only of them, but
also of all that wish them well, is by their pecuniary charms, flateries,
gifts, bribes, promises, or delusions, to put the officers by their, agents
upon the invading and infringing the essential and common rights of the Army
before expressed, which within a little while will beget such pride, scorn and
contempt in the Officers against the Soldiers (who to their eternal praises
be it spoken, did the work to their hands, and acted at the beginning like
prudent and resolved men, when all or most of the Officers sat still like so
many Drones and Snekes) as will breed unquenchable heart-burnings in the
Soldiers against them, which will speedily draw them into discontents and
factions against them, which of necessity will speedily break out into civil
broyls amongst them, and so undoubtedly destroy them: for what occasions all
the wars in the world, but invading of rights? And what occasioned all the
late broils betwixt the King and the two Houses, but the invasion of rights?
And what has occasioned the present difference betwixt the two Houses and the
Army, but the two Houses invading their rights, and endeavoring to make them
slaves, by arbitrary Lording over them, by proclaiming them traitors, for
endeavoring to acquaint them with their grievances, and invasion of the common
and agreed of rights before mentioned of the private Soldiers of the Army by
the Council of War, etc. will evedently and apparently occasion the same
betwixt the Officers and Soldiers of the Army: And therefore accursed be he
that is the causer or contriver of it. For if it be treason in a Kingdom (as
Str^fford and Canterbury found it to be) to endeavor the subversion of the
fundamental Laws and Rights of the Kingdom; can it be less then treason in
the Army for any of their Officers to endeavor the subversion of their
essential, fundamental Laws, Rights, and agreements expressed in their
foresaid solemn Engagements. And truly, being more then jealous, that it was
the study, labor and practice of some Officers in the Army, to invade the
foresaid rights of the private Soldiers of the Army, which if continued in,
will destroy them, and so by consequence the whole Kingdom and my self: For
if they do not deliver us from vassalage, we are perfect slaves, and so made
by the treachery of our Servants, our Trustees in Parliament. And therefore out
of love and affection to my native country, and my own Being, I could do no
less then by my writing, etc. endeavor the prevention of it, and also give a
hint of those that my often intelligence told me again and again, were like to
be the most pernicious instruments in it, which is before named. And seeing my
writing was to no purpose, nor took not any such effect as I hoped it would,
but rather procured me menaces and threats, which I value no more then the wind
that blows, fearing no man in the world, nor caring for the favor or
friendship of any in the world whatsoever he be, no further then I find him
just and honest, at least morally so: And therefore in mercy to my own Being,
and the wel-being of my native country, I can do no less then publish the
foregoing Letters as an Alarm to all the private Soldiers in the Army, and to
all their honest Officers, that really, cordially, and heartily desire the
settlement of all men's just interest in England, whose principles are not
destructive to cohabitation and humane neighborhood and society, that they may
awake out of their sluggish dreams, before their and the Kingdoms enemies
surprise them, beat up and destroy them in their quarters; which I am confident
will speedily and unavoidably be their portion, unless they have extraordinary
watchful eyes over Nich. Machiavils chief sons amongst them, and preserve
their forementioned agreement entire, and do what they intend to do quickly
and resolvedly, their delays already having amongst thousands that honored
them, shaken their reputation: And if any gilded or varnished Scribe or
Pharisee, as tithe monging Noy or Marshall 'who were principal instruments to
bring the Scotch, and the Devils Fetters (the Covenant) into this Kingdom,
almost to the ruin (I am sure to the perjury) thereof find themselves
agreiv'd, I desire to let them know, that Fiat justitia ruat Celum is my Motto,
and if I perish, it shall be in the following of justice for justice sake.

16. of July 1647. John Lilburne.

A Copy of a Letter written to Coll. Henry Martin, a Member of the House of
Commons, by Leiu. Col. John Lilburn July. 20. 1647.
SIR,
YOur Delitory and unjust delaying to make my Report to your House according to
your duty, has so hastened forward the ruin and destruction of me, my wife and
tender infants, and riveted the House of Lords fast in their tyrannical
domination, That I cannot now style you either a friend to me, the
Commonwealth, or to justice truth, or honesty, and of all men in the world I
should least have dreamed to have found such unworthy and unjust dealing from
you; But yet notwithstanding, by reason of a Paper come from the Army, a copy
of which I have even now seen, (which desires of the House of Commons that I,
etc. may immediately, and legally be tried, or if the great Affairs of the
Kingdom will not suffer them to debate my business at present, that then I
may be bailed,) I therefore desire you to acquaint the House, that the Law of
the Land is clear and plain, that the Lords in the case in controversy
betwixt me and them, have no Jurisdiction at all over me, or any Commoner of
England whatsoever, and I have justly protested against them, and legally
appealed Which Appeal you may read in the Free man's Freedom vindicated, page
9, 10, 11.
above a year ago to your House for justice against their insufferable
usurpations and incrochments; (the enjoyment of which is principally hindered by
your self) and therefore I require according to Law, justice equity,
conscience and reason; either to be justified or condemned by your House, which
is done in an hour there being nothing wanting but your Report of it, and
their Jud^ement upon it. And as for bail, I will by the goodness of God be cut
in a thousand pieces, before I will in this case stoop the breadth of one heir,
or do any act that in my own understanding shall declare my owning of their
Jurisdiction in the least over me, which my giving bail, or so much as my
Parroule would do, which in my apprehension would be a granting that their most
devilish tyrannical illegal sentensing of me, to pay 4000 l', and to be
seven years in prison, and for ever to be d^^sranchised of the Liberties of an
English man, were just and legal: And therefore if you will discharge your
duty after above a years unjust delay in making my Report to your House, I
shall yet thank you but if you will not the blood, and ruin of me and mine,
be upon the head of you and your posterity, and the righteous and just God of
heaven and earth, either incline your heart to make my Report for me now at
last (let the issue be what it will be, I care not, as I fully told you in my
last large Epistle to you of the 31. of May 1647. now in print page 4, 5, 6.) or
else speedily avenge my cruel sufferings (by your means) without mercy or
compassion upon you and yours. Sir in short, if your House will (as they ought)
give me my Liberty, without intanglements, I will take it, if not, I am
resolved to stick so close to my just cause, till I be forced to eat my own
flesh for want of bread, which in the eye of human reason cannot be long
before I be forced to do it, but assure your self that if the putting forth
all the resolution in a man that for this ten years, never feared death,
tortures, nor torments; (no, nor yet knew what belonged to base fear,) will
save me or do me good, I will by the strength of God leave no means whatsoever
unattempted or unassaid, though it lose me all the earthly props and relations
I have in the world; and I advise you, as a friend, to look well to your self,
and do not continue such insupportable burdens upon me by your delay of
justice, after suffering ship-wracke of my estate and fortunes, by the grand
tyrannical Tyrants of England, for above ten years together, as I am not able
longer to bear without evident destruction to me and mine, and so at present I
rest, and wish I could subscribe my self:

Your Servant John Lilburne.
From my causlesse and most unjust Captivity in the Tower of London, the place
of my fixed and resolved resolution, to spend the last drop of my heart blood
against the House of Lords Usurpations over the legal rights and freedoms of
all the Commons of England, July 20 1647.




