A More full Relation of the great Battle fought between Sir THO: FAIRFAX,
and GORING, on Thursday last, 1645.

Made in the House of COMMONS by Lieut: Col: Lilbourne, the last Messenger that
came from the Army.

With the manner of the Fight, Goring cut on the Ear. The Lieutenant General
of the Ordnance taken, and the particulars of what loss was on both sides. And
the Routing of a party of Gorings Forces by the Club-men.

Also four Propositions presented to the House of Commons in the behalf of
the Army.

Commanded to be Printed, and is Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET for PETER COLE. 1645.

Upon Monday being July 14. 1645. were diverse Letters brought to the Honorable
House of Commons by Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, to several Members thereof from
Sir Thomas Fairfaxes army, and after the delivery of them he was called into
the House to give an account of what he knew concerning the late engagement
near Lampart, and the question being demanded by the Hon. Speaker, if he were
at the late engagement with Goring, he answered, yea, and being commanded to
declare what he knew concerning it, he proceeded to this effect: May it please
this Hon: Assembly, to afford me the liberty and I shall declare unto you
nothing but that which J saw, and upon good ground I know to be true, and shall
acquaint you with the Generals proceedings with his Army for 4. or 5 days
before the Engagement: that night the Generals headquarter was at Bemaster
which is not far from Lime, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell (by the Generals command)
sent out a Party of about 120 Horse under the Command of Captain Pattison to
Crookhorne some 5 miles from the head quarters, to discover if it were possible
the motions of the Enemy, and marching according to his command sent a small
party into the Town, Commanded by Captain Whiting by which was taken an Irish
Cornet and some other Prisoners, and being brought unto Sir Thomas quarters,
and upon the intelligence received from them. The General Commanded Orders to
be issued out to Colonel Charles Fleetwood, to draw out his Regiment with
another that quarterd with him at Brood Winsor, and to be upon their march the
next morning by 4 a clock after the Enemy, and having the next day, an
additional strength joined to him of horse and Dragoons, he pursued them to
Peverton Bridge where after a small Skirmish he took some Prisoners, and that
night our head quarters were at Crook-horn, and the next day being the Lords
day, we stayed there. And upon Monday July 7 our Rendesvouz was at Peverton
where was a Conjunction of General Major Masseys forces and Colonels Welden
to the Generals, Goring having got beyond the River upon which Bridgewater
stands lay in safety that we could not come to him having 4 Garrisons and
guards upon Load Bridge, and all other passages upon the river: the Gen* having
viewed many parts of the River marched down toward Ilchester with a
considerable body of Horse and Dragoons, to see if it were fesable to force a
Passage there, but it being not to be done without an extraordinary hazard,
Goring having fortified both the County Jayles which stood just upon the Pass,
and upon a large debate at a Counsel of War in the field, it was concluded
to march that night to Evil 4 miles from Sherburne, and there to get a Pass,
of which Goring understanding betimes in the morning, quitted his hold at
Ilchester, and drew down with his whole Army to Lampart upon which the
General marched that day to Ilchester and there kept his head quarters,
Ordering Major Genesis Massey with about 5000 Horse Dragoons to march up toward
Ilmaster, which lies within 6 miles of Taunton, to straiten the Enemy in their
quarters and to take advantage of them if it were administered and the next day
the Genesis Major having intelligence that a good party of the Enemy were Grasing
their Horses within 2 miles of them, fell upon the^, and took about 300 Horses,
and about 200 Prisoners, cut Goring in the Ear, and slew his Quartermaster
General* with diverse others* (at which time Colonel Cook was shot through
the mouth) and forced the remaining party of the Enemy to retreat to Lampart.
The same day the General marched to Long Sutton, where at the further end of
the Town next Lampart, he drew out both horse and foot, wherein the fallow
Field and pass, was some small skirmishes betwixt us and the Enemy, some
Prisoners of theirs was taken: toward the Evening we heard the Muskets go off
very thick toward Major General Masseys quarters, which were on the other
side of the River, and the General not well knowing how it went with him,
ordered Col. Mountague who then was quartered at Martack (in Masseys tear) to
march up with the greatest part of his Brigade of foot to his assistance and
that night quartered his other two Brigades of foot (which are commanded by
Colonel Ransborow, and Col. Welden) in Long-Sutton and the rest of the horse
hard by them, the next morning called a Council of War to consider what was
fittest to be done, and being ready to take horse, Mr. Hollis and one other
Club Commissioner, delivered a Petition to the General from the Club-men of
Dorsetshire (who are very vild and malignant) to desire Justice against the
Governor of Lime, in which Petition they speak very high language, and while
he was a talking with them came in an alarm that the Enemy were drawn out of
Lampart and advancing both with horse and foot, upon which the General
presently ordered all his Forces that were on that side of the River with him
to be drawn out, and having sent Orders to General Major Massey to send him
over some of his Forces with him, being not very long in the field, diverse
Countrymen came to the General and told him Goring was sending away his
Carriages to Bridge-water, diverse of them being upon their march; Upon which
the Gen: caused all things to be set in order for the Battle, and ordered
Colonel Ransborow to draw out about 1500. musketeers for commanded partees to
disposesse the Enemy of the hedges which they had lined very thick, that so
the Pass might be gained which was but very narrow betwixt us and the Enemy,
the Cannoners ordered their Guns, the muskets and Cannon playing very hot, the
Cannoniers playing their parts as gallently as ever I saw Gunners in my life,
who made the ground very hot for the Enemy to stand upon: It coming to Major
Bethels turn to charge with his forelorne of horse, which consisted of 3.
Troops of Col: Wales Regiment, Viz. Mayor Bethels, Captain Evinsons, and Capt.
Groves: Mayor Desborow with 3. Troops of the Generals own Regime^nt being to
second them, Bethell upon command given, led on his own troop through the water
which was deep and dirty and very narrow, the Enemy having a very large body
at the tope of the lane, many times over his number, charged them with as much
gallentry as ever I saw men in my life, forceing them with the sword to give
ground, which made way for Capt. Evinsons Troop to draw out of the lane, and
front with him, driving the enemies great body and their reserve up the hill,
but a very great fresh body of the Enemies horse coming upon them, forced them
to retreat to Capt. Grove who was their reserve, who drawing his men close,
received the enemy with much bravery and resolution, and gave liberty to his
friends to rally and front with him who all three charged the enemies numerous
bodies very furiously and routed them quite, which made way for our musketeers
to run up the hedges and gaul the enemy; and for Major Desborow to draw his 3.
Troops out of the lane and front with Bethell, upon which 6. Troops, diverse
mighty bodies of the enemies came, and having disputed it soundly with their
swords, the foot marching up furiously, and the other Troops ca^ered up; God
took away the enemies Courage, and away they run: Of which charge of Major
Bethels, I heard the General, Lieutenant general, and all the chief Officers
that saw it, say, it was one of the bravest that ever their eyes beheld, and
being routed, the greatest part of them took toward Bridge-water, after whom
Mayor Bethell, and Mayor Desborow persued a full gallop with a good body or
horse very near Bridg-water, the enemy several times at the Bridges faceing
about, and charged the persuers, where good store of themselves and horses were
forced into the Ditches: Another part of the Enemy where Goring was himself,
being about 1000. horse and some foot with 2. Pieces of Ordnance and 4. or 5.
Wagons took into Lampert Town which at the lower end hard by the Bridge they
fired on both sides of the Town, that so none might pursue them; Yet
notwithstanding Leiutenant General Cromwell carered after them with a body of
horse, and rid through the fired street in much danger, and took there 2.
Guns, some Carriages and many prisoners; Goring and that partee as is supposed
being fled to Exeter: The number of the enemy that was taken that day was
conceived to be about 2000. and about 1500. of their horse, and of men of
quallity there was taken there, Leiutenant General of their Ordnance, 3. or 4.
Horse Colonels, besides diverse other Officers, and good quantities of Arms;
but being the list was not brought in to the Gen^rall; I am not able to give
you a more particular account, and of our friends I could not conceive there
was above 30. slain; and for wounded men, I think the most was in Bethels
Troop, who had about 14. or 16. gallant and honest men wounded, and himself
in the pursuit had his Thumb and his 2. fore fingers shattered with a Pistol
bullet.

The Speaker demanding if he had any Letters from the General, was answered,
He staid at the Generals Quarters for his Letters which were a writting, but
hasty business coming in, the General presently took Horse and went to the
Rendezvous which was in the way to Weston 2. miles on this side Bridgewater
where the head quarters were to be on Friday night, when I came from him, and
Genesis Major Masseys quarters, being 2 miles from Bridgewater on the other side
of the river, and great store of Club-men being up, amongst whom were 500
Musketeers, that keeps a pass that stops Gorings men from marching to Bristow
with their Carriages, them Club-men being very right for the Parliament, having
upon the Rout taken diverse Horse and Arms from Gorings men, the Genesis had
begirt a petty Garrison of theirs standing upon a strong hill called Bridges,
as J remember, with Col* Okeys Dragoons which I believe is his own.

He further said: Now may it please this Hon. Assembly to give me leave to
speak two or 3 words of my own thoughts which I desire to do, if without
offense J may, which J shall reduce into these heads. J humbly conceive if you
will be pleased to do but three or 4 things, Sir Thomas will be able in a few
months to render you a good account of the whole West, and make it a peaceable
place.

The first is, to have a special care to pay his Soldiers, that so they may
constantly be able to pay their Quarters, the doing of which has infinitely
gained the Country, and if continued will speedily make them a people in many
thousands to do you faithful service, for I can assure you the Pressures of
the Enemy toward them were unsupportable, who had not only free quarter of
the best that could be provided but also had a days pay laid under their
trenchers, of which if they missed they were ready to kill their Landlords, or
to plunder them. Yea in many places where they enjoyed the 2 former they
performed the latter also, insomuch that when we came amongst the people and
demanded when we were to march away what we had to pay for our quarters, the
people wondered at us, what kind of men we were or what we meant by such a
question. Diverse of them telling us they never knew what it was to finger
Soldiers money; so that I am confidently persuaded, the readiest way to make
the people yours, is to enable the Soldiers to pay their quarters.

2. Thing is constantly to recrute the Army* that thereby they may be the
better enabled with speed to reduce the Garrisons, and to keep up their
reputation amongst their Enemies to be a formidable Army. 3. To give
encouragement to men that serve you upon principals of honor and honesty. 4.
To provide a good and present supply of Stockings, and Shoes, for the poor
Common soldier, who are mightily in want for those necessaries by their long
and continued marches.


