A DIVINE BALSAM TO CURE The bleeding WOUNDS of these dangerous TIMES. OR, The
true cause of two grand and heavy Judgments of Almighty God now upon this
Kingdom.

I. The PLAGUE, which is incumbent on us:

II. The SWORD, which is imminent over us.

The former we feel, the later we fear.

WITH The only remedy for the cessation of the one, and the prevention of the
other.

Composed by I. L. and exposed to public view for the benefit of the
Republicke.

London printed for Robert Wood. 1642.

A Divine Balsam to cure the bleeding wounds of these dangerous times.
Physicians hold, that there are two causes of a pestilence, external and
internal; the infection of the air, and the corruption of men's humors. But
Divines (who transcend them in this their judgment) are of another opinion,
ascribing it to the wrath of God, and to the sin of man; so that it is not so
much putredo humorum, as corruption morum. This is magnum mysterium; and in this
great mystery we must look beyond and aabove nature, to the God of Nature,
acknowledging with the Egyptian Magi, that Digitus Dei est hic, the finger of
God is here. I have sent pestilence amongst you, says the Lord, Amos 4 10.

From these premises some happily may infer, that God, (the fountain of all
goodness) is the author of evil, and may enforce the argument by divine writ,
as in that of the Prophet, Is there evil in a City, and the Lord has not done
it? In which interrogation there is an asseveration, and vehement affirmation,
that there is no evil in a City, but the Lord has done it? For the
understanding whereof you must distinguish of evil: for there is duplex malum,
a double evil, malum culpae, and malum poenae, the evil of sin, and the evil
of punishment; the evil in us, and the evil on us, or (according to S.
Austine) malum quod homo facit, and malum quod homo patitur, the evil that man
does, and the evil that man suffers. Of the first God is not the author,
but the last. God (who is (...), Goodness it self) would have all men to be
saved. How often would I have gathered thee, etc. says our blessed Lord? I
would, sed nolu^sti, but thou would not; therefore (the judgment follows in
the subseque^t words) Thy habitation is left unto thee desolate. Nemo laditur,
nisi a seipso, no man is hurt but by himself. Per ditio tua est ex te, Thy
destruction is of thy self. Intra muros hostis, the enemy is within the
walls. There is no greater enemy to man, then man himself is to himself.
Though the Devil like a roaring Lion, goes about continually, seeking whom he
may devour, yet he cannot devour whom he would. He will do for our ruin
what he can; there is his malice: but he cannot do what he would, that is our
comfort. But this is our misery, that we our selves are the only workers of
our own woe. Man's sin is the cause of Gods plague, and Gods plague is but
the effect of man's sin. Suppose we are now in a set battle, the Lord of
Hosts the General of the Army, his wrath the trumpet summoning and sounding
the Alarm, our iniquities are his enemies, which have provoked him to make
war against us, sin is our sickness, and sin the quarrel. It is nothing
but the exhalation of our sins, which has now caused the clouds of these
judgments both on us and over us: Judgment does as naturally flow from sin,
as water from a fountain. It was never known that sin went before, and
punishment did not follow after. If thou do not well, sin lies at the
door, Genesis 4.7. Sin, that is, the punishment of sin. And hence it is, that
sin and punishment, are all one in the Hebrew tongue, and signify the very
same. Punishment (like a swift hunting Nimrod) pursues sin; It says, like
Naomi, I will lodge with thee. Both these (like two inseparable twins) live
and dye together. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? It is the Quaere of
the Prophet, Lament. 3.39. and he resolves the question in the same verse; Man
suffers for his sin: If men be active in sinning, they shall be passive in
mourning. Great sins do procure great sorrows: Why are we so diseased but
because God is so much displeased? We have grievously sinned, therefore are we
so grievously plagued. The grievousnesse of our sins does add grief unto
our souls.

The elements would be our attendants, and all the creatures would be our
friends, were not we by our iniquities at enmity with our Creator. All
sublunary bodies would be our servants, would we but serve in holiness and
righteousness, the father of Spirits: Heaven would have no quarrel with us,
did not we by our impieties, war with the God of Heaven. Nay, Hell it self,
and all the infernal powers thereof, could have no power over us, were it not
for sin. Sin is the only makebate between God and Man. It is the wall of
separation, that separates us from the favor and grace of God in this life,
and from the joys and glory with God in the life to come. Your transgressions
(says the Prophet Isaiah) have separated between you and your God; they have
hid his face from you. Sin is that (...), the great gulf between God and
Man, so great, that it hinders the ascent of our prayers unto God, and the
descent of his favors upon us.

It is an unsupportable load, the greatest burden man can possibly undergo.
It is a burden to the Creator, and it is no less to the Creatures. God
complains by his Prophet, that he is pressed with their iniquities, as a Cart
that is full of Sheaves: And the whole creation groans under this intolerable
weight, Romans 8. It was the doleful song of the sweet Singer of Israel,
Iniquitates meae gravatae sunt super me, mine iniquities over-burthen me. It
made our blessed Savior suffer like a cursed sinner. It made him, who knew no
sin in himself, to become sin for us; him, who was invested with a Deity,
to assume to himself our humanity; him, who was the Lord over all, to become
subject unto all; him, who was the God of Nature, to yield himself unto
Nature: It made him groan till he wept, weep till he sweat, sweat till he
bled, and bleed till he died. These are the woeful effects, and miserable
consequents of sin. And can that seem light and delicious to us, which was
so heavy and grievous to Christ?) This is the lamentable tragedy, and sad
Catastrophe of iniquity. Stipendium peccati est mors. After iniquity has for a
while played her part, then death comes upon the stage: With death it has its
period here, and without repentance the torments of the second death do ensue
hereafter: which second death is so dismal and dreadful, that from it, and
from the terrible torments of it, good Lord save and deliver us. It is not
only a natural death of the body, nor a spiritual death of the soul, but an
eternal death of both body and soul for evermore. Sin is the Devils work,
wicked men are the Devils laborers, or hired servants, and the stipend or
wages for their service, is no better then death here, hell and damnation
hereafter. If ye would see the guiltiness of sin, look upon Caine; If ye
would behold the beastliness of sin, look upon Nebuchadnezzar: If ye would
take notice of the shame of sin, view then Hamon: If ye would observe the
madness of sin, consider Saul; and if ye would see the end of sin, look
upon the Glutton frying in hell, so doleful is the end of sin, yea, without
end.

These are the lamentable effects, and bitter fruits which sin produces to
us. It is the ground of all our miseries, and has wrought all the disasters
and calamities that we now sustain. What has caused the sword in Ireland,
and the plague in England, but the iniquity of Ireland, and transgression of
England? Toto Mars saevit in orb, what a havoc and vastation has the bloody
hand of war made in the Christian world? where fair Towns, famous Cities,
and flourishing Kingdoms, have been made Stages and Theaters of desolation
and destruction for our eyes to behold. Sin is the cause of all these
mischiefs. The pale horse of death goes in triumph through our streets. The
pestilence has a long time continued and been dispersed and scattered in most
places amongst us. Though graves in Churchyards have been so pestered, that
there is scarce room left for any more to be buried in; yet so insatiate are
they, that they are still gaping for more karkasses. Our ears are nocturnall
auditors of sad sounding passing bells, and our eyes are diurnall spectators of
the common objects of mortality.

The sword is already drawn forth, and at this present brandished over our
heads. It was the case of the inhabitants of Manchester in Lancashire the last
week, and it may be our own here in London the next week: we hear daily of
wars, and rumors of wars, of preparations of Men, Horses, Arms and
Ammunition, both here and else where, at home and abroad, both in London and at
York: I pray God all these may tend to our good (as they are pretended) If any
evil by these does befall any of us, it is the evil of our wickedness, which
is the just cause of it.

The only remedy against these evils, that the plague may be stai^d and the
sword sheathed, is repentance. Repentance is a Supersedeas to all judgment. It
is that precious Balm of Gilead, that will cure a sick-languishing land of all
her diseases. The only way to repair our breaches, is to prepare our selves
to meet our God. Therefore in the name and fear of God, let us resolve with
our selves to repent of our sins. We have all sinned from the highest to the
lowest, from the richest to the poorest, from the mightiest to the meanest. The
sins of the Priests, and the sins of the people, have caused Gods judgments to
light heavy upon us; no man can exempt himself, or plead impunity: and therefore
as we are all partakers of the common calamity, so let us all betake our selves
to the prescribed remedy. The axe is now laid to the root of the tree; by the
axe is meant Gods judgment, and by the tree is understood every man. Now for
ought I know the axe of Gods judgment is now laid to the root of the Kingdom,
or the root of the Church, or to the roots of the several individual members
of the Church. Let every true subject of the King, and let every sound member
of the Church, bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Amendment and
reformation is the only way to avert evil, to procure mercy, and to prevent
judgment. If we will turn from our sins, and turn unto our God by a true and
timely repentance, God will turn away his judgments from us, and return in his
former mercies unto us. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the
Lord; he had rather that we should redire then perire, return unto him then
perish without him. God delights not in the death of any sinner, but had rather
that he should turn from his wickedness and live. The Lord has graciously
promised, that when he does send pestilence amongst his people, if his people
which are called by his name shall humble themselves, pray unto him, seek his
face, and turn from their evil ways, he will then hear from heaven, be
merciful to their sins, and will heal the land, the sores of the land are the
sins of the land. Let us unfainedly perform our duty in the former words, and
we shall certainly obtain Gods mercy in the latter; let us sic plangere
commissa peccata, ut ne committamus plangenda, so lament our sins which we have
committed, that we do not commit those again which we have lamented. Let
remorse for our sins, and divorse from our sins, be expressed in our hearty
humiliation, and resolved reformation. This twofold act must be performed by
us in our aversion from sin, and conversion to God, namely, dolere and cavere;
unum, respectu praeteriti; alterum, respectu futuri: grieve for our sins past
and take heed of sin for the time to come Thus let us prepare to meet our God,
to meet him in the way of his fury to meet him as the Gibeonites met Iosuah,
resolve to do any thing rather then stand it out: for God will have the
victory at the last; either his will must be done by us, or it will be done
upon us. A terrible tempest at this instant is over our heads; in regard
whereof the Ark of this Church is tossed with various and perilous waves; and the
Ship of the State of the Kingdom, is now in great danger. Let us therefore
meet him, lachrymit and precibus, (lachrymae and preces sunt arma
Christianorum) with tears in our eyes, and with prayers in our mouths, with
sorrow in our hearts, with our knees on the ground, and our faces in the dust.
By this means he will preserve us from ruin, by this means he will preserve
this City of London from desolation, the whole kingdom of England from
destruction; and will save our bodies and souls in the day of the appearance
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If every man would sweep his own door,
the streets would soon be clean; and if every man would cleanse his own hands,
purify his own heart, purge himself of his particular and personal
corruptions, and forsake his dilecta delicta, his beloved and bosom sins,
there would then be a wished for alteration, and a blessed reformation amongst
us; and without all question a most happy concurrence and union between our
Royal King and his loyal Parliament. In one word, to conclude all, let every
one amend one and I pray God amend us all. Amen.

FINIS.

