A PREPARATIVE TO AN HUE AND CRY AFTER Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG, (A late Member of
the FORCIBLY DISSOLVED House of Commons, and now the present wicked, bloody,
and tyrannical Governor of Newcastle upon Tine)
For his several ways attempting to MURDER, and by base plots, conspiracies
and false Witness to take away the life of Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILBVRN now
Prisoner in the Tower of London: As also for his felonious Rob^ing the said
Lieut Col. JOHN LILBVRN of betwixt 24 and 2500 l. by the mere power of his own
will, without ever fixing any real or pretended crime upon the said Lieutenant
Col. or so much as affording him any formal proceedings, though upon a paper
Petition.

IN WHICH ACTION ALONE, he the s^i^ HASLERIG has outstript the Earl of
STRAFFORD, in traitorously sulverting the fundamental Liberties of England,
and (in time of Peace) exercising an arbitrary and tyrannical Government, OVER
AND ABOVE LAW, and better and more justly deserves to die therefore, then ever
the Earl of STRAFFORD did (especially, considering he was one of his Judges,
that for such actions condemned him to lose his head as a Traitor) by which
tyrannical actions the said HASLERIG is become a Polecat, a Fox, and a Wolf,
(as a subverter and destroyer of humane society) and may and ought to be knocked
on the head therefore, by the very words of Solicitor St. JOHN's own doctrine
against the said Earl of Strafford.

All which the said Lieutenant Col. JOHN LILBURN has clearly and evidently
evinced in his following Epistle of the 18 of August 1649, to his Uncle GEORGE
LILBURN ESQUIRE OF SUNDERLAND, in the County of Durham.

Isa. 1.14. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul hates: they are
a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them.

Verse. 15. And when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of
blood.


Honored Sir,
YOurs of the 2 present from Durham, about Sir Arthur Hoslerig and my Money, I
have received: In answer unto which, I cannot choose but acquaint you, that the
Law of England is the Birth ^^ght and Inheritance of the people of England,
yea, of the meanest as well as (...) richest: 1 Part Parliaments Book of
Declarat. page 459. 660. And though the Law of England be not so good, and so
exact in every particular, especially (...) manifestly proved; First, that
before indictment the goods or other things of any offender cannot be searched,
inventoried, or in any sort seized, nor after judgment seized and removed, or
taken away before conviction or Attainder.

Secondly, That the begging of the goods or state of any delinquent, accused or
indicted of any Treason, felony, or any other offense, before he be convicted
and attainted, is utterly unlawful; because before conviction or attainder, as
has been said, nothing is forfeited to the King, nor grantable by him; and
besides it either makes the prosecution against the delinquent more
precipitate, violent, and undue, then the quiet and equal proceeding of law
and justice would See notably to this purpose in the 2 p. instit. fol. 48.
permit, or else by some underhand composition and agreement, stop and hinder
the due course of justice, for exemplary punishment of the offender; And
lastly, when the Delinquent is begged, it discourageth, both Judge, Juror and
Witness to do their duty. Therefore (says he there) let such as beg the
delinquent, and prosecute against him be terrified by the villainous judgment
against conspirators, which you may read before, cap. 1. Judgment and
execution, fol. 122. as also fol. 143 163, 164. and 1 par. fol. 269. and 2 par.
fol. 130. 237, 238. 562. which are most excellent pieces, and well worth the
reading. Therefore considering what is before expressed, I cannnot but wonder
upon what Peruse carefully I entreat you the quotations in the 6 and 8 pages of
my forementioned impeachment of high Treason against Cromwell, as also the 12
and 15 pages of the 2 edition of my forementioned Book, dated the 8 of June
1649. Entitled The Legal fundamental liberties, etc.
pretense Sir Arthur Haslerig, Col. George Fenwick, and the rest of their
Committee at Newcastle, can seize upon my estate in the hands of Sir Henry
Belli^gham, and Master Thomas Bows, and stopping my rents du^ from Sir Henry
Gibs his hands, to the full value of betwixt twenty four and twenty five
hundred pounds.

For first, though the late Parliament in the height of wars, a little
outstript the bounds and rules of the law, as themselves confess in their
notabl. Declaration of the 17 of Apr. 1646. printed in the 2 part of the Book
of Declarations, page 879 in sequestring of men's estates, in another manner and
form the law requires delinquents estates to be seized upon, because their
persons by reason of the raging of the sword could not be come by, nor were all
the Courts of Justice open, nor the wants of the commonwealth to maintain the
wars, could not well permit so great delays, as the regular course of the law
requires, which when the wars are over (as in England now they are) they
promise to amend and to proceed according to the form of the law, as fully
appears in their last forementioned Declaration, add several others, as
particularly the Declaration of this present Juncto against Kingship, Dated the
17 of March 1648.

Yet I am sure by the Parliaments own Ordinances, no man in times of wars ought
to be sequestered, till it be judicially upon Oath proved, that he has been in
arms against them, all voluntarily contributed horse, money or plate to the King
against them; none of all which in the least can be so much as be pretended
against me, or ever was; and therefore no cause to pretend to deal with me, as
with a Cavalier Delinquent in the least; and therefore if I have transgressed,
I must upon their own principles, he dealt with according to law and the form
thereof; And therefore I have not tra^sgressed the law, but am an innocent man
clearly appears by their own particular dealing with me, in that they never let
me see, either Prosecutor, Informer or witness, against me, nor never showed
me my Indictment, Charge or impeachment, no nor so much as face to face ever
laid any manner of crime to my charge; See my narrative of their original
wicked Tyrannical dealing with me, laid down in my Second Edition of the
picture of the Council of State in the ^6 page of which, the Copy of their
mittimus is recorded, which yet lays no And their warrants since for my close
imprisonment, runs thus (without any cause or crime expressed in them Die
Mercurij 9 of May 1649. Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that
there be restraint upon all persons from coming to Lieu Col. John Lilburne, M.
Thomas Prince, M. William Walwin, and M. Richard Overton, except their wives
and children and necessary servants, Hen. Scobel Cler. Parlie. and then the 12
of May 1649. It is Ordered and Resolved that we all four be restrained a^ close
Prisoners, apart one from another in several lodgings in the Tower, but he
were wise that knew wherefore.
crime to my charge, for it only commits me (Sir Arthur being one of the makers
of it) for suspicion of treason, and names no particular act, and generals in
law are nothing as appears in 2 par. instit. fol. 52. 53. 590. 591. 615. 616.
and by the 1 par. Parl. book of Dec. pa. 38. 39. 77. 66 67 101. 123. 162. 201.
203. 277. 278. 845. see also the Armies Book of Declarations, page 70. and my
Plea before the Judges of the Kings Bench the 8 of May 1648. called the Laws
funeral page 8. 16, 17. 11. At which trial by strength of arguments, I forced
the Judges openly to confess, that generals are nothing in law; see also the 2
Edition of my Book of the 8 of June 1649. Entitled, The legal fundamental
liberties of the people of England, revived, asserted and vindicated, page 5
21. all which rightly considered, it clearly appears, I am an innocent man, in
the eyes of those very men that committed me, who never laid crimes in their
lives to my charge to this present hour; And therefore I can style it no
better then Robbery and Felony in Sir Arthur Haslerig, Colonel George Fenwicke,
etc, seizing upon my estate with a Felonious intent, to deprive me of it,
without any pretense, shadow or color of law, and not only felony, but Treason
it self in subverting our fundamental laws, higher then ever the Earl of
Straffords was for which he lost his head, who in his large additionall
Impeachment, 1640. in the preamble of it, recorded in Speeches and passages of
Parliament page 120. 121. 122. to 143. is impeached as a Traitor, for procuring
instructions or commission from the King, to him in the North of England, as
Lord President to hear and determine causes, according to the arbitrary course
of the Star Chamber, in pursuance of which he the said Earl in the month of
May, in the 8 year of the said King, and diverse years following did put in
practice the said Commission and Instructions, and did direct and exercise, an
exorbitant and unlawful power and jurisdiction, on the persons and estates of
his Majesty's subjects in those parts, and did disinherit diverse of his
Majesty's subjects in those parts, of their inheritances, sequestered their
possessions, and did fine, ransom, punish and imprison them and caused them to
be fined, ransomed, punished and imprisoned, to their ruin and destruction,
and namely, Sir Conyer Darcy, Sir John Boucher and diverse others, against the
laws, and in subversion of the same; and that by virtue of the said illegal
Commission he did most Traitorously stop the efficacy of all prohibitions, and
habeas corpus^es, and would not suffer any party to be discharged, till the
party performed the Arbitrary De^^ce: and Orders of him and his associates; and
Traitorously to the subversion of the fundamental law of ENGLAND, and to the
terror of those that administered them; did the 21 of March in the fo^^^* 18
year at the open assizes at York say, that some of the Justices were all for
Law, but they should find that the King* little finger, should be heavier then
the loins of the Law; but the said Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG, etc. more arbitrartly
and more traitorously then Strafford, having no pretense of REGAL, Legal or
Parliamentary-Commission or Authority (no no^ so much as from the present
nothing or illegal JVNCTO, or the present illegal thing called The ^ouncel of
state, that ever he produced or showed) has Feloniously and trayte^ously
seized upon my estate, merely by his own will and of set purpose, to starve me
and my family thereby, without any manner of, colorable pretense, and
therefore abundantly ^^^h in law and reason more deserve to dye then the Earl
of STRAFFORD did, especially considering he was one of his Judges, that in
terror and example to others seriously and judiciously condemned him to the
Scaffold for these very things; and this Arbitrary Power exercised in England
by the Earl of Strafford, is not only condemned and judged See the Act of his
Attainder which says, that he is impeached of high treason for endeavoring to
subvert the ancient and fundamental laws and government of his Majesty's
Realms of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
government against law in the said Kingdoms and for exercising a tyrannous and
exorbitant power over and against the laws of the said Kingdoms, over the
Liberties, estates and lives of his Majesty's Subjects, for which he is
adjudged and attainted of high Treason, and shall therefore suffer the pains
of death, and loss of his estate. See this at large in the peoples
Prerogative, page 29.
Treason, but also the like in Ireland, as appears in the 3 article of his
Impeachment; for that (as the article says) it was governed by the same Laws,
where the Earl being Lord Deputy, and intending the subversion of the
fundamental laws there, did upon the 30 day of Septem. in the ninth year of
the late King, in a public Speech at Dublin, declare and publish that Ireland,
Which very language is now grown so common amongst them, that their little
Beagles commonly yelp it out; See Master Prinnes Book, called a legal
vindication of the Liberties of England against illegal taxes and pretended
Acts of Parliament, lately enforced on the people, page 1.
was a conquered Nation (and so say our great o^es here England now is) and
that the King might do with it what he pleased, (as Oliver etc. say they may do
with this) And in his 4 Article he is impeached as a Traitor, for arbitrarily
stopping and prohibiting Richard Earl of Cork the benefit of the Law, for
recovery of his possession, from which he was put by color of an Order made by
the said Earl of S^rafford, and the Council Table there, whom upon the 20 of
Feb. in the 11 year of the late King, upon a paper petition, without a legal
proceeding, he threatened to imprison him unless he would surceae his suit, and
said, that he would have neither Law nor Lawyers dispute or question any of his
Orders, and further said he would make the the Earl and all Ireland know so
long as he had the government there; any act of State there made, or to be
made, should be as binding to the sub^ects of that Kingdom, a an act of
Parliament, and upon sundry other occasions (^ust Host^^ig like) by his words
and speeches, did arrogate to himself a power above the fundamental^ Laws,
and established government of that Kingdom, and scorned the said Laws and
established government.

And in Article 6. he is impeached as a Traitor, in that without any legal
proceedings, and upon a paper petition of Richard Ralstone, he did cause the
said Lord Mo^n^ Norris to be disseised, and put out of possession (as the
Trustees for Bishops Lands has lately, but more unjustly, done my self and my
Landlord Whose legal interest thereunto is thus: Nicholas Young Esquire, had a
Patent from Bishop Montague, about 30 years since, confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter of Winchester, (which is unquestionably good in Law) for the keeping of
the Manor of Winchester House in Southwark: and not only so, but also for his
life to enjoy all the profits, benefits, etc. of the said Manor house, gardens,
orchards, and all things thereunto belonging, as is largely set forth in the
said Patent: All which, upon special view of Youngs Evidence by a select
Committee of Parliament, has been since solemnly confirmed by an Ordinance of
a full, free and unquestionable Parliament about five years ago; which
Ordinance forced Devenish to pay Young as his tenant, for his un^^^estionable,
legal and confirmed right in the said house 52 l. per ^^nun for the bare Manor
House; reserving unto the said Young as much besides, as was worth about as
much more per annum: all which right the said Devenish bought for money of him,
and M. John Cook drew up the conveyances; who has often told me, Devenish his
right was as good as either Law or Ordinance could make it: of which Devenish I
took a Lease for three years, in case Young lives so long, for as much as I am
to pay 13 l. per annum: and yet by force of arms, without any manner of
proceedings at Law, by the command and will of the said T^uftees etc. we are
dispossessed of our just and legal possessions by the hands of the Sheriff of
Surrey, who (if we could enjoy any Law, as in the least we cannot) is liable to
repay all our wrongs etc. But for my part, seeing I live in a Land where Law
and Justice is in words professed, I am resolved as soon to part with my heart
blood, as in silence, slave and vassal-like, part with my legal and
unquestionable right and possession, although the Trustees have lately sold it
(as it is said) to M. Walker of Newington; which they have no more right to do,
then so many thieves have to sell the clothes of my back Ob^ave Independent
Justice! more abominable in their ways and doings, then all the currupt
Interest that pretendedly for tyranny they have pulled down.
Devenish at Winchester house) of his freehold and inheritance of his Manor of
TYMORE in the County of ARMAGH, after he had two years quiet possession. In the
7 and 8 Articles of which, are several other cases of the like nature; as of
Thomas Lord Dillons, Adam Viscount Losius and George Earl of Kildare, and the
Lady Mary Hibbots; which eighth Article concludes in these words, That the
Earl in like manner did imprison diverse others of his Majesty's subjects upon
pretense of disobedience to his Orders, Decrees, and other illegal commands by
him made for pretended Debts, titles of Lands, and other causes, in an
arbitrary and extrajudiciall course upon paper Petitions to him preferred, and
no other cause legally depending. For aggravation of whose offenses, in
treasonably subverting the fundamental Laws and Liberties of England and
Ireland, read the Masculine speech of Mr. John Py^ against him, and the
Argument of Solicitor S. John (now the pretended Lord chief Justice of the
Common Pleas) against him, who toward the last end of his argument, by way of
aggravation of Straffords crime in setting up an arbitrary Government, in the
overthrow of the Law, says,

The Parliament is the representation of the whole Kingdom, wherein the King as
Head, your Lordships as the more noble, and the Commons the other members are
knit together in one body politic; this crime of Straffords dissolves the
arteries and ligaments that hold the bo^y together (viz) the Laws: he that
takes away the Laws, takes not away the allegiance of one s^bject alone, but of
the whole kingdom.

It was (says he) made treason by the Statute of the 13 Eliz, for her time, to
affirm, That the Laws of the Land do not bind the descent of the Crown; No
Law, no descent at all. No Laws, no PEERAGE, no ranks or degrees of men; the
same condition to all.

Its Treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench: This kills not only the Judge, but
the Judgment.

Its Felony to imbezell any one of the judicial Records of the Kingdom: This
at once sweeps them all away, and from all.

Its treason to counterfeit a twenty shillings Piece: Here Is a counterfeiting
of the Law; we can neither call the counterfeit nor true Coin our own.

Its Treason to counterfeit the Great Seal for an Acre of Land: No property
hereby is left to any It was well said in a Speech against the Ship money
Judges, Take from us (as the said Judges by that Judgment had done) the
propriety of our estates, our subsistence, and we are no more a people:
Speeches and Passages of Parliament page 271.
land at all. Nothing Treason now, neither against King, NOR KINGDOM, no Law to
punish it. And therefore he concludes, in aggravation against Strafford, or any
thing by way of Plea, advantage or excuse that can be said for him; He that
would not have others to have Law, why should he have any himself? why should
not that be done to him, that himself would have done to others?

Its true, (says he) We give law to Hares and Deers, because they be beasts of
chase: but it was never accounted cruelty or foul play TO KNOCK FOXES AND
WOLVES ON THE HEAD AS THEY CAN BE FOUND, because these be beasts of prey. Out
of thine own mouth (says Christ) thou wicked servant, will I judge thee Luke
19 21. And says Paul, Tit. 1.12, 13. One of themselves, even one of their own
prophets said, The Cretians are alwa^es Liars, evil beasts, flow bellies. This
witness is true. Therefore, I desire Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG to consider, that if
he deserves death that steals a sheep or an o^, etc. because it is a
transgression of a Law, (which Law, I say, in it self is unjust, for putting
men to death for theft) what does he deserve that breaks not only that Law by
theft, (as he has done in stealing my goods) but breaks all the Laws of humane
society, by murder, plots and conspiracies to take away the innocents lives?
all which he has done to me;

First, By endavouring to murder me by cruel and illegal imprisonment, and
close and barbarous imprisonment; for he was one of my unjust Judges, that for
nothing committed me.

Secondly, By conspiracy The punishment of Conspirators says Cook in his 3
Part Inst. f. 222 is five fold, 1. That their bodies shall be imprisoned in the
Common Goal. 2. Their Wives and children amoved out of their houses. Thirdly,
that all their Houses and Lands shall be seized into the Kings hands, and the
House wasted, and the Trees extirpated. Fourthly, All their goods and chattels
forfeited to the King. Fifthly, That they shall lose the freedom and franchise
of the Law. That is, 1. They shall never be of any jury, or recognitors of
assize. 2. Nor ever be received for a witness in any case That they shall
never come into any of the King Courts, but make Atturneys if they have any
thing to do there; do this is called a villainous indictment (in the 24. E. 3.
f. 33 and 27. ass. 53.) because of the villainy and infamy, which they deserve
against whom it is given, and all is inflicted by the Common Law. See also f.
143. 163. See also more to this purpose, 1 part. Inst. fol. 294. and 2. part
Instit. f. 130, 237, 238, 562.
to take away my life which is manifested by his endeavoring (in an
extraordinary manner) by bribes to hire false witness against me (as his mother
Jezabel did against innocent Naboth tor his vineyard) to take away my life, and
when the party would not consent to his wicked and damnable conspiracy, he
etc. has caused him to be most horribly whipped with scars and hundreds of
stripes, by running the Gantlop from S. James almost to Charing cross although
he was no Soldier, without so much as ever convicting him of any crime, yea or
so much as ever bringing him before, either pretended Marshall or civil
judicature, but merely did it in a higher, Arbitrary, tyrannical, traiterly
manner, then ever the Earl of Strafford acting any of his treasons, for which
he lost his head; all which the said Haslerig and his Associats has most
barbarously acted and done with, and upon the body of Mr. William Blanke of
Colemanstreet London, as he himself in Print notably declares, whose remarkable
Narrative is already printed in Mercurius Militaris, numb. 3. which thus
follows.

William May of the Generals Regiment of Horse, and I being School fellows, he
came unto me Febr. 17. and asked me if I and my Master were friends yet and I
told him no; then said he unto me, if you will be at Whitehall to morrow, I
will help you to a place of credence; at which time I was there according to
his appointment, and when I had spoken with him there, he had me into a Chamber
where were many Officers of the Army, as also Captain Story. Mr. Lavender, Mr.
John Goodwin, Mr. John Price, and Mr. ^arrus Shoemaker, where they offered to
me and nine more an Oath of Secrecy, which is as follows:

YOu shall swear by the four Evangelists, and by all things contained therein,
that you shall faithfully discover all such English Delinquents as are and
shall be there, and this to any of the four Commissioners; So God you help. And
they offered us 10 s. advance, and 40 s. the month to be paid by the four
Commissioners, whose names are Andrews, De^eroy, Mountain, Atte^ny, and eight
did take this Oath, but I and one William Hill in Col. Prides Company did
refuse it; 'After which, the said William May did promise me to help me to be
Barber to C^lonel John Hewson, of which service of mine he did accept, Febr.
20. 1647. For which Col John Hewson did promise me 14 s. weekly and I after
some weeks asking him for money was by him put off; and being in great want for
money at a time when I was trimming Lieutenant General Cromwell, I made my
complaint unto him, and he promised to see me paid.

And Sir Arthur Hasl^rig did often tell me, but especially on Monday April 23.
that unless Lilburn and Walwin were taken off, they could not bring about
their design: for (said he) they are great Politicians, and if they live we
cannot carry on our design; for they are Obstacles in our way; but (said he) if
they were taken off, then we should carry on our design: And further he said
unto me, pry into their actions so far as you can, and make discovery unto us
what they act, and who are chief Agents for them at the meeting at the
Whal^bone in ^o^hbury; and (said he) if they will employ you in any
negotiations of theirs refuse it not, but make discovery thereof unto us, and
be sure (said he) to learn the depth of their consultations, and if at any time
(said he) you should be taken with the rest of the Faction in your meetings yet
I promise you, you shall be for a while kept in prison, but you shall be
released under hand, and we will say that you made friends, or that you broke
prison, so that you shall be clear, and shall be satisfied for all your expense
that you are at herein. And further he said unto me, that if I would swear, or
undertake to produce evidences that the forementioned men were privy to the
consultations of the Kings party, that then it should be sufficient Mark
Haslerigs wicked, and bloodthirstiness after our innocent lives.
against them, and I should be pleased, and they would consider my trouble
hereof. And at the same time I told him, I had an Order from the Lieut.
General Cromwell for my Master James Coc^ey to pay unto my Father 40 l. but he
refused it; he de^^red of me to see the Order which I did show unto him; and he
said, That when this was done, then he himself would see my Master pay the said
sum of 40 l. to my Father: And further he said unto me, meet me tomorrow in St.
Jamses Park, which I did April 24. and then he carried me into the garden of
Saint James, and when he had locked the door, he with Commissary General
Ireton asked me, if I knew Mr. Almary, Bubal, Hartley James Edington, John
Arrowsmith, Thomas Robbinson, and I made Answer yes; then said they unto me, Be
here in the afternoon walking; at which place I did meet: And shortly after Sir
Arthur Haslerig, with Colonel Pride, and one Captain Pretty came unto me and
had me up to Commissary General Ireton, at which time Sir Arthur Haslerig and
Commissary General Ireton did desire of me to consent that my name might be
inserted in the Warrant for to seize upon my body, as Prisoner with the rest
that are specified in the said Warrant; for said Ireton, you must be with the
rest seized upon as Prisoner unto us, or otherwise you will be suspected; but
said he and Haslerig, it shall not at all prove hurtful unto you, for you shall
go only under the notion of a Prisoner unto us; upon which promise of theirs, I
consented that my name should be inserted in the Warrant, which was to this
effect as follows.

These are to will and authorize you to seize upon the bodies of William
Blanke, junior, George A^maner, William Senball, John Arrowsmith, James
Edington, and these you are to bring unto S James to be examined upon a present
dangerous design against the Parliament, City, Kingdom and Army.

Given under my Hand at S. Jamses this 24. of April, 1649. Henry Ireton.

Forthwith there was commanded a guard of Musketeers to go with me for the
apprehending of the aforesaid men, which was done accordingly; and about twelve
a clock at night was brought to S. Jamses before Commis. Genesis Ireton, Sir
Arthur Haslerig. Col. Pride, Capt. Pretty, Lieut. Col. Mason, (who examined
them upon questions of the business aforesaid). Sir Arthur Haslerig and Commis.
General Ireton would have had me to witness against them, which I denied, for
in the thing I had no knowledge, upon which they were forthwith released; and
Sir Arthur Hasleri^ then after told me by my self, except I would confess
these Papers to be mine I should be Prisoner, the which I denying was committed
Prisoner, April 25, 1649. and was continued in prison until the 27. of April
1649 until 9. in the morning; And about that time I was then brought to the
place commonly called Pelmel, or near thereunto, and there was forced to run
the Gauntlet for no other cause that I know of but for denying to swear against
them, Mr John Lilburn, and Mr Walwin, and my refusing to get any to swear
against them, as Sir Arthur Haslerig would have had me have done, and likewise
that I did not witness against the forementioned Gentlemen, and likewise for
refusing to take their Oaths.

April 30. 1649. In testimony of the truth hereof I have set my hand and am
ready to depose it upon my Corporal Oath before any Magistrate of England:
William Blanks Junior.

Thirdly, Haslerig and Bradshaw etc. by false witness, by Blanks means could
not effect the taking away of my life; then do they or one of them employ Yea
an Agent of the said Haslerigs and Crowwels called Richard Arnold a Hopman at
the Blue Anchor in Thames Street near Billinsgate, and a Member of the Knavish
Conspiracy called Mr. John Goodwins Congregation, upon the Exchange about the
time that the Juncto's new Treason trap came out, gave his Instruction to
Justice Cooper in Southwark, under pretense of friendship to come and visit us
on purpose by discourse to ensnare us, and so to bear witness against us, of
which one that heard the Instructions given, out of conscience of our integrity
against his particular Interest, came to the Tower and told us all, how and by
whom, Major, or Justice Cooper was appointed to come, the time when, and also
the Subject and manner of his discourse, who accordingly the next day came
accompanied with our quondam friend Justice Hill once of Southwark, etc. and
Cooper especially demeaned himself exactly according to his Instructions
foretold to us; but being forewarned of his intended villainy, and Arnolds plot
to take away our lives, we were fitted for them, and within a few days after,
we sent for Cooper, and before diverse honest people, opened to his face all
Arnolds bloody design upon us, to both their infamy and shame.
one Tho^ Verney a qu^ndam Cavalier, and give him a Commission to plot and
contrive yea (and justify him therein) the taking away my life, as app^ars by
his following Letters.

For my esteemed good friend Colonel John Lilburne, at his Chamber in the Tower
these present.
Sir
SInce my arrival in England, I have endeavored to find out the several
constitutions and dispositions of men, and I perceive the major part of those I
have discoursed withal, are led more by their own fancies then reason; I am
very much troubled to see how strangely things are carried, "finding the
Subject not at all eased or freed from oppression: I pray inform me in any one
particular thing, wherein England has received any benefit since the war
began? "Oh this is a blessed reformation! Those Books of yours which I have
lately seen does handsomely lash them; I am joyful to hear that we have some
true Englishmen left that will stand for our Lib^rties and just Rights. My
earnest desire is to engage with such a party, and to join with you and your
friends in on^ and the same thing, and to steer my course by your compass, and
I shall (to the utmost of my ability) further your design in any thing, though
it be with the hazard of my life, which I should willingly sacrifice for my
Countries L^berty: To the same intent and purpose I make my addresses to your
self, imagining you to be the chiefest of those (who are in a scornful way by
your and the commonwealths Enemies) branded with the name of Levellers. I
never yet regarded much the malice of my enemies* I believe the like in you;
therefore I am the more encouraged to join with such: Excuse I beseech you for
my liberal and true hearted And yet a greater Judasly villain, never breathed
upon the earth.
expressions by way of writing; It is a custom that I am used to, and cannot
on a sudden leave it. "I shall at any place or hour give a meeting to any of
your friends to discourse further of it, and then you will find my compliance
with you will be very acceptable, "for I love to advance and further all
honest, lawful and christian like actions. But I fear (unless you act more
privately then you have formerly done) that all will come to naught, for
yesterday I accidentally heard of some that were employed in the Country to act
for you, were taken and carried Prisoners to Oxford by some of Colonel Scroopes
Its a common saying a treacherous lier had need of a good memory, which Verney
wonts; for at this time Scroops Regiment was at Salisbury in Rebellion against
their General and Officers.
Regiment, the truth of this Report I cannot much aver, but I received my
intelligence from a very credible hand; If it should be so, you must be the
more cautious hereafter, otherwise you will wilfully give up your lives as a
prey to your enemies. I cannot as yet say we, because I know not as yet whether
I shall be received as a friend amongst you or no. I can assure you my
friendship shall very much advance your business, for I shall engage many
friends in Buckinghamshire (it being my Native Country) with me, I am confident
to gain the strongest party in that Country in spite of Fate. And as for
Oxfordshire, Barkeshire, and some part in Hertfordshire, I can (by reason of my
many friends) engage a considerable party in all those Countries, and prevail
with others (that love to sleep in a whole skin) to be as Neuters. This I
beeleeve deserves thanks: But I can further advance your business in a more
considerable way, if I find you have good and faithful Counselors about you,
and that you have Gentlemen that are well beloved, and well esteemed in their
Countries, that can on a sudden (as I shall do) bring three or four thousand
men into the field to back him that should do you service. If you can do so I
shall make another provision to you, which is to gain the City of Oxford for
you, which you may conceive will be very difficult to do, and many more that do
not know me. "But by my means I shall work with my friends within the Town as
well as those without, I am almost confident of gaining it. Then shall we be in
a condition to furnish our selves with Arms, and have a place of retreat upon
any occasion; And until such a thing be done, it will not be wisdom in any
publicly to appear; You will conclude the like, or any rational man,
therefore my request to you is, that you would seriously weigh and take into
your consideration this my Letter, "and return me your absolute answer by my
Porter. But if I should be so foolish as accidentally to speak a word or so, he
is so honest that it passes no further, the experience I have had of him
assures me as much. Moreover if you should require a longer time in returning
me an answer of what I desire "my lodging is in Aldersgate street in Trinity
Court at one Master Edward Pearse his house hard by Aldersgate, therefore whom
you are pleased to send to me, may there find me. But in these dangerous times
we cannot be too cautious in our Company, therefore unless I am well a
assured" that they that shall treat with me in your behalf, come really from
you; I shall be very sparing in unfolding my mind, therefore I pray send me a
token in writing by my Porter, that he which shall come to me as from you, may
deliver me the same token, then shall I not be sparing to let him know my
resolution. I dare not come to the Tower least there should be notice taken And
yet at the same time had Bradshaws and Frosts Commission to write this Letter,
O pure Rogue!
of me. Thus have I in part made a discovery of my mind unto you (though to you
not very well known) I am the more sorry for it; For seriously all the
acquaintance that ever I had with you, was in the Tower, where I had the
happiness three or four times to be in your company, in my honored friend
Sir John Maynard his Chamber. I know not whether you may call me to mind or no,
but really you will find a most trusty secret and a most obliging friend and
servant of

May thee 8th. 1648. THO. VERNEY.
I beseech you deal as freely with me as I have with you.




But returning a considering answer to this, judging the Author at the first
view a Knave, I enquired of a Presbiterian friend of Sir John Maynards, whether
he knew the man or no, who told me that a quondam fellow prisoner of mine had
lately sent word out of the Low Countries that this man was empl^yed by those
of Darby-House, to lay a Trap to ship the Prince and send him over unto them to
England to destroy him; but the next day being made a kind of a close prisoner
by the restraint of my friends and inhabitants of the Tower upon my stayers
stopped the original of these following lines in my hand.

For my esteemed good friend Colonel John Lilburne these present.
Sir,
MY Porter was at the Tower this morning, thinking to have admittance in, but
they would not suffer him; which has much troubled me: but being well
acquainted with this Gentleman one of the Coyners in the Tower, I have
prevailed with him to deliver you this Note, beseeching you to return an
answer of the former in writing, The answering of which in any kind had
apparently hazarded my life.
sealed up, and this my friend will see that it first (...) safe to my hand; I
pray use means to burn my Letter, as I shall cruel yours for fear of the
worst, and you shall extremely oblige a most faithful Servitor of

May 9th. 1649. THO. VERNEY.
Much news abroad, but I dare not commit to Paper.




Upon receeipt of this I was more confirmed in my own mind he was a Cheat, but
having not absolute proofs of my thoughts, I judged it the most safe way for me
to sit still and return no written answer, nor yet much reveal him: So within
two days after he sent me a third Letter, the Copy of which thus follows.

SIr by a Monyers means I gate leave to come in, thinking to have had the good
fortune to have had an hours discourse with you, but I found I could not
obtain my desire with safety either for you or my self; upon that I departed,
and leaving you this note, by the which you may the better know of my
willingness to engage with you, assuring you that my friendship shall be
advantageous. My desire is to receive a full answer of my first Letter, which I
sent by my Porter Ric. Vaughan whose name you have taken. If then ink and
paper be kept from you, I am confident as yet your speech is not nor I hope
will not; therefore you may desire a friend (whom you have a good confidence of)
to treat with me in your behalf, and I doubt not but to give him satisfaction,
to your and the Commonwealths good content. But as I told you in my first
letter, so I do in this, which is, that unless "I can receive a certain token
from you, that you really send him I shall be very sparing in my discourse.
Yesterday morning I received a Letter from one Master William Parkins, whom I
do not all know, and in that he advertized me, "that he was desired by your
self to signify unto me that it was your desire to have me speedily to r^pair
into Buckingham-shire to engage my friends in your behalf, and how that he was
going thither himself. If that be true, I pray use a speedy means add let me
know as much, and let me but receive a Letter from you to any one of quality in
that County that is of your party that we may advise together, and you will
find that you have a most faithful Servant of

11 of May, 1649. THO. VERNEY.
This M. Parkins specified in his Letter, that I should find him at the George
at Ailsbury, where your friends and my self should meet and advise about
engaging the Country. IF I AM BETRAYED, I pray let me know the truth from you.




Upon the receipt of which third Letter, I was absolutely of opinion, he was a
perfect Knave and Cheat, and especially by reason of the before mentioned
Parkins, who to my knowledge, is a Man I never saw nor heard of before. But
with the Letter I received a Message,

That at such a ho^s^ in the Tower, there was a Gentleman must needs speak with
me about earnest business; which I presently judged to be the forementioned
Thomas Verney: and as I was going to him, I met accidentally a Gentleman
formerly of the Kings party, and enquired of him if he knew one M. Tho. Verney
a Knights Son or no: And he told me, that a Knight of the Kings party had
lately told him, that Sir Edward Verney the Kings Standard Bearer had a son
lately come from the Hague, which was looked upon to be a very odd, strange,
light kind of fellow; but yet to the Cavaliers pretended to be some kind of
Agent from the Prince. Whereupon I told the Gentleman the grounds and reasons
wherefore I asked him. But this Reply increased more jealousy in me, that this
VERNEY was a perfect Rogue indeed: and so to VERNEY himself I went; who upon
discourse told me, he had formerly five years ago been of the Kings party, and
"that his Father was slain at Edg-hill, being the Kings Standard Bearer. So I
told him, I had read three Letters from him, which he confessed he had sent to
me. But I also told him (having Mr. Walwyn and Mr. Overton with me) I wondered
how he durst write such lines to me as he did: But he asked, wherefore? I told
him, "Because he was a mere stranger unto me; and there were such lines, as if
were he not one of DERBY-HOUSE Agents, might cost him his life But he said, he
kn^w me to be so honest I durst do him no mischief: And for being one of
DERBY-HOUSE Agents, he as much abhorred them as I did: and I wonder, said he, I
having been in Arms for the King, how you should imagine they would be so silly
to trust me with any of their secrets; which they must do if I were their
Agent. Sir (said I) It is no wonder that wicked men make use of any instruments
to accomplish their base ends; and you having been for the King are the more
likely to deceive other men, and the more unsuspected to work their ends: and
money, we all know, is so tempting a thing, that it will make men of b^se
spirits change their principles; yet, though it be to the destruction of their
Fathers, and nighest Relations: and why you may not be such a one, I have too
plain demonstrations to believe. And for that part of the irrationability of
their trusting you, having been a Cavalier, Why may they not as well trust and
employ you as their Agent, as Parson KEM, who now is their active and hired
Agent, as from very good hand, I fully know: although its notorious he was an
active man last year in the rebellion of Kent, and a notable Agent in the
revolt of the Ships. But Sir, to be plain with you, I tell you, You are a
jaggling Knave, and I could find in my heart to lay hold on you for a knave,
and carry you pre^ently before the Lieutenant of the Tower with your own
Letters. And that you are a Knave. I have these informations to believe: You
were lately at the Hague at the Princes Court (which he confessed) and there
you were employed by some belonging to the Committee of DERBY-HOUSE, to lay a
design to get the PRINCE a shipboard, and send him for England to lose his
head: And this was sent over by some exiled Presbyter Gentleman to his friends
in London. A Citizen of London and a Colonel told me this the other day: and a
Gentlemen Cavalier bid me beware of you for a Knave: At which the Gentleman
(with the impudentest face and undaunted countenance that I have seen) denied
all; but confessed he knew Parson KEM, and did believe him to be a Derby House
Agent; and meeting with him the other day in Westminster Hall, he did confess
that KEM told him. Men reported as much of him as I now told him to his face.
But with his much reasoning with my self, Mr. Walwyn, and Mr. Overton (who went
on purpose with me to him, as fearing he came either to stab or poison me in a
cup of wine, or the like,) he justified his integrity; hoping I would not so
violate the Rules of society and manhood, as to betray him, and so undo him
and his friends, especially my friend Sir JOHN MAYNARD, who he often pretended,
was bound in great bonds for him, before he could get his liberty, and to this
day so continued. So telling him his own to the purpose, I left him for a
Knave; although Mr. Walwyn especially pressed hard to have him laid hold of:
But being desirous yet to trace him a little further, for many reasons I can
give, I let him alone. But yet, for my own safety, the next day before all my
three Fellow Prisoners, I fully informed the Lieutenant of the Tower of the
business, before an Officer of the Army then Captain of the Guard, and desired
him to acquaint the Committee of State with that, for I had the Letters and
told him I would produce and avouch them; and another time the Lieutenant of
the Tower (since I was close) being in my Chamber I told him again of it, and
proffered him the Original Letters which he seemed not willing to meddle with,
so I have ^ested since till the 29 of June last; upon which day I wrote a
Letter to Master Hunt of Whitehall, and sent him an exact Copy of Verneys
foregoing Letters, and my foregoing Observations upon them, which Letter of Mr.
Hunts I entreat you seriously to read in p. 8. of my Impeachment of High
Treason against Oliver Cromwell etc.

And not many days after, Captain Den^y Sergeant at Arms to the thing called
the Council of State, came with a pretended Warrant to search my Chamber, by
whose hands (for a token I sent an Exact Copy (of all I had sent to Master
Hunt of Verney^) to his Master Mr. John Bradshaw etc. which although I have
long since, as before you see, again and again acquainted Bradshaw and other of
Haslerig. Associates with VERNEYS Letters, etc. Yet the said VERNEY continues
as great with Bradshaw and others, at the thing called the COUNCIL OF STATE to
this very day, as if he were their ALPHA and OMEGA, which is a clear proof of
their designingly setting him at work whom they a little before sent out by
express Commission in a Man of War to (...); where at his coming to the Hague,
he had presently (as groundedly it is sa^^) got something like a Commission
from the Prince: but being at his Court discovered for a Traitor to him, he in
haste took his leave there; and at his departure shook hands with an
a^quaintance of his, and ^id him farewell, he was in haste, for he was betrayed.
So coming into England, Hasleri^, etc. having tempted by offered bribes the
foresaid honest M Blank to swear fasly against me, he and Bradshaw, or other of
then brethren in evil, commissionated the said villainous Thomas Verney to
write Letters to me, the which, if under my hand I had answered, or sent a
friend, as he desired, to treat with him; then might they easily have searched
his chamber, and there found some kind of Commission from the Prince to the
said Verney, to authorize him to be his Agent in England, for which Verney
might have been in some seeming danger, and pretendingly to save himself, might
have produced my Letter, and also swore, according to the largeness of his
conscience, what he had pleased against me; which might have been looked upon
by Haslerig and Bradshaw etc. as crime enough to have hanged me up without any
more ado, for corresponding with their declared Traitor the PRINCE, seeing
they could not (as they earnestly desired) murder me any other way: and this
act of Verney's should have, to the eyes of the world, been merit enough to
have saved Verney 's life, and also procured him his liberty from his Lords and
Masters Haslerig and Bradshaw etc. who for his traitorous and good services
done them, protect him against all the complaints of cheating, perjury,
forgery, and all manner of knavery that my intelligence tells on daily is
brought in against him. Which Verny, a few days ago (as I am from
extraordinary good hands informed) had the impudence, for all the high
complaints against him, to petition (or otherwise to sue for) an annual
Pension for his good services done them, in forsaking his Interest in the
PRINCE, and adhering to Them in any thing they put him upon (though never so
wicked)

Fourthly, Haslerigs design in endeavoring to murder me is not only evident,
in his Associats imprisoning me for nothing, and so robbing me of my trade and
credit, but also in close imprisoning me from the society of all my friends,
and denying me the just and legal allowance due to me in my case and
condition, (not one penny of which I have received to this day) but also in
taking away completely betwixt 24 and 2500 l. that so I may not have a penny
left to buy me my wife, or family a bit of bread.

But to ^eturne, I would fain have HASLERIG to consider seriously from his
friend S. John's words, and the rest foregoing what he deserves, that not only
by theft of murder breaks one of the Laws of England, but endeavors to
destroy, and actually plucks up by the roots the whole Fabric of the Laws of
England? and so destroys HUMANE SOCIETY, by bringing all things into the
original Chaos of confusion, and when he has so done doubly and trebly,
protects and secures himself by force of the sa^d and other tyrannical
Privileges, from all manner of Process of Law or Justice truly he deserves
wherever he be found, to be dealt with as Felton did with the Duke of
Backingham; which for my part I protest seriously, I judge to be more juster
both before God and man a thousand times over, then Haslerigs dealing with me,
and the last and ultimate refuge and remedy that all such men have in such
cases, and a thousand times more just then for a man to murder himself by
fami^hing in silence, by such men's oppressive and tyrannical de^ling with him
And if Strafford upon S. John's forementioned principles were A FOX and A WOLF
for arbitrarily subverting the Law, and taking away men's prop^^ties and estates
by proceedings upon Paper petitions; then abundantly (...) is Haslerig a FOX
and a WOLF in arbitrarily subverting the Law, and taking away my estate, with
wi^e much as any proceedings at all, or any Paper Petition against me, (...) so
much as receiving and producing any pretended Commission from any Legal, or
pretended Magistracy so to do.

And therefore undeniably from S. John's and his own grounds may as a POLCAT, a
FOX and a WOLF, yea and as a Destroyer of the society of mankind he knocked on
the Read carefully for illustration hereof my Law-quotations in the Marginall
note of the sixth page of the late Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver
Cromwell and his Son in law Henry Ireton.
head where ever he is found (...) he had; which peradventure before much time
may be expired may be for his portion, and that justifiably both before God and
man, seeing no law in the world can be said against him in the least, or take
hold of him: And therefore as in a Speech made, one thousand six hundred and
forty it is said against the Ship Money Judges, Speeches and passages of
Parliament page 275. Much more truly may I say now, when our Liberties are
violated, our Fundamental Laws abrogated, our Modern Laws already obsoleted,
the property of our Estates alienated, nothing left us we can call our own,
but our misery and our patience, if ever any Nation might justifiably, this
certainly may now, most properly, most seasonably, cry out, and cry aloud, VEL
SACRA REGNAT JUSTITIA, VEL RUAT CAELUM, that is, Either let the Heavens fall,
or let Sacred Justice reign. But if he should deny that that which at Newcastle
he has seized upon is none of mine, I prove my Legal right thus.

1. Admit I had in the eye of the law illegally come by it, yet being in
possession of it, he has no pretense in the world to dispossess me of it, of
his own head, and by his own will; but 2ly I answer that against the law of
equity, reason and Justice, yea, and the law of England. I was in the year
1637, 1638. 1639. 1640. most illegally and tyrannically dealt with by the
High Commission, Councel-Board and Star Chamber; by Doctor Guinne, Doctor
Lamb, Doctor Ali^, and the Lord Keeper Coventry, Lord Privy Seal Manchester
Lord Newberg, Old Sir Henry Vane, Lord Chief Justice Bramston, and Judge Jones;
And by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Keeper again, Lord Treasurer Bishop
of London, Lord Privy Seal again, Earl of Arundel, Earl of Salisbury, Lord
Cottington, Secretary Cook and Secretary Windebank and the Warden of the Fleet,
who gagged me upon the Pillo^ without order in writing: Of which, the 3. of
November. 164^. being the first day the late dissolved Parliament sat, I
according to Law and Justice preferred my Petition and Complaint to to them;
who upon the reading of my Petit^on, immediately ordered me my Liberty, being,
as I remember, the first prisoner in England set at liberty by them] to foll^w
my Petition, and according to the legal custom of Parliaments make i^ good by
proof before a select Committee appointed by them to that purpose, Mr. Francis
Reuse having the hai^^; before whom many particular days one after another^ I
appeared with my Council [being Mr. Robert Gurden brother to Mr. John Gurdon
now Member of the p^es^nt J^ncto, or pretended House of Commons] and my
Witnesses, and fully proved all my Petition. Upon the report of all which by Mr
Reus the Chairman, the House of Commons the fourth of May 164^ [being the very
same day that the King himself caused me to be arraigned for high Treason at
the Ba^r of the House of Pee^s] voted and resolved upon the Question,

That the Sentence of Star Chamber given against JOHN LILBURN is illegal, and
against the liberty of the Subject, and also bloody, cruel, wicked,
barbarous, and tyrannical.

Resolved upon the Question. That reparations ought to be given to M. LILBURN
for his imprisonment, sufferings, and lostes sustained by that illegal
sentence.

O^dered, That the Committee shall prepare this case of Mr Li^burns to be
transmitted to the Lords, with those other of Dr. Bastwick, D^ctor L^^gh^on, Mr
Button and Mr. Pryn.

H. E^singe Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

After which Votes (being in a full, free, un^avisht, or enforced, legal, and
unquestionable Parliament (after a full, open, free Where, I very well
remember, Sir Arthur Hosle^ig was one of my zealous and forward Judges; and
when Warned James Ingram came to the B^^ of the Court of Wards, and brought
Master Herne ^^h C^uncellor to plead for the Lords, and in excuse of himself,
who st^sly insisted in a high manner upon the orders and decrees of
Star Chamber, upon which I very well remember Sir Arthur with a great deal of
indignation said unto Herne, I value not a Decree of the Lords in Star Chamber
a rush, if it be not expressly according to the tenor of their commission the
Law, and I further tell you it is a ridiculous thing Sir to summon Parliaments
to meet together to make Laws, if the Lords decrees in Star Chamber against law
should be bind^ng; and therefore, although you have proved for your Clyant
Master Ingram that the Lords in open Court (the Court sitting) commanded him on
the Pillory to gagg Master Lilburn^ yet for speaking against them, I tell you
by law that order ought to have been in writing according to the custom of the
Court, which you confess it was not, and therefore Master Ingram must smart
for his executing of orders on M. Lilburne made illegally.
and fan hearing, and examining of all my foresaid sufferings and complaints)
troubles and the wars came on, and being in my own conscience, folly
satisfied of the justness^ of the Parliaments then cause, in the height of
zeal accompanied with judgment and conscience, upon the principles I have
largely laid down in the 26. 27. 75. 76 pages of my book of the 8th of June
1649. entitled Englands legal, fundamental, etc. I took up Arms for them,
and fought heartily and faithfully in their quarrel, (for maintaining of which
I had like to have been hanged at Oxford, while during my in prisonnment there,
I lost 5 or 600 l. out of my estate at London,) till the p^esent Earl of
Manchester, had like to have hanged me, for being a little to quick in taking
in Tikell Castle, which spoiled a soldier of me ever since; after which in the
year 1648. I followed the House of Commons close to transmit my foresaid votes
to the Lords; which with much difficulty (occasioned chiefly by Mr, William
Prinne, and other his zealous Presbyterian frien^s) I got by peice-meales
transmitted, where by reason of Manchesters interest I might have expected long
delay, yet I found quick dispatch, and upon the 1 of December 1645 by specially
decree, they took off the fine set upon me by the Starchamber; and afterward I
got the whole vote transmitted, who at their open Bar, Judicially upon the 13
of February 1645. appointed me a solemn hearing de novo of the whole matter,
and assigned Mr. John Bradshaw and Mr. John Cook for my counsel; who with
abundance of witnesses accordingly appeared, where Mr. Bradshaw did most
notably open the Starchamber injustice toward me, but especially their Whose
very words all are recorded by M. John Cook in his printed Relation of that
days proceedings before the Lords, who in the 3 page thereof upon the reading
of the Star Chamber sentence against me, most truly recites Mr. Bradshaws
observations in these very words; viz. that the said sentence was felo de se,
guilty of its own death, the ground whereof being because Mr Lilburne refused
to take an oath, to answer to all such questions as should be demanded of him;
It being so contrary to the Laws of God, Nature, and the Kingdom, for any man
to be his own accuser, and yet the same Mr. Bradshaw after he has most
illegally taken away the Kings life and drenched his hands in his blood:
commits me then to prison for suspicion of Treason, merely for refusing to
answer to a question that he himself demanded of me, as fully appears in the 2
edition of my picture of the Council of state page 10. 11. 16.
ex officio or interogatogatory proceedings with me and produced my witnesses
upon oath punctually to prove every head of his argument Upon which full
hearing the Lords made a notable decree; and adjudged, and declared tho said
proceedings of the said Star chamber, against the said John Lilburn, to be
illegal and most unjust and against the Liberty of the Subject, and Law of the
Land, and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon record.

But not assigning me any reparations in that Decree (the doing of which the
House of Commons left unto them, and the Lords according to former custom
looked upon to be their right in law to do,) whereupon I got Mr. John Cook to
draw me up that days work with most pregnant and notable aggravations, which I
printed and presented a few days after to every one of the Lords; praying
their assigning me particular reparations according to Law and Justice out of
the Estates of my unjust Judges, that had done me so much wrong; upon which new
address to them they did upon the fifth of March 1645. order and decree; and
assigned to be paid unto the said John Lilburne the sum of ten thousand
pounds for his Reparations which for many reasons (as there being ayding in the
wars to the King etc.) they fixed upon the Estates real and personal of
Francis Lord Cottington, Sir Francis Windebank, and James Ingram late Deputy
Warden of the Fleet, and afterward by an other Decree for the present levying
thereof out of their lands at eight years purchase (as they were before the
Wars,) with the allowance of Interest at 8 l* per centum, per annum; in case
of obstruction; for all or any part of it; and to this purchase caused an
Ordinance to be drawn up which fully passed their House the 15 20 and 27. of
April 1646. and afterward transmitted it to the House of Commons, where by
reason of my bloody adversary old Sir Henry Vains Interests and of my
imprisonment by Manchesters means in the Tower of London it lay asleep till the
1. of August 1648 at which time 7. or 8000. of my true friends in London,
signed and caused to be delivered a Petition to the House of Commons for my
Liberty, and the passing of the said Ordinance: which Petition is since
printed, with the Speech of my true Friend Sir John Maynard upon it. And in
reference to which Ordinance the House made this Order:

Die Martis, 1 August 1648. Sir JOHN MAYNARD. Sir PETER WENTVVORTH. Lord CARRE.
Col. BOSVVEL. Col. LUDLOVV. Mr HOLLAND. Mr COPLEY.

IT is referred to this Committee, or any five of them, to consider how Colonel
John Lilburn may have such satisfaction and allowance for his sufferings and
losses as was formerly intended him by this House.

Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Upon which Order I got the Committee to meet, and preferred a Petition to
them, the true copy of which follows in my address to every individual
Member, daied 4 of September 1648. Upon which Petition, at my discourse with
them, the Parliament having disposed of all that part of the Lord COTTINGTONS
estate that I should have had, unto the Lord SEY, and also compounded with Sir
FRANCIS WINDEBANK'S heir; the said Committee were pleased (seeing they judged
it a difficult piece of work for me to get it proportionably from all or most
part of my unjust Judges) to fix it entirely upon the Lord Keepers estate, as
the principal guilty man: of which, when the young Lord COVENTRY his Son and
Heir heard thereof in France, he came posting to England as in a maze, fearing
what such a precedent might bring upon him, if his Fathers estate [then dead]
should be compelled to make me satisfaction; he being so capital in injustice,
that if that course should be taken, his estate left him by his Father [if it
were trebled] would not satisfy for his Fathers palpable injustice committed
in his life time. And Manchester being in the same Briars with his Father,
being as unjust as the other, and having a Brother (viz. George Montague) and
other considerable Interests in the House of Commons, so plied their friends
there, that they put a stop to the second reading of the aforesaid Ordinance.
Which I first fully understood by the Speakers means, then my great pretended
friend, who one day began to reason with a Member of the House [and my special
Friend] about the unreasonablenesse to fix my Reparations upon the estate of
the deceased Lord COVENTRY; nay, or to give me any Reparations at all out of
the estates of those persons that did me wrong, for fear the precedent in time
might reach to themselves; for Sir, said the Speaker, [as the Member told me]
if my Son and Heir should be liable in law to make satisfaction to all those
men [out of that Estate I should leave him] that I have in the eye of the Law
wronged [by signing Warrants, Orders and Decrees by the Command of my
Superiours] he would soon be a beggar, although I should leave him 5 or 6000 l.
per annum; and therefore desired, as it were, the said Members concurrence with
them; who see a necessity, both in justice, and for the clamorous importunity
[as they called it] of me and my friends, to give me reparations; but yet to do
it in such a way, that the Precedent might not in future make themselves smart
for their injustice to particular men. Of which, when the said Member told me,
and withal told me, they were resolved to make the Common wealth my Play Master
out of the public Treasury, and color over the justness of it with this
pretense, That Cottingtons estate etc. formerly assigned me, they had since
disposed of for the Commonwealths use, to the Lord Sey; and therefore now it
would be no injustice to the Commonwealth [although in the Star Chamber it
never wronged me] to pay me my reparation. Of all which, when I understood
their design, I was not a little troubled and perplexed in my spirit (although
I was grown much into debt by reason of my long and chargeable sufferings and
large losses) to see that my sufferings should produce no benefit at all to the
Commonwealth; which I must, as before God, in the sincerity of my heart aver,
was much in mine eye, no earthly Treasure in the world being of that value to
me, to make me undergo those sorrows and distresses that I underwent in the
Bishops time: neither had I undertaken any hazards (and continued in them) out
of any other consideration. but out of conscience and duty to God, and my
native Country, I was much perplexed and raised up in my spirit, seeing the
main end of my struglings was like to be frustrated, which was, That the Nation
might have good by it, by the creating of Precedents, and terror for the
future to Tyrants and Knaves; that so the people hereafter might live more in
freedom and peace, in the enjoyment of their Laws and Liberties; the
consideration of which made me something fearlesse of my own particular
welfare; and in my discourse at their door, to set all my expectation on the
Tenter-hooks: and a little recollecting my thoughts, I modellized the
forementioned Address of the 4 of Sebtember, 1648, and printed it, and the
next day (as I remember) with my own hands presented it to every Member that
would receive it, as they went into the House: The true copy of which thus
follows;

To every individual Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
The Humble Remembrance of Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBURN, September. 4. 1648.
Honored Sir,
VOuchsafe to take notice and seriously to consider, That the first week this
present Parliament sat, which is now almost full 8 years ago, I presented a
humble Petition to the House of Commons, for justice and right against the
cruel Judges of the high Commission Court, and the Star Chamber, and I had the
honor [the same day it was presented) to be one of the first prisoners in
England that was set at liberty by this Parliament, and also received a speedy,
full, fair, and candid proceeding, in the hearing and examining of my
tyrannical sufferings: but by reason of multiplicity of public business, and
other great obstructions, I have not as yet been able to attain to the full end
of my legal and just expectation and right, viz. Reparations for my long, sad
and tormenting sufferings by the foresaid unjust and unrighteous Judges.

Be pleased also favorably to take notice, That upon the first of August last,
there was an humble Petition presented to the Honorable House of Commons,
subscribed by many thousands of honest citizens, etc humbly to desire you to
put me in the fall possession of all your be-past just Votes about my foresaid
sufferings: upon reading and debating of which Petition, as in answer to that
particular of it, your House were pleased to make this ensuing Order.

Die Martis, 1 Augusti 1648. Lord Carre, Sir John Maynard, Sir Peter Wentworth,
Col. Boswell, Col. Ludlow, M. Copley, M. Holland.
IT is referred to this Committee, or any five of them, to consider how Col.
John Lilburn may have such satisfaction and allowance for his sufferings and
losses as was formerly intended him by this House.

Henry Elsing Cler. Dom. Com.

Unto which said Committee at their first sitting, I presented a Petition; the
copy of which thus follows.

To the Honorable the Committee of the House of Commons appointed to consider
of Lieut. Col. Lilburns business in reference to the Star Chamber: The humble
Petition of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn.
SHOWS,
THat besides your Petitioners sufferings by reason of his banishment into the
Low Countries, he was first committed by D. Lamb, Guin, Ayle^, 1637. and
afterward had 3 years imprisonment in the common Jail of the Fleet, being
whipped from Fleet-bridg to Westminster, and enduring the cruel torment of above
five hundred stripes with knotted cords: afterward being set in the Pillory
for the space of two hours; and by James Ingram Deputy Warden of the Fleet,
gagged, tearing his jaws almost in pieces, without Order: which Sentence was
given by Lord Keeper Coventry, Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal, Lord
Newburgh, Sir Henry Vane senior, Lord chief Justice Brampston, and Judge Jones.
And after the barbarous execution of this Sentence, being April 18. 1638. the
said Lord Coventry, Arch bishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London, Earl of
Manchester, Earl of Arundel, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Conington, Lord Newburgh,
Secretary Cook, and Windebank, passed another Sentence, in effect, for the
Starving of your Petitioner, and for the tormenting of him with irons upon both
hands and legs both night and day; and by keeping him close in the comm^n Gacle
of the Fleet from the speech of any of his friends: all which was executed with
the greatest cruelty that could be for the space of almost three years
together, to the apparent hazard of his life, both by starving him [which was
with all art and industry several ways attempted;] and also by several
assaults made upon him by the said Wardens men [instigated thereunto by the
said Deputy Warden, to the maiming and wounding him, whereby to this day he is
totally deprived of the use of two of his fingers:] All which, with much more,
too tedious to be here inserted, was fully proved by sufficient witnesses,
before a Committee of your House, whereof M. Francis Rous had the Chair; upon
whose report made May 4. 1641, your House voted, That the Sentence in the
Star Chamber given against the said John Lilburn, and all the proceedings
thereupon, was illegal, and against the liberty of the Subject, and also
bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous and tyrannical; and that he ought to have
good Repa^ations therefore. Which Votes (by reason of multiplicity of business
in your House) cost your Petitioner some years of importunate and chargeable
attendance to get them transmitted to the Lords; which was obtained in February
1645. the 13 day of which month your Petitioners whole cause was effectually
opened at the Lords Bar, by his learned Council M. John Bradshaw, and M. John
Cook; and there every particular again proved upon Oath, by testimony of people
of very good quality; whereupon they concurred in all things with the House of
Commons, saving in the matter of Reparation; But upon the delivery of a true
narrative, the Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, (which your Petitioner with
his own hands in the same month delivered unto every individual Lord) they
made a further Decree, that your Petitioner should have 2000 l. reparations out
of the estates of the said Lord Cottington, Sir Francis Windebank, and James
Ingram, for the reasons alleged in an Ordinance which they passed in April
1646, and transmitted to your House, where it has lain dormant ever since, and
is now referred to the consideration of this Honorable Committee.

Now, forasmuch as by the judicial Laws of God (which are the pure laws of
right reason) he that wilfully harteth his neighbor, is bound to the
performance of these five things: First, If it be a blemish or wound, Like for
like, or to redeem it with money, thereby to satisfy him for his wound.
Secondly, For his pain and torment. Thirdly, "For the healing. Fourthly, "For
his loss of time in his calling. Fifthly, "For the shame and disgrace; all
which are to be considered according to the quality of the person damnified:
which reparations are to be paid out of the best of the goods of him that
damnified him, and that without delay.

And as the Law of God, so the Laws of this Nation does abhor, and has
severely punished (above all persons) Judges many times with the loss of their
See notably to this purpose those pregnant instances in my Epistle to my nick
named Levelling friends, usually meeting at the Whalebone in Lothbury behind
the Exchange, dated From my close imprisonment in the Tower of London, the 17
of July, and recorded in my Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver Cromwell,
etc. page 6. 7. 8.
lives and estates, who under color of Law, have violated their Oaths, and
destroyed the lives, liberties and properties of the People, whom by law they
should have preserved: as may be instanced by the 44 Judges and Justices hanged
in one year by King Alfred; diverse of them for less crimes then has been done
in this case of your Petitioner; as may be read in the Law-book, called The
Mirror of Justice, page 239. 240. 241. and translated and reprinted this very
Parliament: and by Justice Thorp in Edw the third his time, who was condemned
to death for the violation of his Oath, for taking small sums of money in
Causes depending before him; as appears in the 3 part of Cooks Institute, fol.
155.156.

And by the Lord chief Justice Tresilian, etc. who in full Parliament in Rich.
the seconds time was attached as a Traitor in the forenoon, and had his throat
cut at Tyburn in the afternoon, because he had given it under his hand that the
King might create unto himself as his pleasure, another rule to walk by then
the Law of the Land prescribes him; as appears by the Parliament Records in the
Tower, by many of your own Declarations, and also by the Chronicles of England.

Now forasmuch as your Petitioners sufferings has been unparalleled, and his
prejudice sustained thereby altogether unrepatrable; having lost his limb,
etc. And forasmuch as by the Law of God, Nature and Nations, reparations for
hurts and damages received, ought to be satisfied as far as may be in all
persons, though done by a^cident and not intentionally, and though through
ignorance: much more when the Persons offending, did it knowingly, and on
purpose in the face, nay, in the spite of the fundamental Laws of the Land,
which they were swoon to preserve: And for that the reparations in the said
Ordinance assigned does scarce amount to what your Petitioner spent in his
three years sad captivity, and his now almost eight years chargeable
attendance, ^n suing for it, besides the loss of a rich and profitable trade
for eleven years together, and his wounds, torments, smart and disgrace,
sustained by his said Tyannicall sentences.

He therefore humbly prays the favor and Justice of this honorable Committee
for some considerable augmentation of his said Reparations, and the rather,
because his fellow sufferer Doctor B^stwick had 4000 l. reparations allotted
him, whose sufferings (he submissively conceives) was nothing nigh so great,
in torment, pain and shame, as your Petitioners) And forasmuch as the now Lord
Coventry, son and heir to the foresaid Lord Coventry, has walked in his
Father, Steps, in enmity to the Laws Liberties, and freedom of the Nation; by
being in arms at the beginning of the Wars against the Parliament, and made his
peace with the Earl of Essex for a small matter, and has since disened the
Kingdom, living in France privately, receiving the profits of a vast estate
which his Father left him. And forasmuch as his said Father (the late Lord
Coventry) was the activest man in infringing the Laws and liberties of the
Nation; although a Lawyer and Judge, sitting on the supreme seat of justice,
and a person (as is groundedly conceived) who got a great estate by corruption,
and particularly a man that principally passed, as chief Judge of the Court,
both the aforesaid sentence against your Petitioner: And in regard the estates
of the said Lord Cottington, and Sir Francis Windebank, by subsequent orders of
both Houses upon urgent occasions are much entangled and altered from the
condition they were in, in 1646* when the Lords ordered your Petitioner 2000
Marks out of them, and for that the estate of James Ingram cannot be found, nor
at present come by. Your Petition^r therefore most humbly prays, That the
greatest part if not all your Petitioners reparations may be fixed upon the
said now Lord Coventries estate, to be immediately paid your Petitioner; or else
that his Rents, and the profits of his woods and goods may be seized in the
respective Counties where they lie, for the satisfying thereof; that your
Petitioner may no longer run the hazard of ruin to him and his, by tedious
delays, having already contracted the debts of many hundreds of pounds,
occasioned by the chargeable prosecution hereof: And that if you shall think of
conjoyning any other with him, That it may be principally the Judges of the
Law; who ought to have been Pilots and guides unto the rest of the Judges of
that Court, who were Lords, and persons not knowing the Law.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. JOHN LILBURN.

After the reading of which they entered into a serious debate of the whole
business, and thereupon passed several Votes to be the Heads of an Ordinance to
be drawn up and reported to the House, by the Right Honorable the Lord Car
Chairman to the said Committee, who accordingly reported the proceedings and
votes of the said Committee to your House, who approved of the said Votes, and
ordered an Ordinance to be presented to the House consonant thereunto, which
was accordingly done by the Lord Car, which Ordinance has been once read in
your House: The Copy of which thus follows:

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the raising
of three thousand pounds, out of the real Estate of the late Thomas Lord
Coventry, late Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, for and toward the
reparation and damages of John Lilburn Gent. which he sustained by virtue and
color of two Sentences given and made against him, in the late Court of
Star Chamber, the one the 13. of Febr. 1637. the other the 18. of April, 1638.
WHereas the cause of John Lilburn Gent. concerning two Sentences pronounced
against him in the late Court of Star Chamber, 13 Febr. 13 Car. Regn. and 18.
Apr. 14 Car. Regis, were voted the 4. of May 1641. by the House of Commons to
be illegal, and against the Liberty of the Subject, and also bloody, wicked,
cruel, barbarous, and tyrannical, (which were transmitted from the said House
of Commons, unto the House of Lords; who thereupon, by an order or decree by
them made, 13 Feb. 1645. Adjudged do declared the said proceedings of the said
Star chamber, against the said John Lilburn, to be illegal, and most unjust,
and against the liberty of the Subject, and Mag. Chart. and unfit to continue
upon Record, etc. And by another Order or Decree, made by them the said Lords,
the 5. of March 1645. they assigned to be paid unto the said John Lilburn, the
sum of two thousand pounds for his reparations; and the said House of Peers
then fixed that sum upon the estates real and personal, of Francis Lord
Cottington, Sir Francis VVindebank, and James Ingram, But the Lord Roberts, the
Lord Wharton, etc. told me several times, if their estates had not been under
Sequestration by Ordinance of Parliament, they would never have gone about to
fix my reparations by Ordinance (which they must needs then do to take off the
Sequestration) but have issued out a decree and extent under the great Seal,
immediately to have put me in present possession of my 2000 l. which they said
was their right by Law to do.
late Deputy Warden of the Fleet: and afterward for the present levying
thereof, with allowance of Interest, in case of Obstructions, while the same
should be in levying, and of such part as should not be forthwith levied; The
said House of Peers did cause an Ordinance to be drawn up, and passed the same
in their House, the 27 April 1646. and afterward transmitted the same to the
House of Commons for their concurrence; with whom it yet depends. And for as
much as since that transm^ssion, all or the greatest part, of the estates of
the said Lord Cottington and Sir Francis Wind^ban^k, is since by both Houses
disposed of to other uses, and the estate of the said James Ingram is so small
and weak, and so entangled with former ni^umbrances, that it can afford little
or no part unto the said John Lilburn of the said reparations. And for that the
said late Lord Coventry, was the principal Judge, and chief Actor, in giving
of both the said Illegal Sentences in the said Court of Starchamber; and for
the barbarous inflicting of punishments thereupon:

Therefore, and or satisfaction of the said 2000 l. and for the increase of
reparation unto the said John Lilburn for his extraordinary wrongs, sufferings
and losses thereby sustained, and the ^ong time hitherto elapsed without any
satisfaction. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do ordain, and be
it hereby ordained by the said Lords and Commons and by Authority of the same,
That the said John Lilburn shall receive the sum of 3000 l. out of all or any
the Manors, Mesuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof he the said
late Thomas Lord Coventry, or any other person or persons to or for his use, or
in trust for him, was or were seized in fee-simple, or fee tail, or otherwise,
at the time of the said sentences or decrees, or o^ either of them, in the said
late Court of Star Chamber, or since within the Kingdom of England or Dominion
of Wales, any Order o^ Ordinance heretofore made by either or both Houses of
Parliament for the employment of the estate of the said late Thomas Lord
Coventry to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. And for the more
spee^ly levying of the said sum of three thousand pounds, It is further
Ordered and Ordained, That the several and respect^ve Sheriffs, of the
several and respective Counties, within England and Wales, wherein any of the
said Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments do lie, shall forthwith upon sight,
and by virtue of this Ordinance cause an inquisition to be made, and taken by
the oaths of twelve or more lawful men, where the same lands do lie, and what
the same are and do contain, and of the clear yearly value thereof, over and
above all charges and re-prises; and after such inquisition so made and taken,
the several and respective Sheriffs, shall deliver unto the said John Lilburne
true copies in Parchment of the same inquisitions by them taken, and shall then
also deliver unto the said John Li^burn the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments which shall be so comprised or mentioned in the said
inquisitions, To have and to hold, to him the said John Lilburne and his
assigns without impeachment of waste; and until he shall have received out of
the issues and profits thereof (to be estimated according to the yearly values
contained in the said inquisions) the said sum of three thousand pounds;
together with all reasonable charges and expenses to be sustained from
henceforth for obtaining the said sum of three thousand pounds: And all and
every the said several and respective Sheriffs, and all other person and
persons whatsoever that shall any ways act or ^ssist in obedience to this
Ordinance, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, shall be therefore
defended and kept harmless by the authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Be pleased further to take notice, That after the foresaid Ordi^ance, was once
read, it came to a debate in your House for to be read the second time, which
was carried in the negative by majority of voices; and I cannot but apprehend
that were diverse in the house unsatisfied in the Ordinance it self, in regard
the House was divided upon the debate and Vote, which I cannot but apprehend
must flow from one of these two considerations.

First, Either because that the whole reparations is fixed upon the Lord
Coventries estate singly; who had many copartners in the sentences, and who
also it may be supposed has expiated his crime by his death. Or else secondly,
Because in some men's thoughts, some of my late actions are or have been so
evil in themselves, that they may seem to them to overballance the merrits of
all my ancient sufferings.

To the first of which, besides the reasons contained in the foregoing
Petition, I humbly crave leave to offer these unto your judicious consideration.

First, I have by almost eight years Viz. the Earl of Salisbury, but
especially old Sr. Henry Vane that notorious and guilty Traitor, that betrayed
all the North of England to the Earl of Newcastle, the particulars whereof you
may at large read in Englands birthright page 19 20, 21. and in my Resolved
man's Resolution, April 1647: page 14. 15, 16. 17, 18. See also the 2 Edition of
my picture of my forementioned book of the eight of June 1649: page 19. 20.
and the Impeachment of high Treason against Cromwell. page 6.
dear-bought experi^nce, found the interest of some of my forementioned potent
Judges (who yet sit in both houses of Parliament) to be too strong for me to
grapple with (and the only cause in my apprehension that has all this while
kept me from my own) and therefore my own interest (which compels me strongly
to endeavor by all just ways and means to attain to my just end reparations)
necessitates me as much as I can to wave the fixing upon them.

Secondly, I continually find amongst the greatest part of my Judges an
apprehension, in their own spirits, that in conscience and equity there ought
to be favor showed to those of my Star Chamber Judges that have joined with
the Parliament and Kingdom, rather then to those that have fought and contested
against them both, and that seeing the latter are able enough in Estates to
make satisfaction, it ought in conscience and equity soly to lie upon their
heads; and I being not to guide or command my Judges, but rather to be in this
guided and commanded by them, and to acquiess in their reasons they give me,
especially when my own understanding tells me they most conduce to the obtaining
my main end, which is justice in the possessing of my own. Now these things
considered, and conjoined to the reasons laid down in my foregoing Petition, I
submissively conceive, as things now stand, in Law, equity and conscience, no
juster objecton can be found for you to fix my reparations upon then the real
estate (wherever it is to be found) of the late Thomas Lord Coventry, who was
the Principal Actor in this bloody Tragedy: and who was not less eminent in
cruellty then in place, being judge of the highest seat of mercy, the Chancery,
which ought to abate the ^edge of the Law, when it is too keen: Now for the
chief Read carefully Mr. John Cooks most remarkable aggravations in his
forementioned relation of my sufferings at the Lords bar Febr. 13. 1645. p. 8,
9.
Judge of mercy to degenerate into a savage cruelty, not heard of amongst the
Barbarians, nor to be read of in the Histories of the bloodiest Persecutors,
how transcendently heinous and punishable is it?

And though he be dead, yet justice lives; and whatsoever is become of him, his
estate ought to make satisfaction, according to the rule of his own court of
Star Chamber, he that suffers not in his body, must suffer in his purse. And
therefore I may justly expect my reparations out of his real estate that he
was possessor of at his death, where ever I can now find it; whether it be in
the possession of the present Lord Coventry, or others* and you may there as
righteous Judges fix it for these reasons;

First, Because the said Thomas late Lord Coventries real estate, in equity,
if not in the eye of the Common law, ought to satisfy his debts, though dead;
though now it be in the possession of the present Lord Coventry, etc. and in
reason and conscience there is at least as much equity that it should repair
injuries, especially of so high a nature as mine is of; and the rather, if it
be considered that the late Lord keeper Coventry had, besides his real estate,
a very considerable personal estate at his death, which I desire not to meddle
with, although it be descended to his heirs, etc.

Secondly, Because the estate now in the hands of the son and heir, etc. of the
late Lord Keeper Coventry descended from him, and was in the hands of the said
late Lord Keeper Coventry himself, at the time and some years after his passing
the forementioned two illegal and barbarous sentences against me. Now in case
I could have enjoyed the benefit of the Law then, or immediately after they
were passed against me, I might by an action of the case have had at Law
satisfactory damages out of his estate: And if there was any Law or equity for
reparations to be given me out of his estate then, the equity and justice of
the case is nothing altered by the said late Lord Coventries decease, and
bequest of the same estate to the present Lord Coventry his son or others.

Thirdly, Because the late Lord keeper Coventries passing such sentences as he
did against me, was [as may appear by the Votes of your own House, made in the
case, 4. May, 1641.] a subversion of the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions
of the Land, and in the case of the Earl of Strafford, that was adjudged
Treason: And in the case of Treason, the Law does dis-inherit and dis-franchise
all the posterity of any one adjudged guilty thereof; therefore my reparations
(for transcendent injuries done, in such an extraordinary case,) out of the
estate of the Father, though it be descended to the Son, or Sons, etc. is no
injury to them in equity nor conscience: neither do I conceive, that in case
this Parliament should impose a Fine of ten-times as much as my reparations
amount unto, out of the aforesaid late Lord Coventries vast estate, to be paid
to the public purse of the Kingdom, for the satisfaction of the public
Justice thereof, and the expiation of his notorious and superlative crimes,
could not in the least, in equity reason and conscience, be esteemed unjust in
the eye of any impartial, righteous, or just man in England; and so much in
answer to the first Objection.

And now with all respect to the just honor of Parliament, a word or two to
the second: which is, That it may be in some Parliament men's thoughts, the
evil of some of my late actions may weigh down the merit and desert of all my
ancient sufferings; and therefore to quit scores with me, without passing my
Ordinance for Starchamber reparation, is too large Justice (in the strictness
of Justice) for me?

To which with all modesty and respect, I Answer:

Admit my late actions were as vile, and as punishable, as by the worst of my
enemies can be supposed to be, yet there can be no Justice in quitting scores
with me therefore; and the reason is, because, that were not only to punish me
for good actions done, which my sufferings against the Starchamber was, and was
almost eight years ago so adjudged by your own Votes: but it were also to
acquit and gratify the guilty and obnoxious, which the present Lord Coventry
[upon your own principles] is; as well as his Father was: and the Spirit of
truth says, To justify the wicked, and to condemn the righteous, is both an
abomination in the sight of God.

Secondly, I answer: It is not now seasonable for me to justify my self, Yet I
have since that do^e it with justification, as you may clearly and fully read
in the second Edition of my book of the eighth of June, 1649. intitulled, The
legal fundamental Liberties, etc. p. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. etc.
but rather to entreat you to do me justice and right, in passing my present
Ordinance, without any more delay, for my reparations; wherein I have deserved
well, by your own often and ancient confessions, before ever you had any
pretense of evil to fix upon me, or lay unto my charge; and when you have so
done, if for any subsequent actions, any of you be offended again with me, I
will put you in sufficient and good security to answer the Law, without
interceding for mercy or compassion: But O if you be men of gallantry, justice,
honesty, or conscience, punish not my poor and afflicted wife, and tender babes
for my pretended transgressions, by exposing them to famish, or eat one
another, by keeping my own from me, which should preserve them alive, voted
unto me by your selves, almost eight years ago; and when you have done, do your
pleasure with me, even whatsoever seems good in your eyes, rather then expose
me to see my dearest Consort, and the tender offspring of our wombs, to perish
before my eyes; which I must ingeniously confess, the strength of duty, and
natural indeared affections, will not enable me to behold, with patience and
silence: So desiring God to direct your hearts, now at the last, to do just
and righteous things to me, and the Kingdom, for just and righteous ends; I
take leave, in sincerity, to subscribe my self,

From the Tower of London, this fourth of Septem. 1648. Yours to the last drop
of my heart-blood, (if either you be Gods, or your Countries,) JOHN LILBVRN.
Nevertheless we according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwells righocousnesse, 2 Pet. 3.13.


Upon the presenting of which, my Ordinance was called for to be read the
second time, which Elsynge the Clerk pretended he had laid ready upon the
table before him; but what betwixt his knavery, old Henry Vanes, the Speakers,
and young Mountagues, my Ordinance was stolen, and could never after be found:
so that I was sent to out of the House to get another fair copy writ over
presently, which being long in doing, my friends went away, not expecting it
would any more be meddled with that day; so that when most of them were gone, my
adversaries took the advantage to call for it, and in a thin House read it the
second time, and upon debate threw it out of doors, and at present to stop my
mouth, voted me 300. l. ready money (as they pretended) out of Sir Charles
Kemish his Composition, to enable me for present subsistence, and to follow my
business, and also made this further Order,

Die Martis, Septem. 5. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the sum of three thousand
pounds be allowed and paid unto Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, for
reparations of his damages sustained by color of the sentences given against
him in the late Court of Star Chamber, where Lord Carr has the Chair, with
the addition of Sir John Danvers, and Colonel Rigby, to consider of, and
present to this House an Ordinance for settling of Lands to him and his heirs,
to the value of 3000. l. at twelve years purchase, out of the estates of new
Delinquents In the Insurrections, not yet sequestered.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Of which when I fully understood, I was troubled, but knew not how to help
myself, and having already met with so many difficulties, and received so many
baffles, as I had done, I thought it was better (being almost wearied out with
struggling) to take half a loaf, then go away without any bread at all: so I
addressed my self to the Committee, who left me to my choice to fix my
reparations upon what Delinquents I thought fittest, that were not already
disposed of, and some of them told me of an Order the House had made against
Sir Henry Gibbs (who had a good estate in the County of Durham) upon an
information M. Ashurst, and the rest of their Commissioners from Scotland, had
brought them; upon which they made this Order.

Die Luna, Aug. 28. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the estate of Sir Henry
Gibbs, real and personal in England, be forthwith sequestered.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Upon consideration of which, and my Fathers and Uncles being Committee Men in
the said County of Durham, I then judged it most fittest for me, for the speedy
dispatch of my business (without any more baffles, delays, or cheats) to fix
in that County, and accordingly I got my foresaid Committee to write a Letter
to them; the copy of which thus follows:

For their honored friends the Committee of Sequestrations in the County of
Durham or to any three of them.
Gentlemen,
IT being by an Order of the House of Commons of the fifth of this instant,
referred to us to consider of, and to present unto them an Ordinance for
settling of Lands upon Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, and his heirs, to the
value of 3000. l. at twelve years purchase, out of the estates of new
Delinquents in the insurrections not yet sequestered; we (that we may be the
better enabled to perform this service) do desire you, or some three or more
of you, to make Certificate unto us in writing with all convenient speed, of
the names of such Gentlemen, or others in your County, who have been emixous
and known Delinquents (or so proved before you) in these late insurrections,
as also a particular in writing of their estates, and of the clear yearly value
thereof (communibus annis) over and above all charges and reprises, and what
terms and estates they have therein, and what encumbrances lie thereupon, as
far as can come to your knowledge, and to send by this Bearer Lievenant-Col.
John Lilburne that Certificate sealed up unto us, who are

Dated at Westminster, Septem. 9. 1648. Your Friends and Servants. Charles
Carr, John Maynard, Alexander Rigby, Godfrey Boswell, Edmond Ludlow, Lionel
Copley, Corneliu^ Holland.


With which Letter, I immediately took a long, tedious, and chargeable journey
into the North, and brought back an answer; the copy of which thus follows:
To the right honorable the Lord Charles Carr, and the rest of the Gentlemen of
the House of Commons, appointed to consider the satisfaction of Lievtenant-Col.
John Lilburne: These present.
Right Honorable,
WE received your Honors Letter dated the ninth of September last, for
certifying the names and estates of such new Delinquents as have been in the
late insurrections, wherein we have labored as much as we can to inform our
selves to give you satisfaction in your desires, and therefore have sent up
these several Certificates here enclosed of the names of such persons as have
been Delinquents in these late insurrections, amongst whom is Sir Henry Gibbs,
for whose sequestration we have received a peremptory Order from the Lords and
Commons of Sequestrations, dated the 28. of August last; the other two are
openly known to have been in these late wars: We have also sent particulars of
the yearly values of their estates in this County, so near as we are able to
learn, considering the shortness of the time allowed by the necessities of
the Bearer concerned therein, and the fewness of us, who are now left to
attend the service of the Sequestration in this County, being no more that will
act at all, then we whose names are hereunto subscribed; we rest,

Durham, October 12. 1648. Your Honors humble Servants, Thomas Midford,
Richard Lilburne, George Lilburne.
Which forementioned Certificate in brief thus follows; A rentall of Sir
Henry Gibs Lands in Jarro, in the County of Durham above the reprises, for any
thing we can find by examinations of the immediate Tenants of the said Lands in
October. 1648.

Jarroe with the grounds thereunto belonging 222. l. per annum, belonging to
Thomas Bows Esquire (which he had with his wife) October. 1648. at Broadwood,
Hareup, Pawse, Meadows, Stotley, Riding, Birkclose, and Land in Medelton
field, Foggerforth, and Evenwood, 308. l. 10. s. per annum (But as I remember,
Evenwood being 80. l. per annum proved to be his brother Cradocks, and so
rests 228. l. 10. s.) belonging to Sir Henry Bellinham at Beamount hill, in
the County of Durham, October. 1648. copyhold, and worth 180. l. per annum.

Thomas Midford. Richard Lilburn. George Lilburn.







After I came to London with this, and delivered it to the Committee, they were
willing I should fix upon Sir Henry Gibbs his Land at Jarroe, to make over to
me, and to my heirs for ever, for my 3000. l. allotted, and accordingly drew up
an Ordinance, and truly what with the personal Treaties vigorous going on,
which rendered the making over such lands to be very dubious in the possessing
of them, and the taking away his estate for ever, without visibly declaring any
particular cause, or ever so much as summoning him to answer, for the Crimes
the Parliament Commissioners (privately in their house) laid to his charge,
upon which they sequestered him, (though I confess I my self before rid unto
Scotland to inquire of him, and had enough to sequester him) or in default of
appearance legally to outlaw him; all which laid together, with other things
following, I had no stomach to his, or any other Delinquents Lands, knowing no
reason why Sir Henry Vane, etc. should shift off from themselves my
reperations, for the transcendent injustice they had done me, and lay it upon
the shoulders of those in an extraordinary manner, that never particularly had
done me wrong, (and besides force me to put it to a dubious hazard, whether I
should enjoy it or no) and understanding that Sir Henry Gibbs had an
impropriation in the said County, amounting to about 70. or 80. l. per an.
besides a legal and just right in a great deal of wood in Bransboth Park, some
part of which was ready feld, and so would make ready money, upon all which
considerations, etc. in as plausable a manner as I could, I drew up a Petition
to the foresaid Committee to avoid the settling upon me the said Lands, the copy
of which follows.

To the honorable the Committee of the House of Commons, appointed to consider
of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburns business, in reference to the
Starchamber. The humble Petition of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn.
Shows,
THat upon several debates of the Petitioners barbarous sufferings by the
Starchamber in both Houses of Parliament, The House of Lords were pleased the
15. 20. 27. of April 1646. to pass an ordinance that your Petitioner should
receive 2000. l. reparations out of the Lands of the Lord Cottington, etc. at
eight years purchase and upon the humble Petition of your Petitioner, to this
honorable Committee in August last, for augmentation of his reparations, you
were pleased for the reasons therein alleged, to ^^te your Petitioner 3000. l.
for his Reparations, to be raised out of the estate of the now Lord Coventry in
money, upon the report of which to the House of Commons, by the right
honorable the Lord Carr, the House were pleased to confirm the said Vote, and
upon the Lord Carrs presenting an Ordinance to the house to that end, the House
past it once, but before it could be read twice, either by the carelessness or
wilfulness of Mr. Elsynge the Clarke, your Petitioners Ordinance was
imbesled and tossed, and a new copy the same day was drawn and presented to a
thin House, who threw it out of doors, and ordered your Petitioner to receive
3000. l. at 12. years purchase, out of the Lands of new Delinquents, which
3000. l. in effect and substance is not one 6. d. more, then the Lords 2000. l.
was, the Lords 2000. l. being at 8. years purchase, and the House of Commons
3000. l. at 12. years purchase.

That upon the last sitting of this Committee, you were pleased to write to the
Committee of Sequestrations of the County of Durham, to make Certificates to
this Committee of the estates of new Delinquents in their County, who by their
Letter and Certificates of the 12. of October present, certify of the clear
delinquency of Sir Henry Gibb Knight, Sir Henry Bellingham Knight and Baronet,
and Thomas Bows Esquire, all of whom have real estates in the said County of
Durham, the obtaining of which Certificate, cost your Petitioner a tedious and
chargeable journey into those parts.

That your Petitioner, for diverse weighty reasons in his own thoughts, fixed
principally upon the estate of Sir Henry Gibb: but having been with diverse and
several Counselors learned in the Law of England, he clearly finds that in
Law strictly, his nor no other Delinquents Lands, can immediately be made over
absolutely to your Petitioner, and his heirs for ever, without such clauses of
reservation, as may totally endanger your Petitioner within a few months to
lose the fruit of his almo^t eight years extraordinary chargeable attendance,
for justice in the premises in your House, the terms of the conveyance in law
being so ticklish, that your Petitioner would not willingly give one years
purchase for land so conveyed.

Wherefore, and in regard your Petitioner cannot believe, that your House
intends him a^fiction without a^ substance; for his already twice voted 3000.
l. reparation, he (...) humbly prays, that he may receive your honorable
assistance for the immediate (...) of an Ordinance, for your Petitioner to
receive 8. l. per centum per annum for (...) forbearance of his money, from the
hands of the Committee of Sequestrations of the County of Durham, arising out
of the estates sequestered in the said County of the said S^. Henry Gibb, Sir
Henry Bellingham, and Thomas Bows Esquire, beginning at the 25. of March ^^st
past, and that the residue of the profits of the lands, woods or other goods of
the forsaid persons, lying in the said County, may as they arise go to the
payment of your Petitioner his said 3000. l. till it be fully paid, with an
assurance unto (...) P^^^t^^ner, that in case any, or all of them compound with
the Parliament for their delinquency, that so much of your petitioner
reparations as thou shall remain, may be sat^^^^ed and paid out of their
compositions.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. John Lilburne.


Which Petition of mine the Committee granted, and caused an Ordinance
accordingly to be drawn up very fully, only my back friend John Blaxston and
my uncle M George Lilburne being sorely falled out, the man endeavored to
revenge himself of me, and busled so hard against me in the House, as that he
got all consideration for the fu^u^e forbearance of my money dashed out: which I
was fain to bear with patience at the present, being not able to help my self;
and as I remember it was read and past the second time, but the stream of the
House running after the personal Treaty, with the supposition or jealousy of
diverse of my acquaintance (and former friends amongst those men) that I had too
deep a hand in the late London Petition of 11. September 1648. which seemed to
them to be a choke pear to the Treaty, and they conceiving that I still
pursued the same ends, made the chariot wheels of the finishing of my Ordinance
to got heavier then they used to do; so that for my blood I totally could not
get fit to pass the House of Commons in October 1648. and other business of
the Army coming on, I left looking after my Ordinance, and visibly and totally,
devoted my self to an industrious endeavor to see if I with any other
nicknamed levelling friends, could prevent another cheat by the Army (who
promised fair in their large Remonstrance from S. Albans of 16. November. 1648.
page 66, 67, 68. but especially in their most remarkable Declaration, showing
the reasons of their last advance to London) the true narrative of my
proceedings with them and their friends you may read in the 2. edition of my
book of the 8. of June 1649. entitled The legal fundamental Liberties of the
People of England received, asserted and vindicated, page 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38. which pages I entreat you seriously to read; and with them I continued very
diligently and closely following them, to see if it were possible to get them
consent to the settling of the Kingdom upon the bases and foundations of the
principles of true freedom and justice, by an The speedy doing of which they
both publicly and privately, as solemnly promised and engaged to perform as
almost it was possible for men to do, as clearly you may fully read in their
two last forementioned Declarations, but especially that of the reasons of
their last advance to London, which being but short I have herewith sent you,
and entreat you most seriously to peruse, as a clear and everlasting testimony
against their present wretched and apostatized baseness.
Agreement of the People that had not fought against their Freedoms; the only
and alone just cure of all Englands maladies, not only in my thoughts then,
but still at this present day; but when I apparently and visibly saw their
juggling and cheating, of which I with out fear told them, as you may read in
page 39, 40. of my last named books. I say at the perceiving of their
baseness, I judged it Impossible for me ever to get my Ordinance fully pass,
unless I would be their slave and vassal, which Harrison, Sir William
Constable, and Sir Hardresse Wader at their first coming to Whitehall labored
to get me to be, and to engage my pen for them; but my positive answer to them
all three face to face (in their chamber) was, That I would as soon engage for
the Turk as for them, unless they would come to a righteous center where they
would fixedly acquiesce, before they so much as attempted the meddling with
those great things they intended, as the breaking the House, and taking off the
Kings hea^: I say, perceiving they were resolved to be knaves in the highest,
and to go through with their intended resolutions what ever it cost, I thought
it best for me to stir before all their fears and troubles were over, to get my
Ordinance fully to pass before they fully got up into the throne, being
confident if I staid till they had got their (...) business about the King
over, I should never get it pass then, but upon implicit engagements to be
their slave, which I us much abhorred as I did the cutting of my own (...), and
therefore I put pen to paper and write a netling Letter to the Speaker about
it, being resolved to lay my bones at their door in the pursuit of it, and its
effect it had, for as I remember the next day my Ordinance was transmitted to
the Lords, the copy of which Letter thus follows.

M. Speaker,
THough I cannot challenge much interest in you, yet being a suffering
oppressed Englishman, and considering you in the place you are in, I cannot
choose but in black and white present you with a little of my sorrows, which I
assuredly know is now as easy for you to redress, (if you please) as it is
almost for me to write these lines to you; it is not unknown to your self
what transcendent miseries I suffered before this Parliament by the Bishops,
etc. for diverse years together, and how that for betwixt eight and nine years I
have in a manner constantly waited upon your House for redress, without any
real fruit at all to this day, though I dare safely say it, I have spent well
nigh 1500. l. one way and another, since I first begun my suit unto you, diverse
hundreds of which I must in truth tell you I am at this time engaged for, and
owe at this hour, and how soon I may be thrown into a Jayle, and there rot
for want of payment of it, and see my wife and tender babes perish for want
before my eyes, I know not; and therefore truly Sir, I must with bitterness of
spirit say, a happiness it had been for me, if when almost full eight years
ago you voted me reparations to my barbarous sufferings, you had voted me to
everlasting banishment, out of the land of my nativity, and that it should have
been immediate death for me to have returned, to have fought for any justice at
your hands; for alas, Sir, what a happy man as to the world had I been? to have
had the improvement of my wasted money, and my eight years hazardous ill spent
time, in waiting upon you for your often promised Justice, in my calling in
some foreign land, for the subsistence of me and mine; whereas all the
benefit I have really enjoyed from you has been the tormenting of my spirits,
and the filling of my bones with aches and pains, in those hard, unrighteous
and unjust imprisonments that I have six or seven several times sustained from
your House, and their Committees, in which I will not now say your self had a
considerable hand in some of them, and yet have always been delivered by you
as an innocent and righteous man, without ever having any thing laid unto my
charge: Sir, I have often had many fair promises from you, and so have some of
my friends besides of your readiness and desirablenesse to help me to justice
and my own (though some other of my friends that have sat within your walls
have told me the quite contrary, which I have been loath to believe) and
therefore I now write unto you, to put you to the test: Wherefore without any
more delay I adjure you, as you will answer before God and his mighty Angels,
that now you deal ingeniously and honestly with me, and either help me
effectually to get my Ordinance past your House, for my 3000. l. reparations,
and force that faith breaking man that has not a spark of Gentleman in him, I
mean Sir Charles Kemish, to help me to my 300. l. which by your assignment I
should have had four months ago from him, or else tell me plainly and truly you
will not, cannot, or dare not (for fear of my adversaries) meddle with my
business to do me any effectual good, and I do assure you I will take it for
an honest final answer, and never trouble you particularly any more, but put
my business to a public test, by one more printed address, suitable to my
extremities, and if I must perish (because I cannot, nor will not creaturize,
to crouch unto men's corrupt lusts and wills) I perish; but by Gods assistance I
shall do the best I can, if it must needs be so, that it shall be with a
witness. So with my service presented unto you, being desirous to wait upon
you at your lodging for an answer, I rest,

From my lodging in Brewers yard in Kings street Westminster, December. 16. 1648.
Yours, very desirous to have just cause to be Your Servant, John Lilburne.


So when my Ordinance came to the Lords, they disinabled me to cut down any
more timber trees, then what was already felled, which I judged fitter for me
to content my self with, then to struggle any longer to get it pass, as the
House of Commons had sent it up, so, the Lords in two or three days dispatched
it, and sent it down to the House of Commons for their concurrence, according
to those abridgements they had made in it, and taking my opportunity to speak
to those in the House of Commons, I had interest in, I entreated them to
dispute it no more, but pass it as the Lords had gelded it, and accordingly
they did, the copy of which thus follows.

Die Jovis 21. December. 1648. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, for raising of three thousand pounds out of the sequestered estates
and compositions of Sir Henry Gibb Knight, Sir Henry Bellingham Knight and
Baronet, and Thomas Bows Esquire, lying and being within the County of Durham,
to be paid unto L. Col. John Lilburne, by the Committee of Sequestrations of
the said County, for and toward the reparation and damages of the said John
Lilburn, which he sustained by virtue and color of two unjust Sentences, or
Decrees given and made against him in the late Court of Starchamber, the one
the 13. of February 1637. the other the 18. of April 1638.
WHereas the cause of Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, concerning two sentences
pronounced against him in the late Court of Starchamber 13. February, decimo
tertio Caroli Regis, and the 18. April decimo quarto Caroli Regis, (which were
voted the 4. of May 1641. by the House of Commons to be illegal, and against
the liberty of the Subject, and also bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous and
tyrannical) were transmitted from the said House of Commons unto the House of
Lords, in which the House of Peers concurred in judgment, and the 13. of
February 1645. declared the said proceedings of the said Starchamber against
the said John Lilburne to be illegal, most unjust, and against the liberty of
the Subject, and law of the land, and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon
record, etc. The said Lords and Commons taking into their serious consideration
the extraordinary sufferings and barbarous tyranny that by color of the said
unjust Decrees were inflicted upon the said Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, and the
long time hitherto elapsed without any satisfaction, do conceive it most just,
equitable and reasonable, to repair him in some considerable manner; and
therefore in pursuance of two orders of the House of Commons, one of the 22. of
August 1648. and the other of the 5. of September 1648. have ordained, and be
it hereby ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the
authority of the same, That the said John Lilburne shall have, and receive the
sum of 3000. l. to be paid unto him or his Assigns by the Committee of
Sequestrations for the County of Durham out of the first profits of the
sequestered estates both lands and goods of Sir Henry Gibb Knight, And therefore
for the Committee of Durham, who by this Ordinance stand engaged to pay me my
3000. l. according to the tenure thereof, to suffer Sir Arthur Haslerig [that
is no member of their Committee, and so by consequence has no more to do
amongst them then any other man] by his mere will just tyrant like to take my
money.
Sir Henry Bellingham Knight and Baronet, and Thomas Bows Esquire, lying and
being in the County of Durham, having been all active in the late Northern
insurrections, and aiding and assisting to the most wicked invasion of Duke
Hamilton. And the said Committee are hereby authorized to sell all such woods
(except timber trees now standing) as may conveniently be spared, and now
standing upon the said lands (or already felled) or any of them. And if the
said Sir Henry Gibb, Sir Henry Bellingham, and Thomas Bows, or any of them
shall compound for their estate, so much of the said three thousand pounds as
then shall remain unsatisfied, shall be paid unto the said John Lilburne, or
his assigns, out of their, or the first of their Compositions. And this
Ordinance or copy thereof attested under the hand, or hands of the Clerk, or
Clerks of one or both Houses of Parliament, shall be a sufficient Warrant to
the said Committee of Sequestrations in the said County of Durham, to pay the
said 3000. l. as ^s before expressed, unto the said John Lilburne or his
assigns; and likewise to indemp^ifie and save harmless, all, and every person
or persons that shall any way act in the performance of the true intent and
meaning of this Ordinance.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

With which Ordinance I posted away to you of the Committee of Durham, where as
you may remember, I found Sir Arthur Haslerig amongst you, continually sitting
with you, not only as a Member of your Committee of Militia, and of
Sequestrations, but also Chairman to them both; and not only that, but also
Lord paramount over you all, doing even what himself pleased by mere will,
tearing your Orders, rasing, cancelling, and putting in what he pleased; of the
most of which I then being an eyewitness, I very seriously (as you may well
remember) inquired of my Father, Colonel Midford, M. Bra^, and your self,
whether by Ordinance of Parliament Sir Arthur was a Member of your Committees?
and you all told me no, he was not of either of them; at which I wondered, and
stood amazed, that he durst do that which he constantly did, and that you were
men of such low and mean spirits, as to suffer him, yea, or to permit him so
much as to sit amongst you; but it was replied to me, as you may remember, how
could you help it? for your County was more in slavery then all the Counties of
England, never having either Knights, or Burgesses in Parliament, to speak and
act there for the welfare of your County, or any that belong to it, and wished
it well, and besides, Sir Arthur was a great and a powerful man both in
Parliament and Army, and had soldiers enough at his heels: upon all which he
bears himself so high, that he presumes to do even what he pleases, and who
dare to control him? for, has he not merely by his will, and of his own
Authority laid four shillings a chaldern Sir Arthurs very excize of coals
alone in the two Ports of Newcastle and Sunderland, being commonly by the
knowingest Ship-masters, etc. computed to be worth well nigh a hundred thousand
pounds per annum.
Excize upon coals? (which at the dearest with you are sold under twenty
shillings the chaldern) in which arbitrary taxation not only all London is
concerned, but almost all the Sea and great Towns in the South of England,
etc. and yet the City of London it self never prosecuted him therefore, no nor
so much as complained of him, and therefore much more may he do what he
pleases amongst you, who rationally have scarce any means afforded you so much
as to complain of him, much less to help your selves aganst him, and
therefore you advised me then to hear, and see, and say nothing, but look
after my own business, to get that dispatched, which you very well know I
fully acquainted your Committee with at Durham, while Sir Arthur Haslerig was
there, before whom my Ordinance was read, and approved of without the least
exceptions, and the originalls delivered to your Clerk to record in your
Journall, and with whose consent and approbation (I mean Sir Arthur^) your
Committee made this following Order.

Dunelm. Septimo die Januarii, 1648.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament dated December. 21. 1648. it is declared,
That Lieutenant Col John Lilburne having had two Sentences pronounced against
him in the late Court of Starchamber, Febr. 13. decimo tertio Caroli Regis, and
18. of April, decimo quarto Caroli Regis, which were voted the 4. of May, 1641.
by the House of Commons to be illegal, and against the Liberty of the Subject,
and also bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous and tyrannical, were transmitted
from the said House of Commons unto the House of Lords; in which the House of
Peers concurred in judgment, and the 13. of Febr. 1645. declared the
proceedings of the said Starchamber to be illegal, and most unjust, and
against the Liberty of the Subject, and the Law of the Land, and Magna Charta,
and unfit to continue upon record, etc. whereupon the Lords and Commons did
conceive it most just, equitable and reasonable, to repair him in some
considerable manner; and therefore ordained, that the said Lievtenant-Col. John
Lilburn shall have and receive the sum of 3000. l. to be paid unto him, or his
Assigns, by the Committee of Sequestrations for the County of Durham, out of
the first profits of the sequestered estates, both lands and goods of Sir Henry
Gibbs Knight, Sir Henry Bellingham, Knight and Baronet, and Thomas Bows
Esquire, lying and being within this County of Durham, having been all active
in the late Northern Insurrections, and aiding and assisting to the most wicked
invasion of Duke Hambleton, in obedience unto which said Ordinance, it is this
day ordered by the Committee of Sequestrations for this County, That the said
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn or his assigns, shall and may, and hereby is
authorized to go to the several Tenants and Creditors of the said several
Delinquents, to demand and receive the several rents, profits and debts, due
to each or any of them, for and toward the payment of the said three thousand
pounds, and his or their receipt shall be their sufficient discharge, and the
said Tenants, Farmers, or Creditors, are presently, or within 14. days after,
to send copies of the said receipts, to this Committee; and the said Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn, is from time to time to certify this Committee, the
manner of his proceedings herein, and he is also authorized hereby, to go and
repair to Henry Young, Banchman of the Collyery of Carterthorn, or to his
Deputy or Deputies, and fully to enquire and inform himself of the true estate
and value of the said Collyery, as relating to the said Mr. Thomas Bows; As
also to repair to the Iron Mill and Furnace at Hunwick and Witton, and there to
take a true and perfect account, and Inventory, of all the Stock, Implements,
Vtensills, and necessaries, and of all profits and advantages arising, growing
or coming thereby, unto the said Mr. Thomas Bows, and speedily to certify
this Committee thereof, also to summon, John Hodgson Steward of the Iron works
at Witton, and the said Henry Young, to be before this Committee at Gatshead,
upon Wednesday next, to give in and testify their knowledge, touching Mr.
Bows his interest, in the said Iron works and Collyery.

Isaac Gilpin Cler. Com.

By virtue of which Order, my Father and my self went to the Tenants of the
three forementioned Delinquents, as also to the foresaid Young and Hodgson,
which Young and Hudgson according to the aforesaid order appeared at Gateside
before Sir Arthur Haslerig, and your said Committee of Sequestrations unto whom
I punctually gave an ex^ct account of Mr. Bows his ^oles at Karterthorn, and
his Iron Mill and Forge at Hunwick and Witton, upon which the foresaid Stewards
were examined what they conceived M^. Bowe^ interest in the said Colepits and
Iron Mill to be worth, and after they had given in their Verdict and opinion,
the said Committee of Sequestration sold (with my good liking) the said Bows
his interest to Sir Arthur Haslerig, for 400. l present money, upon his
engagement to pay it me at London, (which he did) within the compass of about
a month after, as part of my 3000. l. and I also received then in the Country
of the respective Tenants and^. of the foresaid three Gentlemen, betwixt 100.
and 200. l. ready money, all which I certified your Committee of at Durham, and
by (...) special order, delivered to their Clark and A^^itor copies of all the
discharges I had given the several Tenants, who comparing them with the
respective rentalls and deductions for assessements and free quarter (the
originalls of which they had by them) did audit my accounts, and gave me a
discharge under b^ (...) hands upon the eighth day of February, 1648. si^ned
Isaac Gilpin Cler. Com Ex^ per Ca^hl^^t Haw^* Auditor, so that now I have from
step to step showed you my right and ti^^e to my 3000. l. which is not ab^^ne
o^ gratuity given me, ^as some men imagine by the Parliament, but the issue and
product of several legal Parliamentary judgments judicially given me for
damage sustained in body, estate, and loss of time and trade, by illegal
unjust decrees made and given against me, which Parliamentary judgments and
decrees of mine, and some of them of eight years standing, before any wars or
^ar^^ betwixt the King and Parliament, others of 5 and 4. years standing, while
the Lords and Commons were a free, just and unquestionable Parliament, in the
(...) opinion of all the Parliamenteers in England, others of my decrees and
judgments merely in confirmations of the former, of 3. and 2. years standing,
while ^^th Houses were commonly received and owned for an unforc^d, unpurged,
and unravished Parliament; and the very last passing of my Ordinance was, by
both Houses before the Lords dissolution, or the Kings beheading, whose death
in Law unquestionably put a period to the Parliament.

In most of which judgments, For full pre^^se of which assertion, read my
arguments (...) the second edition of my book of the 8. of June 1649. in^^^ted,
The legal F^^^ (...) ^ill Liberties of the people of England revived, page 55.
56 57. and Mr. William P^ins a^^^ments in his late book, (...) the illegal tax
of 90. thousand pounds per annum. page 3. 46 47.
Sir Arthur Haslerig was one of the ^udges, I am sure of it eminently in some
of them, and who was one of those that was active in putting me into a quiet,
just, and legal possession (for so it was eminently up in his own principles)
of my long strugled for, and dear bought right, unto which in the strictest eye
of God or man, I have as true a judicial legal right unto, as either he or
you have, or ever had, to any clothes you wore in your lives, and therefore Sir
I may well call it theft in him, in stealing my goods or moneys from me by will
and force, just like a cutter upon the high way, yea and by his own and the
late Parliaments principles, treason it self, in disp^ssessing me of my legal
and just come by estate, without any manner of proceedings is Law; yea or so
much as upon any proceedings upon a paper Petition, or so much as ever
summoning (...) to answer for my self, or to know what he had to lay to my
charge, as a colorable pretense to take it away from me: it is impossible for
him to plead ignorance of my right, he having as is before truly declared, been
privy to all the circumstances of my just proceedings, yea as I understand, my
Father did not a little plead my right with him, and produced my Ordinance etc.
to his face to maintain it, when he took it away, which notwithstanding he
valued not, but most maliciously, premiditately, and in despite and contempt of
the Law of England, and most traitorously in subversion thereof, has exercised
an arbitrary and tyrannical power over and above the Law, in his taking it
away, for which felonious and trayte^ous Action of his, by Gods assistance I
will stick as close to him, as ever his shirt did to his back, or as ever I did
to the Bishop of Canterbury, who for less villainies then his, I saw lose his
head as a Traitor upon Tower Hill.

Sir, the late King has lost his head by Sir Arthur and his associates for
tyranny, in advancing his will above the Law of England, as in his impeachment,
printed at the last end of my late Impeachment of Cromwell, you may read page
57. 58. And yet I am sure he formerly, and (for any thing I groundedly know to
the contrary) legally impeached Haslerig of high Treason, and yet never
pretended any right to a penny of his estate before conviction, but Haslerig
nor any body else never laid any crime in the world to my charge, either of
Treason particularly, or of Felony, or Misdemeanour, or any thing else, and yet
has seized upon my estate, without any pretense or shadow, or color of Law.

And that the King impeached him, you may read in 1. part Parliament. book
Decla. page 34. 35. which verbatim thus follows.

Articles of high Treason, and other Misdemeanors against the Lord Kimbolton,
Mr. Pym, John Hampden, Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, and William Strode,
being all Members of the House of Commons.
1. That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws
and Government of this Kingdom, and deprive the King of his legal power, and
to place on Subjects, an arbitrary and tyrannical power. 2. That they have
endeavored by many foul aspersions, upon his Majesty and his Government, to
alienate the affections of his people, and to make his Majesty odious to them.
3. That they have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army to disobedience
to his Majesty's command, and to side with them in their traiterous design. 4.
That they have traitorously invited and encouraged a Foreign Power, to invade
his Majesty's Kingdom of England. 5. That they have traitorously endeavored
to subvert the very rights and beings of Parliament. 6. That for the
completing of their traiterous designs, they have endeavored as far as in
them lay, by force and terror, to compel the Parliament to join with them in
their traiterous designs, and to that end, have actually raised, and
countenanced tumults against the King and Parliament. 7. That they have
traitorously conspired to levy, and actually have levied war against the King.
And therefore the premises duly considered, Haslerig has dealt more
unjustly, more illegal^y and more unrighteously with me, then ever the King
dealt with him, or his Associates, and therefore as a Tyrant and a Traitor he
ought to die therefore upon his own practiced and declared principles. But
moreover, although the King formally and for any thing I know to the contrary,
Parliamentarily impeached him as a Traitor, and yet for all that never sought
for or challenged any of his money, Lands, or Goods, until he were Legally
convicted: and yet by the Parliament it self it was looked upon for such a
violation of the Law (because it was not as they pretended formal in every
punctilio according to the Law) as occasioned the highest Declarations against
the King that their pens could invent, with aggravation upon aggravation, and
no personal recantatation from the King himself could serve their ^^rn (^he
illustration of which you may notably and fully read in the 2 Edition of my
book of the 8 of June 1649 page 12. 13. 14. 15. 18. 19. 20. 21. 'till they had
made it the first declared occasion to ki^dle the flames of all the 'late eight
years cruel wars in England: yea and for it, and such like as it, at the
conclusion they took off the Kings head as a Tyr^nt, 'for that he had set his
will above the law ^y which he ought to have governed, as appears in the first
Article of his impeachment, Therefore let Haslerig look to himself; for I do
b^leeve if he or hi^ bloodthirsty associates should murder me, yet God out of
my ashes, would raise up some vigorously to endeavor to bring h^s neck to the
gallows, or his head to the block for his Tyrannies and A^bitrary dealing with
me, and for my part so long as I have bre^th (by the gracious assistance of
God) I shall not bate him an^^ce although I perish in the prosecution of him,
let him and all his associates do the worst they dare or can.

And therefore Sir, I most earnestly beg of you, to entreat my Father to pluck
up so much courage, as truly and exactly to state the present condition of my
business with Haslerig, and send me an exact Narrative of it from the
beginning of Haslerigs meddling with it: and also I entreat you your self, to
certify me (if you dare) under your hand, the manner and particulars of all
his arbitrary dealings with your particular self, and your Committees etc.

And whether that he himself were not the absolute and single Instrument, that
caused you and my Father for your public and known good affection to the
Commonwealth and nothing else, to be turned out of the Commission of the Peace,
etc. And when he had so done, whether he alone by his mere Will and Prerogative
did not name Master Henry Draper, and caused him to be made a Justice of the
Peace, etc. although as I am credibly and certainly informed, he was a notable
Cavalier, and had a Commission from the Earl of Newcastle, and not three
months before HASLERIGS making him a Justice of Peace, he had paid part of his
Composition to HASLERIGS own particular hands or his Treasurer by his order and
appointment

And whether he did not also lately name, and by his Prerogative will put in
Sir Richard B^ll^s for another Justice of Peace for your County, who to my own
knowledge was about my last being in your County found and proved a Delinquent;
Sir Arthur himself being one of his chiefest Prosecutors, and stands
sequestered as a Delinquent Cavalier to this day?

And whether he did not lately the same to Sir George Vane, who you may
remember at the Committee betwixt you and John Blaston, and his Cavalier
brother in Law, Mr. Shadforth, where Sir Arthur (at Westminster in Febr. last)
sat Chairman? I offered before Sir Arthurs face, and all the rest of his
fellow Members to prove Sir Georg^ Vane a Cavalier; and to have been actually
in Arms with the King at Edge hill and also opened to Haslerigs face, and the
whole Committees, Haslerigs base and partial dealings in the North, in
contradicting the Orders of your Commit of Sequestration, and racing out of
their Orders what he pleased in the case of Shadforth and your self, and
putting in what he pleased, yea and against the Order and mind of the Committee
would have i^ in his pa^ticular Order to pass for your and Shadforths drawing
stakes (to the great intentionall cheating and cozening of the Common wealth,
after Shadforth was fully proved a Delinquent upon the 14. Articles, and to
save himself had impeached you (who desired nothing but a fair and judicial
trial) to be another; of which false Charge, since as I understand, for all
Haslerigs and John Blastons power and malice; The present Jancto has fully
(...) you, which Shadforth by his mere will as I understand he has since made
a justic^ of peace etc. as also Colonel Francis Wren: who he himself knows,
was most basely and vildly, in the head of his Regiment in Scotland, cashiered,
by his friend Cromwell for a desperate plunderer etc. And all th^s he has done
as to me clearly appears, that he may rule and govern you by his will and
pleasure, and have none in power that shall dare to control him, or to tell
tales of him: of which rather then he will fail, he will against his own
declared Principles, and the 'Ordinances of Lords and Commons, yea the acts of
the present Juncto make use of the notablest Cavaliers amongst you to be your
principal governors, and more especial Rulers and yet lately would have
hanged me for but appearing corresponding with the Princes Agents, of which he
was so zealous to take away my life for that rather then he would fail, he etc.
attempted to bribe and hire false witness to swear against me: declaring bare
correspondency with the Prince his Agents to be crime enough to take away my
life, as is truly noted and declared before page 7. 8. 9. 10. 'O brave Arthur;
whom for his base and villainous wicked dealings with me etc. I hope not only
to scare but also really to scourge, and thereby put him into a greater fright,
then he was in when the Earl of Stamford (a lesser man then himself) tamed him
as he was going to his house nigh Islington, although he had his sword by his
side; of which a few days after like a poor cowardly School boy, with little
better then his finger in his eye, he complained of to his Masters or
Associates in the House of Commons.

And as for your desire in your letter, for me a few days to come down, to
look after my own business my self.: I cannot but return you this answer.
First, If I would I cannot, for I am not absolutely at liberty as you suppose,
only I have liberty upon the day time to go see my distressed wife and family,
which I procured not upon a petition to the house '(as their Friday
Newes-monger Henry Walker that lying and base fellow with other falsehoods about
me has lately printed) but upon a letter the Copy of which thus follows.

For my honored and noble friends, the Lord Gray of Groby, Colonel Henry
Martin, Col. Francis Russell, Capt. Fry or any of them these present.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
A Greater trial then ever I had upon me in my life, forces and compells me to
be troublesome unto you, or else I should not have presumed to have put you
upon so unwelcome an employment as to make a public Motion for a man so
despicable and obnoxious to the eyes of the great men in present power as I am;
but necessity has no Law, and therefore I must acquaint you, that the
overruling disposing hand of him (that without whose overruling providence,
the meanest hair of my head shall not fall to the ground) has so pleased to
lay his visiting hand upon my eldest son by a violent sickness for this 3.
weeks, and my self being very dear to the poor boy continually in his sickness
to the exceeding spending of his spirits) CRIED OUT TO SEE HIS FATHER OR BE
CARRIED TO PRISON TO HIM, and upon Saturday was sevennight, my child being very
ill all night, crying scores and some hundreds of times for his Father to come
to him, the knowledge of which in the morning very much pierced the bowels of
his tender mother, and supposing that if I could be got to come and see him, it
might much refresh his spirits, and so ease the child of some of his extremity
of pain; Upon Lords day after in the morning in little better then half a
distempered condition, she posted away to Mr. Holland to Sommerset house, and
with tears begged him to get me two or three days liberty upon my Paroll to
come and see him, knowing he had if he pleased power enough to get it done, and
have since again and again sent to him, but all in vain; Truly Gentlemen I have
often mused upon that saying of the Spirit of God, Prove. 12.10. That the tender
mercies of the wicked are cruelty; but that the tender mercies of men
professing God, godliness and a public Reformation of tyranny and cruelty,
should be so full of Barbarism, as to TORMENT THE POOR CHILD, FOR THEIR
INDIGNATION AGAINST ME HIS FATHER, is that that (...) m^^ and amazeth me, and
makes death more desirable to me (fully knowing in whom I do^ believe) then to
live under such men's Government. Sure I am the BISHOPS in the days of the
highest of Lands Tyranny, had more bowels of compassion in ^^em to men in my
case, as I could instance; and all my torments suffered by then I can never
equal to this. But how-ever, I must be patient, although my poor B^be ^^^^lain
in the height of torment till this afternoon, with HIS ABSENT FATHER
CONTINUALLY IN HIS MOUTH, so long as he had strength to speak of me, (...)
whose sorrows and miseries, with both my other childrens falling sick upon
Sunday ^^st, of the small Pocks (the youngest of which sucks its mothers
breasts) has so overwhelmed her spirits, that yester-night it brought her close
to deaths doo^; Of which, when I understood to day, I posted away to you four,
to BEG AND BESEECH YOU, or any one of you, at this great strait, to make a
Motion openly in your House, (...) little liberty for me to go see my
distressed Wife and Children. I CONFESS I SHOULD NOT HAVE PUT YOU TO SUCH A
TROUBLE FOR THE SAVING OF MY OWN PARTICULAR LIFE; But your House being risen,
the messenger brings me tidings of the death of my poor babe, and the exceeding
i^lnesse of my Wife, and her exceeding desire to see me in her great distress.
Therefore I earnestly beseech you, as bowels of men dwell within you, to make
an effectual and speedy Motion in your open House, for a few days liberty for
me to go see my distressed Wife, giving satisfactory Security to the Lieutenant
of the Tower for my faithful return at the hour appointed. Make your own terms
as strict as you please; FOR THOUGH I LIE IN A DUNGEON IN FETTERS OF IRON AT MY
COMING BACK, I care not, so I may but see her. So, with my real Service
presented to you all four, craving your pardon for my troubling of you for a
Motion in your House, which I know cannot be pleasing to you, I take leave to
rest,

From my close Imprisonment in the Tower of London, this 17 of July, 1649.
SIRS, Your affectionate and hearty Friend and Servant, JOHN LILBURN.


Upon the delivery of which said Letter to Col. Henry Martin, (the other three
which it was directed to, being out of Town) he procured this following Order.

Die Mercurii 18. July 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the Lieutenant of the
Tower of London, permit Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBURN to go out of the Tower, to
visit his Wife and Children, being sick, upon such security (as the Lieutenant
of the Tower shall think fit) to render himself again to the prison of the
Tower.

HENRY SCOBEL, Cler. Parliament.

Secondly, Being as I am, although my not coming down would lose me six times
as much as Haslerig has a ready seized upon; yet could I not be free in my own
spirit (against the dictates of which I will not go for all the world) to
address my self to those men for liberty to come down; no, nor so much as give
my consent that any other shall do it for me.

But thirdly, If I were absolutely at liberty, I should scarce judge it either
wisdom or discretion, to come immediately under the armed power of a man that
has so thirsted after my blood, and dealt so illegally and barbarously with me
as Haslerig has done, in the face of the throng of my friends: and without all
question he that at London (where I have more friends then Haslerig himself)
will not stick to run the hazards of going so many indirect ways to work, to
take away my innocent life, will make no bones (himself) to knock my brains
out, could he catch me in the remote clutches of his armed mercenary power at
New Castle, far off from the throng of my friends. So with my true and obliged
love and respect presented to your self, and my Ant your second self, I
heartily commit you to God, and rest:

From my Imprisonment in the Tower of London, this 18 of Aug. 1649. Your
faithful and affectionate loving Nephew, JOHN LILBURN.

FINIS.

