The outcries of oppressed Commons.
Directed to all the Rational and understanding men in the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, (that have not resolved with themselves to be
Vassells and Slaves, unto the lusts and wills of Tyrants.) From Lieut. Col.
John Lilburne, prerogative prisoner in the Tower of London, and Richard
Overton, prerogative prisoner, in the infamous Jail of Newgate. Febr. 1647.
Ier. 7.8, 9.10. Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit. Will ye
steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other Gods, whom ye know not, and come and stand before
me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, we are delivered to do
all these abominations. Verse. 6. Therefore pray not for this people, neither
lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me for I will not
hear thee. Mat. 13.14. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye
devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers, therefore you
shall receive the greater damnation.
GEntle men, Anti-Magistrates we are not, but own Magistracy as Gods Ordinance
appointed for the good and well being of mankind, Romans 13.1.2.3.4.5.6. Unto
whose power and Authority, in all lawful things, we both have, and are willing
to stoop unto, but no further, neither do we crave or desire, any favor,
privilege or benefit, but what is given unto us by the good, established and
just Laws of England (which the Parliament solemnly, have often sworn to
maintain) of which for our particulars, we have for many months been robbed of,
by the tyranny and usurpation of the Lords, (commonly called the House of
Peers) now sitting at Westminster, who have usurpedly, and contrary to the
just and known Law of the Land, assumed unto themselves, (by the law of their
own wills) a power in criminal causes, to judge and commit us who are
Commoners, which by law they have no authority not in the least to do, as
appears in the twenty ninth Chapter of Magna Charta, which expressly says, No
freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
distroyed, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the Land. We will sell to no man, we
will not deny nor defer to any man either justice or right. And the 3. E. 1.
6. likewise expressly says, and that no City Borough, norrowne, nor any man be
amerced without reasonable cause and according to the quantity of his
trespass, that is to say, every free man saving his free hold* (9 H. 3. 1^.) A
Merchant saving his Merchandise, a Villain saving his waynage, and that by his
or their Peers. Which 29 Chap. of Magna Charta, is express by name confirmed
in the Petition of Right, made in the third year of the present King Charles,
which absolutely abolisheth all Laws made in derogation of the said just Law,
which Petition of Right, and every clawse therein contained, is expressly
confirmed by this present Parliament, as appears by the statute that abolished
the Star Chamber, and the statute, that abolished Ship money. And that learned
man of the Law Sir Edward Cook, in his exposition of Magna Charta, which book
is published, to the public view of the Kingdom as Law, by two special
orders of the present House of Commons, as in the last page thereof you may
read, who in his exposition of the 14. chap. of Magna Charta, 2. part
institutes fol. 28. says, that by Peers, is meant Equals, and in fol. 29. he
says, the general division of persons by the Law of England, is either one
that is Noble, and in respect of his Nobility of the Lords House of Parliament,
or one of the Commons of the Realm, and in respect thereof, of the House of
Commons in Parliament, and as there be diverse degrees of Nobility, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, and yet all of them are comprehended
within the word PARES, so of the Commons of the Realm, there be Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens, yea men and Burgesses of several degrees, and
yet all of them of the Commons of the Realm, and as every of the Nobles is one,
a Peer to another, though he be of a several degree, so is it of the Commons,
and as it has been said of men, so does it hold of Noble Women, either by
birth or by marriage, but see hereof, chap. 29. And in his exposition of chap.
29. page 46. Ibim. he says, no man shall be disseised, that is, put out of
seison, or dispossessed of his freehold, (that is) lands or livelihood, or of
his liberties, or free customs, that is, of such franchises, and freedoms,
and free-customes, as belong to him by his free birthright, unless it be by
the lawful judgment, that is, verdict of his EQUALS, (that is men of his own
condition) or by the Law of the Land, that is to speak once for all) by the
due course and process of Law.

No man shall be in any sort distroyed (to destroy id est) what was first built
and made, wholly to overthrow and pull down) unless it be by the verdict of
his Equals, or according to the law of the Land. And so says he is the
sentence, (neither will we pass up him) to be understood, but by the judgment
of his Peers, that is Equals, or according to the Law of the Land, see him,
fol. 48. upon this sentence; pro judinum parum suorum, and page 50. he says it
was inacted, that the Lords and Peers of the Realm, should not give judgment
upon any but their Peers, and cites Rot. Parl. 4. E. 3 Number. 6. But the Roll
is 4 E. 3. Number. 2, in the case of Sir Simon de Bereford, in which the Lords do
ingeniously confess, that it is contrary to Law, for them to pass judgment
upon a Commoner, being they are not their Peers, that is Equals, which record
at large you may read in The oppressed man's oppressions declared, Edition the
second. page 18, 19. And also in part: in Vox Plebis, page 40. 41.

So that by what has been said, it clearly, evidently, and undeniably appears
by the Law of the Land, and the Lords own confession, that they are not the
Peers or Judges of Commoners in any criminal cases whatsoever And we offer (at
our utmost peril) before any legal power in England, to maintain it by the
known and declared Law of the Land, (which the Lords themselves, have solemnly
covinanted and sworn to maintain) that the Lords by the Law of England, have
not in the least any Jurisdiction at all over any of the Commons of England in
any criminal cases whatsoever. But if the studious and industrious Reader,
please to read that notable, and late printed book, called Regal tyranny
discovered, he shall find that the Author of that book in his 43. 44, 45, 46,
47, and 86. pages lays down many strong and solid arguments, to prove that
the House of Lords have not justly, neither judicative, noe legislative power
at all in them; and in his 94. 95, 96, 97, 98. pages he declares from very
sound and good authority that before William the Conqueror and invader,
subdued the rights and privileges of Parliaments, that the King and the
Commons held and kept Parliaments, without Temporal Lords, Bishops, or Abbots,
the two last of which, viz. Bishops and Abbots he proves had as true and good
right to sit in Parliament as any of the present Lords now sitting at
Westminster, either now have, or ever had, yea, and out of the 20. 21. pages of
that notable, and very useful to be known book, called the manner of holding
Parliaments in England, before and since the conquest, etc. declares plainly,
that in times by past, there was neither Bishops, Earl nor Baron, and yet even
then the Kings of England kept Parliaments with their Commons only, and though
since by innovation, Bishops, Earls and Barons, have been by the Kings
prerogative Charters, (which of what legal or binding authority they are, you
may fully read in the Lords and Commons Declaration this present Parliament)
summoned to sit in Parliament, yet not withstanding the King may hold a
Parliament, with the Commonalty, or Commons of the Kingdom, without Bishops,
Earls, and Barons, and says Mr. Will. Prynn, in the 1 part of his Sovereign
Power of Parliaments, page 43. (which book is commanded to be printed by
special authority, of the present House of Commons) out of Mr. John Vowells
manner of holding Parliaments, which is recorded in Holingh: Cron of Ireland,
fol. 127. 128. that in times, by past the King and the Commons did make a full
Parliament, which authority was never hitherto abridged. Yea, this present
Parliament in their Declaration concerning the Treaty of Peace in Yorkshire 20
Septem. 1641. betwixt the Lord Fairfax, etc. and Mr. Bellasis, etc. book decl.
1. part. page 628. do declare, first, that none of the parties to that
agreement, had any authority by any act of theirs, to bind that Country, to any
such Nutrality, as is mentioned in that agreement, it being a peculiar and
proper power and priveledge of Parliament, where the whole body of the Kingdom
is represented to bind all or any part. And we say the body of the Kingdom, is
represented only in the House of Commons, the Lords not being in the least
chosen or represent any body at all, yea, and the House of Commons, calls their
single order, for the receiving of Pole Money, May 6. 1642. 1. part decl. page
178. An order of the House of Parliament, yea, and by several single orders,
have acted in the greatest affairs of the Commonwealth.

And yet notwithstanding all this, the Lords like a company of for-sworne men,
(for they have often solemnly sworn to maintain the Law) have by force and
violence, endeavored to their power, and contrary to law, to assume to
themselves a judicative power over us, (who are Commons of England in criminal
cases,) and for refusing to stoop thereunto, have barbarously for many months
tirannized over us, with imprisonments, etc. And we according to that duty we
owe to our native country, and to our selves and ours, for the preservation of
our selves, and the good and just declared laws and libertise of England, and
from keeping our selves and our posterities, from vassalage and bondage, did
thereupon according to law and justice, appeal to the honorable House of
Commons (as you may truly and largely read, in diverse and sundry books,
published by us, and our friends) as the supreme and legal power and
judicature in England, whom we did think and judge, had been chosen of
purpose, by the free men of England to maintain the fundamental good laws
and liberties thereof, but to their everlasting shame (and the amazement of all
that chose and betrusted them) We are forced to speak it, we have not yet
found any real intentions in them, to perform unto us, the trust in that
particular reposed in them by the whole Kingdom, neither have we any grounded
cause to, say (in truth) any otherwise of them, but that they are more studious
and industrious-unjustly in deviding hundred thousands of pounds of the Common
wealths Money amongst themselves, then in in actual doing to us (in whom all
and every the Commons of England are concerned, for what by the wills of the
Lords is done to us to day, may by done to any Commoner of England to morrow)
either justice or right, according to their duty, and their often sworn
oaths, though we have not ceased continual to the utmost of our power,
legally, and justly to crave it at their hands, as you may fully read in our
forementioned printed books. Sure we are; they tell us in their printed
Declarations that they are chosen and betrusted by the people, 1. part decl.
page, 171, 172. 263, 264, 266. 336, 340, 361, 459. 462. 508. 588, 613, 628. 690.
703, 705, 711. 714. 716. 724, 725. 729. And that to provide for their weal,
but not for their woe, book decl. 1. part page 150. 81. 382. 726. 728.

And they in their notable Declaration of the 2. November. 1642. book decl. 1
part page 700. expressly tell us, that all interests of public trust is only
for the public good, and not for private advantages, nor to the prejudice of
any man's particular interest, much less of the public, and in the same page
they further say, that all interests of trust, is limited to such ends or
uses, and may not be employed to any other, especially they that have any
interests only to the use of others, (as they confess all Interests of trust
are) cannot employ them to there own, or any other use, then that for which
they are entrusted, yea, and page 266. (see 1. part book decl, page 687) they
tell the King, that the whole Kingdom it self is entrusted unto him for the
good and safety and best advantage thereof, and as this trust is for the use of
the Kingdom, so ought it to be managed by the advice of the Houses of
Parliament, whom the Kingdom has entrusted for that purpose, it being their
duty to see it be discharged according to the cond^tion, and true intent
thereof, and as much as in them lies, by all possible means to prevent the
contrary.

And therefore negatively in the second place, we are sure, that the House of
Commons, by their own Declarations, were never intentionally chosen and sent
to Westminster to devide amongst themselves, the great offices and places of
the Kingdom, and under pretense of them to make themselves rich and mighty
men, with sucking and deviding among themselves, the vital and heart blood of
the Common wealth, ( viz. its treasure) now lying not in a swound, but even a
gasping for life and being, but let us see whether this and other of their late
doings, be according to their former protestations, imprecations and just
Declarations, which if they be not, woe to them, for says the spirit of God,
Eccle. 5.4.5. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he has
no pl^^sure in fools, pay that which thou have vowed. For better it is that
thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay, see Deuteronomy.
23.21.23. That which is gone out of thy lyps, says God, thou shall keep and
perform, Number. 30.2. Psalm. 76.11. Job 22.27 We find in their Declaration of the
5. May 1642. book decl. 1. part page 172. these words, The Lords and Commons
therefore entrusted with the safely of the Kingdom, and peace of the people
(which they call God to witness is their only aim) finding themselves denied
these their so necessary and just demands, (about the Malitia) and that they
can never be discharged before God or man, if they should suffer the safety of
the Kingdom, and peace of the people, to be exposed to the malice of the
Malignant party, etc. And in their Remonstrance of the 19. of May, 1642. book
decl. 1 part page 195. they say, That the providing for the public peace, and
the prosperity of all his Majesty's Realms: within the presence of the all
seeing diety, we protest to have been, and still to be the only end of all our
counsels and endeavors, wherein we have resolved to continue freed and
enlarged from all private aims, personal respects or passions whatsoever. But
we wish withal our souls, they had intended, what they here declared, when
they declared it, which is too much evident to every rational man's eyes, that
sees and knows their practices, that they did not, or that if they did, that
they have broken and falcified their words and promises, and in the same
Remonstrance, page, 214, speaking of those many difficulties they meet with in
the discharge of their places and duty: (see 1 part. Col. decl. page 156. 278.
496. 629) they, say, Yet we doubt not, but we shall overcome all this at last,
1. the people suffer not themselves to be deluded with false and specious
shows, and so drawn t^ betray us to their own undoing, who have ever been
willing to hazard the undoing ^f our selves, that they might not be betra'd by
our neglect of the trust reposed (...), b^t if it were possible, they should
prevail herein, yet we would not fail through God; grace still to persist in
our duties, and to look beyond our own lives, estates, (...) advantages, as
those who think nothing worth the enjoying, without the liberty, pe^ce and
safety of the Kingdom: nor any thing too good to be hazarded in discharge of
our consciences, for the obtaining of it, and shall always repose our selves
upon the protection of Almighty God, which we are confident shall never be
wanting to us, (while we seek his glory) as we have found it hitherto,
wonderfully going along with us, in all our proceedings O golden words! unto
the makers of which we desire to rehearse the 23. Mat, 27. Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited Sepuchers, which indeed
appear butifull outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness.

And in their Remonstrance, May 26 1642. page 281. They declare that their
indevours for the preservation of the Laws and liberties of England, have been
most hearty and sincere, in which endeavor, say they, by the grace of God we
will still persist though we should perish in the work; which if it should be,
it is much to be feared, that Religion, Laws liberties and Parliaments, will
not be long lived after us: but says Christ, Mat. 23.23.28. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye make clean the outside of the cup,
and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess. Ye also
appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within ye a^^ full of hypocrisy and
iniquity.

And in their Declaration of July, 1642. concerning the destractions of the
Kingdom, etc page 463, 464 speaking of the business of Hull, they say, the
war being thus by his Majesty begun, the Lords and Commons in Parliament, hold
themselves bound in conscience to raise forces for the preservation of
themselves, the peace of the Kingdom and protection of the Subjects in their
persons and estates, according to Law, the defense and security of Parliament,
and of all those who have been employed by them in any public service for
these ends, and through Gods blessing to disappoint the designs, and
expectations of those who have drawn his Majesty to these courses and
Counsels, in favor of the Papists at home, the Rebbels in Ireland, the
foreign enemies of our Religion and peace.

In the opposing of all which, they desire the concurrence of the well disposed
Subjects of this Kingdom, and shall manifest by their courses and endeavors,
that they are carried by no respects but of the public good, which they will
always prefer be-their own lives and fortunes. O that we might not too
justly say, they are already fallen from their words.

And in their most notable Declaration of August, 1642. page 498. being in
great distress they cry out in these words, and we do here require all those
that have any sense of piety, honor or compassion, to help a distressed
state, especially such as have taken the Protestation, and are bound in the
same duty with us unto their God, their King and country, to come in to our aid
and assistance, this being the true cause, for which we have raised an Army,
under the command of the Earl of Essex with whom in this quarrel we will live
and dye.

And in their answer to his Majesty's message of the 12. of No. 1642. p 750
they have the^e words, God who sees our innocence, and that we have no aims,
but at his glory and the public good, etc. O golden language, but without
real performance, are but an execrable abomination in the sight of God, and
all rational men,

But when these Declarations and Promises were solemnly made, the Authors of
them took it extreme ill at the Hands of the King, when he told them they
dissembled, and merely sough^ themselves, and their own honor and greatness,
which he does to the purpose in several of his Declarations, but especially in
his Declaration of the 12. August, 1642. page 520. where speaking of the
earnest desire he had to ease and satisfy his Subjects, he says, that whilst
we were busy in providing for the public, they were contriving particular
advantages of offices and places for themselves, and made use under hand of the
former grievances of the Subject, in things concerning Religion and Law, etc.
and in the next page speaking of their zeal against the Bishops, etc. He
declares their design was but of their goodly revenue to erect Stipends to
their own Clergy, and to raise estates to repare their own broken fortunes.

And in the same Remonstrance page 539. he declares, that after fears and
jealousies were begun, they would suffer no means to compose it, but inflamed
the people, because (he says) they knew they should not only be disappointed
of the places: offi^es, honors and employments they had promised themselves,
but be exposed to the justice of the law, and the just hatred of all good men.

All which they in their ancient and primitive Declarations disdain, as most
dishonorable to be fixed upon them, or supposed ever intentively to be acted
by them, especially so visibly that any should be able to see it, and therefore
in their Remonstrance, bo. dee. 3. par. pa. 264. they labor to persuade the
people not to destroy themselves, by taking their lives, liberties, and estates
out of their hands, whom they have chosen and betrusted therewith, and resign
them up to some evil Counselors about his Majesty, who (they say) are the
men that would persuade the people, that both Houses of Parliament containing
all the Peers, and representing all the Commons of England, would destroy the
Laws of the land, and liberties of the People, wherein besides the trust of the
whole, they themselves in their own particulars, have so great an interest of
honor and estate, that we hope it will gain little credit with any, that have
the least use of reason, that such as have so great a share in the misery,
should take so much pains in the procuring thereof, and spend so much time,
and run so many hazzards to make themselves slaves, and to destroy the property
of their estates. But we lay in the bitterness of our souls. O! that their
actions and dealings with us, and many other free men of England, had not given
too just and grounded cause to judge that the forementioned charge of the
Kings, was righteous, just, and true upon them, and which if their own
consciences were not seared with hot Irons, and so past feeling, would tell
them with horror, that he spoake the truth.

And in the forementioned most notable Declaration, page 494. one of the
principal things they complain of against the King, and his evil
Counselors, that they endeavor to possess the people, that the parliament
will take away the law, and introduce an arbitrary Government; a thing (say
they) which every honest moral man abhors, much more the wisdom; justice,
and piety of the two Houses of Parliament, If so then as Samuel said to Saul, 2 Samuel 15.14. What means then this bleating of the sheep to my ears, and the
lowing of the Oxen which I bear.
and in truth such a charge as no rational man can believe it, it being
impossible so many several persons, as the houses of Parliament consists of
about 600. and in either House all of equal power, shall all of them, or at
least the Major part, agree in acts of will and tyranny, which make up an
arbitrary government, Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee, Luke 19.22. for
if this diffinition of tyranny, be true we are very sure we are under it.
and most improbable, that the nobility and chief Gentry of this Kingdom,
should conspire to take away the law, by which they enjoy their estates, are
protected from any act of violence, and power; and differenced from the meaner
sort of people, with whom otherwise they should be but fellow servants.

And when they come to answer the Kings maine charge, laid to them, in his
Declaration, in answer to theirs of the 26. of May, 1642. they say, book decl.
page 694. As for that concerning our inclination to be slaves, it is affirmed,
that his Majesty said nothing which might imply any such inclination in us,
but sure, what ever be our inclination, slavery would be our condition, if we
should go about to overthrow the Laws of the Land, We say no more but wish
you had not.
and the propriety of every man's estate, and the liberty of his person. For
therein we must needs be as much patients as Agents, No not so, for you have a
power to carve for your selves which you do.
and must every one in his turn suffer our selves, whatsoever we should impose
upon others, we have ever refused to do or suffer our selves, and that in a
high proportion. But there is a strong and vehement presumption, that we affect
to be Tyrants, and what is that? because we will admit no rule to govern by
but our own wills: See 1. part of book decl. page 696.
But we wish the charge might not too truly be laid upon you. For our parts, we
aver, we feel the insupportable weight of it upon both our shoulders.

And therefore to conclude this, we desire to inform you, that in several of
their Declarations, they declare and profess, they "will maintain what they
have sworn in their protestation, the which if you please to read, you shall
find there amongst other things, that they have sworn solemnly to maintain
the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and every person what ever,
that shall lawfully endeavor the preservation thereofe, and therefore book
decl. 1. part page 497. they solemnly Imprecate the Judgments of God to fall
upon them, if they perform not their vows, Which undoubtedly will, if the
word of God be true. Number. 30.2. Deuteronomy. 23.21.22. Eccle. 5.4.5.
promises and duties; and say woe to us if we do it not, at least do our
utmost endeavors in it, for the discharge of our duties, and the saving of our
souls, and leave the success to God Almighty.

Now what the liberty of the Subject is; they themselves in their Declarations
excellent well discribe and declare; that it is the liberty of every Subject to
enjoy the benefit of the law, and not arbitrarily and illegally to be committed
to prison, but only by due course and process of law, nor to have their lives,
liberties nor estates taken from them, but by due course and process of Law:
according to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, who condemns as unjust,
all Interrogatorie proceeding in in a man's own case, nor to be denied Habias
Corpusses, nor bail in all cases whatsoever, that by law are baileable, and to
enjoy speedy trials without having the just course of the Law, abstructed
against them, 1. part book decl. page 6. 7. 38, 77, 277. 201. 278. 458, 459,
660. 845.

Yea, in their great Declaration of the 2. November. 1642. book decl. 1 part
page 720. they decleare, it is the liberty and privilege of the people, to
Petition unto them for the ease and redress of their grievances and
oppressions; and that they are bound in duty to receive their Petitions, their
own words are these, "we acknowledge that we have received Petitions for the
removal of things established by Law, and we must say, and all that know what
belongs to the Course and practice of Parl^ament, will say, that we ought so
to do, and that our predicessors and his Majesty's Ancestors have constantly
done it, there being no other place wherein Laws, that by experience may be
found grievous and burdensome, can be altered or appealed, and their being no
other due and legal way, wherein they which are agrieved by them, can seek
redress; yea, in other of their Declarations, they declare, that is, the
liberty of the people in multitudes to come to the Parliament to deliver their
Petitions, and there day by day to wait for answers to them, 1 part. book
decl. page 123. 201. 202. 209 448.

And there is not a little harmony betwixt these their Declarations, and the
ancient and just Law of the Land, as appears by the statute of 36. E. 3. 10,
which expressly says that for maintenance of the law, and redress of diverse
mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden
every year, as another time was ordained by a statute of the 4. E 3. 14. yea
says learned Sir Edward Cook in the 4 part of his in st^tutes, chap. high
Court of Parliament, fo. 11. One of the principal ends of calling of
Parliaments is for the redress of the mischiefs and grievances that daily
happen, and therefore says he (Ibim) the Parliament ought not to be ended
while any Petition depends undiscussed, or at least to which a determinate
answer is not made, but truly we are afraid that if this last rule should be
observed, this present Parliament must sit tell the day of judgment, for we
foe our particulars may truly say, it is the furthest thing in their thoughts,
duly to redress the grievances of the people: for care they take none for any
thing we can see, but how to accomplish their own pecuniary ends, and to study
ways how to increase mischief and grievances, and to involve the generallity
of the people in an everlasting case of confusion, by making their wills and
lusts a law, their envy and malice a law, their coveteousnesse, and ambition a
law, for we for our parts are necessitated to declare (with anxiety of spirit)
that we can obtain no justice nor right at their hands, though we have long
since appealed to them for it, yet can we not obtain so much justice from them,
as to get our reports made in the House, from their own Committee they
themselves appointed to examine our business: neither can we so much as get
our business publicly debaited in the House (because as it seems they have
no time to spare, to spend to redress the Commons grand grievances, from their
weighty Employments, in unjustly sharing vast sums of the Common wealths money
among themselves) although we have not ceased to use all the legal means,
that both our own brain, and all the friends and interests we had about London
could furnish us with, and when they failed us, God himself raised us up
diverse friends in the Country of our fellow Commons, who made ou^ oppressions
their own, and of their selves before we know any thing, were about framing a
Petition in our behalf, which as soon as we knew it, we could not choose but
took upon it (as to us) in the nature of a resurrection from the dead, who we
have too just cause to think were buried alive, and swallowed up quick in the
Canaball breasts, and man's of the man eating, and devouring House of Lords, And
therefore as Paul in the like case said in the 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. The Lord
g^ve mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not
ashamed of my chain. But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very
diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of
the Lord in that day.

Even so say we in the inlargednesse of our souls, the Lord give mercy to the
honest, man-like, and Saint like Inhabitants of Buckinghamshire: and Harford
shire, for they have greatly and extraordinarily refreshed us, and were not
ashamed of our chains and bonds for the libertys of their country, and when
they were in London sought us out very diligently, and found us, and not only
so, but the greatest part of ten thousand of them, as we understand, subscribed
a petition for us, to the House of Commons, to desire them, according to their
duty, to deliver us out of the devouring Paus, of the tyrannical House of
Lords, and to free us from their arbitrary and illegal power, and diverse
hundreds of them at their own costs and charges, through much underhand
opposition, came to the Cities of London and Westminster, about or upon the 10.
Feb. 1646. But not finding speedy and free access to the House of Commons,
with their Petition, according to their just expectation, their own primative
practice, and publicly declared duty: in which regard they left behind them
6. of themselves, as Commissioners for all the rest, to improve their utmost
interests to get the Petition to be delivered and read in the House, and gave
unto them instructions in writing to explain some things in the Petition in
case they were called into the House, and then to give a perfect account unto
them what was done about their petition: but their Commissioners waited with
all deligence upon the House, till the 17 or 18. of Feb. 1646. and improved (as
we credibly understand) all their interests in all or the most of their own
Knights and Burgesses, etc. but could not by all the means they could use get
their Petition read in the House, the reason of which we are not able to
render, unless it be that the peoples chosen trustees of the house of Commons,
are resolved to betray their trust, and to sacrifice the lives, liberties, and
proprieties of all the Commons of England, to the merciless tyranny; and
barbarous cruelty of the House of Lords; Oh Commons of England, awake, awake,
and look seriously and carefully about you, before you be made absolute
vassells and slaves, unto the lusts and wills of those that you have preserved
alive with your blood, and treasures, from whom ye deserve better then you
find, or are likely to enjoy.

The Lord grant unto the foresaid men of Buckingham-shire and Harfordshire,
that they may find mercy of the Lord in the day of their account, and the Lord
God grant that their spirits may not faint, flag, nor be weary, but that they
may reneue their strength, and double and trible their Petition, and never give
over till they have made them and their posterity free, from the bondage of the
Lords, and shakt of all arbitrary power whatever. And the Lord God of heaven
raise up the spirit of all their fellow Commons in all the Countys of England
to second them and join with them, in that legal, just and righteous work
they have begun, and to glue their hearts and souls together, as Jonathan and
David's was, that they may never part nor be divided, till they have
accomplished their just enterprise, and the good Lord, require all their
kindnesses and labor of love, manifested unto us poor afflicted and distressed
prisoners seven fold, into their own bosoms. Amen, Amen.

But now in regard our friends, nor their Commissioners cannot get their
Petition to be delivered, in which regard they have all left the City and
Parliament, as dispairing in obtaining their just end at the present, and are
gone down into the Country, truly to acquaint the rest of their friends how
they have been dealt with, we judge it our duty, and that we are so much bound
to our selves and the whole Kingdom, (though we must truly confess, that we
have no such Commission from the petitioners not their Commissioners) as to
publish a true Copy of their Petition and instructions, which thus follows.

To the right Honorable, the betrusted Knights, Citiz^ns, and Burgesses in the
Commons House of Parliament (Englands legal, Sovereign power, Assembled.)
The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of Buckingham-shire, and
Hartford-shire, etc. Whose Names are hereunto subscribed.
HVMBLY SHOWS.
THat your Petitioners, and the rest of the freemen of England, before the
beginning of this Parliament, being almost destroyed of their Laws, Libertyes,
and Freedoms, by the arbitrary machinations, politic designs, and practices
of the Pattentee-Monopolizers, and of other arbitrary supplanters and Agents;
which labored to subvert the Fundamental Constitutions of this Realm, and to
set up a tyrannical Government, tending to the utter vassalage, and overthrow
of all the free people of this Kingdom, together with their Natural,
National, and Legal Rights and Liberties, God putting into our hands, an
opportunity to free our selves from those tyrannies and oppressions; We, for
our better weal and happiness, chose and betrusted your Honors for the same
end and purpose; and to that end we have elected, invested, and betrusted you
with our indubitable and natural power and Birthrights, for the just and
legal removal of our National Evils; In the expectation whereof, we have
waited ever since your first siting; continually and cheerfully assisting you
with our lives, persons, and estates, being much encouraged thereto by the
several Protestations, and Declarations, wherein you have solemnly protested
before the great God of Heaven and Earth, and to the whole world declared your
upright and well grounded resolutions, to vindicate the just liberties of every
Freeborn English man, without exception.

Now therefore, our most humble request unto your Honors, is, that you would
(according to your duties, and the Great Trust reposed in you) take into your
consideration the slavish condition, that we the free People of England are yet
subject unto, by reason of those Arbitrary practices that are still continued,
acted, and perpetrated upon us by some prerogative men of this Kingdom; whom
we humbly conceive, have no power over our bodies or Estates, they being not
Elected thereunto by the freemen of England; and therefore may not Commit our
bodies to prison (contrary to the Fundamental laws of this Kingdom) as we
suppose has been done to some Freemen of this Kingdom without producing any
Legal Authority, that your Petitioners can hear of; for what they did.
Wherefore your Petitioners most humble desire is, that you would, according to
the respective Appeals of the said Free Subjects unto this Supreme House, be
pleased to take their cause into the legal judgment, and speedy
determination of this House, as the whole matter thereof shall be reported unto
you, by the honorable Committee, for consideration of the Commons Liberties,
who have their whole manner of the proceedings against them, together with
their respective defenses ready to represent unto your Honors, and to grant
unto them your indubitable justice (according to their late Petitionary, and
still constant desires) whereby they may receive the Sentence of this House,
either for their present justification, or condemnation; that they may not be
ruined and undone by an arbitrary and injustifiable Imprisonment. And if that,
through the urgent affairs of the Kingdom, your occasions will not afford you
so much time, as to consider and expedite their business at present: Our
humble request is, that you would by an Order from this House, forthwith set
them free out of Prison; they giving legal security for their future forth
coming, until such time as your honors shall be pleased to hand out to them
full and effectual justice. And that you would be pleased, in case the
principal Informers and Actors be found guilty, to grant them full and ample
reparations according to the Law of the Land. And further, that you would take
care for the time to come, to free us and our children from the fear and
prejudice of the like A^bitrary and Prerogative proceedings, according to your
late promise in your most just Declaration of the 17. of April 1646. And your
Petitioners as in duty bound shall ever pray, etc.

Instructions agreed upon as the sense of the Petitioners of Buckingham-shire,
and Hartford-shire.
First the persons imprisoned, Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Mr. Overton,
his Wife and Brother, Mr. Larners Brother and Maid, etc.

Secondly, by Prerogative-men, we mean such as sit to try Commoners, and are
not elected by the free choice of the People. viz. the House of Lords.

Thirdly, by Arbitrary practices, we mean such as are contrary to the Law of
the Kingdom.

As first for any persons to try those their are not their Peers or Equals:
witness Magna Charta. C. 29.3. E. 1.6. Sir Edward Cooks exposition of the 14
and 29 C. of Magna Charta, etc. (as the House of Lords have done, and would
have done all the above mentioned.)

Secondly, For any to imprison men for not answering to Interrogatories in
Criminal Causes.

We must profess to all the world, we are in amazement, and almost at a stand,
when we consider that the House of Commons, who are chosen and betrusted by the
people for no other end in the World, but to maintain, preserve and defend,
their Laws and liberties, and to redress their mischiefs and grievances, and
to provide for their earthly happiness and well-being, book. decl. 1. part.
page 150. which they have so often sworn, vowed, protested, and declared to
do, that they should be so negligent in performing their trust and duty, and
making good their Oaths and Vows, in not doing us justice and right,
according to the Laws of the Kingdom, (who have legally and formally, long
since appealed to them for that end,) but suffer before their faces, the
tyrannical House of Lords, arbitrarily and illegally to destroy us; and to
tread and trample under their feet, the Laws and Liberties of all the Commons
of England, and so by consequence make us all Vassals and Slaves, to their
tyrannical lusts and wills.

But Considering that by natures principal, we are bound to the utmost of our
power to preserve our selves, and to leave no ways and means unattempted that
tends thereunto, we cannot yet sit still, but go on, and the rather because
our Judges to whom we have appealed to for justice, tell us in their
Declaration of the 19. May 1642. 1. part book decl. page 207: That this Law is
as old as the Kingdom. That the Kingdom must not be without a means to
preserve it self, the ground and reason of which Law, extends to the benefit
of every particular individual man in the Kingdom, whose destruction,
contrary to the law of the Land is endeavored by those that should preserve
them, which is our case, as well as it was theirs, (in reference to the King)
with whom we have to do, and therefore we desire for the satisfying of all to
whom this is directed, to declare out of their own Declarations, their
arguments against the King, when he ceased (as they say, page 636. 580.) to
extend his legal protection and justice to them; but this by the way, we must
aver, that we are very confident the King is ten times more fortified, and
hedged about with the Law of the kingdom, then they are. Which we demonstrate
thus, they are all as they call themselves Subjects, and therefore though their
privileges be great as they are Parliament men, yet they are (or at least
ought to be) by their own confession subject to the severitie of the Law, in
cases of treason, felony, and breach of the peace, 1. part book decl. page 48.
278. which is also averred by that able and learned Lawyer Sir Edward Cook in
his 4. part institutes chap. of the high Court of Parliament, fol. 25. which
book is published by their own special Order, but we read not in any of
their Declarations, that they themselves aver any such thing of the King.

And therefore if by themselves, their arguments be esteemed just and sound
against him, for not doing his duty (who is much more fortified by Law then
themselves) then much more when they cease to do their duty, and in practice
destroy the laws and liberties of the Kingdom, and subject the free men
thereof to an Arbitrary and tyrannical power, (which we aver they have done
us) will their own arguments serve and be sound and good against themselves.

Therefore we desire to declare unto you, that when they apprehended themselves
in danger, they sent unto His Majesty the 31. December. 1641. book decl. 1 part
page 44. and desire him that they may have a guard, in which message they have
these words. They have therefore their recourse unto your Majesty, most humbly
beseeching you, that if it may ^end with your good l^king, if they provide for
their own safety, which the very Law of nature Mark it well.
and reason does allow unto them, it is their humble desire, that they may have
a guard out of the City of London, commanded by the Earl of Essex, Lord
Chamberlain of your Majesty's household, of whose fidelity to your Majesty
and the Common Wealth, they have had large experience.

And in their Petition to his Majesty about the Militia: 2. March 1641. book
decl. ^ part page 92, 93, 94 after they have told his Majesty what danger they
are in, for, want of settling the Militia, they use these very words. Wherefore
they are enforced in all humility to protest, that if your Majesty shall
persist in that denial, the dangers and distempers of the Kingdom are such,
as will endure no longer delay. But unless you shall be graciously pleased to
assure them by th^se messengers, that you will speedily apply your royal
asse^t to the satisfaction of their former desires, they shall be enforced, for
the safety of your Majesty and your Kingdoms, to dispose of the Militia, by
the authority of both Houses, in such manner as has been propounded to your
Majesty: and they resolve to do it accordingly.

And a little below, they beseech his Majesty to be informed by them, that by
the Laws of the Kingdom, the power of raising, ordering, and disposing of the
Militia, within any City, Town or other place, cannot be granted to any
Corporation by Charter, or otherwise, without the authority and consent of
Observe this well ye free men of England.
Parliament: and that those parts of the Kingdom which have put themselves
into a posture of defense against the Common danger have therein done nothing
but according to the Declaration and direction of both Houses, and what is
justifiable by the Laws of the Kingdom.

And in their Declaration of the 19. May 1642. page 202. they say, we must
maintain the ground of our fears, to be of that moment, that we cannot
discharge the trust and duty which lies upon us, unless we do apply our
selves to the use of those means, to which the Law has enabled us in cases of
this nature, (viz. to settle the Militia without, and against his consent) for
the necessary defense of the Kingdom, and as his Majesty does graciously
declare, the Law shall be the measure of his power, so do we most heartily
profess, that we shall always make it the rule of our obedience.

But O say we! that you had not now forfeited all your credit, by notoriously
violating your never intended to be kept promises.

And in their Petition to the King about the business of Hull. page 465. 466.
they say, we shall be ready to settle the Militia, in such way, as shall be
honorable and safe for your Majesty, most agreeable to the duty of
Parliament, and effectual for the good of the Kingdom, that the strength
thereof be not employed against it self. And we say we wish it may not, to the
setting up of a tyranny of another nature, but worse then the former we groaned
under. But we go on to their answer of the Kings positions, which answer is
annexed to their great Declaration of the 2. No. 1642. where in the third
answer page 726. they say, that we did and do say, that a Parliament may
dispose of any thing, wherein the King or any Subject has a right, in such way
as that the Kingdom may not be in danger thereby, and that if the King, being
humbly sought unto by his Parliament, shall refuse to join with them in such
cases, the representative body of the Kingdom is not to sit still, and see the
Kingdom perish before their eyes, and of this danger they are Judges. Here may
be an excellent Argument drawn from the greater to the less, which will
undeniably hold good against the Arbitrary and Illegal practices of the
Parliament, which we in our particulars groan under.

Now all these things considered, we hope it justly cannot be taken ill at our
hands by the Parliament, nor by any rational or understanding man in the
Kingdom, though never so much devoted unto implicit, and blind Presbyterian,
Synodian obedience, if we for our preservation shall tread in the Parliament
steps by appealing to the People against them, as they did against the King,
especially considering they deal worse with us then ever he dealt with them,
for he did not actually imprison their bodies, and thereby rob them of their
liberties, trades, lively hoods and subsistence, and allow them nothing to live
upon, and expose their whole families, to (the eye of reason to an unavoydable
famishing and perishing condition; all and every of which (contrary to the Law
of the Land, Justice, reason and conscience) they have actually with a great
deal of Barbarous cruelty done to us.

But before we do solemnly, seriously and actual appeal to the people, as of
necessity, if by them we cannot enjoy justice and right, and the benefit of the
known and unrepealed Laws of the Land which is all we crave or desire; ( We
both must and will: cost it hanging or burning or what ever it will) we desire
from their own words to make our way plain before hand, and the more to leave
them without excuse before God, and all our fellow Commons of England. Seeing
skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life, Job 2.

And therefore in the first place, we must profess in their own words in
their Declaration to the States of Holland; page 637, that we have no other
design (in the world) but not to be destroyed, and save our selves, Laws,
Liberties and Freedoms, and let not them say, if we should formally appeal to
the people, that we maliciously endeavor to dissolve the whole frame and
constitution of the civil policy and government of this Kingdom, into the
original Law of nature, by arraigning and condemning before the people the
High Court of Parliament, from whence legally there can be no appeal, we do
truly confess (and own) the Honorable House of Commons, whose just interest
we honor with all our hearts, to be to us the legal supreme power in the
Kingdom, from whom we conceive in law we have no higher appeal, but if the
House of Commons will not do us justice and right, and so discharge their
trust and duty, but suffer the Lords contrary to the Law of the Land (which
they have sworn to maintain) to murder and destroy us, our wives and
children, and by consequence the liberty of all the Commons of England, we
cannot nor dare not, for fear of being Traitors and fellons to our selves, sit
still, and willingly suffer our selves contrary to the good and just Laws and
constitutions of the Kingdom to be destroyed by the Lords; who in Law have no
more power to commit our bodies to prison being Commoners, then we have to
commit theirs.

Therefore, it is not we but they themselves, that dissolve the legal frame
and constitution of the civil policy and government of the Kingdom, by
suffering will and lust, but not law to rule and govern us, and so reduce us
into the original Law of nature, for every man to preserve and defend himself
the best he can, and therefore since it must be so (for so it is) we in their
own words page 690. say in Gods name, let the people Judge every man within
his own breast, whether they or we are most guilty of the foresaid charge.

But we come to their own words in their appealing to the people, and craving
their aid and assistance to help to preserve them, against those that (they
say) contrary to Law would have destroyed them, and we shall begin in the first
place with the Protestation which they made and took the 3. of May 1641. and
by an Order of the 5. May, 1641. give their approbation to the taking it by any
Commoner of England in the preamble of which, they spend much time to
demonstrate, that there have been and still is, a strong endeavor by a
Malignant party to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England, etc. And to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and tyrannical government, and
therefore they swear and protest, "they will maintain the lawful Rights and
Liberties of the Subject, and every Person that makes this protestation, in
what soever he shall do in the lawful persuance of the same, And to my power,
and as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose and by all good ways and means,
endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such, (whether Lords or Members
of the House of Commons without exception) "as shall either by force, practice,
counsels, plots, conspiracies, do any thing to the contrary, and by their
Vote of the 30 June 1641. They say, that what person soever will not take this
Protestation, is unfit to bear office in the Church or Commonwealth.

Now let us see what use they make of this Protestation against the King, and
we shall find in the 1. part book decl. page 190. 191. The Vote of the House of
Commons in these words Resolved upon the Question.

That this House does declare that if any person whatsoever shall arrest, or
imprison the persons of the Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them: or any other
of the Members of either House of Parliament, that shall be employed in the
service of both Houses of Parliament, or shall offer violence to them, or any
of them for doing any thing in pursuance of the commands or instructions of
both Houses, shall be held disturbers of the proceedings of Parliament, and
public enemies of the State. And that all persons Mark it well ye Commons of
England.
are bound by their Protestation to endeavor to bring them to condign
punishment. An Order of the self same effect you may read, page 156. made by
them 26. Appill 16^2.

And in their Declaration of the 26. May 1642 page 278. speaking of the Kings
proclaming Sir John Hotham a Traitor, without due process of Law, they declare
it not only a breach of the Privilege of Parliament, but a subvertion of the
Subjects common right, yea, and such a breach of the Privilege of Parliament,
as that the very being thereof depends upon it: and therefore (say they) we no
ways doubt, but every one that has taken the Protestation, will, according to
his solemn Vow and Oath defend it with his life and fortunes.

And in their Declaratioe of the 19. May 1642. page 214. speaking of the many
difficulties that they are forced to encounter with in the discharge of their
duty to the Kingdom, they say, yet we doubt not, but we shall overcome all
this at last, if the people suffer not themselves to be deluded with false and
specious shows, and so drawn to betray us to their own undoing, who have
ever been willing to hazard the undoing of our selves, that they might not be
betrayed by our neglect of the trust reposed in us.

And in their smart Declaration of the beginning of August 1642 page 496.
replying unto his Majesty's Answers to their propositions, they say, And having
received so sharp a return, such expressions of bitterness, a justification
and a vowed protection of Delinquents from the hand of Justice, Demands of so
apparent danger, such manifestations of an intention to destroy us, and with us
the whole kingdom, (and this most clearly evidenced by their subsiquent
actions, even since these propositions have been made unto us from his
Majesty, overrunning several Countries, compelling the Trained Bands by
force to come in and join with them, or disarming them, and putting their
Arms into the hands of lewd and desperate persons, thereby turning the Arms
of the Kingdom against it self) it be not fit for us, not only not to yield
to what is required, but also to make further provision, for the preservation
of our selves, and of those who have sent us hither, and entrusted us with all
they have, Estates, Liberty and life, and that which is the life of their
lives, their That we absolutely deny, and therefore if the blind lead the
blind, they must needs both fall into the ditch.
Religion, and even for the safety of the Kings person now environed by those,
who carry him upon his own ruin, and the destruction of all his people: At
least to give them warning, that all this is in danger: That if the King may
force this Parliament they may bid fare well to all Parliaments, from ever
receiving good by them; and if Parliaments be lost, they are lost; their Laws
are lost, as well as those lately made, as in former times, all which will be
cut in sunder, with the same sword now drawn for the destruction of this
Parliament. Then if they will not come to help the Parliament, and save
themselves, though both they and we must perish, yet have we discharged our
Consciences, and delivered our souls, and will look for a reward in Heaven,
should we be so ill requited upon Earth, by those of whom we have so well
deserved; which we cannot fear, having found upon all occasions, such real
demonstrations of their love and affection, and of their right understanding
and apprehension of our and their common danger.

And in their large Declaration of the 2. Novem. 1642. page 699. speaking of his
Majesty's charge in his Declaration where he compaires them to the Anabaptists
mentioned in Mr. Hookers book, they say if ever God shall discover the foul
Authors of so false a calumny, we doubt not but the Kingdom (that is the
universallity of the people) will be very sensible of it, and esteem that they
can never do themselves right, And if the people should do themselves right,
What should become of the Earl of Manchester, old Sir Henry Vain, Mr. Barw^s,
etc. for visibly betraying their several trusts. See Englands Birthright, etc.
but by bringing to condign punishment, such persons as could find in their
hearts to lay so vile an aspertion upon the Parliament, a name that always
has, and we hope always shall be of so great honor and reverence within
this Kingdom.

And in the same Declaration, page 728. answering his Majesty's charge fixed
upon them, of designing the ruin not only of his Majesty's person, but of
Monarchy it self. And we appeal to all the world, (say they) whether worse
words then these can be given us? And whether we may not justly expect the
worst actions that the malice and power of the Malignant party about his
Majesty can produce? And whether it be not high time for us to stand upon our
defense, which nature teaches A^ve all here expressed take notice of this
special undenable and accued principal.
every man to provide for, and this Kingdom, unless it be very unnatural,
and unmindfull of it self, cannot but afford to them whom it has entrusted
and by whom it is represented.

Now from all the forementioned authorities, and arguments of the Parliaments
own Declarations, we draw these conclusions (which naturally flow from them)
first that all Majesteriall Power in England whatever, are but Offices of
trust, and bound up with this limitation, to be executed for the good of the
trusters.

Secondly that it is posible, that all or any, of the several Majesteriall
trustees may forfit their, or its trust.

Thirdly that in case of ^orfiting the Majesterycall trust, the trusters (the
people) are disobleged from their obedience and subjection, and may lawfully
do the best they can for their own preservation; but if what has been said,
be not fully clear out of all doubt to prove the foresaid deducions. We will
only ad two more proofs at present of there own Authoryties which will put
them all out of dispute the first is out a late sheet of paper, newly Printed
according to Order of Parliaments Entitled King James his Opinion and Judgment
concerning a Real King and a Tirant, extracted out of his own speech to the
Lords and Commons in Parliament at White Hall. 1609.

A King (says King James) in a settled Kingdom, binds himself to a double
oath, to the observation of the fundamental Laws of his Kingdom, tacitly, as
by being a King, and so bound to perfect, as well the People, as the Law of his
Kingdom, and expressly by his oath at his Coronation. So as every just King in
a settled Kingdom is bound to observe that Paction (or Covenant) made to his
people by his laws, in framing his government agreeable thereunto, according
to that paction made with Noah, after the deluge (Genesis 9.11.) therefore a King
governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King and degenerates into a
Tyrant, as soon as he leaves of to rule according to his laws; therefore all
Kings that are not Tyrants or perjured, will be glad to bound themselves within
the Limits of their Laws, and they that persuade them the contrary, are Vipers
and Pests, both against them and the Common Wealth, thus far King James, out of
which the Author of that sheet draws nine inferences or conclusions, the fifth
of which is in these words. That a King governing in a settled Kingdom as the
Kingdom of England is, leaves to be a King, so soon as he leaves of and
fails to rule according to his Laws. And so leaving of to be a King, the
government on his part is infringed, so as the people are no longer his
subjects to obey him in his lawless government, then be is their King
governing them according to his Laws, to the same effect is his sixth
conclusion, and in the last end of the seventh, he has these words. That if
Kings cease to be Kings, setting up an absolute tyranny over the People, to
govern them no longer by the Laws as free borne liege People, but lawlesly as
vassells and slaves, then on the other side the people leaving to be subjects,
do owe them no more obedience, as being none of their Kings, but as usurping
tyrants. For as a King turning Tyrant, practicing tyranny under the name of
prerogative, has broken the bonds of the Kingdom; so the subjects owe him no
more duty of liege people, except they will avow themselves his Slaves, and so
betrayers of their own and the public liberties, which ought to be more
precious unto them then their ^l^ves and ^^^ds. Again 8 a King so degenerating
into a Tyrant, is by the verdict of K. James departed a perjured man etc. and
perjured men as they are odious to God, so they bring an execration upon a
land, Za. 53.4. and if so then say we, woe, woe, woe, unto poor England, by
reason of the perjuries of the dissembling Lords and Commons at Westminster,
that have laid aside the Law, and trodden under their feet, the liberties of
England. And the unreverend Dissembly of Divines, that rob Jesus Christ of his
honor and glory, by jusling him out of his regalliry and Kingship given unto
him by his Father, and yet take oaths themselves, and force other men to do
so too, to maintain the Law, and liberties of the Kingdom, and to set up and
Ecclesiastical Church government according to the word of God, and yet set up
nothing but a spiritual and temporal tyranny, and with a high hand endeavor
the destruction of every man, that endeavors to keep them close to their
violated oaths and Covenants, therefore whatsoever the author of the
forementioned discourse avers of a King, when he seeks to govern according to
his laws, the same do we aver of a Parliament, and Parliament Men, that when
they cease to execute the end of their trust, which is as themselves say, to
provide for the peoples weals, but not for their woes, and do merely
endeavor to make themselves tyrants over the people, to govern them not by
the established laws, but by their lusts and wills,, they do thereby make the
people their vassels, and slaves, (as much as in them lies) and thereby
disobleidge the people to obey, stoop or submit, to any of their commands, but
in the eye of God and all rational men, may as justly resist and withstand
them, and by force of Arms defend themselves against them, (as a company of
forsworn men that have forfeited their Majesteriall trusts, and are
degenerated into the habits of tyrants) as they withstood, and by force of
arms defended themselves against the King, for the further proof of which in
the second place, read their own words 1. par. b. dec. page 150. which thus
follows.

For it cannot be supposed that the Parliament would ever by Law entrust the
King, with the Militia, against themselves, or the Common wealth, that intrusts
them to provide for their weal, not for their woe. So that when there is
certain appearance or grounded suspicion, that the letter of the law shall be
improved, against the equity of it (that is the public good, whether of the
body real or representative) then the commander going against its equity,
gives liberty to the commanded to refuse obedience to the letter, for the Law
taken a stract from its original reason and end, is made a shell without a
kernel, a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul. It is the
execution of Laws, according to their equity and reason, which (as I may say)
is the spirit that gives life to authority, the letter kills Nor ne^d this
equity be expressed in the law, being so naturally employed and supposed in all
Laws that are not merely imperial, from that Anologie which all bodies
politic hold with the natural, whence all government and governors borrow a
proportionable respect; and therefore when the Militia of an Army is committed
to the General, it is not with an express condition, that he shall not turn
the mouths of his Cannons against his own Soldiers, for that is so naturally
and necessarily employed, that it is needless to be expressed, in so much as if
he did attempt, or command such a thing against the nature of his trust and
place, it did ipso facto estate the Army in a right of disobedience, except we
think that obedience binds men to cut their own throat, or at least their
companions.

We shall at present leave the application to them whom it most concerns, and
wait as patiently as we can to see the operation of it, which if it be not
according to our expectation, we shall be necessicated to put some stronger
pills into the next, and so at present conclude and rest.

From our Prerogative Captivity, (for the Laws and the public liberties of
all the Commons of England, against the tyranny and usurpation of the House of
Peers) in the prisons of the Tower of London, and Newgate this last of Februa.
1647. Your faithful and true Countrymen, though commonly (by the Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites of our present age) called Heretics and Schismatiques,
and Movers of sedition. John Lilburn. Richard Overton.

The Publisher to the Reader.
Courteous Reader, having here some spare room, I judge it convenient to fill
it up with a notable petition delivered to the House of Commons, the 1. of
March 1646. by young men, whose zeal and forwardness for their Countries good,
may be a shame to all the old men in the City, the Petition it self thus
follows.

To the High and Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in the
supreme Court of Parliament Assembled. The Petition of diverse Young men and
Apprentices of the City of London, humbly
Shows,
THat out of the grounded confidence we have of the readiness of this
Honorable House to hear and repair the grievances of all those for whose
well fare you were chosen and betrusted to take care and provide: and being
encouraged unto the same, by several good Ordinances and Declaration of your
own to that purpose. A Declaration May 19. 1642. Remonst. may 26. 1642.


We whose names are hereunto annexed, although the meanest members of this
great Commonwealth: yet having by birth a right of subsistence, here conceive
our selves (in our proportion) to have as real an interest in the Kingdoms
inioyments, as those who in respect of place or other accidents are above us:
As also many of us, having under the direction of your Honorable grave
Counsel and Guidance, freely adventured our lives, for the preservation of our
Native Rights, and the just Privileges of our dear Country, against the
public violaters of the same: upon these and other serious grounds, we are
bold at this time to make our humble addresses to this Honorable and supreme
Court of Judicature, (the only refuge under God we have to fly to) And in the
first place, we cannot but with all thankefullnesse take notice of the
unwearied pains, together with many great and almost intolerable difficulties
by you undergone, in the faithful discharge of your trust, in bringing about
the establishment of a well grounded peace. The perfection of which (in
relation to the common enemy) seems now by the blessing of God to be brought
near to a wished period: Yet the consummation of this work being (as it were)
the Crown of all our labors, we humble conceive it may deservedly challenge
from you a more then ordinary respect, which we doubt not but that your grave
wisedoms are very sencible of: yet, noble Senators, let it seem no presumption,
if we your poor Petitioners in all humility make known the grounds of some
fears and jealousies to us apparent in this particular. And those are (amongst
other great grievances) chiefly derived from the present sense we have of the
too much prevalency of that party who have dealt in the late wars, declared
themselves disaffected to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom; who now seem
to be in hopes of obtaining that by policy which they have not been able to
do by force. Cunningly contriving to aggravate and increase differences
between the well-affected party, and striving to bring an Odium upon all good
men, under the distinction of several terms of obloquie and disgrace, by
such subtle endeavors, laboring to avert the edge of justice from themselves
(who come deservedly under the stroke of it, and turn it upon those who are
most innocent. Strongly endeavoring (and have already affected it in part, to
justle all honest, faithful, well affected men out of places of trust, office
and authority, and to put in Newters, Ambodexters, or persons apparently
disaffected: By all these means, together with the advantage of the Kingdoms
present unsetlednesse) they seem to be in a more then probable expectation of
getting the reins once more into their own hands, to the evident indangering
of the Commonwealths speedy ruin, and to the great grief of your poor
Petitioners, and all others who cordially desire the peace and safety of this
destracted Kingdom. And further we are bold to make known, as more
particularly relating to the condition of your Petitioners, That whereas, we at
our being made free of the City are enjoined by oath, to maintain the
Libertyes and Privileges of the same City, which notwithstanding we are in a
great measure disabled to do, by the intercession of diverse illegal and undue
Customs and Monopolies (partly about the election and removal of our
Magistrates) crept into the dimunition of the ancient Liberties of this famous
City, A clause of 11. of Hen 6.
whose just ^mmun^ties we are confident your Honors have been and are very
tender of.

Wherefore, your Petitioners humbly pray that this honorable House, taking
into consideration the Premises, would be pleased by your mature Prudence and
Care, to endeavor, as much as possibly you can, to take away all occasions of
breaches between the well affected party. And that such as have in these late
times of trouble, by adventuring their lives or otherwise, approved themselves
faithful to their Countries common good, may without respect to differences, no
ways prejudicial to the Common wealth, impartially enjoy their Birthright
Privileges, and be equally capable with others of the freedom to officiate in
place of trust, which they are or shall be chosen unto. And on the contrary,
that all those who have dis franchised themselves by Traterously adhering to
the enemy, may be disabled from bearing office, or voting in the Election of
offices in the Commonwealth. And we further crave, with submission to your
Honors grave approvements that in regard of the Kingdoms present
unsetlednesse, it may not be left destitute of a trusty and sufficient guard to
secure it from intestine Broils, and foreign Invasi^n. And as for your
Petitioners more particular grievances, as they are members of this City, we
humbly pray that you would be pleased by your Authority so to provide, that we,
as we are or shall be capable of it, may be enabled to enjoy the benefit of all
ancient Charters and Grants, made and confirmed by several Acts of Parliament,
for the enlargement of our freedoms and Privileges; ^ especially 4. Chart. of
King John 5. Chart of Edw. 2. confirmed ^y Ed. 3.
and that whatsoever has been illegally intended, may be taken away and made
void. And lastly, as some have desired, we likewise pray, that, if so small a
thing may be worthy the intention of this grave and Honorable Assembly, you
would be pleased to appoint some times of lawful Recreation for servants, as
your wisdoms shall think fit.

And your Petitioners, as they have many of them already, according to their
duty, freely adventured their lives, and whatsoever was dear to them for the
common safety of their Countr^^ so they still profess their readiness, to
give their best assistance to the suppressing all Arbitrary and tyrannical
power; and to the upholding the fundamental Rights and libertyes of freeborn
English men, and the just Privileges of this Honorable House against all that
shall set themselves in opposition of the same,

And be ever bound to pray, etc,
Whatsoever is contained in the Petition, the Subscribers will be ready to make
good by Particular instances, when they shall be lawfully called to the same.

Die Lunae 1. March 1646.

A Petition being styled the humble Petition of diverse Young men and
Apprentices of the City of London was this day read, and it is ordered that
Alderman Atkins, Col. Venn, and Mr. ^ass^^l, do from this House give the
Petitioners thanks for the expressions of their good affections* that they
will take their Petition into consideration ^n convenient time; and as for that
business concerning days of relaxation is already under consideration and
Committee.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. Dom. Com.



FINIS.

