Rash Oaths unwarrantable: And the breaking of them as inexcusable. Or, A
DISCOURSE, showing, that the two Houses of Parliament had little ground to make
those Oaths they have made, or less ground to take, or press the taking of
them, being it is easy to be apprehended, they never intended to keep them,
but only made them for snares, and cloaks for knavery, as is clearly evinced
by their constant arbitrary and tyrannical practices, no justice nor right
being to be found amongst them; by means of which they have declaratorily, and
visibly lost the very soul and essence of true Magistracy, (which is, the
doing of justice, judgment, equity and right) and are become a dead carcass.
In which is also a true and just DECLARATION of the unspeakable evil of the
delay of justice, and the extraordinary sufferings of Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburne, very much occasioned by M. Henry Martins unfriendly and unjust
dealing with him, in not making his Report to the House. All which with diverse
other things of very high concernment, are declared in the following discourse,
being an Epistle written by Lievtenant-Colonell John Lilburne,
Prerogative-prisoner in the Tower of London, to Colonel Henry Marten, a Member
of the House of Commons, and Chaire-man to the Committee for consideration of
the Liberties of the Commons of England. May 1647.

Eccles. 5.2.4. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God; but when thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to
pay it: for he has no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed

Numb. 30.2. If a ^an vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to hind his
soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth.

Deuteronomy. 23.21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not
slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it
will be sin to thee.

Jer. 4.2. And thou shall swear the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness.

Ezekiel. 17.15,16,19. Shall he break the Covenant, and be delivered? As I live,
says the Lord God, surely in the place where the king dwells that made him
king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the
midd^st of Babylon he shall die; and my covenant that he has broken, even it
will I recompense upon his own head.

Hos. 4.2,3. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and s^aling, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood; therefore shall the land
mourn.

Ier. 6.19. Hear O earth, behold I will bring evil upon this people, even the
fruit of their thoughts, because they have not harkened to my words, nor to my
law, but rejected it.

SIR, When Israel degenerated from the Law of her Sovereign Lord and King, and
followed her own crooked ways, the Lord himself, as one that was not delighted
in her destruction, but rather with her preservation, cries out again her, to
make her ashamed of the evil of her ways. How is the faithful city b^come a
harlot? it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
murd^ers. Thy silver is became dross, thy wine mixed with water. Thy Princes
are rebellion and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows
after rewards; the judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the
widow come unto them. Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty
one of Israel, ah, I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of my
enemies, Isa. 1.21,22,23,24.

Sir, an enemy to you he is not, that shall cordially and heartily tell you of
your faults, with a desire to reclaim you from the evil of your ways by so
doing, Ps^ 141.5. which task though unpleasant in it self, he that never in
his life knew ho^ to flatter, nor play the hypocrite and dissembler, is
urgently necessitated now (...) his own preservation, to undertake.

And therefore Sir, to give you your due and right, I must ingenuously a^
knowledge, that I have for a long time looked upon you, as one of the great
p^lars of the Liberties of the Commons of England, and your name amongst all
ju^ and unbiassed men, has been extraordinary famous this present Parliament
therefore, and for this you suffered an expulsion of the House, and a
reproachful a^ unjust imprisonment in the Tower of London, by the gilded men
of the time who (you then discovered) carried two faces under one hood; and
many monet^ (if not some years) you continued an ejected person from your just
place in the House: And since your readmission again, have there in your
Speeches behave^ your self so gallantly for your Country, that your name and
fame has loud been spread abroad by it: Yea give me leave to tell you, that
one of your own Members esteemed very honest, but by me too prudentiall; that
is to say, too cowardly, and too much for himself and his selfish interest, in
a time when a No^thern tempest was likely to arise, told me in the Tower, that
the true lovers (...) their Country in England were more beholden unto M.
Henry Marten for h^ sincerity, uprightness, boldness and gallantry, then to
half, if not all tho^ that are called conscientious men in the House. And
truly Sir, having had the happiness (for so I esteemed it) often to be in your
company, I have admire^ those gallant discourses for the Liberty of this Nation
that have flowed from yo^ so that when I first made my appeal to the House of
Commons the 16. of June 1646. and heard that my business was referred to a
Committee where M. Ma^ten had the Chair, I was not a little refreshed, being
even where I would have wished and desired to be; thinking that you, of all the
men in the House (...) Commons, would have been the most sensible of me and my
condition: But must deal truly with you, I found it otherwise: For after, by
the earnest soll^ citation of my wife and friends, you and the Committee had
examined my bu^nesse, and passed (as I was informed) gallant and excellent
Votes upon it; but yet you (by your negligence and delay, if not wilfulness)
exasperated the spirits of the House of Lords against me, and exposed me to
their merciless fury and devouring indignation, by delaying my Report: And
truly Sir, I must give this commendation of them, That the tender mercies of
the House of Lords are cruelty: For, upon your examining my business, and not
reporting it, they took courage to themselves, and locked me up most
illegally, barbarously and tyrannically in New gate above three weeks close
prisoner, from the society of my wife, children, or friends; and would neither
suffer me to receive either meat, drink, money, nor any other necessaries, from
the hands of my wife, maid, or friends; nor suffer my wife to come into the
Prison-yard to speak with me before my Keepers out of my window; the story of
which you may more fully read in the 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. pages of
my late printed Book called Londons Liberty in chains discovered; and in my
Speech before your self (at the Committee) now in print, and called An
Anatomy of the Lords tyranny, page 3, 4, 5, 6. and in the second Edition of
the Outcries of oppressed Commons, page 21, 22, 23. All this while my wife and
friends following you day by day, with all the importunity in the world, to beg
and entreat of you to make my Report, for want of which I was likely to be
destroyed by the devouring House of Lords; but you would not do it: so that in
some sense I may complain with Job (in reference to you, and the rest of my
timorous friends in the House) My kinsfolk have failed me, my familiar friends
have forgotten me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me, Job
19.13,14. which did hearten the tyrannical House of Lords, further to go on
with their cruelty and tyranny toward me; and then upon the 11. of July 1646.
at their Bar, past a most lawless, illegal, and unjust sentence against me,
To pay four thousand pound to the King, to be seven years a prisoner in the
Tower of London, and for ever to be incapable to bear any Office or Place in
military or in civil government, in Church or Commonwealth, as more at large
you may read in the Sentence it self, printed in the 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. pages
of a little book called Vox Plebis: and what illegal cruelty and tyranny I
have since suffered and endured in my imprisonment in the Tower of London, even
to the hazard of my life and being, and the destruction of my wife and
helpless children, you may largely read in several printed Books; as Liberty
vindicated against Slavery, page 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23. Londons Liberty in
chains discovered, page 31, 32, 33, 34. Regal tyranny discovered, page 1, 47,
48, 49, 62, 63, to 78. but especially in my late Epistle to Col. West the
Lieutenant of the Tower, called, The oppressed man's oppressions declared.

And after the forementioned Sentence, being committed to the Tower, there to
be kept only in safe custody for seven years, as by the Warrant you may read
printed in Vox Plebis, page 34, 35. I was by the Lieutenant thereof with out
ground or cause, most illegally divorced from the society of my wife, fir^ by
himself, who afterward obtained by his own solicitation, an Order for his
indemnity from the Lords, the severity of which by him was executed upon me for
above eleven weeks together, as by the forementioned Books you may fully
understand, and when by my wives Petition, and my own, both of which yo^ may
read in the 65, 66, 67. 68, 69, 71, 72. pages of my Book called, Londons
Liberty in chains, I had obtained the just privilege to be heard before a
Committe^ appointed by the House of Commons on purpose, where you your self
again^ (to my then great refreshment) was in the Chair, before whom I had two
hearings upon two several days, and I must ingenuously confess, I had as
fair an^ just play before you, as any man in England could desire, having free
liberty, with out interruption, to speak whatsoever I in my own
understanding, conceive^ might be for my benefit and advantage, to your praise
and honor, in that particular of your well doing I desire to speak it, and my
last discourse then with you and the Committee, was so abundantly satisfactorie
and well pleasing unto you that your selves by special order the 6. Novem.
1646. commanded me to brin^ it in unto you in writing, upon the 9. of Novem.
next, which I accordingly did and since printed it, not doubting then but
within fourteen days after, I should have been a freeman, freely set at
liberty as unjustly imprisoned, and against the good and known Law of
England, for as high as this, if not higher, I have been informed was the
result of the Committee then, and the temper of you^ House toward justice a
thousand times better then now it is.

Sir, I must confess, I desired you then upon some weighty reasons which gave
you, to forbear the Report four or five days, but when I see that thing fell
not out according to my expectation, I sent immediately to you with al^
earnestness speedily to make my Report, and you gave those I sent to you very
fair words, which truly I must tell you, would no^ the bellies of me, my wife
nor children, nor procure us money to buy bread to do it; whereupon having
high thoughts of your honesty, and your gallant integrity to the love of the
Liberties of the Commons of England, grounded (as I conceived) upon a good
foundation, and backed with high and resolved resolutions, I did not only with
all the honorable respect I could, send my wife unto you, to beseech and
entreat you, to be sensible of my trying condition, and to do me and all the
Commons of England (who were and are not a little concerned in me) that justice
and right, as without further delay to make my Report to the House for me, but
I also sent unto several of my friends in the House and City, in the most
candidest manner I could, that I knew had a familiar acquaintance with you,
earnestly pressing them to improve all their interest in you, to get you to
make my Report, and when I could not prevail with you that way, I writ a few
importuning lines to you, and the like to others of my friends, which I knew
were dear unto you, and when that would not do, I sent some of your own
Contrymen unto you, whose Commissioner and representer you are, to improve
their utmost interest in you, and I also gave you a gentle touch or two in
print of my great suffering by your neglect. Sir, in short, wanted I a wife, I
should not I am confident of it, use so much wooing to the fairest and vertuest
woman in England, though with a rich portion in Lands and money, to obtain her
for my wife, as I have done to you to make my Report, having (I protest it
before the presence of God) left no just means (and others though I perish, I
will never take) unattempted, that all the wits and brains I have could think
of, to obtain this piece of reasonable justice at your hands to make my Report
for me to the House, which you are bound in duty, conscience, justice and
honor to do for me long since, without one tenth part of that importunate
solicitation, that I for the greatest part of a year together have used to you.

Sir, I pray remember the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, which requires you not
only to do impartial justice, but speedy justice without delay: the
unrighteous Judge though at last he did justice, yet he is called the
unrighteous Judge because he would not do it speedily, but suffered the poor
widow to pump and importune him for it; but say I to you, I wish my Judges
were not worse then the unrighteous Judge.

But Sir, seeing it is to no purpose, I can no longer now forbear, but must
write you my mind to the purpose, cost it what it will, being now at present as
careless of you, as you are and have been of me, and my long (but I will not
say unsupportable) sufferings, though I might truly say it, if it were not that
I had a full, faithful, and soule-satisfying God, to rest and rely upon, and
the distresses and hardly to be undergone portion of my wife and little
infants: But Sir, I beseech you, give me leave, before I lansh into the deep, a
little mildly to expostulate with you, in a friendly way before we fall out,
and to demand this question of you, what I have said or done to you, to give
you any tolerable cause to deal thus with me, as you have done, as by your
delay of your duty to destroy me, and given me too just cause in reference to
you, to say with David, Psalm. 55.12,13,14. For it was not an enemy that
reproached me, then I could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me,
that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my self from him;
but it was thou, ah man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acqaintance, we took
sweet counsel together: And truly Sir, the evil doings of a friend are the
most piercing and wounding, and the least to be endured, and the most odious to
God, and detestable amongst all rational and gallant men, Jer. 9.4. to the 9.
Chapter 12.6. and Chapter 20.10,11,12. But Sir, if you have nothing to lay to my charge
in reference to your self, I desire to know if you have any thing to accuse me
of in reference to the public, have I deerted my interest? or betrayed the
Liberties of my fellow Commons of England? or have I been sluggish, slothful,
or cowardly in mannaging the business I have in hand? or have I been impatient
in my sufferings, and by my madness and folly destroyed my business? or given
grounded advantage to my adversaries? If all or any of these can be justly
laid to my charge, I desire not to be spared.

But Sir, if you can say nothing against me by way of miscarriage to you in
particular, or the public in general, then I pray you give me leave to demand
of you this question, What have you to say for your self, that you have thus
delayed to make my report, and thereby over and over, again and again have
hazzarded my destruction and utter ruin, contrary to law, honesty, justice,
reason and conscience?

If you should say, it is not seasonable, and that the temper of your House is
such that to make it, it would do me nor the Kingdom no good, but rather a
mischief, in hazzarding the confirmation of the Lords tyranny toward me by a
vote of your House, whose spirits are extremely exasperated against me above
all men in England. To answer which, what do you else then hereby give me too
just cause to say of your House, in which so many that profess honesty sit,
though it be but little demonstrative by their actions, that you are a
corrupted and degenerated generation of men, that are fallen from doing of
Justice to the executing of Tyranny, and from maintaining, defending, and
protecting (according to your duty, and the end of your sitting where you do)
the Laws and Liberties of the Commons of England, to the betraying, subverting
and destroying them, and so have all of you forfeited your trust, and your
Parliamentary power, which (as you your selves say, 1. par. Book Decl. p. 150.)
was given you to provide for the Peoples weals, but not for their woes, and
have thereby absolutely absolved and discharged the people from all subjection
to you, and given them cause that sent you, to call you home, and choose
honester men in your places, to call you to a strict account for all your
tyranny, oppression and trechercy, and know what you have done with all their
money; which they may justly (by your own arguments against the King) do: See
the second Edition of the Outcries of oppressed Commons, p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18.

And in case of disobedience from you to your trusters, and impowers the
several Shires, Countries, and Corporations that choose you, what do you
else, then thereby give them cause to look upon you, as you have this four or
five years looked upon the King, and deal by you, as you have dealt with the
King, even to wage war against you, for betrayers of your trust, which they and
the whole Kingdom reposed in you, who are now degenerated from a just House of
Parliament (the end of calling of which by the Law, is to redress mischiefs
and grievances that daily happen, 36. E. 3.10. but not to augment and wholly
increase them) into a conspiracy and consederacy of lawless, unlimited, and
unbounded men, that have actually destroyed the Laws and Liberties of England,
and that will have no rule to walk by but their own corrupted and bloody
wills, and thereby have set up the highest Tyranny that can be set up in the
world, against which, by your own principles, the Kingdom may justly rise up
in Arms as one man, and destroy all the foresaid conspirators without mercy
or compassion, as a company of devouring Lions, ravening Wolves, and crafty
Foxes, that would destroy the poor flocks of lambs, and sheep of this
distressed Kingdom, the people and Inhabitants thereof; for take away Law (as
the Parliament in a transcendent measure has done) and deny us justice and
right, as is constantly in a great measure done unto us by the Parliament: And
what are we now better then the brute beasts of the field? the weakest of which
are torn in pieces, devoured, and destroyed by the strongest, for remedie^
(...) which the Parliament against the King took up Arms, and when they h^d no
Law of the Kingdom to warrant them in so doing, they make use of the law of
nature and reason, and tell the King, Book Dec. 1 part page 207.

That this Law is as old as the Kingdom, that the Kingdom must not be without
a means to preserve it self; but in which of our Statutes this is writ, I
never yet could hear, see, nor read of, and am very sure it is no where but in
their own Declarations, and engraven in the heart of man as a principle of
nature and reason, which as they very well and justly say, teaches a man or
Kingdom to preserve its self, 1 part Book Dec. page ^4. 93, 94. 112, 123.
202. 465. 466. 726, 728. see 2. Edition of the Outcries, page 12, 13.

And if this Doctrine be true, as you avouch it is, then it will much more
serve against your selves then the King, because the King is so fenced about
with the Laws of the Kingdom, that it is impossible for a man or Magistrate
to be more, and if you are but a betrusted power, empowered protempore, by the
people, for no other end in the world, but to provide for their weal and
happiness, and to redress their mischiefs and grievances unfortified at all,
by the established known and declared Law of the Kingdom, degenerate from
your trust, destroy their Liberties, and trades, overthrow their Laws, and the
Bounds that establish meum and tuum, and tyrannize over their persons ten times
worse then ever the King did, or his wicked and evil Ministers of Justice, the
Judges and Patentee Monopolizers, especially all of whom you cannot deny but he
at the beginning of your Session surrendered up to you to be punished by you
according to Law and Justice, which in them you extremely perverted and took
bribes, for the acquitting the capitallest of them, and otherwise made use of
them to do more mischief since to the Commonwealth then ever they had done
before, by assuring any thing for Law that you would propound to them, by
means of which you with your wicked and unbounded Privileges, have dared to
exercise the absolutest and grandest tyranny over the lives, liberties, trades,
properties, and estates of the Freemen of England, that ever was, I dare
positively aver it, since it was a Nation, governed by an established and
declared Law, to your eternal and everlasting shame I speak it: so that
truly, if the Freemen of England seriously look upon all your late public, and
to us visible actions, and compare them with their former enjoyments, they may
justly take up Miach's lamentation and say with him to you, The good man is
perished out of the earth, and there is none upright amongst you men: they (or
you) all lie in wait for blood: they (or you) hunt every man his brother with
a net: that they, or you, may do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince
asks and the Judge asks for a reward, and the great man he utters his
mischievous desire, so they wrap it up, (therefore woe unto the Parliament,
for) the best of them is as a briar, the most upright is sharper then a thorn
hedge, the day of thy watchmen, and thy visitation comes, now (with a
vengeance) shall be their perplexity; therefore, O all ye understanding
Commons of England, in reference to your Parliament Trustees, trust ye not in a
friend, put ye no confidence in a guide, for your enemies are the men of your
own House, Micah 7.2,3,4,5,6.

Therefore M. Martin, I profess it before you, and all the world, that were I
rationally able, I would make no scruple of conscience to help forward with my
sword in my hand, the destruction of every lawless, tyrannical, treacherous
man amongst you, that I should groundedly know to be a ringleader in the
foresaid transcendent vileness, then I should to help to destroy so many rats
or devouring vermin; and by your own forementioned Principles, Declarations,
Protestations, Oaths, Actions and doings, it will undeniably be justified to
be lawful for all the Commons of Englands to do the same toward you.

But now Sir, let us come to some particulars, in the first place the 29. Chap,
and the most excellent Petition of right, which I call the English-mans legal
treasure, does clearly condemn all the pract^ses amongst you, for they
expressly say, that no Freeman shall be taken and imprisoned, or be disseized
of his freehold or liberties, or free-customes, or be outlawed, or exiled or
any otherwise destroyed, nor we will not pass upon him nor condemn him, but
by lawful judgment of his Peers, (that is to say equals, or men of his own
condition) or by the Law of the Land. We will sell to no man, we will not deny
or defer to any man either justice or right, and that no man be imprisoned
without cause showed, or expressed in his Warrant of Commitment, nor no man
refused Habeas Corpus's for any cause whatever, nor no man taken by Petition,
nor suggestion made to our Lord the King, nor his Counsel, unless it be by
Indictment or Presentment of his good and lawful People of the same
neighborhood where such deeds be done, (25. E. 3.4.) in due manner, or by
Process made by Writ Original at the common Law; nor that none be put out of
his Franchises, nor of hi^ Free-holds, unless he be duly brought in to answer,
and fore-judged of the same by the course of the Law, and that no man hereafter
be compelled to make or yield any gift, bond, benevolence, tax, or such like
charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament; Now compare your daily and
hourly actions to those good, just, and unrepealed Laws, and blush for shame.

But to wipe all this off, you will it may be say the same, that is said in
your Declaration of the 17 of April 1645, Book Decl. 2 part page 879. That
the end of the Primitive institution of all government, is the safty and weal
of the people, which is above all Laws, and therefore the Kingdom being
imbroyled in war, necessitated, nacessitie compells you to do many actions
contrary to the known Laws of the Land, without the doing of which actions,
wanting the puntillo of the Kings consent, you could not save your selves, nor
the kingdom, will admit all this for a truth, I pray then why do you impose
such illegal, devilsh, impossible to be kept, contradicting Oaths, and
Covenants, upon all the Freemen of England? upon such sever penalties that all
men must be disfranchised or destroyed that will not take them, and in them
without any provisoes, eautions, limitations, or declared exceptions, and
reservation, tie them to maintain the Law of the Land, and the lawful^ rightes
and liberties of the Subjects of England, is not this to force men to swear to
contradict and oppose to the death all your actions, and to destory you for
doing those actions, because they are contrary to the Law, and Liberties of
England? O ye, forsworn men, for so I may call you all, that have taken these
illegal, damnable, hellish, and soul insnaring Oaths, because ye do your
selves, and suffer to be done daily, such things as tends to the absolute
destruction of the Laws, and the lawful Liberties of the freemen of England,
which by all these Oaths you have sworn to maintain and defend, with all your
might, and yet there is not one just, nor righteous man amongst you, that dare
avowedly and publicly, to the whole Kingdom protest against all the rest, but
by parsilent patient and constant seting there own approve of all their
actions: O ye unworthy forsworn men in the highest degree, for this may too
justly be the style, and title of all, and every one of you without exceptions,
in the condition of the visablest best of whom, for Millions of Gold I would
not be, for if perjuries, swearings, and false swearings be so odious,
abominable, and detestable unto God as in Scripture he declares they are, read
Exodus 20.7. Lev. 19.11.12 Number. 30.2. Deuteronomy. 23.21.22.23. Psalm. 15.4. Eccl. 5.4.5.
Ezekiel. 17.13.14.15.16.17.18.19. Jer. 24.10, Zek. 5.3.4.9.8.16.17.

Then woe, we, and vengance upon earth is your vadoubted portion, if (...)
everlasting woe, and indignation in the world to come.

But that I may not be sentenced for rashness in saying this which is not in
your Oath^, and Covenants, I will site your own words, and leave them to your
judgment to pass sentence upon them.

First, in your Protestation of the 5 of May 1641, I find you swear in these
words, To maintain and defend the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject,
and every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in
the lawful pursuance of the same.

And secondly, in your Vow and Covenant, which you commanded to be taken
througho^t the whole Kingdom, You vow in the presence of Almighty God the
Searcher of all hearts that you do in your Conscience believe, that the forces
raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continue for their just
defense, and for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, (which what that
is I think never a one of your selves knows,) And Laws and Liberties of the
Subject, against the Forces raised by the King and a little below you all that
took that Oath, declare, vow, and covenant, to assi^t all persons that shall
take this Oath, in what they shall do in pursuance thereof and if so, then
^aver it for a truth, that all the men of England that have taken this Oath,
are bound to assist me, or any other whatsoever that shall oppose the Lords and
Commons sitting at Westminster, for their apparent indeavoring the destruction
of the Liberties of the Subject.

And in the third place, in the preamble to the League and Covenant, framed in
Scotland, and most basely, illegally, and unjustly, obtruded upon England, and
the Freemen thereof, with an unsupportable penalty, I find that amongst the
things, the Fraimers of it had before their eyes, this is one, viz.

The true public Liberty, safety and Peace of the Kingdom, wherein every
ones private condition is included, And in the third Article of the Covenant,
you and all those that took it, swear sencerely, really, and constantly, in
your several e^ditions, to endeavor with your estates and lives, mutually to
preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament; and the leiberties of the
Kingdom, and I am sure the Parliament has often declared (though in action;
they have visablely denied it) that they have no Privileges for the destruction
of the Kingdom, but for the preservation of it, nor no Privileges for the
over-throwing of good and wholesome Laws, but for the defending and preserving
of them, nor no Privileges for the trampling under their feet the Liberties of
the Kingdom, but to maintain them in their luster and glory, and what they
are, you may in part read before, and in your own Declaration.

First part book Decl. page 6. 7. 38. 39. 77. 123. 201. 202. 209. 277. 278.
458. 459. 548. 660. 720. 845. see the second edition of the outcries of
oppressed Commons. page 8.

I shall give you but one notable instance, of the most rememberable Vengence
of God upon the Hungarians for breaking and violating their Faith and Covenant,
made with the Turk, and it is in the Turkish History made of the Life of
Amurath the second, the sixth King of the Turks: In which History the fourth
edition, printed by Adam Islip, 1631, I read that the Hungarians, were much
distressed by inrods and spoils made by the said Amurath, whereupon the States
and great men of Hungary chused Vladislaus King of Polonia, for their King, and
Captain General, and he made that, famous man Huniades his General in
Transliluania, who obtained several most notable Victories against the Turks*
as you may read in the foresaid History folio 267. 269. 273. 277. one of which
is extraordinary remarkable; that Huniades with 15000. ^ought a pitcht-field
with about 80000. Turks and after five hours there fe^ a feirce and bloody
fight, totally overthrew the Turks by ^aine dint of sword, and just about that
time Scanderbeg that ^amous Wa^rie^, and wonder of his age for gallant
achevements, revolted from the Turk, which with his great losses be the
valiant Hungarians, so te^fied old Amurath, that in a very great fear of
himself and his Kingdom^, he made a peace, (to his own particular great
loss,) for ten years with t^ H^gar^an^, the capulations whereof were, First,
that Amurath withdraw all his forces and garrisons, should clearly depart out
of Seruia, and restore the same unto the p^ssession of George the late Dispot,
the right Lord and Owner thereof. (then in arms and confideracy with the
Hungarians) Delivering also freely unto him his two sons Stephen and George,
who was bereft of their sight, he had long time keept in strait prison. Also,
that from henceforth he should make no claim unto the Kingdom of Moldavia,
nor to that part of Bulgaria, which he had in the late Wars lost, And
finally, that he should not invate nor molest the Hungarians, nor any part of
the kingdom, during the whole time of that peace, and to pay 40000. Ducats
for the Ransom of Carambey one of his Generals, which conditions by solome
Oath were confirmed, King, Vlad^aus taking his Oath upon the Holy Evangle^s,
and Amurath (by his Ambassoders) upon their Turkish Alcoron, inviolable to
observe the ten years peace, and Amurath forthwith faith fully performed those
things that he was presently to do, follo 292. but by the perswadtion of
diverse Princes, but especially of Julian the Cardinal, the Popes Legate, who in
his large and set speech in a full convention, urged that against a perfidious
enemy, (as the Turk was) it is lawful for a man to use all cunning, force
and deceit, deluding craft with craft, and fraud with fraud, and says he, by
craft the Turk first passed into Europe, and by little and little he crept
into that Kingdom, and never kept faith with any. It is sometimes lawful for
the commonweal sake, neither to stand to our Leauges, neither to keep our
faith with them that be themselves faithless; lawful says he it is to break
unlawful Oaths, especially such as are thought to be against right reason, and
equity, therefore says he make no conscince of the League you made with the
Infidel, upon which the King Vladislaus condescended to be absolved by the
Cardinal, from his Oath and Covenant, and prepaires for wars against the
Turks, and the Turk with his army met him, and pitched battle within Arvarna,
that fatal place to the Hungarians, and when the battle came close to be
joined, it was clear of the Christians sides, who had put to flight both the
wings of the Turkish army, insomuch that Am^th dismayed with the flight of his
Soldiers, was about to have fled himself cut of the maine battle, had he not
bin stayed by a common soldier, who laying hands upon the raines of his bridle
stayed him by force, and sharply reproved him for cowardice: And Amurath seeing
the great slaughter of his men, and all brought into extreme danger, beholding
the picture of the crucifix in the displayed ensigns of the voluntary
Christians, plucked the writing out of his bosom, wherein the League was
comprised, and holding it up in his hand with his eyes cast up to Heaven, said.

Behold thou crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy name
made with me, which they have without cause violared. Now if thou be a God, as
they say thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name,
and me, and show thy power upon thy perjurious people, who in their deeds deny
thee their God. Whereupon there began a most cruel and feirce fight, the
success of which within alittle while wholly fell to the Turks, who having
slain King Vladislaus, and discomforted his Army, Huniades that most valiant
Captain was forced to fly for his life, and it is observable, that in this
battle were destroyed all the chi^fe Authors and Actours ( yea Julian himself)
in breaking the Oath, Covenant, and League, they had made with the Turk, Folio
297. 298. which overthrow proved a fatal and dismal blow to the Hungarians,
which may be a good warning to all men in the world, not rashly to enter into
an Oath or Covenant, but delibrately, and with a resolved resolution enviolably
to keep and observe it, which is impossible for any man breathing to do yours.

For first I read in the 1 Eliz. Chapter 1 that all and every Archbishop,
Bishop, and all and every other Ecclesiastical Person, and other
Ecclesiastical Officer, and Minister, of what estate, dignity pre-eminence, or
degree, soever he or they be, or shall be, and all and every temporal Judge,
Justice, Mayor, and other lay or temporal Officer, and Minister, and every
other person having your highness sees or wagges within this Realm, or any
your Highness Dominions etc. shall take that Oath following, viz.

THat the King is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other
his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal. And a little below all that
takes it (which all you Parliament men) must and ought to do, or else you
cannot sit, as by the Statute of the 5 Elz. 1. appears, swears and promises,
that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true Alleagence to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and
defend all jurisdictions, privileges, prehemanencies, and authorities, granted
or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, united and
annexed to the imperial Crown of this Realm.

And by the Oath of Allegiance inacted the 3 of Jam. chapter 4. which
principally and originally was made for Popish Recusants to take and for such
men of England as traviled beyond the Seas to serve any Foreign State, or
Prince, though of late years as I am informed, imposed upon all Members of
Parliament before they are admitted to sit there, in which Oath, you and every
one that takes it, swears and declares in your Conscience before God and the
World* that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is lawful and rightful King of
this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries, and that
the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church on Sea of
^ome, or by any other means with any other, (mark the last clause well) has
any power or authority to despose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's
kingdoms or dommious, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade or annoy
him, or his countries, or to give lisceuce or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his
Dominions.

And a little below, he that takes that Oath swears, I will bear Faith and
true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, and him, and them
will, defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and
attempts whatsoever, (mark the word whatseover) which shall be made against
his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any
such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise, (make the word otherwise well,) and
will do to my best endeavor to disclose or make known unto his Majesty, his
Heirs, and Successors, all treasons and treacherous conspiricies, which I
shall know or hear of, to be against him or them, And below the Oath says, I
do believe, and in conscience am resolucd, that neither the Pope, nor any
person whatsoever, (note the four last words well) has power to absolve me of
this Oath, nor any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full
authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and
Dispensations to the contrary, and all these things I do plainly and sincerely
acknowledge and swear, according to these express words by me spoken
according to the plain and common sense, and understanding of the same words,
without any equevocation, or menthall evation, or secret reseruati^n,
whatsoever: And I do make this recogniction and acknowledgemeni heartily,
willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God, And
add unto these your forementioned Covenants, and upon them all I conclude it
is impossible for any man breathing to keep them.

Now Sir, set aside the evil ingredients of these two Legal or Statute Oaths
forementioned, which were easy in my judgment to be evinsed, especially that
clause of the Oath of Supreamicy, recorded 1 Eliz. 1 the express words of
which are, That the King is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of
all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastiall things or causes, as Temporal.

To say nothing of the Temporal part of it, I will desire you to satisfy me in
two or three things of the Spiritual.

First, whether or no Jesus Christ, by God the Father was not appointed to be
the perfect Lawmakers, and Lawgiver, unto his visible Church on earth under
the Gospel? and so to settle it, that there should be no room at all left for
Kings, Parliaments, or any other power on earth to add to, or detract from
what he by the eternally and everlasting assigament of his Father was to do in
that particular?

Secondly, whether or no he has been faithful in executing fully the will of
his Father in this particular?

Thirdly, whether or no, to deny his faithfulness, or to set up in the
Spiritual Church, House, or City of Jesus Christ; the dictats, laws, or
injuntions, or commands of Kings, Parliaments, or any other earthly power
whatsoever be not an absolut denial of the faithfulness of Jesus Christ, a
calling the Scripturea lie, and false thing and a Declaration that he that we
own of our anointed Mesias or Seviour is a These Deluder, and false Prophet,
and not the true real and great Prophet, professed of old to be sent into the
world, as the Atoner of man unto God, the King of Saints, as well as the King
of Kings, unto whom all power in Heaven and Earth was to be committed, to make
absolute, perfect, sperituall Laws. unalterable, unchangable, by any King,
Parliament, or Potentats whatsoever?

Fourthly, whether there can be greater treason committed on earth, by man
against Jesus Christ, then to disclaim and renounce him and his absolut
Kingship? by swearing that either the Pope, or any King, Parliament, or
Potentats, are the head, or only supreme Governor in their several
Kingdoms Dominions, or Jurisdictions, in all Sperituall or Ecclesiastical
things or causes?

Lastly, whether Kings, Parliaments, and Magestraites, as Kings, Parliaments,
and Magestrates, have any thing at all to do with the Sperituall House, City,
or Church of Christ on earth? and whether that if any of them clame any
interest, power, or authority, in the Church of Christ, it be not by virtue of
their Saintship? not Kingship, and whether or no^ the worship and service of
the soul, spirit, or inward renewed man, be not the absolute alone and only
right of God? and as much his single due without compettitors, as the obedience
and subjection of the body, outward man, and estate is the right and due of
Caesar, Kings, Parliaments, or Potentats?

But Sir to return back again unto the Oath; I beseech you let me ask you,
whether are not those men forsworn that have taken the formentioned Oaths, and
then within a little while after give men commissions to fight with, kill and
slay the very same man they had so sworn unto, for the tenor of the Earl of
Essex Commission was to kill and slay all those that opposed him, and in the
head of that Army who opposed him was the King, who was as possibly to have
been killed in the battle as any other in the Army. Nay Sir, is it not the
highest of contradictions, that when you have authorized men three or four
years to fight against the King and have taken him prisoner and so keep him,
yet you shall force men, (although they be freely chosen by their Country
before you will admit them to set in your house,) to take the fore recited
Oaths to be true to the King: truly for my part the Oaths to me are so
notablely penned, that I know not with what evasions or distinctions, you, or
any of you that have taken the said Oaths, are able rationally to free your
selves, (considering your actions) from being forsworn and perjured if a man
may so call it before conviction. I pray you Sir, give me leave here to recite
your late negative Oath, and so whether it be not point blank against the Oaths
of Allegience and Supremisie, before recited, the negitive Oath begins thus,

I A. B. do swear from my heart, that I will not directly nor indirectly
adheare unto or willingly assist the King in this War or in this cause
against the Parliament, nor any forces raised against the two Houses of
Parliament in this Cause or War, and I do likewise swear that my coming and
submitting my self under the power and protection of the Parliament, is with
any manner of design whatsoever, to the prejudice or proceeding of this
present Parliament, and without the direction, privity, and advise of the King,
or any of his counsel or Officers other then what I have now made known, so
help me God, and the contents of this Book. This is the Oath that all the
Cavaliers take (or by your orders ought to take.) before they can make their
composition, therefore I pray you let me ask you these question.

First, whether or no this Oath called the Negative Oath, be not absolutely
point blanke opposite against the Oaths called the Oaths of Suppremisie and
Allegience?

Secondly, whether or no, are not all those Cavaliers that take this Negative
Oath that have taken the two former absolutely forsworn and perjured, and what
trust or confidence is to be put in perjured Persons, I leave you to judge;

Thirdly, Whether or no, are not the Parliament it self the maine instruments
of these men's perjury, in forcing many times this negative Oath and others upon
them against their wills, minds, and consciences, and so for any thing they
know, send them headlong to the devil, which is one of the most wickedest
actions in the world:

Now Sir to conclude this point; I would feign in the third place know, how it
is possible for any of you to sw^er in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness, as you ought. Iere. 4.2. When you take or make Oaths by forms,
the ingredients of which admits in your own understandings of various
interpretations, so that you are but in a doubting condition, whether that
sense you take it be the true sense, or no? and so hereby the end of an Oath is
frustrate in you, for by Gods appointment, it ought to be the end of all
controvercy and strife. Heb. 6.16. but to you these Oaths are but the beginning
of them, and so in that preticular alone altogether unlawful.

Fourthly, Seeing Jesus Christ in the fist of Matthew. 34.35,36,37. expressly
says, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne; nor by the
earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of
the great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not
make one hair white or black. But let your communication be yea, yea, nay,
nay; for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. and the Apostle
James, chap. 5 12. says, but above all things my brethren, swear not neither
by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other Oath: but let your yea,
be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

And seeing that in all the New Testament, there is not the least rule at all,
for any that profess the fear of God, to forsware at all, in any case
whatsoever, unless it be, that a ground for swearing can be fetched from that
of the sixth of the Hebrews. 16. which if it can, it is but in one case only,
namely, for confirmation of that truth which a man delivers for the ending of
all strife, as I conceive betwixt party, and party, but that which a man
swears, he must be sure of it, and that he knows it in his own knowledge to
be true, or else he swears not as God requires, as before is truly observed.

Now Sir, these things premised and seriously considered, I desire to know of
you, from whence you, or any Parliament upon earth fetches and derives your
Power, Ground, or Authority, to make and impose such forms of Oaths, as the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance are? or the Oaths of your Vows and
Covenants before mentioned are? that have not only so many dubious things in
every one of them, but also are expressly against the positive command of
Christ, the Anointed King of Saints as well as King of kings, and by whom Kings
rule; for my part I protest it freely before the God of heaven and earth, I
think it as lawful for me to cut mine own throat, as to take all or any of your
fore nentioned unwarrantable Oaths, for he that has said, Thou shall not
kill. has also said, thou shall not in that manner swear. And I would fain
know of you, what confidence the Parliament upon sollid grounds, can put upon
any men in England that are so ready and willing to swallow your oat^es? that
now are become nothing else but cloaks of knavery, and breeders of strife and
mischief? therefore for shame say them all down and press them no more upon
any man whatsoever for he that consciensiously maks nothing of an Oath, will
make as little of breaking his Oa^h whenever it shall make for his profit,
ease or preferment, whereas to him that conscienciously scruples an Oath, his
bare word, promise, or engagement, is the sencerest tie in the world, which he
would not willingly violate for all the earth.

But Sir, to return to your forementioned grand Objection, That your Houses are
not in a temper to hear my report and to do me justice upon it, I pray Sir what
is the reason of it? Is it because there is a Faction of great men in it that
hates my person? and therefore though my cause be never so just, yet they will
do me no right? and if so, then I tell you plainly without fear they are a
company of Factious knaves, and not a company of righteous Judges, who ought in
judgment to be so impartial that they should not regard or respect persons,
but the justness of their cause.

Or Secondly, it is because I have not the Law of the Land sufficiently on my
side, and if so, it is the easier judged against me, but why did you receive
and approve of my appeple to your house at first, but know Sir, that although I
be no Lawyer, yet I dare throw the gantlet to all the Lawyers in England; and
against them all before any Legal Bar in England will plead my own cause my
self, and justify and prove the Lords proceedings with me, to be point blanke
against the good, old, and unrepealed Law of England; and this I will do at my
at most, perrell, yea let the Lords (in the front) put their lying Champion
William Prinn, the basest and lyingest of men who in less then eight lines,
has told and printed twelve or thirteen notorious lies against me, see
Inocencie and truth justified, page 4. 5. 6. and has such a firey zeal to my
destruction that in his late book called, The Sword of Christian Majestracy
supported, he would have the two Houses without Law, by the power of their
own wills to hang me, for no other cause in the world, but for being zealous
and courageous in standing for the Laws and Liberties of England: which you and
he have sworn, vowed, and covenanted, to maintain, preserve, and defend, and
for which you have shed (at least in pretense) so much English blood Oh brave
Prinn! a fit man indeed to be a Privy-Counseller to the great Turk. whose will
is his Law.

Or in the third place, it is because the Lords are so great that you dare not
do me justice and right? for fear of displeasing them, and if so, why do you
not tell the Kingdom so (for it is not a ^t^le conserned in the contest
betwixt the Lords and my self) that we may follow your former pattren, to know
the names of them, among them that are enemies to our Liberties and just Free
some, and so endeavor to give them their just defer^s: For I read in the 547
548. pages of the first part book Declaration, that upon a lamentable Petition
of many thousands of pore people in and about the City of London, the House of
Commons appointed a conference with the Lords, where Mr. Hollis, whose actions
demonstrats thereby his ambition is not to be less then a Duke, or a petty
King, though not in title yet in power and domination one of the chiefest
stickler then against the King, in the whole house, (and one of the chiefest
Beginners, Causers, and Promoters of the bypast wars against the King)
pressed the Lords at there Bar, to join with the house of Commons in their
desire about the Militia, and further (with many expressions of the like
nature) desired in words to this effect, that (if that desire of the House of
Commons were not assented too) those Lords who were willing to concur in would
find some means to make themselves known, that it might he known who were
against them, and they might make it known to them who sent them: yea in page
557 ibim it is positively aver'd, that he required the names of all those of
that House which would not discharge that they then ^alledther Kingdom, se the
Juncto^ notable Declaration at Oxford, the ninteenth of March 1643. page 10.
11. 12. and Mr. Hollis his own printed Speech, and if this fore recited
practis were just then, it is also in the like case just now, yea and the
rather because our case is ten times worse now then it was then, and our Laws
and Liberties (principally by the House of Lords means, and their Arbitrary
confederates in the House of Commons) are now a giving up (to the eyes of all
rational and knowing impartial men) their last breath; yea, and verily there
is but one step betwixt Us the Commons of England and perfect and absolute
slavery, which I for my part had rather be hanged, if it were possible, ten
thousand times over then endure; but Sir, remember that you in your excellent
Declaration of the 19. May 1642. 1. part book Declaration. page 207. tell us,
that this law is as old as the Kingdom, that the Kingdom must not be without a
means to preserve it self; and I say by your own declared principles, that if
you, our ordinary and legal means, will not preserve us, but rather destroy
us, we may justly by extraordinary and rational means preserve our selves, and
destroy you our treacherous destroyers.

Or lastly, is it be cause your House has already done the last Act of Justice
that ever they intended to do for the Commons of England, (there Impowerers,
Lords, and Masters,) and therefore I cannot expect the making of my report:
indeed Sir, I ingniously confess unto you, I think this is the true reason
indeed, though you do not in plain English words tell us as much, yet by your
actions you undeniablely declare it; for truly many say that there is no
Justice nor right to be had at your hands; and for our Laws, they only serve
you to destroy us at your pleasure, or to serve your ends, when your hot
burning malice is incensed against us; which if they serve for your ends, they
shall be your engines tu undo us. But they do not in the least serve to defend
or protect us against you, but when we should use them against any of you, as
justly we may: See your own excellent Declaration of the 26. May 1642. 1 part
book Declar. p. 278. Sir Ed. Cooks 4. part institut. chap. of the High Court
of Parliament; they are esteemed and made by you of no more worth and strength,
then Samsons green withes, with which he was bound, which at his pleasure he
brook, as a thread of tow is broken, when it touches the fire. Judge. 16.9.

As for instance by the 1. Eliz. cap. 2. it is inacted, That whosoever shall
not diligently and faithfully, having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be
absent, endeavoring themselves to resort to their Parish-Churches or Chapels
accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof, to some usual place where Common
Prayer, and such service of God (mark it well) shall be used, shall be dealt
with as is contained in the foresaid Statute, which Statute is confirmed by the
stat of the 23, Eliz cap. 1. and the penalty increased, as th^re you may read,
which Statutes are also c^firmed by 29. Eliz. 6 and 35. Eliz. 1.3. Jam. 4. Now
Sir, I pray you take notice that these and the like laws, does not say, He that
will not come to Church to hear Sermons, or Directory, but he that does not
come to some usual place where Common Prayer, and such, (mark that) service
of God shall be used, shall be punished so and so, as in 1. Eliz chap. 2 and by
the 23. Eliz. chap 1. He that does not repair to some Church, Chapel, or
usual place of Common Prayer, shall forfeit 20 l. a month, and be bound to
his good behavior, etc.

And the other Statutes all refer still, to the place where Common Prayer is
used, see the Statute of Conventicles, being the 35* Eliz. chap. 1.

Now Sir the present Parliament having taken away the Common Prayer, and set up
a Directory, which these laws never knew, nor mention; the sting of these
Laws are gone in that particular; for how can I in Justice, be Indicted for not
coming to hear Common Prayer, when the Parliament (that now exercises an
absolute law-making, and regal power) will not suffer it, under severe
penalties to be read or remain in being in Parish Churches.

And that the Parliament has taken away Common prayer appears, by their
printed Ordinance of the third of January 1644. and by their Ordinance of the
twenty three of August 1645. Book Declaration 2 Part, Folio 715. 716. yea in
the last recited Ordinance, the Parliament ordaines, that the said Book of
Common Prayer should not remain, or be henceforth used in any Church, Chapel,
or place of public Worship within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, and that the Directory for public Worship should be from thenceforth
use, pursued and observed; And is further ordained there;

That if any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall at any time or times hereafter
use, or cause the aforesaid Book of Common Prayer to be used, in any Church,
Chapel, or in any other public place of Worship, or in any other private
place or Family whatsoever within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, that then every s^o^ Person offending therein, shall for the first
offense for fit the sum of 5. l. for the second offense the sum of ten pound,
and for the third offense, shall suffer one whole years imprisonment, without
bail or main prise.

And is it therefurther ordained, that all Common Prayer Books remaining in
Churches or Chappells, shall within a month after the pulishing of this
Ordinance, be by the Churchwardens, etc. under the penalty of forty shilling
carried unto the Committes of the respective Countries, where they shall be
found, to be disposed of as the Parliament shall direct.

And besides the Parliament by Order and Ordinance, has not as yet to this day
appointed any punishment at all, for men that do not come to their parish
Churches or Chapples to hear sermons, or the Directory, or that meet in private
houses, commonly called Convinticles: Therefore though I stay seven years from
Church, and constantly meet in private houses, there is by the Parliaments
principalls neither Law nor Ordinance in force for any Judge or Justices of the
Peace to indict me or any other, or any otherwise to molest or troub^e me.

And as for the Ordinance of the 26 of April 1645 and the Order of the House
of Commons, the 31 of December 1646 they only declare they dislike and their
intentions to proceed against all such persons as shall take upon them to
preach, or expound the Scriptures in any Church or Chapel, or any other
public place, except they be ordained either here, or in some other reformed
Churches, etc. but it says not a word to any of those that hear them, or any
that comes not to their parish Churches but meet in private houses, neither does
it authorize any Judges, Justices of peace, or any other persons whatsoever, to
punish those unordained preaching persons, but reserves the power of punishment
to themselves, without declaring as yet what it is.

And yet notwithstanding all this, That all men that use the Common Prayer, are
liabell to the punishments before recited, multitudes of honest, godly
conscientious persons well-affected men to the Parliament, and who have ventred
al they have for its preservation, are continually indicted and punished by the
Parliaments Judges and Justices of peace, for not coming to there Parish
Churches to hear common prayer, for there are no other Statutes to authorize
them to punish any for not coming to their parish Churches, but those very
Common prayer Statutes, O brave Parliament Justice, what is this else but
perfect ingling, or playing at Hocus po^us?

Sir, I beseech you let me ask you this question, if an Ordinance of
Parliament be not as strongly valievd, and as forciable to take away a Law, as
coutrary to the Law, to create and empower a Judge or Justice to execute a Law
in force? and whether or no that Judge that is made by Ordinance of Parliament
be not an absolute Murderer, and a Contemner of the Parliaments authority.
(in the opinion of all that hold the present Parliaments principalls,) if he
shall take away a man's life, or otherwise punish him for transgressing of a
Law, which the Parliament by Ordinance has taken away, and I said a sever
penalty upon any man that shall observe or do the thing enjoined and commanded
by that Law? and how can a Judge in truth and righteousness swear to execute
the Law when he hat^ not al w^ power in him, but is made by a power opposet to
the Law, see the 27. Hen. 8.24.

In the second place by the Statutes of 1 Edw. 6 chap. 12. and. 39. Eliz. chap.
15. the stealing of Horses, Geldings, or Mares, and the fellonous taking away
in the day time (as well as the night,) of any money, goods, or cattle, being
of the value of five shillings, or upwards, in any dwelling house or houses, or
any part thereof, or any out-house or outhouses be longing, and used to, and
with any dwelling house or houses, although no person shall be in the said
house or outhouses, at the time of such fellonie committed, shall in both
cases loose the benifit of their Clergy, and die without Mercy.

And yet the present Parliament gives authority to diverse persons; to do both
the forementioned things, that is to say, to take horses and goods away by
force, against the wills and minds of the Owners, and that before they be
legally convicted, of any crime, which although they swear to maintain the
Law, yet this is absolutely against the Law, as Sir Edward Cook there own
magnified author in his third part instituts chapter 103. folio 228. declares,
which Book is published by their own authority and command, and he there
expressly says, that regalarly the goods etc. of any Delinquent cannot be
taken and seized to the Kings use, before the same be fofited.

Secondly, the same cannot be inuentoried, and the Town charged therewith
before the Owner be indicted of record.

And amongst other authorities, as Britton, Fleta, Bracton, etc. which he there
makes use of, he fites the 1 Richard the third chapter 3. by which it is
inacted and declared that neither Shriffe Escheater Bayliffe, of franchise, or
any other person take or seize the goods of any person arrested, or imprisoned
for suspiton of felony, before he be convicted or attaint of the felony,
according to the laws of England, or before the goods be other wise lawfully
forfeited upon pain to forfit double the value of the goods so taken to the
party grieved.

From which and the other Authorities he there makes use of, he says these two
conclusions are manifestly proved.

First, that before indictment, the goods or other things of any Offender
cannot be searched, inventored, or in any sort seized, nor after indictment
seized, and removed, or taken away before conviction or attainder.

Secondly, that the begging of the goods or state of any Delinquent accused or
indicted of any treason, felony, or any other offense, before he be convicted
and attainted, is utterly unlawful, because before conviction and attainder,
as has been said, nothing is forfeited to the King, nor grantable by him: And
besides it either makes the prosecution against the Delinquent more
principitate, violent, and undue, then the guiet and eqaall Proceeding of the
Law and Justice would permit, or else by some underhand compossition and
agreement stop or hinder the due course of Justice, for examplary Punishment of
the Offender.

And lastly, (says he) when the Delinquent is begged, it discharges both
Judge, Jurour, and Witness, to do their duty.

And yet for all this, many times the Soldiers employed by the Commanders of
the Parliaments presents war, are commanded and enjoined be their Commanders
authorized thereunto by authority derived from the Parliament, to take away
Horses goods, etc. for the supportation and preservation of the present forces,
which it may be at that time were in great necessity and danger, and the
soldiers refusing in that particular to obey his or there Commander might by
the Articles of War made by Ordinance of Parliament hazard his life, yea and
it may be actually hanged first, yet poor men when the Parliament have served
their turns of him or them, to pay him his Arreares, for all his hazards and
dangers, he is by their Judges and Ministers (made be the Parliament it self)
for the very forementioned actions done in obedience to their commands,
arraigned, indicted, and hanged as a fellon therefore; see the Marginall Notes
of the second Apology of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Soldiers, (this is just as the
builders of Noa's Arc were served) for (or after) their making it: Oh
admirable Parliamentary Justice! worthy for their praise to be recorded to
future Generations, as an everlasting memorial of their unpresidented justice
and gratitude; and yet if any particular man of the Parliament, or any of their
vermin Catchpoles, have a spleen at a man, it is easy for him to get a
Warrant from the Chaire-man of some particular private Committee, to go and
search such a man's house that never professed enmity against the just
proceedings of Parliament, and break open his doors, and take away (at their
pleasure) so many or much of his proper goods, as they please; Oh pure Justice!
without spot or blemish!

Nay, any of their Catchpole Rogues or Caterpillars can forceably enter any
freemans house, when n^ne is in it, and load away diverse Porters with his
proper goods, and that without the seeming Authority of any Law or Statute,
Order, or Ordinance of Parliament, nay without the Warrant of any private
Committee, though in Law such a Committees Order is not worth one straw; ^ea,
and when this is complained of to a Committee of Parliament, not one ^ram of
justice can be had for it: And truly Sir, besides other instances of this, I
will only aver it to be lately my own, for one of M. Corbets and Justice
Whitakers Catchpoles ( Whitaker the Bookseller in Paul's Churchyard London) did
the very forementioned thing to me, of which I complained at my last being
before a Committee of your House, but could not have one dram of Justice,
though (...) pressed it hard; see the relation of it in print, called The
resolved man's Resolution, page 12. 13.

Sir, I pray, is not this unspotted Justice? and yet, is it not as good as the
generality of that which now adays flows from both Houses?

In the third place, by the Statute of the 27. Eliz. Chap. 2. it is inacted
that all and every Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other Priests whatsoever
(mark the word whatsoever) made and ordained out of the Realm of England, or
other her ^ighnesse Dominions, or within any of her Majesty's Realms, or
Dominions, mark well the word within, by any Authority, Power or Jurisdiction,
derived, challenged, (...) pretended from the Sea of Rome since the first year
of her Reign, shall within forty days after the end of that Session of
Parliament, depart out of the Kingdom, etc.

And be it further enacted, That it shall not be lawful to or far any Jesu^e,
Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or religious or Ecclesiaslicall
person whatsoever, being borne within this Realm, or any other her highness
Dominions, and heretofore since the said Feast of the nativity of S. John
Baptist, in the first year of her Majesty's Reign, made, ordained, or
professed or hereafter (mark the word hereafter) to be made, ordained, or
professed by any Authority, or Jurisdiction, derived, challenged or pretended
from the Sea of Rome, by or of what name, title or degree soever the same shall
be called or known, to come into, be or remain in any part of this Realm,
etc. (mark the last sentence well) after the end of forty days, otherwise then
in such special cases, and upon such special occasions only, and for such
time only as is expressed in this Act: and if he do, that then every such
offense shall be taken and adjudged to be high Treason, and every person so
offending, shall for his offense be judged a Traitor, and shall suffer loss,
and forfeit as in case of high Treason.

And it is there further enacted, That whosoever shall wittingly or willingly
receive, relieve, comfort, aid or maintain any such person beforementioned,
being at liberty out of prison, knowing him to be such as before is expressed,
shall also for such offense be adjudged a fellon, without benefit of Clergy,
and suffer death, lose and forfeits, as in case of one attainted of Felony.

And this Parliament has made a solemn League and Covenant, and voted, that
no man shall sit in Parliament without taking it, nor no man bear any Office
without taking it, and you have voted, and in several places made the Freemen
of England incapable to give a voice to choose an Officer, if they will not
take it; in the second Article of which unjust, unrighteous and wicked
contradicting Covenant, all those that take it, swear to extirpate Popery, 1
part Book Deel. fol. 425. and yet notwithstanding the Judges and Justices of
peace made by the present Parliament, force the Freemen of England against
their wills and minds, and the Allegation of the forementioned Law and
Covenant, to pay Tithes (the root and support of Popery) to a generation of new
upstart Romish Priests, (or Synodian Sion College Jure divino men) that have
no other Authority and Power to stand by in their function of Presbytery, but
what they challenge and derive from Rome, having already avowedly in print
renounced and scorned any Jurisdiction, either from the Parliament, or the
people of their Parishes, by virtue of which their own avowed claim, they are
ipso facto, within the lash and reach of the forementioned Statute, and may by
any Freeman of England be indicted at the Assizes or Sessions, for Traitors,
and ought without mercy (by the strength of that Law) to suffer as Traitors;
and all those that pay Tithes or otherwise maintain them, after they know they
have renounced the deriving of their Power and Jurisdiction from the
Parliament, and challenge it Jure divino, derivitive from the Pope, may be
indicted as Fellons, and ought to die as Fellons.

Now Sir, is it not a piece of gallant justice in the Parliaments Judges,
Justices, and illegal Committee Men? to put freemens persons in prison without
Bail or Maineprize, and to plunder (and I think I may say rob) diverse of them
of their goods and cattels, for refusing to support Popery (after they have
sworn to extirpate it) by paying of Tithes to a company of Popish Presbyterian
Priests, that scorn to derive any power from the people of their Parishes, and
have already publicly and avowedly renounced the Parliaments Power and
Authority, and do actually and really claim and assume unto themselves an
Ecclesiastical or Clergy Authority derivitive from Rome.

Fourthly the Law of England has provided an universal remedy, for all the
men of England to recover their debts by, from those that are indebted to them,
the benefit of which Law, the present Parliament both do and will enjoy, and
at their pleasure will sue any freeman in England that is not one of
themselves, but are so fortified with their big swollen privileges, that no man
shall dare to meddle either with their persons or estates, though they owe
never so much, and yet diverse of them will neither (of themselves) pay use nor
principal, although originally the exemption of their persons from Arrests be
not a privilege given them for themselves in reference to their particulars,
but for the good of the Kingdom and People that choose them, that so by the
malice of any prerogative man, or enemy to the just Liberty of the Commons of
England, they might not by malicious Arrests be molested, troubled diverted or
hindered, for doing their Country faithful service in the place they had
chosen them unto: But when this privilege was first given them, (which in its
self is just in its institution, though now by the present Parliament Men
abused in its execution, it remained in them but for certain weeks, for then
Parliaments were very short, being by the ancient and just unrepealed Law of
the Land, to be chosen once every year or oftener if need required, 4. E. 3.14.
and 36. E. 3.10. it being impossible to be conceived that ever they thought
then, that any Parliament in England should remain seven years to the
cheating, cozening, and devouring of particular multitudes of men of their
particular debts, which now are likely by some Parliament Men, to be so long
owing them, that they will not be claimable or recoverable by Law, when this
Parliament is ended, which by its long sitting is, and is more evidently like
to be the greatest subversion of Englands Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms, of
any thing that ever was done in England: King Charles his seventeen years
mis-government before this Parliament (as you in your Declarations call it) was
but a flea-biting, or as a mouldhill to a mountain, in comparison of what this
everlasting Parliament already is, and will be to the whole Kingdom, and
therefore I say, and will maintain it upon the loss of my life, that the
Commons of England may bid adieu to their Laws, Liberties, Freedoms, Trades
and Properties, unless they speedily take a course for the electing of a new
Parliament, for the Members of this Parliament (many of them to my knowledge)
judge themselves subject to no rule, nor to be governed by any law, but say,
that they are above Magna Charta, and the most excellent Petition of Right, and
may abolish them, although there be diverse things in them so founded upon the
principles of pure reason, (which by the fundamental Maxims of the Law are
unalterable, Doctor and Student, Chapter 2. fol. 4, 5. see Innocence and truth
justified, p. 62.) and the Moral Law of God, that it is impossible for any
power whatsoever to abolish them, that is not greater then God, or has not
derived a just power from him to dispense with his unchangeable Laws, one of
which is, That Justice shall never be sold* nor impartially administered, which
is with other most excellent, rational and unalterable things ratified
expressly, in the 29. Chapter of Magna Charta, besides all the rest of most
excellent things in those two Laws confirmed, many of which are of universal
concernment to all the sons of men, under any just Government in the world: and
as for those things contained in them, that are rationally in process of time
upon just experimental grounds alterable, and changeable, if you will give us
better in their places, do when you will, without the doing of which by your
own grounds and principles, you cannot justly change them, being empowered and
chosen by us to provide for our weal, but not for our woe, to provide for our
better being, but not for our worse being. 1 part Book Dec. p. 150.

Again, fifthly, the Law of England has provided, That whosoever breaks the
peace shall be punished, or whosoever lays violent hands upon a man, and if
any man do it to a Parliament Man he will trounce him for it, but they
themselves can break the peace, and lay violent hands without cause upon the
Freemen of England, and then make what lying reports to the House they please,
and get their bodies committed to prison, and that without hearing them, and
all this did M. Hollis and Sir Walter Earl the other day to Major Tuliday.

Again, sixthly, you your selves have declared, that you have received
Petitions for the removal of things established by Law, and (say you) we must
say, that all that know what belongs to the course and practice of Parliament
will say, that we ought so to do, and that our Predecessors and his Majesty's
Ancestors have constantly done it, there being no other place wherein Laws
that by experience may be found grievous and burdensome can be altered or
repealed, and there being no other due and legal way, wherein they which are
aggrieved by them can seek redress; 1 part Book Dec. p. 720. Yea, and in
several of your Declarations you have defended and maintained, that the
concourse of people at Westminster to deliver and wait for answer to their
Petitions is both just and lawful, 1 part Book Dec. p. 123. 201. 209.

And yet now of late you are grown to that pass, that you reject and will not
receive Petitions if they cross your humors, although they be for nothing but
the obtaining Justice, according to the just and unrepealed long practiced Law
of England, and this was the case of the honest Buckinghamshire and
Hartfordshire men in their late Petition: see the scond Edition of the Outcries
of oppressed Commons, p. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Yea, and when diverse honest Citizens of London, and as firm friends to you in
the day of your straits as any was in England, were about a Petition for the
redress of diverse things amiss, and the establishment of their just Laws and
Liberties, for which diverse of them by your command, have freely ventured their
lives: the Petition by one of your informing Catchpoles, was stolen out of M.
Thomas Lamb's house, and by M. Glyn Recorder of London, and one of your own
Members brought into your House, and there in a great heat voted (as I am
informed) a seditious paper, which whether it be so or no, let the world judge
by the copy of it, which thus follows.

To the right honorable and supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons in
PARLIAMENT assembled. The humble Petition of many thousands, carnestly desiring
the glory of God, the freedom of the Commonwealth, and the peace of all men.
Shows,
THat as no Civil Government is more just in the constitution, then that of
Parliaments, having its foundation in the free choice of the people; and as ^he
end of all Government is the safety and freedom of the governed, even ^o the
people of this Nation in all times have manifested most hearty affections into
Parliaments as the most proper remedy of their grievances; yet such has ^een
the wicked policies of those who from time to time have endeavored to ^ring
this Nation into bondage; that they have in all times either by the disuse ^r
abuse of Parliaments deprived the people of their hopes: For testimony whereof
the late times foregoing this Parliament will sadly witness, when it was not
only made a crime to mention a Parliament, but either the pretended ^egative
voice, (the most destructive to freedom) or a speedy dissolution, bla^ed the
fruit and benefit thereof, whilst the whole Land was overspread with ^ll kinds
of oppressions and tyranny, extending both to soul and body, and that ^n so
rooted and settled a way, that the complaints of the people in general
wit^essed, that they would have given any thing in the world for one six
months ^eedome of Parliament. Which has been since evidenced in their instant
and con^tant readiness of assistance to this present Parliament, excee^ing the
Records ^f former ages, and wherein God has blessed them with their first
desires, making this Parliament the most absolute and free of any Parliament
that ever was and enabling it with power sufficient to deliver the whole Nation
from all kind^ of oppressions and grievances, though of very long continuance,
and to make i^ the most absolute and free Nation in the world.

And it is most thankfully acknowledged that ye have in order to the freedom^
of the people suppressed the high Commission, Star Chamber, and Councell^
Table, called home the banished, delivered such as were imprisoned for matter^
of conscience, and brought some Delinquents to deserved punishment. That y^
have suppressed the Bishops and Popish Lords, abolished Episcopacy, and that
kind of Prelatick persecuting government. That ye have taken away Ship Money
and all the new illegal Patents, whereby the hearts of all the well-affected
were enlarged and filled with a confident hope, that they should have seen long
ere thi^ a complete removal of all grievances, and the whole people delivered
from all oppressions over soul or body: But such is our misery that after the
expenc^ of so much precious time, of blood and treasure, and the ruin of so
many thousands of honest families in recovering our Liberties, we still find
this Nation oppressed with grievances of the same destructive nature as
formerly, though under other notions; and which are so much the more grievous
unto us, because the^ are inflicted in the very time of this present
Parliament, under God the hope o^ the oppressed. For, as then all the men and
women in England were made liable to the summons, attachments, sentences, and
imprisonments of the Lords o^ the Councell-boord, so we find by woeful
experience and sufferings of many pa^ticular persons, that the present Lords
do assume and exercise the same power, then which nothing is, or can be more
repugnant and destructive to the Commons just liberties.

As then the unjust power of Star Chamber was exercised in compelling (...) men
and women to answer to Interrogatoties tending to accuse themselves an^ others;
so is the same now frequently practiced upon diverse persons, even yo^ cordial
friends that have been, and still are punished for refusing to answer (...)
questions against themselves, and nearest relations. As then the great
oppress^on of the high Commission was most evident in molesting of godly
peaceab^ people, for nonconformity, or different opinion and practice in
Religion, jud^ing all who were contrary-minded to themselves, to be Heretics,
Sectarie^ Schismatics, seditious, factious, enemies to the State, and the
like; and und^ great penalties forbidding all persons, not licenced by them, to
preach or pu^lish the Gospel: Even so now at this day, the very same, if not
greater molestat^ons, are set on foot, and violently prosecuted by the
instigation of a Clergy n^ more infallible then the former, to the extreme
discouragement and affliction (...) many thousands of your faithful adherents,
who are not satisfied that contr^versies in Religion, can be trusted to the
compulsive regulation of any: And after the Bishops were suppressed, did hope
never to have seen such a power assumed by any in this Nation any more.

And although all new illegal Patents are by you abolished, yet the oppressive
Monopoly of Merchant-adventurers, and others, do still remain to the great
abridgement of the liberties of the people, and to the extreme prejudice of all
such industrious people as depend on clothing, or other woollen manufacture,
(it being the Staple commodity of this Nation,) and to the great discouragement
and disadvantage of all sorts of Tradesmen, Sea-faring-men, and hindrance of
Shipping and Navigation. Also the old tedious and chargable way of deciding
controversies, or suits in Law, is continued to this day, to the extreme
vexation and utter undoing of multitudes of Families; a grievance as great and
as palpable as any in the world. Likewise, that old, but most unequal
punishment of malefactors, is still continued, whereby men's lives and liberties
are as liable to the law, and corporal pains as much inflicted for small as
for great offenses, and that most unjustly upon the restimony of one witness,
contrary both to the law of God, and common equity, a grievance very great, but
little regarded. Also tithes, and other enforced maintenance are still
continued, though there be no ground for either under the Gospel; and though
the same have occasioned multitudes of suites, quarrels and debates, both in
former and latter times. In like manner, multitudes of poor distressed
prisoners for debt, ly still unregarded, in a most miserable and woeful
condition throughout the Land, to the great reproach of this Nation. Likewise
Prison-Keepers, or Goalers, are as presumptuous as ever they were, both in
receiving and detaining of Prisoners illegally committed, as cruel and
inhumane to all, especially to such as are well-affected, as oppressive and
extorting in their Fees, and are attended with underofficers, of such vile and
unchristian demeanor, as is most abominable. Also thousands of men and women
are still (as formerly) permit^d to live in beggary and wickedness all their
life long, and to breed their children to the same idle and vicious course of
life, and no effectual means used to reclaim either, or to reduce them to any
virtue or industry.

And last, as those who found themselves aggrieved formerly at the burdens and
oppressions of those times, that did not conform to the Church Government then
established, refused to pay Ship Money, or yield obedience to unjust Patents,
were reviled and reproached with nicknames of Puritans, Heretics,
Schismatics, Sectaries, or were termed factious or seditious, men of
turbulent spirits, despisers of government, and disturbers of the public
peace; even so is it at this day in all respects, with those who show any
sensibility of the fore-recited grievances, or move in any manner or measure
for remedy thereof, all the reproaches, evils, and mischiefs that can be
devised, are thought too few or too little to be said upon them, as
Roundheads, Sectaries, Independents, Heretics, Schismatics, factious,
seditious, rebellious disturbers of the public peace, destroyers of all eivill
relation, and subordinations; yea, and beyond what was formerly, nonconformity
is now judged a sufficient cause to disable any person though of known
fidelity, from bearing any Office of trust in the Commonwealth, whilst
Neuters, Malignants, and disaffected are admitted and continued. And though it
be not now made a crime to mention a Parliament, yet is it little less to
mention the supreme power of this honorable House. So that in all these
respects, this Nation remains in a very sad and disconsolate condition; and
the more, because it is thus with us after so long a session of so powerful
and so free a Parliament, and which has been so made and maintained, by the
abundant love and liberal effusion of the blood of the people. And therefore
knowing no danger nor thraldom like unto our being left in this most sad
condition by this Parliament, and observing that we are now drawing the great
and weighty affairs of this Nation to some kind of conclusion, and fearing
that ye may ere long be obstructed by something equally evil to a negative
voice, and that ye may be induced to lay by that strength, which (under God)
has hitherto made you powerful to all good works: whilst we have yet time
to hope, and ye power to help, and least by our silence we might be guilty of
that ruin and slavery, which without your speedy help is like to fall upon us,
your selves and the whole Nation; we have persumed to spread our cause thus
plainly and largely before you: And do most earnestly entreat, that ye will
stir up your affections to a zealous love and tender regard of the people, who
have chosen and trusted you, and that ye will seriously consider, that the end
of their trust, was freedom and deliverance from all kind of temporal
grievances and oppressions.

1. And that therefore in the first place, ye will be exceeding careful to
preserve your just authority from all prejudices of a negative voice in any
person or persons whomsoever, which may disable you from making that happy
return unto the people which they justly expect, and that ye will not be
induced to lay by your strength, until ye have satisfied your understandings
in the undoubted security of your selves, and of those who have voluntarily and
faithfully adhered unto you in all your extremities; and until ye have
secured and settled the Commonwealth in solid peace and true freedom, which is
the end of the primitive institution of all governments. 2. That ye will take
off all Sentences, Fines and Imprisonments imposed on Commoners, by any
whomsoever, without due course of Law, or judgment of their equals: and to
give due reparations to a^l those who have been so injuriously dealt withal,
and for preventing the l^ke for the time to come, that ye will enact all such
Arbitrary proceedings to be capital crimes. 3. That ye will permit no
authority whatsoever, to compel any [person or persons to answer to questions
against themselves, or nearest relations, except in cases of private interest
between party and party in a legal way, and to release all such as suffer by
imprisonment, or otherwise for refusing to answer to such Interrogatories. 4.
That all Statutes, Oaths and Covenants may be repealed so far as they tend,
or may be construed to the molestation and ensnaring of religious, peaceable,
well-affected people, for nonconformity, or different opinion or practice in
Religion. 5. That no man for preaching or publishing his opinion in Religion in
a peaceable way, may be punished or persecuted as heretical, by Judges that
are not infallible, but may be mistaken (as well as other men) in their
judgments, least upon pretense of suppressing Errors, Sects or Schisms, the
most necessary truths, and sincere professors thereof may be suppressed, as
upon the like pretense it has been in all ages. 6. That ye will, for the
encouragement of industrious people, dissolve that old oppressive Company of
Merchant-Adventurers, and the like, and prevent all such others by great
penalties for ever. 7. That ye will settle a just, speedy, plain and
unburthensome way, for deciding of controversies and suits in Law, and reduce
all Laws to the nearest agreement with Christianity, and publish them in the
English Tongue, and that all processes and proceedings therein may be true and
also in English, and in the most usual Character of writing, without any
abreviations, that each one who can read, may the better understand their own
affairs; and that the duty of all Judges, Officers, and practicers in the Law,
and of all Magistrates and Officers in the Commonwealth may be prescribed, and
their fees limited understrict penalties, and published in print to the view
and knowledge of all men: by which just and equitable means, this Nation shall
be for ever freed of an oppression more burdensome and troublesome then all
the oppressions hitherto by this Parliament removed. 8. That the life of no
person may be taken away, under the testimony of two witnesses at least, of
honest conversation; and that in an equitable way ye will proportion
punishments to offenses, that so no man's life may be taken, his body punished,
nor his estate forfeited, but upon such weighty and considerable causes as
justly deserve such punishments; and that all prisoners may have a speedy
trial, that they be neither starved, nor their families ruined, by long and
lingering imprisonment; and that imprisonment may be used only safe custody
until time of trial, and not as a punishment for offenses. 9. That tithes and
all other enforced maintenance, may be for ever abolished, and nothing in place
thereof imposed; but that all Ministers may be paid only by those who
voluntarily contribute to them, or choose them, and contract with them for their
labors. 10. That ye will take some speedy and effectual course to relieve all
such prisoners for debt, as are altogether unable to pay, that they may not
perish in prison through the hard-heartednesse of their Creditors; and that all
such as have any estates, may be enforced to make payment accordingly, and not
to shelter themselves in prison to defraud their Creditors. 11. That none may
be Prison-keepers, but such as are of approved honesty, and that they may be
prohibited under great penalties to receive or detain any person or persons
without lawful warrant: That their usage of prisoners may be with gentleness
and civility, their fees moderate and certain, and that they may give security
for the good behavior of their Underofficers. 12. That ye will provide some
powerful means to keep men, women, and children from begging and wickedness,
that this Nation may be no longer a shame to Christianity therein. 13. That ye
will restrain and discountenance the malice and impudency of impious persons,
in their reviling and reproaching the well-affected, with the ignominious
titles of Roundheads, factious, seditious and the like, whereby your real
friends have been a long time, and still are exceedingly wronged, discouraged,
and made obnoxious to rude and profane people, and that ye will not exclude any
of approved fidelity from bearing office of trust in the Commonwealth for
nonconformity; but rather Neuters and such as manifest disaffection or
opposition to common freedom, the admission and continuation of such being the
chief cause of all these our grievances.
These remedies, or what other shall seem more effectual to your grave
wisdoms, we humbly pray may be speedily applied, and that in doing thereof, ye
will be confident of the assistance of your Petitioners, and of all considerate
well-minded people, to the uttermost of their best abilities, against all
opposition whatsoever, looking upon our selves as more concerned now at last to
make a good end, then at the first to have made a good beginning: For what
shall it profit us, or what remedy can we expect, if now after so great
troubles and miseries this Nation should be left by this Parliament in so great
a thraldom, both of body, mind, and estate?

We beseech you therefore, that with all your might whilst he have time,
freedom and power, so effectually to fulfill the true end of Parliaments in
delivering this Nation from these and all other grievances, but none may
presume or da^ to introduce the like for ever.

And we trust, the God of your good success, will manifest the integrity of
our intentions herein, and that our humble desires are such, as tend not only
to our own particular, but to the general good of the Commonwealth, and
proper for this Honorable House to grant, without which this Nation cannot be
safe, or happy: And that he will bless you with true Christian fortitude,
suitable to the trust and greatness of the work ye have undertaken, and make
the memory of this Parliament blessed to all succeeding Generations.

Shall ever be the fervent desire o your humble Petitioners.
And the Prerogative-men of London, which are ready to be Associates with you
in inslaving the people, petition against it, and had thanks returned to them
for it; and M. Lamb sent up for to a Committee as a Delinquent, and diverse
hundreds of his Fellow-petitioners came up with him, with a Certificate to avow
the Petition, which was as follows.

To the honorable the Committee of Parliament sitting in the Queens Court at
Westminster, Colonel Lee being Chaire-man, The humble Certificate of diverse
persons here present interested in, and avouching the Petition lately referred
to this Committee by the right honorable the House of Commons:
Humbly certifying,
THat the Petition entitled, The humble Petition of many thousands earnestly
desiring the glory of God, the freedom of the Commonwealth, and the peace of
all men; and directed to the right honorable and supreme Authority of this
Nation, the Commons in Parliament assembled, Is no scandalous or seditious
Paper, as has been unjustly suggested, but a real Petition, subscribed, and
to be subscribed by none but constant cordial friends to Parliament and
Commonwealth, and to be presented to that honorable House with all possible
speed, as an especial means to procure the universal good of this long
inthralled and distracted Nation. And we trust this honorable Committee will
in no measure dishearten the People from presenting their humble
considerations, reasons, and petitions to those whom they have chosen, (there
being no other due and begall way wherein those that are aggrieved can find
redress Declarat. 2. November. 1642. 1. part book Decl. p. 720
) but rather that you will be pleased to give all encouragement therein: In
assured hope whereof we shall pray, etc.

But the Citizens with their Certificate could not be permitted to deliver it,
but were with violence thrust out of the Committee-Chamber, and a Guard called
for to set them packing with a vengeance: and being below in the Court of
Requests, some of them desired M. Nicolas Tew audibly to read the Certificate
to the whole company, that so all of them might fully understand it; for which
action he was by the said Committee (without any authority at all then from the
House) committed prisoner to the Sergeant at Arms, where to this day he
remains; a most unjust and illegal action, and tending to the utter
destruction of the greatly impoverished man, by his often late and most
illegal and unjust vexatious imprisonments, first, by the House of Lords to
the Fleet, secondly, he was most illegally by the present Lord Mayor of London,
fetched out of his shop and committed to New gate, for having had in his
custody one of the Petitions promoted by the Citizens of London: and now
thirdly, most illegally committed by M. Hollis, and the rest of his arbitrary
and tyrannical Committee, who had not the least power either by Law or from
the House so to do it.

And when the said Committee rise, the said Citizens by M. Denzill Hollis Sir
Philip Stapleton, Sir Walter Earl, and reverend Sir Samuel Luke, with other of
their right worthy comrades, the planters of tyranny, injustice and oppression,
were abused and called by some of them rogues, villains, seditious, factious
fellows, and violent hands laid upon them, offering to beat and cane them, and
to draw their swords upon them, and haled and pulled some of them to make them
prisoners by the law of their own will, and then the forementioned Members of
the House made a most false, unjust and untrue report the next day unto the
House of the said Citizens carriage, and particularly of Major Tulidah, by
means of which the House of Commons outstripped the Pagan Judges of Paul in
injustice, Act. 25.17. and past a vote to commit or condemn Major Tulidah to
prison, without hearing or examining any witnesses against him, or so much as
hearing him to speak one word for himself, although he waited then at the
door of purpose expecting to be called in to speak for himself, which was not
affoorded unto him, (his forementioned adversaries being both Informers,
Jurors and Judges) but without any more ado clapped by the heels.

Which act of the House of Commons is an act of so much baseness and
injustice, that the very Heathen and Pagan Romans will rise up in judgment
against these imaginary pretended Christians, who by the single light of nature
were able to answer Paul's adversaries, when they would unjustly have had
judgment against him, that it is not the manner (or Law) of the Romans (then
Infidells, Pagans, and Heathens,) to deliver any man to die, before that he
which is accused, have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer
for himself concerning the crime laid against him, Act. 25.17.

But Major Tulidah being in prison as well as M. Nicholas Tue, their foresaid
friends and fellow-Citizens the next day framed a Petition to the House of
Commons.

Upon the reading of which Petition, M. Denzill Hollis, and Sir Philip
Stapleton, knowing their own guilt and how basely and unworthily they had
abused not only the said Major Tulidah and his friends, but also the House, in
telling and reporting unto them such lies and falsehoods of them as they
themselves had done, they themselves being the truly guilty persons, and
knowing very well that if Major Tulidah, etc. had comed to the Bar, as both he
and his friends desired, their baseness, lies, and falsehoods, would have been
laid open to their faces before the whole House: to prevent which they
themselves became and were the principal instruments at the hands of the House
to get him his liberty, although themselves were the principal instruments to
get the House to clap him by the heels, yea and have set their agents and
instruments also upon honest M. Tue, to get him to frame a few lines by way of
Petition to the House for his liberty, which he absolutely refusing, to this
very day remains in the messengers hands a prisoner at Westminster, to the
apparent ruin and destruction of the poor man, contrary to all Law and
Justice, there being no color of law or justice for his first commitment, and
as little law fot the continuation of it; which clearly appears by the
Speakers arbitrary and tyrannical Warrant, which thus follows.

BY virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, these are to require you, that
Nicholas Tue now in your custody, be continued in safe custody until the
pleasure of the House be signified to you to the contrary: And for so doing
this shall be your Warrant.

Dated the 19. of March, 1646. William Lenthall, Speaker.

To Edward Birkhead Esquire, Sergeant and Arms attending the House of Commons.

I do nominate and appoint George Brag, and Henry Radley, Gentlemen, to be my
lawful Deputies, for the due execution of this Warrant, dated the 19. of
March, 1646.

Edward Birkhead Sergeant at Arms.

I pray Sir, be judge your self, whether this Warrant of M. Speakers be not
absolutely point blank against the Law, (which you have all sworn to
maintain) and against the very words of the most excellent Petition of right,
made in the third year of the present King, which expressly requires, that in
all commitments, the cause of the commitment shall be expressed, which is not
in this, and so poor M. Tue is deprived of his legal and hereditary
privilege, to seek at King's Bench Bar, etc. for a habias corpus, and the
rather because this tyrannical warrant has no legal conclusion as it ought
to have, viz. and him safely to keep until he be delivered by due course of
Law, as Sir Edward Cook your own learned Oracle of the Law declares in his 2.
part of Institutes fol. 52. which is printed by your own special order, and yet
by your House (or at least your Speaker) who ought to be the Conservators of
the Law, and severe punishers of the violators of it, poor M. Tue must be
without the least shadow of cause disfranchised, spoiled and robbed of the
benefit of the Law, and must by your wills remain in prison till it be the
pleasure of your House to do justice, which I am confident in the way you go,
and have lately gone, must be till doomes-day in the afternoon, for I am sure,
you have lost the very soul, essence, and being of true Magistracy, which is
to do justice, judgment, and right, and to relieve the afflicted, the
helpless, fatherless, and widow, and to let the oppressed go free; and are
I will maintain, degene rated into the notoriousest pack of Tyrants that ever
in the world were assembled together since Adams creation, that professed
Humanity, Morality, and Christianity, minding visibly nothing in the world, but
pleasure, oppression, tyranny, cheating and couzening the whole Kingdom of its
treasure and revenue, trades, lives, bloods, liberties, and properties; for
which (I protest before the Almighty God) in my judgment, you deserve nothing
^t to be pulled out by the ears, and thrown out to the dunghill, and be
trodden under-foot by all men that have but the least sparks of justice, honor,
conscience or honesty in them, and I profess I cannot fully acquit one man of
you that sits there, being all of you (in the eye of both law and reason)
Accessaries unto the Principals, by your base, silent, tame and patient sitting
there, and not protesting against their Actions professedly and publicly to
the whole Kingdom, Acts 7.58. compared with Chapter 8.1, and Chapter 22.24. where
Paul positively accuses himself, for being guilty of the murder and blood of
righteous Stephen, although we read not that he either was an actor in
throwing him out of the City, or stoning him, but only that he stood by and see
it, but declared nothing against it; therefore say I to you, partake not with
them in their evils by continuing with them, but be divided from them, least
you partake of their plagues, which must unavoidably, speedily, and powerfully
come upon them, to their transcendent and exemplary destruction, if God be (as
undoubtedly he is) a God of righteousness, justice, and truth.

But now Sir, seeing that to maintain the good Laws of the Land and to
abolish the bad ones, and to redress the mischiefs and grievances that daily
happen, 4. E. 3.14. and 36. E. 3.10. see The resolved man's Resolution, page 19.
are the maine and principal ends wherefore Parliaments are called, and being it
is impossible for you the peoples chosen and betrusted Stewards or
Commissioners to know the grievances of the people, your Empowerers, earthly
Creators, Lord and Masters, if you take away the liberty of declaring them unto
you, which you have done, let me a little demonstrate, whether or no that you,
by your late burning their Petitions etc. refusing to hear their grievances,
have not positively an^ visibly declared that you have forfeited your essence
and being, and absolutely nullified the end of your sitting, and are from a
company of faithful and careful^ Shepherds, appointed to preserve the being
and well-being of this poor Commonwealth, become to be a company of devouring
Lions and ravening Wolves who deserve to have all the Mastie Dogs in the
Kingdom let loose about your ears, to worry and pull you in pieces, and so
destroy you, before you have totally wasted and destroyed this poor Kingdom,
already in the hie rode way to be destroyed by you.

But to return to the Citizens Petitions to your House, after they had been so
slighted about their Certificate, by the aforesaid Committee, and so abused by
M. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Sir Walter Earl, that base coward, that
ran away, betrayed, or at least in a ground less pannick fear, deserted
Dorchester in Dorsetshire, when it was well and plentifully provided with
Ammunition, etc. and also so behaved himself at Corfe-Castle, that he deserves
to be styled the chief of base, unworthy, and cowardly men; and after that M.
Nicholas Tue, and Major Tuliday, was (as is before declared) most unjustly
imprisoned, the said honest Citizens presented the House with a Petition, which
thus follows:

To the Right Honourrable, the COMMONS of ENGLAND assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
humble Petition of diverse well-affected Citizens.
Shows,
THat as the oppressions of this Nation, in times foregoing this Parliament
were so numerous and burden some, as will never be forgotten; so were ^he
hopes of our deliverance by this Parliament, exceeding great and full of
confidence, which as they were strenthned by many Acts of yours in the
beginning, specially toward conscientious people, without respect unto their
judgments ^r opinions; So did the gratitude of well-minded people exceed all
president or ^xample, sparing neither estates, limbs, liberties, or lives, to
make good the au^hourity of this Honorable House, as the foundation and root of
all just free^ome.

And although we many times observed to our grief, some proceedings holding
^esemblance rather with our former bondage, then with that just freedom we
^xpected: yet did we impute the same to the troublesomenesse of the times of
^ar, patiently and silently passing them over, as undoubtedly hopeing a perfect
^medy so soon as the wars were ended: but perceiving our expectations
alto^ether frustrate, we conceived our selves bound in conscience, and in duty
to God, to set before you the general grievances of the Commonwealth, and the
earnest desires of ingenuous well-minded people: and for that did engage in
promoting the Petition in question, in the usual and approved way of gathering
subscriptions, with full intention to present the same to this Honorable House
so soon as it should be in readiness: but as it appears, a Copy thereof was
unduly obtained, and tendered to this Honorable House under the notion of a
dangerous and seditious Paper: Whereupon this House was pleased to order the
Petition to the Committee, whereof Col. Lee is Chairman; and Mr. Lamb at whose
House it was said to be found, to be there examined concerning the same.

Whereupon your Petitioners conceived it their duty to own and avouch the said
Petition, and for that end, in a peaceable manner attended that Committee with
this humble Certificate herunto annexed, to be offered to their wisdoms as
oppor tunity should be ministered: but through some small miscarriage of some
few persons (for which your Petitioners were much grieved) your Committee took
so sudden and high displeasure, as to command your Petioners to withdraw
threatening to remove them with a guard, before they had time to turn themselves.

Whereupon your Petitioners caused the Certificate to be publicly read in the
Court of Requests, to take the sense and allowance of many persons who had not
before seen the same, with intent still to present it; which though endeavored
to be utmost, was absolutely refused to be received, but to our astonishment,
occasion was taken against our friend M. Nicholas Tue that read the same, so
far, as that he stands a prisoner to that Committee, and much harsh language,
with threatenings and provocations issued from some of the Committee, toward
some other of our friends purposely (as we verily believe) to get some
advantage, to represent us odious to this Honorable House, whose persons and
authority has been as dear in our esteem as our very lives. And therefore,
we have just cause to complain to this Honorable House,

1. Of unjust usage from those that endeavored to interrupt the gathering of
hands in a peaceable way, or to possess this Honorable House with evil
suggestions concerning the intention and purpose of the said Petition. 2. Of
hard measure from your Committee in the particulars forementioned contrary to
what we have deserved, or should have found in former times. 3. Nevertheless,
our liberties, to promote Petitions to this Honorable House is so essential to
our freedom, (out condition without the same being absolute slavery) and our
hope of justice from this Honorable House, is so essential^ to our freedom,
our condition, without the same being absolute slavery: And our hope of justice
from this Honorable House so great, in protecting us therein that we are not
discouraged by what has passed, but in confidence thereof, do humbly entreat,
First, That ye will be pleased to declare our freedom, to promote, and your
readiness to receive the said Petition, which we cannot but still look upon,
as tending to the general good of this Nation. Secondly, That our friends may
be enlarged and that Ye will discountenance the officiousness of such
over-busie informers, as have disturbed the just progress of that Petition.

We are not ignorant, that we have been, and are like to be represented unto
you, as Heretics, Schismatics, Sectaries, seditious persons, and Enemies to
Civill-government, and the like: but our said Petition is sufficient to stop
the mouths of such calumniators, and declare us to be not only sollicitors for
our own particulars, but for the general good of the Commonwealth, and will
minister a just occasion to suspect the designs of those, that so frequently
asperse us, though their pretenses be never so specious. And we trust your
wisdoms will timeously discover and prevent any evil intended against us.

And whereas Major Tuledah stands committed by Order of this Honorable House,
for some conceived misbehaviour toward some Members of your said Committee; we
humbly entreat, that he may be forthwith called to your Bar, and be permitted
to answer for himself, and that witnesses may be also heard on his behalf,
which justice could never yet be obtained, that so this honorable House may be
rightly and fully informed, concerning his cause and demeanor of those
Members, the sudden imprisonment of our friends ^eing very grievous unto us.

And your Petitioners shall pray.
The specified certificate you will read before in page 35.

But finding no benefit to themselves by this Petition, although they followed
it extraordinary close, and at the doote presented it to all the Members in
print, and therefore imediately upon it they frame another, and having got a
competent number of hands to it, they presented it in writing, And afterward
in print, to all the Members that would receive it, the true copy of which thus
follows.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COMMONS OF ENGland assembled in Parliament. The
Humble Petition of diverse well affected people in and about the City of London.
Shows,
THat as the Authority of this Honorable House is entrusted by the people for
remedy of their grievances, so has it been their uncustomed and undoubted
liberty in a peaceable manner to present unto this House what soever they
deemed to be particular or general grievances: And as ye gave encouragement
unto others in the use of this just Liberty, reproving such as endeavor to
obstruct the peaceable promoting of Petitions, so did we verily hope to have
found the like countenance and protection in promoting our large Petition: but
no sooner was the promoting thereof discovered, but Mr. Glin Recorder as is
commonly reported, hastily and untimely brought it into the House, exclaiming
against it, as a most dangerous and sedition, paper, and shortly after the
Common Counsel in like manner prejudged it, as guilty of danger and sedition,
though both without any grounds or reasons affixed, that we know of.

And as the work of Mr. Recorder was the occasion (as we conceive) of an
inquiry after the promoters, so also of the hard measure we found at Col.
Lieghs Committee, where occasion was suddenly taken to threatten or remove by
guard, to imp^ison Nicholas Tew, one of the Petitioners, the rest being reviled
with odious titles of factious and seditious Sectaries and Major Tulidah
another of the Petitioners, not only reviled and reproached as the rest, but
violently hauled, and most boysterously used by Sir Philip, Stapleton, and Col.
Hollis, who made offer as if they would draw their Swords upon the Petitioners,
and Sir Walter Earl lifting up his Caen in a most threatening manner, took
another by the shoulder: all which is ready to be certified by sufficient
witnesses, and which we do verily believe was done purposely, out of their
hatred to the matter of the Petition, to render us as a turbulent people to
this Honorable House, to begit a mislike of our Petition, and to frustrate our
endeavors in promoting thereof.

Unto which their misinformation of this honorable house, as we have cause to
suspect, may be imputed the occasion of the sudden imprisonment of Major
Tulidah without heating of him, and our so long and tedious attendance for
answer to our last Petition and Certificate, and the misapprehension of this
honorable house of our desires in that Petition: For we did not desire (as
your answer imports) that this house should declare their liking or disliking
of our large Petition, being not then promoted nor presented by us, but that
you will be pleased to vindicate our Liberty, to promote that Petition,
notwithstanding the hard measure we had found, and the aspertions cast upon it,
to release the party imprisoned by the Committee, meaning Nicholas Tew, to
discountenance those that obstructed the gathering of subscriptions, to call
Major Tulidah to your Bar, and to hear witnesses on his behalf, that so he
might be also rightly informed, as of his cause, so of the demeanor of some
members of that Committee.

Now for as much as the more we consider the general grievances of the Common
wealth, the greater cause we still find of promoting of the large Petition, as
not discerning any thing of danger therein* except in some corruptions yet
remaining, nor of sedition, except as before this Parliament it be in some men's
esteems seditious to move, though in the most peaceably manner for remedy of
the most palpable grievances; and for as much as we are hopeful this
Honorable House will in due time have good use thereof, for the discovery of
such as are engaged either directly or by Relations in those corruptions, for
removal whereof the Petition is intended, and not knowing for what end so
great an effusion of the blood of the people has been made* except to procure
at the least the particulars desired in that Petition, and that we might know
our selves so far at least to be free men and not slaves, as to be at liberty
to promote Petitions in a peaceable way, to be Judges of the matter thereof,
and for our time of presenting them to this Honorable House, without let or
circumvention.

We humbly entreat that ye will be pleased

1. To weigh in equal Balance the carriage of Mr. Recorder, and that of the
Common Counsel in this weighty cause of prejudging Petitions, and to deal
with them as the cause deserves. 2. To consider of how evil consequence it
is, for your Committees to to assume a power of imprisoning men's persons,
without your Commission, and that ye will not pass over this in this
Committee. 3. To receive the Testimonies concerning Sir Philip Stapleton, Col.
Hollis, and Sir Walier Earl, and to deal with them according to the ill
consequences of their violent demeanor, and misinformation of this Honorable
House, tending to no less then the obstruction of Petitions the gleatest
mischief that can befall a people in time of Parliament. 4. That Nicholas Tew
may be wholly enlarged, and that no man may hence forth be committed by an
Arbitrary power, as he at the first was, nor without cause showed, though by
lawful Authority. 5. That ye will as yet suspend your sense of our Large
Petition, until such time as the Petitioners shall judge it fit to present the
same as a Petition unto your wisdoms.
And as in duty bound we shall pray, etc.
But this Petition being against Mr. Hellis, and Sir Philip Stapleton, the
Captains and heads of the subverters of our Laws, liberties, and freedoms,
after it was debated, it was, as your Diurnall tells me, upon the 20 of May,
1647 ^oted, 1. To be a high breach of Privileges. 2. That it was seditious. 3.
That this Petition and the former, entitled, The humble Petition of many
thou^anas, etc. should be burnt at the Exchange in Cornewell, and the Palace
yard at Westminster, Saturday next. Which as I am informed was accordingly
done, by the hands of the common hangman.

Upon which the petitioners not being willing to be bafled out of their
liberties in making known their grievances; (without the enjoyment of which
they are perfect Read your own words, in Co^d^. page 720.
slaves) they resolve to attempt a Petition once more, though diverse of them
^ather desired to remonstrate against you to the whole Kingdom, for a company
of tyrannical destroyers, and treacherous betrayers (contrary to your oaths,
and the duty of your places) of the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of England
And having discoursed my self with some of them, and perceiving they were
resolved to petition once again, I told them I conceived they had nothing else
to petition for, as things at present stood with your house, but these two
things, viz. That seeing the House had voted they had broken their privileges,
by petitioning unto them for redress of their grievances, without declaring
wherein, how* or after what manner, or giving any reasons at all, wherefore
they burnt their honest Petition, that therefore they would be pleased
forthwith, publicly and distinctly to declare unto the whole Kingdom, what
their privileges are, and when, how and after what manner they came by them,
that so in future time through ignorance, in not knowing their privileges,
they might not run upon the pricks of their iudignation, and the Hang-Mans.

2. That they would also be pleased to declare and dictate to them, what, (how
and after what manner) they should petition for; the next time they would
vouchsafe to give them leave to Petition to them, that so their Petition might
not again be burnt by the hands of the common Hangman; and I withal told
them the house of Commons answer to their last Petition, did necessarily and
justly lead them as it were by the hand, to such a petition as this; but they
rejected it, and framed one of their own, the Copy of which thus follows.

To the Right Honorable the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament. The
humble Petition of many thousands of well affected People.
Shows:
THat having seriously considered what an uncontrouled liberty has generally
been taken, publicly to reproach, and make odious persons of eminent and
constant good affection to Parliament and common wealth, how prevalent
endeavors have been, to withhold such from being chosen into places of trust
or Counsel, how easy to molest, or get them into prisons, how exceedingly
liable to misconstruction, their motions and Petitions in behalf of the
public have lately been.

When we consider what grudgings and repinings, have sinistrously been
b^gotten, against your most faithful and successful Army: what arts and
devises, to prov^ke you against them and to make y^u je^lous of them; what hard
measure some of them, both Offic^rs and Soldiers have found in diverse respects
in sundry places?

When we consider, what change of late has importunately (th^ugh caussessely)
been procured of the Committee of Militia in the City of London, and how that
new Committee has already begun to remove from Command, in the Trained bands
and Auxiliaries, persons not to be suspected of di^affection or ^ewerality but
such as have been most zealous, in promoting the safety of Parliament and City.

When we consider how full of Armies our neighbor Countries are round about
us, and what threatening of foreign forces, we are even astonished with grief
as not able to free our selves from apprehension of eminent danger, but are
strongly induced to fear some evil intentions of some desperate and wilful
persons, yet powerfully working to blast the just ends of this Parliament, and
re-imbroile this late bleeding and much wasted Nation in more violent wars,
distempers and miseries.

And as our earnest desires of the quiet and safety of the Common wealth, has
necessitated these our most sad observations: So are we constrained to believe,
that so dangerous an alteration, could not so generally have appeared, but that
there is some great alteration befaln, both in Counsels and authorities
throughout the land; which we verily conceive arises from no other cause, but
from the treacherous policy of enemies, and weakness of friends, in choosing
such thereinto, as have been unfit for those employments, some whereof (as is
credibly reported) having served the enemy in Arms, some with moneys, horse,
ammunition, or by intelligence, some in Commission of Array, some manifesting
constant malignity in their actions, speeches, or standing Newters in times of
greatest trial, some culpable of notorious crimes; others lying under heavy
accusations, some that are under age, or such who are at present engaged in
such courses as in the beginning of this Parliament were esteemed Monopolies.

Now may it please this honorable House, if such as these should remain, or
may have privily crept into our Counsels or Authorities (as by the forecited
considerations, we humbly conceive cannot but be judged) what can possibly be
expected, by those who have been most active and faithful in your servi^ but
utter ruin or the worst of bondage.

For prevention whereof, and of those dangers, wars and troubles that are
genera^y feared: we are constrained earnestly to entreat.

1. That you will be p^eased instantly to appoint a Committee of such worthy
members of this honorable H^use, as have manifested most sincere affections,
to the well affected, and to authorize them to make speedy ^n ^ict inquir^e
after all such as are possessed of places of Counsel, trust, auth^rity or
command, who according to law, Ordinances, Reason, or ^o^ty, ought not to be
admitted: and that all persons without exception may be permitted and
encouraged, to bring in accusations, witnesses, or testimonies for the more
speedy perfecting of the wo^ke: and that you will forthwith exclude all such
out of all offices of counsel, trust Authority or command, against whom
sufficient cause shall be proved, without which we cannot see how it is
possible for the well affected to live either in peace or safety. 2. That you
will countenance, protect, and succor the cordial well affected in all
places, according to their several cases and conditions, especially in their
addresses with petitions. 3. That you will be pleased to condescend unto all
the just and reasonable desi^es of your Commanders* Officers, and Soldiers, by
whose courage and faithfulness* so great services have been performed, and
severely to punish all such as have any way sought to alienate you from them.
4. That the Militia, of L^ndon may be returned to the custody and disposing of
those persons of whose faithfulness and wisdom in managing thereof, you
have had great experience, and that none may be put out of Command in the
Trained Bands, or Auxiliaries, who have been and are of known good affection to
the Common wealth.
All which we humbly entreat may be speedily and effectually accomplished,
according to the great necessity and exigency of these distracted times, and as
in duty bound, we shall pray, etc.
And having presented it in writing, a day, two or three after they presented
it publicly in print to the members of the House, the issue of which as I
have it out of your own Diurnall was thus.

Die Mercuris 2 Junii. 1647
A Petition styled, the humble Petition of many thousands of well affected
people, was this day read.

The question being put, whether an answer shall be given to this Petition at
this present, the house was divided the yeas went forth

Sir John Evelin of Wilts, Sir Michael Levisay tellers for the yea, with the
yea, 112.

Mr. Hollis, Sir William Luis, tellers for the no, with the no^s 128 so that
the qu^stion past with the negative.

But the Petitioners going up some few days after for an answer to their
petition, and being extremely in base provoking and insufferable language
abused by that worshipful Gentleman, Major General Massy, etc. which
provoked diverse of them to send in a paper to Mr. Speaker as their last
farewell, the copy of which thus follows.

Mr Speaker, diverse Citizens have been here attending for an answer of a
Petition delivered by Sir William Waller on Wednesday last, their desire is
that the house may be acquainted that the petitioners have seen the Vote of the
House, and have discharged themselves from further attendance for the present,
and will notwithstanding still seek just and equitable means for to ease the
grievances of this poor distracted Kingdom, and comfortably put an end to the
groanings of this miserable distressed nation.

And having sent it in, away they came, and now in my apprehension have no
other course to take, but to remonstrate and justly to declare to all the
Commons of England, and the Army, the unpartaleld, illegal and tyrannical
dealing of the House of Commons with them, and to press them by force of Arms
to root up and destroy these tyrants, which without any scruple of conscience
they may do, if it were lawful for the two Houses to levy war against the
King for tyranny declared by them, seeing I am sure there is a hundred times
greater and more visibler, and if it be true as Sir Simon Synod, and the John
of all Sir John's now cries out and says that it is not lawful in any case to
fight against the legal Magistrate, then I am sure Sir John and Sir Simon are
a company of grand Traitors, and ought principally to be hanged, for being the
chief Incendiaries in their Pulpets, etc. to the by past wars against the
King, who I will justify it upon the loss of my life, by the established law
of England, the declared government thereof, is a thousand times more fenced
about and secured, (so far as Law can secure) then the unjust, law and
liberty destroying Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster are.

And secondly, I will justify it, that if the principalls, or law of reason
and nature for preservation take be a sufficient ground to take up Arms
against the King and his party as the H^ Parliament have declared they are,
then the Kingdom and Arm, have much more true grounds to take up Arms against
them for tyranny visibly, avowedly, and professedly acted, a hundred times more
higher and transendent then ever he did, that is yet declared. And a most real
difference there is betwixt the action of them two in this particular.

I clearly find by all that J can yet read of either side, published to the
view of the Kingdom, (and J think that I have read and wayed almost all that
is extant) that the King by the law of his will did not impose Monopolies and
Ship money, etc. upon the free men of England, but was made to believe by his
Judges and Counsel at Law, (being those helps or assistance that the law of
the Kingdom had appointed him to be counseled by out of Parliament) that he
might impose those things by right, or force of the Law of the Kingdom. See
the dispute in Mr. Hamdens case of Ship Money, in the latter end of Judge
Huttons Judge Crookes arguments against Ship money, page 2 3. 4, 5 printed by
authority of this present Parliament, and the Declarations of both sides, 1.
and 2. part Col. Decl. And indeed to speak according to the declared Law of
England, the Judges and his counsel at Law were principally to be blamed, and
not the King. See your own Remonstrance of the 19 May, 1642. 1. part book Decl.
page 199. 304. and the reason in Law is because, "the Law commands the Judges
and Justices of peace, and all the rest of the Administrators of it, not to
delay or disturb common Justice and right, for any command from the King, for
any other) signified by the Great Seal, or privy Seal, or any other ways,
and though such commands do come the Judges and Justices shall not therefore
leave to do right in any point, but shall do common right, according to the
common Law, as though never any such command had been, see the 29 chap of Magna
Charta, and 2. E. 3 8. and 14. E. 3.14. and 11. R. 2.10 And to perform this in
every particular, every Judge and Justice of peace is sworn, as appears by
their oaths recorded in Poultons book of Statutes, folio 144. and made in the
18. year of Edward 3. Anno; 1344. which also you may verbatum read, in the 29:
page of a late printed book called Rega^ tyranny. And it was the duty by law
that this Parliament ought to the whole Kingdom, to have made all those false
and wicked Ship Money Judges examples of terror to future generations. (As King
Alfred before the conquest did for as Andrew Horn in his miror of Justice page
296. says, "that Judges and their Ministers who destroy men by false
judgment, ought to be destroyed as other murderers, which King Alfred did,
who hanged in one year 44. Judges as murderers, for their false judg^ments
against the Law, whose particular crimes and names he specifieth page 296. 297
298 299 300. etc. But to your everlasting shame be it spoken, you took bribes
of some of them, after the King had surrendered them up to your justice, and
after that you had impeached them of high Treason, and imprisoned them, you set
them at liberty to sit upon the seat of justice Which if they had bin made
examples of terror you would have got no Judges to have executed your
arbitrary, illegal and tirannicall commands.
to pass sentence upon the lives, liberties and properties of the freemen of
England, and if I mistake not, one of them continues a Judge in your Commission
to this very day, by means of which base and wicked practices of yours, (I
mean the two Houses) this poor Kingdom under the pretense of Law, has bin
by you filled ^th more oppression and injustice, then ever it underwent in so
short a time since the Norman Conquest, there being neither pure Justice nor
Right to be had according to law at the hands, either of your Judges or
Justices of peace, being in every particular as corrupt as either the House of
Lords or Commons, Tyburne, or at least to row at Oars as slaves, being the
fittest portion for the most part of them, there being never such outcries in
the Kings time against has Judges and Justices, as you^s denying daily the
benefit of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, to any freeman that a
knavish Parliament man appears against; as I could easily enumerate diverse
instances if it were seasonable, but I will keep it in bank for a
representation for the Army or the next Parliament, where I hope they will take
special care, what ever they do with the present base Judges and Justices of
peace; to provide an act of Parliament, that we may have our laws (where they
a^e ambigues and doubtful) made as plain as can be made, and all our
proceedings in law in English, brief and short, in plain English words, and
quick^y to be discided. And that it shall be treason in any Judge, or Justices,
by virtue of any command whatsoever, to pervert the Common law, and the Common
Justice of the Kingdom, and without such a law, and an Annual Parliament to
see it executed, the constitution of which in point of Elections, had
extraordinary need to be amended, for now some Counties choosing about 50. As
Cornewell and others none, as the County of Durham, and their corporations many
times made by bribes given to corrupt Courtiers, to obtain the Kings Letters,
patents, (which merely flows from his will) to enable them to choose two
Burgesses for Parliament, in diverse of which petty and paultery Corporations
throughout the Kingdom, any base fellow, for 20. or 30 I may by so many voices
as will make him a Burgess of Parliament* and diverse of th^se corporations,
consisting for a great part of Inns and Ale houses, will be sure to choose no
other Parliament men* but such as are given to deposednesse, expensivenesse,
wickedness, and drinking, or at least some Ninnie and Gross, wrictor by a
great man, that as Dr. Bastwick says, has no more wit in him, then will reach
from his nose to his mouth. And this is the true reason why our Parliament men
in all ages have so little regard to the Common and just liberties of the
Kingdom, or to the justice and equity of the laws they make. And therefore as
I said in the 54. page of Londons Liberties, so I say now to you, that it would
be more rational and a great deal fuller of justice and equity, to destroy
all these illegal Corporations, and fix upon them the certain number of
Parliament men, be they 600. 500. or 400. or more or less, as by the common
consent shall be thought most fit, and equally to proportion to every Country,
to choose a proportionable number, suitable to the rates, that each County by
their books of rates, are assessed to pay toward the defraying of the
public charge of the Kingdom, and then each County equally and
proportionably, by the common consent of the people thereof, to divide it self
into Divisions, Hundreds, or Weapontacks, that so all the people (without
confusion or tumult) may meet together in their several divisions, and every
free man of England, as well poor as rich, whose life estate etc. is to be
taken away by the law, may have a Vote in choosing those that are to make the
law, it being a maxim in nature, that no man justly can be bound without his
own consent, and care taken that this may be once every year without fail,
and to hold for a certain number of days, without which this Kingdom will
never be free from wars, misery and commotions; but from this present
Parliament, I neither look for good to my particular self, or the Kingdom in
general, the constant and uninterrupted serious of all your visible actions,
being a visible and clear demonstartion to the eyes of every unbiosed,
impartial and rational man in England, of an absolute violation of the laws
and liberties of England, and setting up a perfect tyranny, declaring thereby
both in the sight of God and man, that you have sold, and given up your selves
to work and act all manner of wickedness and impiety, admitting no other
rule either of reason, law, or justice, to square your actions by, but your own
perverse and crooked wills, being an absolute kind of monsters of the Devils,
but not of Gods creation, who never made any man lawless as you avowedly
profess your selves to be, robbing and poling the poor Kingdom by all manner
of illegal taxations, Excise, etc. and then sharing it amongst your selves,
making nothing of fifty thousand pounds at one breakfast in one morning, for
ten of your own Members, viz. Mr Denzel Hollis. Mr Walter Long, etc. and for
all your Hypocritical, cheating, and self denying Ordinance, within a little
while after, (as I am informed) in state Mr. Long (as I am told) worth five
thousand pounds per Annum, viz. the Register of the Chancery, and make the two
Speakers, (both of whom have been impeched if not of treason, yet of high
misdemeanors, and were never yet justly cleared and acquitted) keepers of the
great Seal of England, to raise up their justly lost repute with the people,
thereby declaring that it is your study and delight, to make use of the
corruptest and basest of men amongst you, to tyrannize over the people, and yet
the worst amongst you are so pure and holy, that you must not be touched,
questioned, or called to an account for any thing that you say or do, so that
your pretense to all our liberties, estates, trades proprieties and lives, is
not the law of the kingdom, For Col. Burch a Member of the House of Commons,
before another Member and the Lieutenant of the Tower, did aver before them the
other day to judge Ienkins when he questioned the legality of their
proceedings, that they did not stand upon the Law, nor warrant their actions
thereby, but says he we have conquered you by the Sword, and by the Sword we
will hold it. Therefore look about you Free men of England, give the Tyrants
their deserts.
but your own inherent corrupt lusts, and unbounded wills, so that the
d^fference betwixt you and the King is visible enough, and that we have got by
our exchange of our former government for your tirannicall domination, for I
never read not heard that the King in the worst of his reign, within it self
simply considered, was I think bad enough and not to be justified, and which I
my self felt as much as any man in England, (yet compared to yours was
glorious and beautiful) for did he ever cause to be burnt by the hands of the
Common hangman, the Petitions of those that he by his Declarations had invited
to Petition to him, and who in his greatest straites, had been most hazardous
for him, and truest and firmist to him, both of which you have done, as is
before proved. Neither in the second place, did I ever read that he did
proclaim and declare such men to be Rebels and Traitors, but for going about
to make their just and pressing grievances known, which you have done to the
Army, (yea, to such an Army, as I think I may justly say in every particular
the world never had any) as may larger appear by their Petition, and your
declaration, which as it is printed by themselves, or some of their friends,
thus follows.

The Armies Petition. TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR THOMAS Fairfax, General for the
Parliaments Forces The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army
under your Command.
Shows,
THat ever since our first engagement in the service for the preserving the
power of this Kingdom in the hands of the Parliament, we have in out several
places served them with all faithfulness, and although we have lain under
many discouragements, for want of pay and other necessaryes, yet have we not
disputed their commands, disobeyed their Orders, nor disturbed them with
petitions, nor have there any visible discontents appeared amongst us, to the
encouragement of the enemy, and the impediment of their affairs, but have
with all cheerfullnesse done Summer service in Winter seasons, improving the
utmost of our abillities, in the advancement of their service, and seeing God
has now crowned our endeavors with the end of our desire ( viz. the
dispercing of the pulique Enemy, and reducing them to their obedience) the
King being now brought in, our brethren the Scots now satisfied and departed
the Kingdom, all danger seemingly blown over, and peace in all their quarters.

We (imboldned by the many fold promises and Declarations to defend and protect
those that appeared and acted in the service) do herewith humbly present to
your Excellency, the annexed Representation of our desires, which we humbly
beseech your Excellency to recommend or represent in our behalf unto the
Parliament, and your Petitioners shall ever honor and pray for your
Excellency, etc.

The humble Representation of the desires of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, presented first
^o his Excellency, to be by him presented to the Parliament.
1. Whereas the necessity and exigency of the war has put us upon many
actions, which the law would not warrant, nor we have acted in a time of settled
peace, we humbly desire that before our disbanding, a full and sufficient
provision may be made by Ordinance of Parliament, to which the royal affent
may be desired) In this we desire no more then the City and Parliament have
done before us, notwithstanding their many notable and home Declarations
against the King
for our indemnity and security in all such cases. 2. That Auditors and
Commissioners may be speedily appointed and authorized to repair to the Head
quarters of this Army, to audite and state our accounts, as well for our former
service, as for our service in this Army, and that before the disbanding of the
Army, satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for their Arrears; that for
the charge trouble and loss of time, which we must otherwise necessarily
undergo in attendance for obtaining of them, may be prevented, we having had
experience that many have been reduced to miserable extremity, even almost
starved for want of relief, by their tedious attendance, and that no Officer
may be charged with any thing in his accounts, that does not particularly
concern himself. 3. That those who have voluntarily served the Parliament in
the late war, may not hereafter be compelled by press or otherwise, to serve
as Soldiers out of this Kingdom, nor those who have served as Horsemen, may
be compelled by press, to serve on foot in any future case. 4. That such in
this Army, as have lost their lives, and the wives and children of such as have
been slain in the service, and such Officers and Soldiers as have sustained
losses. or have been prejudiced in their estates, by adhering unto the
Parliament, or in their persons, by sickness or imprisoment under the Enemy,
may have such allowance, and satisfaction, as may be agreeable to justice and
equity. 5. That till the Army be disbanded as aforesaid* some course may be
taken for the supply thereof with money, whereby we may be enabled to discharge
our quarters, that so we may not for necessaries be forced to be beholding to
the parliaments Enemies, burdensome to their friends, or oppressive to the
Country, whose preservation we have always endeavored, and in whose
happiness we shall still rejoice.
Courteou-Reader,

The foregoing is a true copy of the Petition promoting in the Army, which the
Parliament are too much offended with, and therefore let the righteous God and
all ingenious men judge, if the desires of this Army be not rational, just and
equitable, and let the Lord of Heaven and Earth behold what here is desired, to
occasion such a Declaration against this innocent Army (...) any the Officers
thereof, as is here unto annexed, and let men that love (...) ^edome and hate
tyrants, look about and consider if it be not the deug^ of those few men that
abuse the Parliament, maliciously making odious reports (...) the House of the
actions of that Army, in the worse sense they can devise, as Stapleton, Hollis,
Luke, and Earl, lately did in the like c^ (...) abominable act of committing
Ma. Tulidah without ever he^ring what a (...) say for himself, an^niurie so
much former^y complained of by the^, (...) and ^act of the highest injustice in
the world to condern^ (...) ^aring, and when both his friends and himself did
most (...) ^e might be brought to their barie, that the hon^ (...) ^tly
informed of the demeanor of these Members (...) ^ri^g that Ma^or Tulidah should
discover them at the (...) ^emies to the legal and just liberties of the
people, (which to prevent) they became the only instruments to get him his
liberty, and with ut hearing they forthwith got him released.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. Die Martis,
30. Martii. 1647.
THat the two Houses of Parliament having received information The informers
are said to be Col. Rossiter, and Col. Harlow, both members of the House of
Commons, and the Army likewise.
of a dangerous Petition, with representations annexed, tend^ng to put the Army
in a distemper and muteny, to put conditions upon the Parliament, and obstruct
the relief of Ireland, which has been contrived and promoted by some persons
in the Army. They do declare their high dislike of that Petition, their
approbation and esteem of their good Service, who first discovered it and of
all such Officers and Soldiers as have refused to join in it, and that for
such as have been abused, and by the parswasion of others drawn to subscribe
it; if they shall for the future manifest their dislike of what they have done,
by forbearing to proceed any further in it, it shall not be looked upon as any
cause to take away the remembrance and sense the houses have of the good service
they have formerly done, but they shall still be retained in their good
opinion, and shall be cared for with the rest of the Army in all things
necessary and fitting for the satisfaction of persons that have done so good
and faithful service, and as may be expected from a Parliament, so careful to
perform all things appertaining to honor and justice; as on the other side it
is declared, that all those who shall continue in their distempered condition*
and go on in advancing and promoting, that petition shall be looked upon and
proceeded against as enemies to the State, and d^sturbers of the public peace.

Die Martis 30. Martii. 1647. Ordered by the Lords assembled in parliament,
that this Declaration be forthwith printed and published. John Brown Cler.
Parliamentorum.

Now Sir to conclude the tyrannical house of Lords having most illegally,
barbarously, tirannically, and unjustly committed me to prison, and sentenced
me, under whose tyranny you are willing to suffer me to perish and then by your
and their whifling, and buking Curs to bespatter and reproach me in print,
thereby strongly endeavoring to m^ke me as odiou^ in the eyes of the sons of
men, as Job was in all his botches, and alas pocre I, must be kept in pri^
(...) without pen or ink, access of friends or any (...) and so deprived of
all means to vindicate my (...) ^ce write in my own behalf, and set my name
to wi^ (...) ^ing always ready to own and justify my lines, and to seal
then with my (...) blood, yet my wife must be made a prisoner, and fetched up
to your arbitrary Committees for dispersing of my books, and the book women in
Westminster Hall that sell them, must have then shops and houses searched and
robbed of all my books, by your Catch poules, and if you suspect any for
printing of them, they must be sure to be dealt worse wi^h then if they were
Traitors and enemies to their Country, and have their houses robbed, and spoiled
of their goods and presses, with which they earne bread for them and their
families and carried away by force, before any legal trial, or conviction of
any crime, contrary to the laws of the land, which possitively declares, that
no free man of England forfeits his lands, goods or livelyhoods, tell he be
convicted of a crime. 1 R. 3.3. Cooks 2. part institutes, chap 103. fol. 228.
229. See the Petition of Right, yea and their bodies imprisoned most
tyrannical and illegally, without bail or maineprize, although there be no
color in law for the pretended cause of their commitment, nor no power in law
for any Committee of your house to commit a printer, or any other free man in
England to prison. See the law authorities mentioned in Judge Jenkins late
printed papers. And when the prisoner according to the law of the Kingdom sues
for a Habias Corpus, which legally cannot be denied to any prisoner whatsoever,
and by virtue thereof be brought before the present Judges of the Kings bench,
Justice Bacon, and Justice Rowles yet contrary to law and their own oaths
(which oaths are before mentioned) they refuse to deliver the prisoner so
uniustly imprisoned, or to take bail for his forthcomming, but return him
back to prison again, there contrary to law and justice to be kept without
bail or maineprize. Oh horrible tyranny oppression, and injustice, and yet as
I am certainly informed, this was the case of Mr. Thomas Pain a Printer the
last term.

Nay your Catchpoules by their own power, can and have forceably entered and
felloniously and illegally carried away my proper and truly com'd by goods to a
large value, for which though I complained to your Committee, yet could I not
obtain from their hands one dram of Justice, See my examination before them,
called the resolved man's resolution, page 12.

Nay, this is not all for when your members and the Lords and their catchpoules
creatures, have sufficient railed at me, and reproached me, and tied up my
hands; by depriving me of all means (as they thought) to publish any thing for
my own defense, then they as I conce^ve join together, and git some lying
Presbyter assembly man or other, (for the Author concealing his name, and I
not able to find it out, I apprehend, and justly conceive I have just cause to
lay it to them, it being so suitable to the constant means, they and their
Creatures, use to set up their new reformed Kingdom) to frame, contrive and
publish to the view of the world, a Recantation in my name (that J my self,
though my name be to it, had not the least finger in, or knowledge of) thereby
to render me odious to the purpose, and to declare me a weather cock follow,
and as fass^l, and easy in changing my former avowed just principles, as the
Lords and Commons, and assembly men at Westminster are, to change theirs; But
Sir, if God permit, I shall take a more fi^t oppertunity to anotomize that
gross piece of Pa^l^mentary, assembly knavery. And therefore I must plainly
tell you, seeing the Lords and Commons at Westm^nster have dealt so ^arb rously
and illegally with (...) as they have done, And not with me, but also with M.
Over^on his wife and brother, and Mr. Larners man and maid, who are all yet in
person, and can have nor obtain any justice from either of your houses.
and are worse then the unrighteous Judge, that upon no importunity will do me
Justice, I am now in good sober resolved earnest, determined to appeal to the
whole Kingdom and Army against them, and it may be thereby come quittance with
them, and measure unto them as they have measured to me, and doubt not but to
make it evident, that though some of your members call the Army Rebels and
Traitors, for contesting with those that gave them their power and authority;
that they themselves a^e real Rebels and Traitors, to the trust reposed, in
them by the free people of England, their Empero^rs, Lords, and Masters. And
that the Army are really and truly a company of Rogues, Knaves, and traitorous
Villains to themselves and their native Country, if they should disband upon
any terms in the world, till they have brought them to examplary Justice, and
made them vomit up the vast sums of the publiques money, that they have
swallowed down into their devowring canniball mawes, and firmly settled the
peace and justice of the Kingdom, which that they may faithfully and cordially
do is and shall be the daily prayer of

him that has been and will be again, your true friend if you will repent of
your remissness and slacknesse, and manifest your self to be more firm,
active, and valourous for the good of your Country, John Lilburn.
From my unjust Captivity in the Tower of London, for the (visably almost
destroyed) Laws and Liberties of England, which condition I more highly prize
though in misery enough outwardly, then the visiblest condition of any member
whatsoever, that sits in either or both houses, being all and every of them,
apparently, palpably and transendently forsworn, having all of them taken
Oaths upon Oaths, to mainetaine the laws, liberties and freedom of the land
and yet in their daily practice overthrow and destroy them, of which sin and
wickedness, they are all of them guilty, in regard you all sit there in
silence, and do not publicly and avowedly to the whole Kingdom according to
your duty, manfully protest against, and declare your dislike of their crooked,
unjust and Englands destroying ways, this 31. of May 1647. John Lilburne.

FINIS.

