Londons Liberty In Chains discovered. AND, Published by Lieutenant Golonell
JOHN LILBURN, prisoner in the Tower of London, October. 1646.
JER. 22.15.16.17. Shall thou reign, because thou closest thy self in Cedar?
Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it
was well with him?

He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him: was not
this to know me, says the Lord?

But thine eyes and thine heart are not, but for thy covetousness, and for to
shed innocent blood, and for oppression and violence to do it.

Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Iehoiakim the son of Josiah King of
Judah, They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother, or ah my sister:
they shall not lament for him, Ah Lord, or ah his glory.


IT is to be obsebserved, That the illegal election of great Ministers and
Officers for the administration and execution of Justice, and where the people
have been and are deprived of this their just right and liberty; there have
ever all act^ons and practices of injustice and oppressions abounded: Freedom
and Liberty being the only Jewels in esteem with the Commonalty, as a thing
most precious unto them, and meriting that men should expose themselves to all
danger, for the preservation and defense thereof against all tyranny and
oppression of what nature and condition soever.

For prevention therefore of these mischiefs and miseries (which through evil
government of magistrates by their injustice and other oppressive practices)
do usually fall upon Kingdoms and Cities. And for that all lawful powers
reside in the people, for whose good, welfare, and happiness, all government
and just policies were ordained: And forasmuch as that government which is
violent and forced, (not respecting the good of the common people, but only
the will of the commander) may be properly called Tyranny: (the people having
in all well ordered and constituted Comon-wealths, reserved to themselves the
right and free election of the greatest Ministers and Officers of State.) Now
although the tyranny whereby a City or State oppresses her people, may for the
present seem to be more moderate then that of one man; yet in many things it is
more intolerable: And it will clearly appear, that the miseries wherewith a
Tyrant loadeth his people, cannot be so heavy as the burdens imposed by a
cruel City.

Therefore all free Cities, lest their government should become a tyranny, and
their Governors, through ambition and misgovernment, take liberty to oppress
and inslave the people to their lusts and wills; have in their first
Constitutions provided, that all their Officers and Magistrates should be
elective By Votes and Approbation of the free people of each City; and no
longer to continue then a year, (as the Annual Consuls in Rome.) By which
moderation of Government, the people have still preserved their ancient
Liberty, enjoyed peace, honor, and accord: and have thereby avoided those
calamities incident to people subjected to the Laws and Arbitrary Dominion of
their insulting Lords and Magistrates (or Masters;) of all which this Honorable
City, and Metropolis of this Kingdom, upon the first erecting of this Island
into a Monarchy, or Kingdom, by that valiant, wise, and victorious Prince,
Alfrede, who first freed the Land from under the Danish yoke and slavery, under
which it had a long time groaned; did with the approbation of their King, and
States, then assembled in Parliament, for their well-being, and more peaceable
good government, agree, and by a perpetual law, ordain; That all their
Governors, and Magistrates, should be Annual and Elective, by the free votes
of the free men of the City, Then, and Yet, called by the Names of Barons, and
Burgesses of London, as appears by their general Charters of Confirmation of
their Liberties, by several Princes (before and since the Conquest) although
in process of times, their Titles, and Names of their Offices, be changed;
yet the power and right of election still remains, and ought to continue in the
body of Commonalty, and not in any particular or select persons of any Company,
or Brotherhood whatsoever. And for illustration, and more clear manifestation
hereof, I need none other Evidence, or Proof, then the Charter of King John,
granted to the Citizens before the Incorporation of any Company: The first
Company that was incorporate, about the year of our Lord, 1327. being more
then an hundred years after the date and grant of the aforesaid Charter; which
has been since by sundry Kings and Parliaments confirmed. Their Charter I have
here set down at large; which, compared with the Protestation, will make good
your right, and Justify your claim to vote In electing the Major of this
City.

The Charter.
Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dom. Hiberniae, Dux Norman. Aquitania, and
Comes, Anjou. Archiepisc. Episcop. Abbatis, Com. Baron. Justic, Vic.
Prapositis, and omnibus Ballivis fidelib. suic. Salutem, Sciatis nos
concessisse, and praesenti Charta nostra confirmassa Baronibus nostris de
London, quod eligant sibi Majorem de seipsis singulis annis, qui nobis sit
fidelis, discre^us and idoneus ad regimen Civitatis: ita quod cum electus
fuerit; nobis, vel Justic. nostro, si praesentes non fuerimus, praesentetur,
and nobis Juret fidelitatem* and quod liceat eis ipsum in fine Anni amovere,
and alium substituere si voluerunt vel eundem retinere. Ita tamen quod nobis
ostendatur idem vel Justic. nostr. si praesentes non fuerimus. Concessimus
etiam eisdem Baronibus nostris, and hac Charta nostra confirmavimus quod
habeant been and in pace quiet and integre omnes libertates suas quibus
hactenus usi sunt, tam in Civitate quam extra tam in terris quam aquis, and
omnibus aliis locis. Salva nobis Chamblengeria nostra. Quare volumus and
firmiter praecipimus quod praedicti Barons nostri Civitatis nostrae London
eligant sibi Majorem singulis Annis de seipsis praedicto modo: and quod omnes
praedictas Libertates, etc. been and in pace habeant sicut praedict. etc.
Testibus, etc. Anno regni decimo sexto.

JOHN by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy,
Aquitain, and Earl of Anjeou, To his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls,
Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Stewards, and all his Bayliffes, and faithful
Subjects greeting; Know ye, rhat We have granted, and by this present Charter,
have confirmed to our Barons of London, That they may choose to themselves every
year a Ma^o^ of themselves, who is faithful to Us, being discreet and fit for
government of the City. So that when he shall be chosen, he be presented to Us,
or to Our Justice, if We be not present, and swear to Us fidelity, and that it
may be lawful for them at the end of the Year, to remove him, and and appoint
another, or retain him, if they please; yet so, as the same be showed to Us, or
to Our Justice, if We be not present. Moreover. We have granted to Our said
Barons, and by this Our Charter have confirmed, that they may well, and in peace
quietly and fully have and enjoy all the Liberties which hitherto they have
used, as well in the City as without: in the Land as in the Waters, and in all
other places, saving to Us Our Chamberiege; Wherefore We will and firmly
command, that Our said Barons of Our City of London, may yearly elect a Major
of themselves, after the aforesaid manner, and have and enjoy, well and in
peace, wholly and fully, all their said Liberties, with all things appertaining
to the same aforesaid; Witness, etc. in the 16. Year of Our Reign.

Wherein is fit to be observed. 1. That all the Freemen of London be all and
every of them Barons, being so entitled and ordained by the Kings Grant or
Charter. 2. That every of them has his free Vote in the election of their
Major. 3. That they have liberty to choose any Baron or Burgess from amongst
themselves, without restriction or reference to any particular person or
persons, or to any other Fraternities of Aldermen, Co^mon-Councell men, or any
other particular Gown or Livery-men only; so as he be faithful, discreet, and
such as they judge fit to govern. 4. That no Major may continue in office above
one year, without a new Election. 5. That Aldermen were likewise eligible by
the Commonalty, and but to continue for the year, Patent 22. Edw. 2. No: 2.
Cook 2. Part Institutions, fol. 253. 6. Sheriffs are only eligible by the
Barons or Burgesses of the City, as appears by by the Charter of Henry the 3.
made in the 11. Year of his Reign, confirmed after by Henry the 5. Charta de 2.
Hen. 5. Part. 2. No. 11. But of late years the Aldermen and Common Council of
this City, by their power and policy, have invaded your rights and just
privileges, and contrary to the fundamental Law of the Land, and the ancient
customs of the City, most injuriously have betrayed the trust reposed in them:
spoiled you of your Liberties: taken upon them (of themselves, with some
selected Companies) without the free vote, the rest of the Barons or free
Burgesses (the Commonalty) of this City, the sole Power and Government of the
City, changing and altering your Laws and Customs at their pleasure, and
choosing of Majors and Sheriffs, such, and whom they pleased, hindering and
prohibiting all others (who ever had the like equal right and interest with
them) to have their Votes in the choice and election of the Major and
Sheriffs. Whence have ensued many calamities and miseries, even to the
indangering of the utter overthrow and desolation of this most famous and
honorable City of Europe, being wholly disfranchised of those liberties, and
immunities, which even the meanest Borough or Corporation in England now
enjoys.

Hence, by their craft and policy, have so many Monopolies and Pattents under
pretext of public good, been brought in, and set up to the ruining of
thousands, and great decay of Trade and Traffic, bringing in and
countenancing of Arbitrary Laws, and unlimited Power and Government, and
whereby Tyranny, Injustice, and Oppression, have without control been
exercised and practiced by these your late Governors and Rulers, as well as by
those your former Governors and Magistrates, not by the Commonalty.

Were not the Land-Money, Ship Money (and many other illegal Taxes and
Impositions) with rigor and force exacted of you Citizens by these your
illegal Governors? Were not many of you free Barons of this City (for
refusing to pay those exactions, and to part with your estates by such illegal
tyrannous courses) imprisoned by these your Governors (thus illegally forced
upon you without your own free Election?) Were not the cruel Edicts, and
bloody tyrannous Decree of the Star Chamber, High Commission, and
Councell-Table, withal readiness in a compulsive Torrent executed? Nay, to
reckon up in particular, the several cruelties, exactions, oppressions,
insolences, violencies, and the illegal practices and proceedings of these
your Magistrates, and their subordinate Ministers; would require a particular
Tractate, which I rather desire might be buried in Oblivion, by a timely
restoration of you to your ancient and just freedoms in electing your own
Officers. But if still you be denied Justice, and may not enjoy your due and
accustomed privileges; I shall be occasioned to remonstrate at large, and in
particular, set forth your several heavy burdens, harsh dealings, great
grievances, and several encroachments upon your Franchises: how, and by whom
your Rights and Liberties have been invaded: and how you are inslaved, that
were, and are (or at least of Right ought to be) free Burgesses and Barons, but
now captivated to the Laws, covetous Lusts, and the Arbitrarie unlimitted
power and dominion of your illegally imperious lording Magistrates.

Therefore, for the present, I will insist only upon the manner of the election
of your now new Lord Major: The Narrative whereof will fully discover, how much
the Barons of this City suffer, and that by their long forbearance, or rather
neglect, to own and claim their just privileges and immunities (if they
stoutly stand not up) and resolve to be no longer robbed and spoiled of their
Birthright and Inheritance; They are, and will be then in danger to be reduced
into a condition worse then ever any of your Progenitors, were, under the
Bastard Norman Bondage. For indeed, you Citizens are but freemen in name, as
in truth this your giving up your selves to the power and government of men,
without your free and public choice and approbation, demonstrates: and
therefore (truly) you can be accounted none other then mere slaves to your thus
elected Governour^, as the rest of the whole Nation is become, unto Lawyers,
Attorneys, Clerks, Solicitors, and cruel Jaylors, and such instruments of
contentions, by whom the peace and flourishing State of this Kingdom is quite
devoured and the people wholly inslaved to their wills; for truth hereof, I
appeal to all the Inhabitants of every county throughout this Kingdom, whose
estates, purses, and persons, have for these many score of years groaned under
the inhumane burden thereof; all which, is farther demonstrated unto us all,
the Inhabitants of this Land, by the (still continued) frequent, unjust, and
illegal Commitments of your fellow-Citizens, and all the free Commoners of
England to the several murthering-houses (styled Prisons) in this Kingdom,
aboundnig in cruelty, murder, and oppression: being most wickedly and
powerfully countenanced and supported by their Potent Adherents.

I have showed you, how by right, the meanest Baron of this City of London (by
their Charter) has as good right to have his vote in the Election of the new
Major, and other the subordinate Officers, as the Lord Major, or any Aldermen
(for the time being) with their Golden Chains. Notwithstanding, this undoubted
Right be acknowledged; yet is it denied to the people upon bare surmises, and
vain pretenses of danger, by tumults and disorder, if the same should be
yielded unto, which in truth is, but a poor allegation, and frivolous excuse:
The vanity and weakness whereof, must needs be apparent to any who is
impartial, and not carried aside with desire of Rule, through Ambition, and
blinded with affection, or beastly besotted, and against Nature and Reason,
loving Bondage more then Liberty. For what mischief (I pray you) do we find, or
have we ever heard of in any Town, City, or Corporation, (where the Citizens
have, and enjoy this freedom) of any disorder or tumults that have grown
thence?

Were not the Sheriffs (till now of late) ever chosen by the freeholders in
full County? and yet we find not that choosing to have bin complained of but
rather (only) by Prerogative Power taken away to defrauding the people of their
free choice due and of right belonging unto them, by the great Charter of the
Kingdom. And how are the Commons and Burgesses now assembled in that High Court
of Parliament, elected? Whether by the Sheriff, and some few selected Grandees
of each County, or by the Majority of voices of all and every the Freeholders
that will appear, and give their votes upon the day assigned by Proclamation,
if our great Senators come in place, and be chosen by the general and free
voice of all, and not of a few (like some) which has been the right manner of
Election from the first establishment of this Kingdom, and so has continued
to this day, being conceived to be the best form of Government, and so has
been found to be by approved experience? For, did Rome ever so flourish, as
when, not any thing was done but by the Senate and People there? But of this,
expect a larger Discourse.

I pray you, whence have we fetched this new wisdom? Surely, not from above,
but beneath; it being none other then Satanicall pride in thus despising their
fellows, and free Commoners. For these can be of no other spirit, but such as
affect Tyranny, Injustice, and Oppression: And being thus, is it not then a
lawless Dominion, and so, not of God, but of the Devil?

But let us now say somewhat of the election of the Mayor upon the 29. of
September, 1646. the day assigned for electing the Mayor of London; at which
time Mr Wansie, a Citizen and Baron of London, came to the Guild Hall, London,
the place appointed for electing the Lord Mayor for the year ensuing the door
of the Hall being kept shut) the Marshal of London, who was with diverse others,
standing with staves, to keep the door: But Mr. Wansie, with diverse other
Citizens of London, desired, that they might have liberty to go into the Hall;
telling them, that they came with intent to pass their free votes in electing
the new Lord Mayor. But could not by any means obtain liberty to enter the
Hall, (although by them earnestly desired) but were kept out forcibly with
Halberts, Bills, and Staves, upon a special command of the now Lord Mayor,
Thomas Adams: Whereupon the said Citizens having framed a Protest, (which they
intended to deliver in the open Court) the said Mr. Wansie having the said
Protest in his hand, and reading it to the rest of the Citizens there present;
the said Marshall thereupon with force, and much violence, laid hold on him
(with the said protest in his hand) and dragged him into the Guild Hall, and
kept him there as a prisoner for the space of an hour, until the Lord Mayor,
and Aldermen came from the Sermon: and then he was brought before the Lord
Mayor, and Court of Aldermen; who there examined him strictly about the said
Protest; demanding where he had it, and who delivered it to him. And th^^ they
all threatened him very violently, that they would send him to Newgate. But he
answered, That he knew not the framer of it, nor him that delivered the said
protest unto him: and then also affirming, that he and the rest of the
Citizens, intended to have subscribed it, and then to have delivered it unto
h^s Lordship, and the rest of the Court. But the said Protestation was derained
from him. And he thereupon dismissed for the present, with engagement by
promise, that he would attend his Lordship the day following. But for more
assurance, his Lordship sent an Officer for him (as for a Delinquent.) Upon
whose appearing before the Lord Mayor, the said said Marshall made a great
complaint against the said M. Wansie, for saying that he would question him the
said Marshall for abusing him, as aforesaid, being very earnest with his
Lordship to have him committed. But the Lord Mayor and some of the Aldermen for
that time, dismissed and let him go.

Thus you may see how imperious this Marshal is (being none other then a mere
vassal or servant unto the Citizens of London) showing and expressing his
disaffection to all honest and good men, in the highest nature.

After the thus election of the Lord Mayor, the Livery men departing, and the
Court not risen, the Hall door then being opened; the Lord Mayor, Thomas
Adams, gve command to the Constables and Halbert-men then standing at the
door, that they should take care that no Cloak-men should come in; fearing, as
it is conceived, lest the Citizens should come in, and protest against that
unjust and undue election of the new Lord Mayor.

This brief relation, that made unto you, may be a sufficient discovery of
the intentions and sinister ends of your great Masters, to continue you still
under an enforced slavery and subjection, who esteeming you no other then as
objects, and as unworthy to have any thing to do in the choice of your own
Officers, withholding from you your Charter of Liberties, and Franchises, the
more to blind you, and keep you in ignorance, that they may the better carry on
their designs against you, for the continuance of your thraldom, and to hold
your necks under their yoke.

The very relation of the bad usage of M. Wanfie, with the manner of the
election of the Mayor, compared with your Claim of Right, and Protestation
against the same, is sufficient to show and plainly set forth the illegality
thereof, to which you cannot submit, without betraying your own Liberty. Your
Protestation being in my hand, I held it my duty no longer to conceal it: but
for your common good to publish the same, hoping, that as you have freely
fought for your Liberties, sworn to (...) your Liberties, and largely
contributed to the State to enable them to protect you in your Liberties: so
you will not sit still, and pass by this injury and indignity of those that
would and do make themselves Lords and Masters over you, by violence (...)
wrong. But instantly adhere to your Protestation, conclude the claim of your
right, and with courage and resolution, maintain and preserve your just and
undeniable Liberties and Privileges, which are thus unjustly extorted, and
kept from you by fraud and force, lest it be said in after ages; These were the
men, these were the Fathers that durst not, would not, own their Liberties and
Rights: These were the men, who when a free Parliament were sitting, subjected
them, and their Posterity to voluntary slavery. If you neglect this
opportunity, and advantage offered you, for the regaining of your Liberties,
and recovery of your Birthright (the Law;) the loss will be irrepayable,
irrecoverable, bringing with it certain ruin, and unavoidable vassalage upon
you, and your whole City; yea, though I am not a Citizen, yet no stranger, nor
forreigner, but a freeman of England, who has freely hazarded all, for the
recovery of the common Liberty, and my Countries freedom; and it is no small
grief unto me; yea, it lies more heavy upon me, then all other my troubles
undergone, to see our National and Fundamental Laws, Rights, and
Privileges, thus trodden under foot, even by those, by whose endeavors we
expected a restoration of the same. Oh! the unexpressable misery, and besotted
condition possessing this Nation, that we should be so regardlesse of our
selves and Posterity, as thus in, and by cowardly silence, to betray our
selves, and to beget Children, to live and remain (by our means) Bondmen, and
Bond-women; yea, Slaves.

Look but upon your industrious Neighbour-Nation, the Netherlands, how for a
long time, under fair and colorable pretenses; (As Conformity, and Religion,)
they were spoiled of their Lives, Liberties and Estates. But at the length,
they discovered the cunning and crafty dealings and devises of the Bishops, and
their Clergy, whom the Spaniard promoted, and used as his Instruments, by whom
he intended to bring those Countries under the power of his Sovereignty, and
cruel will. These your Neighbors were constrained to knit themselves together
by Bond and Oath, to stand up for their common Liberties, and Countries safety,
leaning every man (in matters of Religion) according to that common Principle,
Religio suadenda non cogenda, Religion may be persuaded, not forced; and the
good success they have had therein, and tranquillity and security they thereby
enjoy; may be great encouragement to us, not to despair of the recovery of our
Native, and just Freedoms, and by the like means to put an end to these our
troubles, and unnatural oppressions, if we will but tread in the same steps,
each one laboring in his place to preserve the common Liberties and Laws of
the Kingdom, which makes us indeed true freemen, without seeking, or
endeavoring to Lord it thus (as now we do) one over another faith; your
Brethren, together with you, and all the Commons of England, have an equal
interest, and property in the Law, being all of us freeborn Englishmen.

Therefore look about you, and be no longer deluded to be by a mere shadow of
greatness and flattery, fooled into slavery; But according to your
Protestation, endeavor to preserve, or rather recover your lost Liberties,
which under conformity, and other specious pretenses and glosses, you have been
long deprived of: Till when, expect not any Justice or Right to be done unto
you: For, it is impossible, for those that have reduced you to this slavery, to
degenerate so far from themselves, as to maintain or give you any assistance or
countenance, in standing for liberty, until they lay down their Offices and
Functions, which they all this time have unjustly usurped, and intruded
themselves into. I will forbear to insist further upon this matter for the
present, being ready and willing, if any should presume to question the
Citizens just rights, in the election of their Major; upon the peril of my
head, and forfeiture of my life (if I be called thereunto, and may have a just
and equal hearing) to prove and maintain, That it is the just and due Right
and Liberty, for any free Citixen and Baron to give his vote in the election of
the Major, and Sheriffs, and other the public Officers: the same being
grounded upon the Law of God and Nations, and agreeable, as well with the
Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and Customs of this City, as by the
Charter and Acts of Parliament (yet unrepealed,) is confirmed.

But one thing I cannot pass by (which may cause some scruples) which is thi^*

By the words (Barons of London) mentioned in King John his Charter, Whether,
all, or but some special Citizens of note, are to be understood; to be the
Electors of the Major and Sheriffs of London;

That all and every Citizen is there meant and employed; The very words of the
Charter it self clearly manifest: For, the Liberties there granted by the
Charter, are to them all as Barons, and not otherwise, nor to any other
particular persons of any Society: Yet the same may be farther cleared, thus in
that before the Conquest; all Freeholders of this Kingdom, (as well as in
Scotland, are yet to this day) were called Barons; and therefore says, Lamb.
fol 128. and 136. Court Baron is so called, because amongst the Laws of King
Edward the Confessor, it is said thus, Barons vero qui suam habent Curiam de
suis hominibus, etc. Barons are those who have their Court for their Tenants or
men. And this Jurisdiction has every Freeholder, according to Mirror, C. 1.
Sect. 3. and ch^s^un, free Tenant use jurisdiction ordinary: every Freeholder
has this ordinary jurisdiction; and the name Baron in the eye of the Law has
relation to Freeholders, says Sir Edward Cook 1. Part, Institut. fol. 58. and
in very ancient Charters and Records, says he, The Barons of London, and the
Barons of the Cinque Ports, do signify, the Freemen of London, and the
Freemen of the Cinque Ports, Cook ibid. All which, I desire may be taken into
due consideration: which, as I writ the Protestation, so this I have published
for the good of this famous City, and for the benefit of all the Barons
thereof; and if you will own this your right, and not suffer your selves to be
brought into voluntary servitude; I shall be encouraged to make a farther
discovery of the Privileges and just Rights, now unjustly detained, and holden
from you.

By the Contriver of the Citizens Protestation, here following.

The Copy of the Protestation made by the Citizens of London, the 29. of
September. 1646.
The right and claim of the Freemen Citizens, and Commonalty of the famous
and most ancient City of London, for their Votes in the election of their great
and highest Officer, the Lord Major, etc. With their Protestation against the
election of such, who shall be elected Majors, as illegal and destructive to
the Liberties and Privileges of this City, if in case the Commonalty, and
Freemen thereof, or any of them, be denied, and not admitted to have their
Votes in the Election.

WHereas this City has had, and enjoyed before, and since the Conquest, many
great and notable Franchises, Custom, and Privileges, often and sundry times
confirmed, as well by the Laws and Statutes made in the several Parliaments,
as by the several Charters of the Kings and Queens of this Realm appears;
amongst which, it has been an ancient and laudable custom* (Time out of mind)
for all, and every the Freemen and Citizens of London, in the annual
elections of the Majors thereof, to have their votes, as formerly they had,
Port Grave, signifies the Governor, and safe Keeper of the City, or Town
gates.
in the election of their Port Graves. In whose place and office, the Major
succeeded; as appears by the Charter of King John, granted in the sixteenth
year of his Reign, where he grants to the Citizens, Liberty and Authority
to choose yearly a Major out of themselves, Cook the 4. Part, Institut. fol.
253. Printed by Authority of this present Parliament.

Which Custom, of Election of Majors, by majority of voices of the Freemen
and Commoners of the City, agrees with the Fundamental Law of this Kingdom,
and the manner of election of Majors, in all other the Cities and Buroughs of
this Realm as Coroners, were, and are chosen in full County, by the
Freeholders of each County, Inter leges Edward. Sanct. Chap. Lambert, folio
136. Artic. super. Charta, chap. 8. and 10, etc. The Major is Coroner within
the City of London.

Now, forasmuch as we be Freemen, and Commoners, and Burgesses of this City,
and so have right, and ought to have our Votes in the election of the Major; Do
hereby claim, and demand, as our Right, Custom, and Privilege, to vote in
the election of this present Major to be chosen; and do likewise hereby
signify, That for the same end we are come hither, to give our free votes in
electing a Major for the ensuing year, if we may freely, without molestation,
disturbance, and interruption, do the same, according to the Statute of
Westminster, the 5. chap. the 9. of Edward the 2. 14. The words whereof are
these;

And for that Elections ought to be free; it is ordained, upon pain of great
forfeiture, That no Noble man, or other, by force of Arms, neither through
malice or menacies, shall hinder to make free Elections in Counties,
Universities, Cities, Corporations, and other places, Cook 2. Part, Instit.
fol. 169.

And forasmuch, as all the due, just, and accustomed Privileges, Franchises,
Liberties, and Immunities of this City, are confirmed by this present
Parliament, The Petition of Right, And Magna Charta, the great Charter of
Liberties, where it is said, That the City of London shall have and enjoy all
its ancient Liberties, and Customs, Mag. Chart. chap. 9. and the 28. of Edw.
1. E. 1.

And although it may seem, by reason of some undue elections of late years
made, through usurpation of some few, who by power and menacies, hindering the
free Elections, not suffering us the Freemen and Commoners to give our votes
upon choosing and electing the Majors to be a Bar, let, or hinderance to this
our present voting; yet the same does nothing at all prejudice our Rights, but
rather aggravates the wrong done unto us: For there is a beneficial Statute
(yet unrepealed) made for the strengthening and preservation of our Liberties
and Rights, which no other Corporation has that we know of; Whereby it is
enacted, That the Citizens of London, shall enjoy all their whole Liberties
whatsoever, with this clause, Licet usi vel abusi fuerunt, Although they have
not used or abused the same, and notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary,
Parl. Rot. R. 2. N. 37.

Therefore, if we may not be admitted, being Freemen and Citizens of London,
to enjoy our due and accustomed Privileges and Liberties, to have and give our
free votes in the election of the Major, we being by Parliament enjoined, and
by Oath and Protestation bound, to our uttermost power, to defend and preserve
the lawful Rights and Liberties of the People; Do declare and protest against
all such who shall any-wise hinder us, or any of us, in a free way, to vote in
the electing of the said Major; as oppugnors and violators of the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and destroyers of the Privileges of this ancient
Metropolitan City, and shall by all lawful ways and means, labor to bring
them to condign punishment, for such their offenses.

And we do hereby declare, and protest against the Major, so unduly and
illegally elected, being chosen without our free Votes and consents, who have
right, and are come hither to give in our free votes, if we might have freely,
peaceably, and without let or trouble done the same, always acknowledging our
obedience, and shall be ready, with all alacrity and cheerfulness to manifest
the same, to our lawful Magistracy duly elected, in all their just Commands.

LONDON.
A Postscript written by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Prisoner in the
Tower of London, October. 1646.
THE omnipotent, glorious, and wise God, creating man for his own praise; made
him more glorious then all the rest of his Creatures that he placed upon earth:
creating him in his own Image, (which principally consisted in his reason and
understanding) and made him Lord over the earth, and all the things therein
contained, Genesis 26, 27, 28, 29. and chap. 5.1. and 9.6. 1 Cor. 11.7. Col. 3.10;
But made him not Lord, or gave him dominion over the individuals of Mankind, no
further then by free consent, or agreement, by giving up their power, each to
other, for their better being; so that originally, he gave no Lordship, nor
Sovereignty, to any of Adams Posterity, by Will, and Prerogative, to rule over
his Brethren-Men, but ingraved by nature in the soul of Man, this goulden and
everlasting principle, to do to another, as the would have another to do to
him; but man by his transgression, falling from his perfection of reason (that
Image in which God created him, Col. 3.10.) became tyrannical, and beastly in
his principles and actions; the effect of which, we see in Caines slaying of
Abel; for which he was accursed of God, and all things he went about, Genesis
4.8, 10, 11, 12. but God taking mercy of Mankind in some measure, and not
executing the fullness of his wrath, in the 9. of Genesis to revenge that
beastliness, bloody, revengfull, and devouring temper of Spirit, that, by the
fall, had now entered into the Spirits of all Mankind; institutes a perpetual,
moral, unchangeable, and everlasting Law; that is to say, That whosoever he
was, that would be so beastly, bearish, and Woolvish, as to fall upon his
neighbor, brother, or friend, and to do unto him that, which he would not he
should do to him, by taking away his life and blood from him; God ordaines, and
expressly says he shall lose his life without mercy or compassion for so doing,
verse. 5.6. Yea, and afterward, when he chooses unto himself Israel, out of all
the Nations of the world to be his peculiar people, Levit. 19.15, 16, 17, 18.
ordaines this for a standing Law amongst them; Ye shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment; thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty; but in righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor.
Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer amongst thy people; neither
shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor: I am the Lord. Thou shall
not hate thy Brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge
against the Children of thy People; but thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self: I am the Lord.

And when the fullness of time was come, that Christ the Restorer and Repairer
of man's loss and fall, should come and preach Righteousness and Justice to
the world; He says, it is the Law, and the Prophets, that whatsoever we would
that men should do to us, that we should do to them, Matthew. 7.12. Luke 6.31.
Yea, and further says, That as it is the great Commandment, that we should
love (our Sovereign Creator, and Preserver) the Lord our God with all our
hearts, and all our souls, and with all our minds; so the second Commandment,
which is like unto it, is, That we should love our neighbors as our selves;
and on these two, says he, hang all the Law and the Prophets: So that by
this, it is clearly evident, that Religion, Christianity; or the knowledge of
Christ, does not destroy morality, civility, justice, and right reason; but
rather restores it to its first perfection, beauty, splendour, and glory: and
therefore the Apostle exhorts Saints and Believers, Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24. Not to walk as other Gentiles do, in the vanity of their mind,
having their understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
heart. Who being past feeling; have given themselves over to lasciviousn^sse, to
work all uncleanness with greediness. But (says the Apostle to all that love
Christ,) Ye have not so learned Christ: If so be ye have heard him, and have
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. That ye put off, concerning the
former conversation, the old man; which is corrupt, according to the deceitful
lusts: And be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. And that ye put on that new
man, which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness; and
excellent to this purpose, is that of the Apostle, Col 3.7, 8. where speaking
of, and to those that have put off the old man, with his deeds; and have put on
the new man, which (says he) is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him
that created him.

And therefore the same Apostle lays down his exhortation at large, and
declares, it is not only the duty of the Saints, to do good each unto other,
but as much as in them lies, to do good unto all the Sons of Adam; saying,
Gal. 6.10. as we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men;
especially, unto them, who are of the Household of Faith. But the greatest good
that I know of, that any man can do unto the Sons of Men besides the discovery
of the knowledge of Christ, and the benefits and privileges that are to be
enjoyed by him; is, rationally to discover the privilege, that is, the Right,
Due, and Propriety of all the Sons of Adam, as men: that so they may not live
in beastliness, by devouring one another: and not only so, but also to stand
for, and maintain those Rights and Privileges in any Kingdom, or Nation,
wheresoever they are in any measure established: that so the trusted, made
great and potent, by a power conferred upon them; may not therewith (as is too
commonly seen) Lord it, domineer over, and destroy by their Prerogative-will
and pleasure, the Betrusters: yea, and also to maintain the liberties and
privileges established in a Land, by Law, against the incroaching usurpations
of some great and mighty Nimrods of the world, made so by ways and means,
more immediately and properly flowing from the Devil, then God: and by their
false-assumed incroaching power, tyrant-like tread under their feet, all just,
and innocent persons: and protect, defend, and countenance none but those, that
will comply, applaud, and assist them, in their brutish, woolvish, and
tyrant-like proceedings: which practices are contrary to the very end of
Government, and Magistracy; as is largly declared by the Apostle, Romans 13.3, 4.
where he plainly says, Rulers are not (no nor ought not to be) a terror to
good works, but to the evil: will thou then not be afraid of the power? Do
that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the
Minister of God to thee for good: But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a
Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, but not upon him that does
good. The knowledge of which, in some measure, in my own soul, has been the
true ground, that conscienciously made me out of duty to my self, and
neighbors, and obedience to God; stand against, and oppose my self against the
Bishops, and with resolution so often since, in the midst of many deaths;
hazard my life for my liberties, and the laws, liberties, and rights of all
the people of this Land, and which is the only principle that now carries me on
in opposition against the Lords: unto whom, as so many men, I have and must
confess, I am ten times more obliged, for my own particular, than to the
house of Commons it self, having found at their hands several times cordial
and speedy Justice, which I never enjoyed from the House of Commons in my life;
although I have waited upon them therefore, these six years, and followed them
as close as any man (I think) in England: and I dare safely say it, without
vain or lying boasting; for these nine or ten years together, I have been as
serviceable to the Commonwealth of England in my place and condition, as any
one man whatsoever that sits in that house; though I have been as ungratefully
dealt with by them, as ever man in England was: yet I say, when the Lords
forced me to contest with them, which I profess, I was as unwilling to do, as
I was to run my head against the wall, the which I told unto one of themselves;
yet I say, before I would have parted with my reason and understanding, and so
have defaced, obliterated, and annihilated, as much as in me lay, the Image
that God created me in, (and which Christ by communicating of himself to me;
has restored, confirmed, and enlarged) and degenerated into the habit of a
beast, (which all slaves that live in the World without a rational and just
Law are in) by parting with, and betraying my native, natural, just liberties,
which the fundamental laws of this Land give me; I will part with my very
heart-blood first; yea, and if I had a thousand lives, they should all go,
before I will part with my just liberties, either to them, or any power on
earth, what ever it be, that dare assume unto themselves so much tyranny, and
satanicall pride as to go about it, or endeavor it. And it is this very
principle that now engages to write this Postscript, to beget a Contest with
the Prerogative-men of London, Englands mighty Nimrods, who have inslaved not
only this City, but been strong Instruments from time to time, to do the same
to the whole Land. And the present ground of my putting pen to paper at
present, arises from this ensuing: The day the last Lord Major was elected; It
seems, Major Wansie, a Watch-maker in Cornhill, (a man that in these late
wars, has freely and gallantly adventured his life for the preservation of the
present Parliament, and Englands Liberties) and some other free Citizens,
commonly by the Prerogative-men of London, distinguished by the name of
Cloak-men; intended to have claimed their right, to give their Vote in the
election of the Lord Major, as by Law, and the Charters of London, every
freeman thereof ought to do; as also, in both the Sheriffs, etc. And in case
the prerogative- L. Major Adams, and the prerogative-Aldermen his Brethren,
would not permit them; They then intended, to deliver in a Protest in writing;
the Copy of which Protest within a day or two after, I saw and read, and not
before: and understanding how basely Major VVansey was used by the Marshall of
London, and of my Lord Majors prerogative-Mastives; and how that contrary to
Law, Guild Hall Gate was guarded with armed men, which rendered the election in
no sense to be free, as all elections of all public Officers ought to be; and
reading the Protest over, the reason of it, and the injustice offered to its
well-willers; It inflamed my spirit with indignation, and set my very soul as
it were all on fire; Insomuch, that I went immediately to old Mr. Colet, the
Record-keeper of the Tower, and asked him, if he had the original Records of
the Charters of London; and understanding he had them; out of my penury, I
bestowed three or four pound for the Copies of those that were most useful
for me; and also the Copy of H. 5. prerogative, and unbinding Proclamation: by
virtue and authority of which, they have invaded the rights of all the free men
of London, in diverse particulars, and as much as in them lies, annihilated
diverse of the ancient and just Charters, and legal privileges of this City
confirmed by Magna Charta; and making further inquiry of a man versed in
antiquity, I understood that there was an ancient book in print, above 100.
years ago, containing many of the Liberties and Franchises of London; for
which I sent into Duck-lane, and with some industry found it out, which is a
most excellent book, which with the Records I sent to a true friend of mine, to
get him to translate the Records into English, and all the Latin and French
that is in that book, who sent unto me the foregoing Discourse; which in
regard he was a stranger to London, he was unwilling to set his name to it, and
I reading the Discourse, and liking it very well, judged my self bound in duty
to my self, and all my fellow-Commoners, the Cloak-men of London, to publish it
in print; and in regard, by Gods assistance, I intend shortly to publish and
print the Records, with a Co^mentary in point of Law upon them; I judged it
convenient hereby, by way of Postscript, to give you the understanding
thereof; and also, to give you the reasons which moved me to resolve, to hazard
no small adventure there upon, which are these:

First, because the Prerogative-Pattentee monopolizing Merchant adventurers,
have contrary to Right, Law, and Justice, robbed me of my trade, whose
illegal, arbytrary, destructive practices, to the liberties, freedom, and
prosperity of England; I have in my answer to Mr. Will. Pryn (called
Innocence and Truth justified) punctually anatomized, as there you may read
from page 48. to page 63. Now, as Paul says, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not
for his own family, and specially for those of his own house, he has denied
the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel; In which, to me is employed, that a
man must not only be provident and industrious to keep and preserve what he
has, but also to maintain and defend his rights liberties, and proprieties,
that they be not invaded or taken from him: and this made honest Naboth, that
he would not part-with his Vineyard, his inheritance to wicked King Ahab,
although he offered him very good terms for it, 1 Kings 21.1, 2, 3. much
less should I part with my trade, to any illegal Monopoliser and every
individual Free-mans of London, etc. and that not only by the principles of
nature and reason, but also by the Law of England, as is not only proved by
the forenamed Discourse, but also by another excellent Treatise, called,
Discourse for free Trade, published about two years ago by a Merchant of
London.

Secondly, the readiness of the Prerogative-Magistrates of London, to execute
any illegal Commands upon the freemen thereof, and particularly upon my self;
as for instance, when I was prisoner in Newgate, illegally committed by the
house of Lords, that had no jurisdiction over me in that case, and when upon
the 22. of June last, by their Warrant, they commanded me to dance attendance
at their Bar, for what cause they did not express: neither know I any Law
extant that authorizeth them so to do. Which action, I looked upon, as a
trampling the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of all the free Commons of
England, under their feet; and therefore, for the prevention of further
mischief, I writ this following Letter to Mr. VVoollaston, the chief Jailer
of Newgate under the Sheriffs of London.

SJR,
I This morning have seen a Warrant from the house of Lords, made yesterday, to
command you to bring me this day at ten a clock before them, the Warrant
expresses no cause wherefore I should dance attendance before them; neither do
I know any ground or reason wherefore I should, nor any Law that compels, me
thereunto; for their Lordships sitting by virtue of Prerogative-pattents, and
not by election or common consent of the people, has, as Magna Charta (and
other good Laws of the Land) tells me, nothing to do to try me, or any Commoner
whatsoever in any criminal case, either for life, limb, liberty, or estate:
but, contrary hereunto, as incrochers and usurpers upon my freedoms and
liberties; they lately and illegally endeavored to try me a Commoner at their
Bar, for which I under my hand and seal, protested to their faces against
them, as violent and illegal incrochers upon the rights and liberties of me,
and all the Commons of England (a copy of which etc. I in Print herewith, and
send you) and at their Bar I openly appealed to my competent, proper, legal
tryers, and Judges, the Commons of England assembled in Parliament (for which
their Lordships did illegally, arbytrarily, and tyrannically, commit me to
prison into your custody) unto whom diverse days ago I sent my appeal etc.
which now remains in the hands of their Speaker, if it be not already read in
their house, unto which I do, and will stand, and obey their commands.

Sir, I am a freeman of England, and therefore I am not to be used as a slave
or Vassal by the Lords, which they have already done, and would further do. I
also am a man of peace and quietness^, and desire not to molest any, if I be
not forced thereunto: therefore I desire you as you tender my good and your
own; take this for an answer, that I cannot without turning traitor to my
liberties; dance attendance to their Lordships Bar: being bound in
conscience, duty, to God, my self, mine, and my Country; to oppose their
encroachments to the death: which by the strength of God I am resolved to do.

Sir, you may, or cause to be exercised upon me, some force or violence to pull
and drag me out of my chamber, which I am resolved to maintain, as long as I
can, before I will be compelled to go before them; and therefore I desire you,
in a friendly way, to be wise and considerate before you do that, which it may
be, you can never undo,

Sir, I am your true and fair conditioned prisoner, if you will be so to me,
JOHN LILBURN.
From my Cock-lost in the Presse-yard of Newgate this 13. of June 1646.

The Copy of the Order.
Die Lunae 22 Junij 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburn now a prisoner in Newgate, shall be brought before their Lordships [in
the High Court of Parliament] tomorrow morning by ten of the clock: And this to
be a sufficient Warrant in that behalf.

To the Gent. Usher of this House, or his Deputy, to be delivered to the Keeper
of Newgate, or his Deputy.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Which Letter I sent by my wife, and a friend; but they not finding Mr.
Wollaston within, I ordered them to carry it to Mr. Kendrick, and Mr. Foot, the
Sheriffs of London his Masters, whom they found at Guild Hall, at the Court of
Aldermen; to whom they delivered the letter, with my Protest against the Lords,
and appeal to to the House of Commons therein mentioned; who (as they told me)
carried it in to the Court of Aldermen: and, as they judged, there read them.
But, in stead of any remedy, according to my just expectation; I had my chamber
wall immediately after broke down by force, by Ralph Brisco, the Clerk of
Newgate, and their Officer: and a violent and forcible entry made into my
chamber, and my person by force carried away before the Lords, who had no
Legal, or Magisteriall power over me. I confess, I was suddenly surprised, it
being past ten a clock at night before I knew of it: and so could neither
provide my self of victuals, or any defensive Arms; the which if I had had, I
would (to the death) have defended my self against all the Officers in London
that had come to have fetched me out of my Chamber (my legal Castle) by virtue
of that illegal Warrant, to carry me before the Lords, who had nothing to do
with me: especially considering I had legally protested against them; and
legally appealed to the House of Commons, my proper and legal Judges; who had
accepted, read, and approved of my appeal, as just and legal: And therefore
not only that business, or proceeding of the Lords; but all their after
proceedings: yea, the sentence it self, in this very particular alone; was,
and is, illegal: For they ought not, neither (in law) had they any ground to
meddle or make with me any further; unless the House of Commons had judged my
proceedings with the Lords, illegal, and had given me up to them as my legal
Judges to try me. And therefore the affront of the Lords (in point of right and
privilege) is as great to the House of Commons, in proceeding to judgment
against me without their leave, or so much as ever desiring it; as their
usurpations are destructive to me and my Liberties, and the Liberties of all
the Commons of England: And opportunity they could not have had to have made me
so fully as they did, the object or subject of their usurpation; if it had not
been that the prerogative-Sheriffs of London had been as full of
prerogative-Principles, as the Lords themselves, and as desirous to destroy the
Laws and Liberties of England, as they; for which I will never forgive them,
till they have acknowledged their great wickedness therein, and made me
(according to Law and Justice) ample reparations: which by Gods assistance I
will with all the strength and might I have, uncessantly seek for.

But their malice and indignation to me, for standing for the Laws,
Liberties, and Freedoms of England, ceased not here; but when the Lords
committed me, by their tyrannical order, close prisoner to Newgate, to be
locked up close in my Chamber; These Arbitrary and tyrannical Sheriffs and
their Officers executed it upon me to some purpose for 3 weeks together. For;
contrary to all law and justice, they kept my wife from me, and would not so
much as suffer her, or any of my friends, to set their feet over the threshold
of my chamber door: nor suffer my wife, servant, or any of my friends, to
deliver either meat, drink, money, or any other necessaries. And when I pressed
the Jaylors to permit my wife to come into the prison yard, that so I might (in
their presence) speak with her out of my chamber window; they absolutely
refused it, and told me, I little knew what a strict charge was laid upon them
to the contrary, by the great ones at Guild Hall. And therefore my wife was
forced to speak with me out of the window of a neighboring house, at about
forty yards distance: whose cruelty and malice was so enraged, that they often
threatened to board and nail up the poor man's windows: Yea, Brisco, the Clerk
came up into my chamber, and commanded me to forbear speaking to my wife,
(although it were at such a distance) or else he would board up my windows,
and so deprive me not only of seeing and speaking to my wife; but also rob me
of the greatest part of that little air that I had coming in at my Casements.
But I bid him do his worst: for I would pull them down as fast as he naild
them up; or else if I could not, I would set ^re to them, though it burnt the
House down to the ground: And also I would speak to my wife in spite of his
teeth, and all his great Masters; unless they either sewed up my lips, or cut
out my tongue. And then in a rage he told me, He would carry me into Newgate
it self, and lay me in a close place, where I should speak with none, nor see
none, whereupon I desired him to cease his threatening of me; for I scorned him,
and bid defiance to the malice of him and all the Men and Devils in earth and
hell; having my confidence fixed in and upon that God that I knew would
preserve and keep me, and who by his power was able to destroy him, and ten
thousand such, in the twinkling of an eye; telling him, that to lock me up in
such a place, was the ready way speedily to get me my liberty: For then all my
friends and acquaintance would conclude, that the Lords had set his Masters and
him on to murder me: (as the Earl of Northampton, and the Earl of Sommerset,
set Sir Gervis Elvis, the Lieutenant of the Tower, and Weston his servant, to
murder Sir Thomas Overbury in his imprisonment in the Tower of London; for
which act they were both deservedly and justly hanged) which might hazard, at
the least, either the pulling down, or breaking open the prison; to see what
was become of me: Therefore I wished him to be advised what he did; for I
assured him, I would improve all the interest I had in the world to effect it.
For, before I will be murdered, I would sell my life at as dear a rate as it
was possible for me to sell it at. And at another time I turned him to the
Parliaments Declaration, 2 N. 1642. Book Declar. page 722.723. Where, speaking
of the difference betwixt the King and themselves, in answer to something said
by him about the interpretation of the Statute of 25. E. 3. that they would
take away his power from him; they demand a question, How that does appear?
And they answer, Because we say it is treason to destroy the Kingdom of
England, as well as the King of England; and because we say, that the King of
England has not a power to destroy the laws and people of England. And what
is that interpretation of that Statute, that no learned Lawyer will set his
hand to? That treason may be committed against the Kings Authority, though not
directed against his Person. Do there want (say they) presidents, or
Book-cases to make this good? Or, is it not, that they cannot see wood for
trees, that look after presidents to prove this, which at length is
acknowledged in his Majesty's Proclamation of the 18. of June? Is it then that
interpretation of the Statute, that the raising of force in the maintenance of
his Majesty's Authority, and of the Laws, against those that would destroy
both it and them, is no treason, though such acts of traitors and rebels should
be in pursuance of his Majesty's personal commands, and accompanied with his
Presence? And have we cited no presidents to this purpose? What are those then
of Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Veere, Duke of Ireland, and the
rest in the time of Richard the second, which we caused to be published: whose
levying of Forces against the authoriy of the Parliament, and to put to death
diverse principal members of both Houses, by the Kings express command, which
he promised to accompany with his presence; was by two Acts of Parliament
judged Treason: And the Act of such levied forces to suppress them, was judged
good service to the Commonwealth. These presidents are said to be grounded
upon repealed Statutes: and we have indeed heard it said so twice; but we
never heard the Statute that repealed them, cited once. And whether the
Parliament of the eleventh of Richard the second, was a more forced Parliament
then that of the twenty first of Richard the second, which repealed the Acts
thereof: And whether that of the first of Henry the fourth, which repealed that
of the twenty first of Richard the second, and all the acts thereof, and
revived that of the eleventh of Richard the second, and all acts made therein;
was ever yet repealed: And consequently, whether those two acts of the eleventh
of Richard the second, and the first of Hen: the fourth, do not still stand in
force; None that are acquainted with the Records and History of that time, can
deny, or so much as doubt. But do we need Presidents in this case? Is it not a
known Rule in Law, That the Kings illegal commands, though accompanied with
his presence, do not excuse those that obey him? And how then (say they) shall
it excuse Rebels and Traitors? and how shall it hinder the Kings Courts and
Ministers to proceed against them judicially, if they submit; or by force, if
they make opposition with force? If the King might control all the Courts in
Westminster Hall, and the High Court of Parliament it self, and make it good
by force; what were become of the known legal government of this Kingdom? or
what a Jewel had we of the Law? or what benefit of being Governed according to
Law; if all Laws might by force be overthrown, and by force might not be
upheld and maintained?

Now Mr. Brisco, said I, if the Kings commands and power cannot overthrow the
Law; much less can the Lords commands, who are far inferior in power unto
him, their absolute earthly Creator and Master, from whom they have derived all
that they have; and therefore cannot be above him. For it is a maxim in Nature
and Reason, That there is no Being beyond the power of Being. And another
Maxim it is, That every like begets its like; but not more: And therefore
impossible it is, that their power should be above the power of their begetter,
or Improver, the King.

Again, Mr. Brisco, said I, if here, by the confession of the Lords themselves;
(for they joined in the making of this very Declaration) it be a known Rule in
Law, That the Kings illegal commands, though accompanied with his presence,
do not excuse those that obey him; then much less are you, your Master
Wollaston, nor his Masters, the Sheriffs of London, excusable, for executing
the Lords illegal and barbarous Warrants and Orders upon me; which they do
not accompany with their presence to see put in execution. Therefore, Mr.
Brisco, assure your self, that if I live, I will turn all the stones in
England that possibly I can turn, but I will have justice, satisfaction, and
reparations from you and all your masters, for executing the Lords illegal
Orders and Commands upon me. At which he told me, he and his Masters were
Officers, and must execute the commands the Lords gave them, without the
disputing the illegality of them. Well then, said I, by the same Rule, if the
Lords (who have no legal authority over me) send you a Warrant to hang,
strangle, or stab me, or cut off my head in prison, although I have had no
legal trial according to the Law of the Land; you will put it in execution:
And as well, said I, may you do that, as to do to me as you have done: and
besides I know no Ground they had to receive me a prisoner upon the Lords
Warrant, at all: especially considering according to Magna Charta, the Petition
of Right etc. none of their Warrants of commitments of me, have either legal
beginning, or legal conclusions. And excellent to this purpose are those
Golden expressions of the most worthy Lawyer, Sir Edward Cook in his exposition
of the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, in his 2. Part. Instit. fol. 52. Where
expounding what is meant by per legem terrae, that is, the law of the land,
having spoken of diverse things, he comes to speak of Commitments, and says,

Now seeing no man can be taken, arrested, attached, or imprisoned, but by due
process of law, and according to the law of the land; these conclusions
hereupon do follow.

First, that a Commitment by lawful warrant, either in deed, or in law; is
accounted in law due process or proceeding of law, and by the law of the land,
as well as by process by force of the Kings Writ.

Secondly, That he or they which do commit them; have lawful authority.

Thirdly, That his warrant or MITTIMVS be lawful, and that must be in writing
under his hand and seal.

Fourthly, The CAUSE must be contained in the WARRANT, as for Treason, Felony,
etc. or for suspicion of Treason, or Felony, etc. Otherwise if the MITTIMVS
contain no cause at all, if the prisoner escape; it is no offense at all:
Whereas if the MITTIMVS contained the cause; the escape were Treason or Felony:
though he were not guilty of the offense. And therefore for the Kings benefit,
and that the prisoner may be the more safely kept; the MITTIMVS ought to
contain the cause.

Fifthly, the Warrant, or MITTIMVS containing a lawful CAUSE, ought to have a
lawful CONCLUSION, Viz. and him safely to keep, until he be delivered by Law
etc. and not until the party commiting does further order. And this does
evidently appear by the Writs of Habeas Corpus, both in the Kings Bench, and
Common Pleas, Exchequer, and Chancery, which there Hecites.

But, Mr. Briscoe, I am a legal man of England, who in all my actions have
declared a conformity to the laws thereof, and have as freely adventured my
life for the preservation of them, as any Lord in the Land, whatsoever he be,
has done. And besides, I have to do with those very LORDS that have styled
themselves, The Conservators of the Laws and Liberties of England; and wish in
their printed Declarations, the plague and vengeance of heaven to fall upon
them, when they endeavor the destruction and subversion thereof. And therefore
I expect in every particular to be dealt with according to Law (my inheritance,
and the inheritance of all the free Commoners of England) and not otherwise;
and my life and blood I will venture against that man, whatever he be, that
shall attempt the contrary upon me: for the Freeborn men of England (yea the
meanest of them) can neither by the command of the King, nor by his Commission,
nor Council, nor the Lord of a Villain can, or could imprison, arrest, or
attach any man, without due process of law, or by legal judgment of his
equals, viz. MEN OF HIS OWN CONDITION, or the Law of the Land, against the
form of our defensive great Charter of Liberty. Nay, in old time a Pagan or an
Heathen could not be unjustly imprisoned, or attached, or arrested, without due
process of Law, as appears by the Laws of King Alfred, Chap. 31. and
consonant to this doctrine, and that forementioned in the Parliaments
Declaration; is the judgment of Sir Edward Cook in the 186, 187. pages of the
2. part of his Institut. and which was so resolved for Law, as he there
declares 16. H. 6. and yet notwithstanding all the discourse I had with
Briscoe, the Sheriffs Clerk of Newgate, about 9 a clock at night; the
Sheriffs the next morning sent 30. or 40. of their Varlets that wait upon the
Thieves and Rogues, and the Hangman to Tyburn, to carry me by force, nolens,
volens, to the Lords Bar (those Usurpers and Incrochers) to receive my most
illegal, unjust, barbarous, and tyrannical sentence.

My third reason is, because I have not only been so evilly and unjustly dealt
with this year by the Sheriffs of London; but also the last year by the Lord
Major of London, Alderman Atkins, and Mr. Glyn Recorder thereof, when I was
committed to Newgate by the House of Commons; for what, to this day, I do not
yet know: yet Mr. Glyn so thirsted after my blood, that as I was from very good
hands credibly informed, he was a main stickler to get an Order to pass that
House, to have me tried at the Sessions of Newgate for my life; saying (as I am
told) in the house, to some members thereof, turn him over to me* and I will
hamper him to the purpose: of which, when I heard; it was not for me to sit
still; and therefore, I got published certain Quere's to state my case, in one
side of a sheet or paper: the substance of which, you may read in a printed
Book called Englands Birthright. And what was the issue of that business, you
may fully and truly read in my forementioned answer to Mr. Pryns notorious
lies, falsehoods, and calumnies; especially, in page 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 34.
to which, I refer the Reader.

And then secondly, there was a false, and base report raised, spread, and
divulged by Mr. Pryn, and some other of my bitter Presbyterian Adversaries
(those bloody cozen-Germans to the persecuting Bishops) merely to make me and
my friends odious to the people that so instead of enjoying a legal trial,
and the benefit of the Law, our common Inheritance; we might by the rude
multitude, be either stoned to death, or pulled in pieces: which report was,
that I had conspired with other Separates and Anabaptists to root out the
Members of this Parliament by degrees, beginning with Mr. Speaker; whom if we
could cut off, (as Pryn says it in print, in his book, called, The Liar
confounded) all the rest would follow: and if this succeeded not, then, to
suppress and cut off this Parliament by force of Arms, and set up a new
Parliament of our own choice and faction; my answer to which abominable false
charge, you may read in my forementioned answer to him, pa. 35. And there
running diverse of his Authentical witnesses and Creatures (little better then
Knights of the Post) up and down London; and at last, one or more of them came
into Houndsditch, to one Mr. Rogers, etc. to ensnare him, and told him of the
plot; but he like a wise man, apprehended him by a Constable, and carried him
before the then Lord Major, who dealt neither fair, honestly, nor justly with
me, nor them; no, nor with the Kingdom, etc. But in regard it may at a
distance, touch upon some present Member or Members of the House of Commons,
with whom, I do ingeniously confess, I have no desire at all to contest; I
cease it: though it was as mischevous a plot against me, as ever in my life was
contrived against me, and which had come out to the bottom, if my Lord Major
had been as just and honest, as a righteous Judge ought to be, and had not been
so full of prerogative-principles, as to fear Man, more then God.

My fourth reason, is, because I have not only been robbed of my trade, by the
monopolizing Merchant-Adventurers; and so evilly, hardly, and unjustly dealt
with, by the late Lord Major, the two Sheriffs, and tho Jaylors of Newgate,
all Mr. Recorders pride and malice, all prerogative Officers in London; but
also, have been so evilly, illegally, and unjustly dealt with all, by Col.
Francis West, the present Lieutenant of the Tower (thereunto appointed by the
principal prerogative-men of London,) which you may briefly read in a late
published book of a friend of mine, called, Liberty vindicated against Slavery,
and which I shall, by the help of God, fully lay open in due time; and also, in
regard of that late abuse, given unto my wife at Westminster, at the very
Parliament door, when she was peaceably waiting there with eight Gentlewomen
more of her friends, for an Answer to her late Petition, and for Justice from
the house, about my illegal sufferings, which it is their duty to hold put to
her, and all others whatsoever, that have just cause to seek it from them;
where came unto her one Richard Vaughan, Ensign to the Guard that day, and a
Citizen of London, being a Goldsmith in Foster-lane; who, after he had set his
Guard at the door, that goes into the Room next to the House of Commons: my
wife, with other of her friends, standing in a peaceable manner at the bottom
of those stairs; he came, and enquired of them which was Lilburns wife; at
which my wife answered, she was she; upon which he wished, I had been out of
the Land when I first went out in the Parliaments service; and without any more
ado, laid violent hands upon her, and endeavored to throw her down the next
stairs, which are three or four steps, that go down into the Court of
Requests, and had gone near to have spoiled and undone her, if some of her
friends by her, had not preserved her from the fall: but being not consent with
this, he followed her into the Court of Requests-chamber, and then again laid
violent hands upon her, and took her by the throat, as if he would have
throtled her, and would have dragged her away as a prisoner, calling out to his
armed men to help him: a piece of unmanlike cruelty and barbarism, which will
be in future ages, a badge of shame to the sufferers of it, to go unpunished,
and which renders him to be one of the malicious, basest, unworthiest, and
cowardliest of men, to use a Gentlewoman in such a barbarous manner, that
neither affronted, nor meddled, nor made with him, and which makes me judge him
to be a fellow more fitter to feed hogs and Swine, then to be named a Soldier,
or ranked amongst the number of martial men: but yet notwithstanding, it gives
me cause to think, and judge, that some of my prerogative-adversaries either in
the City, or elsewhere, set him on of purpose, at last, to abuse and affront
my wife; that so, she should never dare any more to come thither to seek for
justice, at the hands of those who have sworn to hand it over impartially to
every legal man and woman of England. The comparing of which, with what I have
but very lately heard, puts my thoughts into a deep and serious muse: the late
relation of which, as it is told me, is thus; That day my wife delivered her
Petition in print to the Members of the House of Commons, there was a Barrister
at Law in the Lords House (it seems before they sat) reading my wifes
Petition, and there came a Lord to him, and said unto him in a familiar manner,
What art thou reading? unto which; he answered, the Petition of Lieut. Col.
Lilburns wife to the House of Commons: Unto which that Lord said, the Plague on
him for a Rogue; how are we troubled with him? but if the Lords would be ruled
by me, and be all of my mind; we would dispatch him, and stretch him up without
any more ado: But truly, my Lord, I must tell you, you have no Law to do it, I
am sure of it; and therefore in reference to that, I challenge you, and your
whole House, to a trial of Law, for all the differences betwixt us, begin when
you please: and your Lordship knows very well, that when I was last at your
Bar, I challenged you all face to face to a trial at Law: But, my Lord, seeing
I find and meet with such ready Instruments, amongst the prerogative-men of
London, my unnatural fellow-Citizens, to put in execution, without dispute,
fear, or check of Conscience; (all your unjust Commands) I have some cause to
be jealous, that I may meet with Sir Thomas Overburies portion, to be murdered
in prison, there being a very near parallel betwixt diverse of his usages and
mine, as appears to me, by the printed relation thereof, made by the Right
Honorable Foulke, Lord Brook, and printed at London for N. R. 1643.

And therefore, for all these reasons laid together, I am resolved, both in
point of conscience, prudence, and safety, to sit no longer in silence; but to
give to you Lords, and your Kinsmen, the prerogative men of London (by some of
whom, I have suffered so much of late, and have just cause to fear, that they
will be your arbitrary and illegal Instruments, to make me yet suffer much
more) a joint and home-charge both together; and this I send you forth, as a
forlorn Hope: the body of which (do all of you the worst you can) by the
strength of God, shall follow after; although you should tie, and fetter both
my hands and feet, and set twenty Warders upon me, to keep me from Pen and
Ink: for I am now resolved, by the power of the Almighty, to sell my life to
you my conjoined adversaries and enemies, as dear (if it be possible) as ever
Sampson did his to the Philistines: of whom it is said, he did them more
mischief at his death, then he did them in all his life, Judge. 16. and good
reason have I so to do, in point of conscience; both in the sight of God, and
all rational men that are not distempered with the principles of prudentiall
cowardlinesse; and that I prove thus:

If to do to another, as we would have another to do to us, be a principle, so
acceptable to God, and all good men, and an unalterable Law established by God,
before Moses Law, and under his Law, and also established by Christ, the just
and righteous Prince of peace, under the Gospel; as the most transcendent
excellentest Law, that can be amongst the sons of men, and which purely flows,
from the pure fountain of reason: then from the same pure principle of reason
and Justice; I deduct this which naturally arises from the less to the
greater;

That which in point of conscience is unlawful for me to do to another, is
much more in point of conscience, unlawful to do unto my self:

But, to do evil unto another, to mischief, rob, spoil, kill, or any way
destroy another, in point of conscience, is unlawful;

And therefore, in point of conscience, it is much more unlawful for me to do
any evil unto my self, or to mischief, rob, spoil, kill, or any way destroy
my self.

And the reason of all is, because in my self, is nature nearer to my self then
all the world besides. And again, if by the Command of God, and the instinct of
nature; I must as much as much as in me lies, do good to all men: then by the
same strength of reason, must I much more do good unto my self. And therefore
for me to know of, and see mischief before my eyes intended me, and to be so
stupid and sottish, as not to take care, by all just and rational means to
prevent it; is to be fellonious to my self, and to do that unto my self,
which I should not do unto another, no, nor suffer to be done unto another: But
my adversaries have taken from me, my liberty, (and tormented and tortured my
body with cruel and close imprisonment) and spoiled me of my trade and
livelihood, and disfranchised me without cause or ground, by robbing me of my
right and benefit in the laws and liberties of England (more dear to me then
any earthly treasure whatsoever) and thereby as much as in them lies, have made
a slave and a beast of me, and so changed the property that God created me in:
and now thirst after my life and blood, which is all they have left me. To
preserve which (finding no remedy at the hands of Justice (by the powerful
operation of some prerogative-men there, the names and qualities of whom you
shall shortly know) to whom I have appealed; I send my adversaries this bone
to pick, as aspeciall means (appearing so to my understanding) to break their
cruel fangs, and devoureing tusks; and the mighty and omnipotent power of the
Lord JEHOVAH, go along with it, and make it effectual for the accomplishing
that end. And I hope no rational man will blame me for doing hereof, seeing as
Job says, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and all that a man has will he give,
(or venture) for his life. And so much for the particular reasons concerning my
self, which moved me to write this.

I will only give you two more, which are more general; and then conclude.

And the first is, because the greatest bondage of this land arises from the
monopolizing patentee-Clergy, who have been and still are the men that as John
in his Reu. (Chap. 7.1.) says, hold the four winds of the earth, that the
wind thereof should not blow upon the earth. And though in Paul's time, some
preached the Gospel of envy, and others of good will; yet he forbids none to
preach it; but rejoices that it was preached by any, whether in pretense or
truth, yea, and thereat would rejoice, Phil. 1.15.16.17.18 But these
Clergymen, like so many of the Devils Agents, whose Kingdom is a Kingdom of
darkness; set themselves on purpose to overspread the earth, with blindness
and darkness, and so by consequence; with injustice, cruelty, and bloodshed:
and rather then any, though never so able, should preach Christ and his Gospel,
that will not receive power; therefore, from them, by their moldy, greazy
consecration and imposition of hands; thousands, and ten thousands of soul^s
shall perish for want of knowledge, and so run headlong to hell eternally: yea,
men that will not be conformable unto them, and be absolutely of their cut, and
fashion; though never so extraordinarily adorned with the knowledge of Christ,
and of his will and mind; shall neither eat, and drink, buy, nor sell amongst
them, no nor live, nor have a habitation amongst them in the land of their
nativity: witness that most DIVELISH, WICKED, BLOODY, UNCHRISTIAN, PAPISTICALL
REMONSTRANCE of the prerogative-men of London, etc. who amongst many other base
and wicked desires, would have us reduced back to the Pope of Rome again, to
believe as the Church believes; for they would have us be conformable in Church
Government, etc. not only to what is already established, but what ever shall
be established: and to speak properly, this very Remonstrance is but one of
their brats, which with other of their actions, does demonstrate them clearly
to be part of that Antichristian beastly power, spoken of Reu. 13.11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17. And what Doctor Leighton in his book called Syons Plea, page
69. says of the prelates in reference to the popish Bishop; may we say of the
present Clergy in reference to the Bishops, whose office and function they have
condemned for Antichristian, viz. that they are garments cut out of the very
same cloth, a pair of sheeres (as we say) went but between them, only diverse
hands have cut them out. And to me it is the greatest riddle in the world, how
the Bishops can be Antichristian as themselves say, and themselves Christ's
Ministers, although they have no other ordination but what is derived from
them, seeing as nature tells me, every like begets its like: and reason also
tells me; that there is no being, beyond the power of being: and the Scripture
says, without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater, Heb.
7.7. but no where says, the better or greater is blessed of the lesser: and
James demands a question which in reason, and the ordinary course of nature is
impossible to be, saying, James 3.11. does a fountain send forth at the same
place, sweet water and bitter? and Job demands to know who he is, that can
bring a clean thing out of an uncleane^ and answers: ^ot one.

Now these Clergymen demonstrating by all their actions, that they are the
natural and true-bred children of their bloody fathers the Prelates, if not
worse then they; for all their fair speeches and glosing pretenses to the
contrary: therefore we may safely avert, that proposition to be true of them,
that Doctor Leighton in the foresaid book, page 51. averrs and proves to be
true of their spiritual forefathers, viz. that of all the evils inflicted,
and of all the good hindered, since Anno. 600; one or more of the hierarchy,
have been a principal cause. And I add and averr, that there is no misery
befallen this Kingdom, nor no good hindered from coming to it, since the
Prelates were put down; but some of the present Clergy have been the maine
principal in it, witness their continual and daily dividing and distracting
the Kingdom in all the parts of it, on ^et purpose for the establishing that
divilish and tyrannical interest of pride, Lordship, and Domination, which
they will effect, or else they will lay it in blood and force. Witness their
bloody intended Ordinance, brought in by Mr. Tate, and Mr. Bacon. And have they
not already almost brought us to the door of a new war with the Scots;
which, God prevent. But, if for a plague to us it should come upon us; I hope
the people of England will have their eyes opened to see the Clergy to be no
small causes of it, whom I hope they will not let pass without due punishment,
as grand disturbers of the peace of this distressed Commonwealth: Seeing that
the temporal and trade-Monopolizers, and other prerogative-men in London, are
their stalking-horses, by which they act their designs the more strongly: the
one helping the other to inslave the people, and therefore are and may justly
be called Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil, and wickedness, whose
tyrannical mystery wants an Anatomy, the beginning of which; this is.

The last reason why I publish this, is, because that although the fundamental
Laws of England, be rational and just laws, and so pleasant and delightsome
to the people: these Prerogative-Monopolizing Patentee-men of London, have done
as much as in them lies, to pervert them, and to turn them into Wormwood and
Gall: And though they be the common birthright and inheritance of every
particular individual freeman of England; yea, of the meanest Cobbler and
Tinker, as well as of the greatest Gentleman or Nobleman. And therefore justly
does the King call the Law, The Birthright of every subject of this Kingdom.
Book Declar. 312. and in page 328. he says, The Law is the common inheritance
of his people. And in page 385. he calls the Law, The common Birthright of his
Subjects; to which only, they owe all they have besides: And therefore are
bound in the defense of it, to be made MARTYRS for it. And in page 28. he
sath, The Law is not only the inheritance of every subject, but also the only
security he has for his life, liberty, or estate: And the which, being
neglected, or disesteemed; (under what specious shows soever) a great measure
of infelicity, if not an irreparable confusion, must without doubt fall up
them. The meanest of which, he says, p. 650. are born equally free, (and to
whom the Law of the Land is an EQUAL INHERITANCE) with the greatest Subject.
And that the wealth and strength of this Kingdom, is in the number and
happiness of the people; which is made up of men of all conditions: and to
whom in duty without Distinction, he acknowledges he owes an EQVALL
Protection. And he in page 140. 163. passes a most superlative high
commendation upon those golden expressions of Mr. John Pyms speech against the
Earl of Strafford: and published in print by a special order of the House of
Commons, which are, That the Law is the SAFEGVARD, the CVSTODY of all private
interests: Your honors, your lives, your liberties, and estates; are all in
the keeping of the Law: And without this, every man has alike right to any
thing. And therefore (says he) the Law is that which puts a difference betwixt
good and evil, betwixt just and unjust. If you take away the Law, all things
will fall into a confusion; every man will become a law unto himself: which, in
the depraved condition of humane nature, must needs produce many great
enormities: Lust will become a law, and envy will become a law, covetousness
and ambition will become laws: and what dictates, what divisions such laws
will produce; may easily be discerned.

And in this very language does the Parliament speak in their declarations,
Book Declar. page 6. where they speak with a great deal of vehemence and
bitterness against the bold and presumptuous injustice of such Ministers of
Justice as before this Parliament, made nothing to break the laws, and
suppress the liberties of the Kingdom, after they by the Petition of Right,
etc. had been so solemnly and evidently declared. Yet they obstructed (amongst
abundance of other grievous crimes there enumerated, the ordinary course of
Justice; which they there (page 7.) call the COMMON BIRTHRIGHT of the Subjects
of England. And in page 38. they speaking of the Kings dealing with the five
accused Members: who, by his Majesty's Warrant, had their Chambers, Studies,
and Trunkes sealed up: Which action (they say) is not only against the
privilege of Parliament, but the common liberty of every Subject. And in the
same page they say, His Majesty did issue forth several warrants to diverse
Officers under his own hand, for the apprehension of the persons of the said
members, which by Law he cannot do; there being not all this time, any legal
charge, or accusation, or due PROCESS of law issued against them, nor any
pretense of charge made known to that House whereof they were Members. All
which are against the fundamental laws and liberties of the Subject, etc. And
in page 458, 459. they declare, That in all their endeavors since this
Parliament began, they have labored the regaining of the ancient (though of
late years much invaded) rights, laws, and liberties of England, being the
Birthright of the Subjects thereof. And therefore page 660. they own it as
their duty, to use their best endeavors, That the meanest of the Commonalty
may enjoy their own Birthrights, freedom, and liberty of the law of the land;
being equally (as they affirm) entitled thereunto with the greatest Subject.
And in page 845. they declare, that to be assaulted or seized on without due
Process or Warrant; is against the legal privilege of every private man: but
the Prerogative-Monopolizing arbitrary-men of London, as though they had an
absolute Deity-power in themselves, and were to be ruled and governed by
nothing, but the law of their own will: And as though they were more absolute
and sovereign in power, then either the King or Parliament, divided or
conjoined; dis-franchising the greatest part of the Commons of London, of their
Liberties, Trade, and Freedoms, at their pleasure; which is granted unto them
not only by God, and the great Charter of Nature, and Principles of Reason,
but also by the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom: by which
laws, and by no other; is London, as well as the rest of England, to be
governed. And therefore Arbitrary, Irrational, and Illegal it is for them, or
any of their brother-hoods, Monopolizing Corporations and Companies, by the
authoirty of any pretended Royal Patent, Proclamation, or Commission,
whatsoever; to assume unto themselves a power to destroy, annihilate, and make
void the Fundamental laws of the Land; which yet notwithstanding they daily
do. And sure I am, by the Petition of Right, the King of himself can neither
make an oath, nor impose 6 pence upon any of his people, nor imprison, nor
punish any of them, but by the Law, and by the Statutes of Magna Charta, chap.
29. and 2. E. 2.8. and 5. E. 3.8.9. The King shall neither by the great Seal,
nor little Seal, disturb, delay, nor defer judgment, or common right: And
though such commandments do come; the Justices shall not therefore leave to
do right in any point. But yet notwithstanding, they merely by their illegal
prerogative, both frame oaths absolutely-destructive to the public law of the
kingdom: impose arbitrary fines, and illegal levies and payments of moneys:
and act illegal imprisonments and punishments: yea, and at their pleasure
seize upon the goods of freemen. All which is constantly practiced in their
Patentee-Monopolizing Companies, Corporations and Fraternities. So that to
speak properly, really, and truly, their Brotherhoods are so many conspiracies
to destroy and overthrow the laws and liberties of England, and to ingrosse,
inhance, and destroy the trades and Franchises of most of the Freemen of London.

But if it should be objected. That these things are the ancient customs and
practices of the Grandees of London: and therefore by prescription of time are
become laws thereto;

I answer: Course of time amends not that which was naught from the beginning.
And that which was not grounded upon good right, and found reason; is not made
good by continuance of time. And therefore to give a definition of the Laws of
England, as it may be proved out of the works of the best and most
conscientious Lawyers thereof.

It consists of the ancient constitutions, and modern acts of Parliament, made
by the States of the Kingdom: but of these only such as are agreeable to the
word of God, and law of Nature, and sound Reason.

Or the Fundamental Law of the Land, is the PERFECTION of Reason, consisting
of Lawful and Reasonable Customs, received and approved of by the people: and
of the old Constitutions, and modern Acts of Parliament, made by the Estates of
the Kingdom. But such only as are agreeable to the law Eternal and Natural,
and not contrary to the word of God: For whatsoever laws, usages, and
customs, not thus qualified; are not the law of the land: nor are to be
observed and obeyed by the people, being contrary to their Birthrights and
Freedoms, which by the Law of God, and the great Charter of Privileges, they
ought not to be.

And therefore Sir Richard Empson, and Edm. Dudley, Justices of Peace, were
both hanged in Henry the eighths days, for putting in execution, several
illegal practices grounded upon an unjust law made in the 11. H. 7. chap. 3.1.
which, as honorable Sir Edw. Cook says, was made against, and in the face of
the Fundamental Law of the great Charter, 2. part. Instit. fol. 51.

And just it was they should be thus dealt with, because it is honorable,
beneficial and profitable for the Commonwealth, that guilty persons should be
punished, lest by the omission of the punishment of one, many men by that ill
example, may be encouraged to commit more heinous offenses. And excellent to
this purpose, is that saying of the Parliament, which I desire they may never
forget, Book, Declar page 39. which is, That they are very sensible, that it
equally imports them, as well to see justice done against them that are
criminous, as to defend the just rights and liberties of the Subjects and
Parliament of England. And therefore page 656. they call the execution of the
law, the very life and soul of the law, as indeed it is: without which; it is
but in truth a dead letter, and a senseless block. But woe unto you
prerogative Patentee-Citizens, if the Law shall be executed upon you; I
profess I will not give three pence for an hundred of your estates, for all
the greatness rhereof, whatever become of some of your liberties, or lives;
which many of you have hitherto preserved by bribes, and other indirect
courses. Witness some of you in a jo^nt fraternity, like brethren in evil,
giving above threescore thousand pounds at once for a bribe in the days of the
Councell-Table, to preserve you from Law and Justice; and to destroy the Law,
and to buy and rob your fellow-Citizens, as free as your se^ves, of their
liberties, franchises, trades, and livelihoods. Read the Discourse for Free
Trade.

Only worse then highway men, pick-pockets, and housebreakers, who now would
fain transform your selves into Angels of light, like your old wicked Father,
and become godly Presbyters, that now-sprung-up Sect and Heresy in England;
whose Lordlinesse and pride, was long since as Heathenish, and Gen^ilisme,
condemned by Christ and his Apostles; and zealous Covenanters, which you make
your stalking horse, to disfranchize all honest and tender conscience men, that
cannot take that impossible to be kept, and double-faced Covenant, the greatest
makebate and snare, that ever the Devil, and the Clergy his Agents, cast in
amongst honest men in England, in our age; which I dare pawn my head and life
so to prove it to be, in a fair and public discourse, against the greatest
maintainer thereof in England. But alas! If it were ten times worse, your
wesons are wide enough to swallow it down, and your consciences large enough to
digest it, without the least danger of vomiting: But I hope the true,
faithful, and just God of Heaven and Earth, will raise up heroical
Instruments, to unvaile, and unmask you, and bring about ways and means
enough, for all your juggling, and machivel-like endeavors, to divide the
peoples affections, each from other, about those unhappy names of Independents
and Presbyters, to bring you to condign, and just deserved punishments, before
you have fully sadled and bridled them, and made them fit to be rid by you as
slaves: And therefore, for the further discovery of you, I judge it not amiss,
here to insert, that excellent Petition of Mr. William Sykes, and Thomas
Johnson, delivered in writing first to the house of Commons, and then in print
to the Members thereof; which thus follows:

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in
Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of William Syeks, and Thomas Johnson, Merchants, on the
behalf of themselves, and all the freemen of England.
Shows,
THat whereas diverse Merchants in the 21. year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, under the great Seal of England, obtained a large and illegal
Charter of incorporation, for them and their Company, to use the traffic and
seat of Merchandise, out, and from any of Her then Majesty's Dominions, through
the Sound into diverse Realms, Kingdoms, Dominions, Dukedoms, Countries,
Cities, and Towns, viz. Norway, Swethi^, Poland, etc. Whereby none but
themselves, and such as they shall think fit, and for such fines and
compositions as they shall impose, shall take any benefit by the said Charter;
disfranchising thereby, all other the freeborn people of England, who during
the time of all these wars, have been in diverse respects, greatly charged for
the defense of this present Parliament; the laws and liberties of their native
Country, and therefore ought indifferently to enjoy the benefit of the good
laws, franchises, and immunities by Magna Charta established: which great
Charter has been ratified by 31. sessions of Parliament; as also this present
Parliament, being bound by protestations, oaths, and covenants to maintain the
same: by reason whereof, and other illegal monopolies, they are debarred from
that free enlargement of common traffic, which the Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland do enjoy; the same being destructory to their laudable liberties and
privileges, the fundamental laws of the Land, to the manifest impoverishing
of all owners of ships, masters, mariners, clothiers, tuckers, spinsters, and
multitudes of poor people; besides the decrease of customs, the ruin and
decay of navigation, together with the abating the price of our wools, cloth,
stuff, and such like commodities, arising and growing within this Ralm, and
the inhauncing of all commodities imported from those foreign parts, by reason
of the insufficiency of the merchants, they being few in number, and not of
ability to keep the great store of our ships and seafaring men a work, and to
vend our native manufactories, and likewise by reason that those foreign
commodities are in few men's hands, much hurt and prejudice has redounded to
every private or freeman of this Kingdom, and tends to the ruin of the
constitutions thereof.

Your Petitioners most humble suit is, that the charter and monopoly of the
Eastland-merchants, the charters and monopolies of the merchant Adventurers,
Turkie-marchants, Greenland-marchants, Muscovia-merchants, etc. upon
mis-informations, and untrue pretenses of public good, so unduely obtained,
and unlawfully put in execution, to the great grievance and inconvenience of
the free Denizons of this Realm, contrary to the great Charter, and diverse
other statutes of former Parliaments, viz. the 12. H. 7* the 3. Jac. which was
made for the overthrow of the Spanish Corporation, etc. the Petition of Right,
the act made for the abolishing of the Star Chamber in this present Parliament
(in which our liberties and freedoms are confirmed) may be, as indeed they are,
declared to be contrary to law, and to be utterly void, and of none effect, and
in no wise to be hereafter put in execution: and this we are the rather
imboldened to crave, for that the Parliament in the 3. Car. by the Petition of
Right, and this Parliament by the act for abolishing the Star Chamber, have
confirmed the statute of tallage, made in the 34. of Edw. 1. whereby in the 4.
chaptar, it is enacted; that we shall have our laws, liberties, and free
customs, as largely and wholly as we or our ancesters have used to have the
same at any time, when we had them at the best: and if any statute has been
made, or any custom brought in contrary to them; that such manner of statutes
and customs, to be void and frustrate forevermore: and by another statute of
the 25. Edw. 1. yet in force, and unrepealed, It is enacted, that if any
Judgment be given contrary and against the subjects liberties, confirmed by
Magna Charta, by any Justices, or by any other Ministers, that hold plea before
them; the same shall be undone, and holden for nothing: all which your
Petitioners doubts not but you will grant and confirm, and no more subject
your Petitioners to those law-destroying monopolizers: but that free trade and
traffic may be restored in all points, according to law, as of right it ought
to be: these Corporations called to a strict account for all their wrongs and
oppressions, and reparations made to the parties grieved, as shall be agreeable
to justice (the life and soul of all well-governed Common wealths) that all
men hereafter to succeeding generations, may be terrified from making
inchroachments upon the common liberties and freedoms of the people.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. William Sykes. Thomas Johnson.

March the 4. 1645.
And I do hereby exhort all my fellow-Citizens that have been denied and
prohibited by you to follow their trades and vend their goods, seriously to
read over the Statute of Monopolies, made 21. James, chap. 3. and seriously
with the best advice and counsel they can get, consider thereof; and I believe
they will, by it, find your practices to be against the Fundamental Laws of
England, and your selves liable to pay treble damages, and double costs, to
every man that shall ground his action upon this Statute; and, sue you at
common law, for hindering, grieving, disturbing, or disquieting, or his, or
their goods, or chattels, any way seizing, attaching, distraining, taking,
carrying away, or detaining by occasion, or pretext of any Monopoly, or of any
such Commission (as in the Declaratory-part of this Statute, is mentioned)
grant, license, power, liberty, faculty, Letters-Pattents, proclamation,
inhibition, restraint, warrant of assistance, or other matter, or any thing
tending as aforesaid.

And for the encouragement of all those, that sue upon this most excellent Law;
it is enacted in the body thereof, That he that delays an action grounded upon
this Statute, incurs a Praemunire, according to the Statute of the 16. R. 2.
chap. 5.

But if you shall think, that you are free, by reason of the 5. proviso therein
contained: I believe you are merely cuzoned; for if you read the Preamble or
Declaratory-part of the Statute, you shall find it there declared, That all
grants of Monopolies, and of the benefit of any penal Laws, or of power to
dispense with the Law, or to compound for the forfeiture, are contrary to Law;
So that thereby it appears, the ancient fundamental known law of the Land, is
absolutely against Monopolists; so that this Statute is no new law, but a
declaration and confirmation of the old and just law of the Land, which makes
the Statute the more stronger: but least it should in future time, by any
scrupulous or cautious Judge, be questioned, whether it be a true Declaration
of the Law: Therefore, to make it strong, without staggering; it is not only
declared to be law, but it is enacted to be so, and that by all the estates, in
a free and peaceable time; which makes it as firm, and sure, without the least
flaw in the world, as it is possible for any humane law to be made: And
therefore, for the avoiding, and preventing of the like mischiefs in future
time, as had happened in the Kingdom in times past, to the great grievance and
inconvenience of the people; May it please your most excellent Majesty, at the
humble suit of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, That it may be declared and enacted; And be it
declared and enacted, by authority of this present Parliament, That all
Monopolies, and all Commissions, Grants, Licenses, Charters, and Letters
Pattents, heretofore made or granted, or hereafter to be made or granted to any
person or persons, bodies politic, or corporate whatsoever, of, or for the
sole buying, selling, making, working, or using of any thing within this Realm
or the Dominion of Wales, or of any other Monopolies, or of power, liberty, or
faculty, to dispense with any others, or to give license or toleration to do,
use, or exercise any thing against the tenor or purport of any Law or Statute,
or to give or make any Warrant for any such dispensation, license, or
toleration to be had or made or to agree, or compound with any others for any
penalty, or forfeitures limited by any Statute, or of any Grant or promise of
the benefit, profit, or commodity of any forfeiture, penalty, or sum of
money, that is, or shall be due by any Statu^e, before judgment thereupon had,
and all Proclamations, Inhibitions, Restraints, Warrants of Assistants, and all
other matters and things whatsoever, any way tending to the instituting,
erecting, strengthening, furthering, or countenancing of the same, or any of
them; are altogether contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and so are, and shall
be utterly void, and of none effect, and in no wise to be put in ure or
execution.

Now I pray tell me, ye Monopolizers of London, of what strength, validity, or
authority, is your proviso against this strong declared Law? truly, not worth a
button, being absolutely weaker, then all the other 9 Provisoes.

But let us a little consider of your proviso; the conclusion of which,
expressly says, That your Fraternity, Charters, Customs, Corporations,
Companies, Fellowships, and Societies, and their Liberties Privileges, Powers,
and Immunities, shall be, and continue of such force and effect (mark it well)
as they were before the making of this Act, and of none other: any thing before
in this Act contained, to the conteary, in any wise notwithstanding. And truly,
they were all of them illegal before, and therefore of no force and effect, as
is fully proved and declared in the Preamble, so that you get not the breadth
of a hair, either in point of benefit or power, by this proviso. But,
notwithstanding, your Pattents, Charters, etc. are not only declared and
enacted, to be illegal, but also your estates liable to pay treble damages,
and double costs, to all men that you wrong, contrary to this just and
excellent Law: in which, besides the incurring the Praemunire, to any that shall
delay an Action grounded upon this Statute: It is also enacted, That no
Ess^ign, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid Prayer, Privilege, Injunction, or order
of restraint, shall in any wise be prayed, granted, admitted, or allowed, nor
any more then one imperlance.

And for the further illustration, that the Proviso of London is under, both
the declaratory, and penal part, of this Statute; seriously read and consider,
the strength of the five last provisoes, which only are fenced in
unquestionably, and you shall find their provisoes run clear in another strain
to that of London, viz. Provided also, and be it enacted, that this Act, or any
Declaration, provision, disablement, penalty, or other thing before in the Act
mentioned; shall not extend to, etc. and in the conclusion of their proviso,
the words run thus. That all etc. shall be, and remain of the like force and
effect, and no other, and as free from the declarations, provisions, penalties,
and forfeitures contained in this Act, as if this ACT had never been had nor
made, and not otherwise.

But compare the proviso for London (which is absolutely the weakest of the
rest) and you shall find no such words in it at all; the words of which
Proviso; thus follow:

"Provided also, and it is hereby further intended, declared, and enacted; that
this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend, or be
prejudicial unto the City of London, or to any City, Borough, or
Towns-Corporate within this Realm; for, or concerning any Grant, Charters, or
Letters-Pattents to them, or any of them, made or granted, or for, or
concerning any custom or customs used by or within them, or any of them, or
unto any Corporations, or Fellowships of any Art, Trade, Occupation, or
Mystery, or to any Companies, or Societies of Merchants within this Realm,
erected for the maintenance, enlargement, or ordering of any Trade of
Merchandise; but that the same Charters, Customs, Corporations, Companies,
Fellowships and Societies, and their liberties, privileges, powers, and
immunities shall be and continue of such force and effect, as they were before
the making of this Act (which was just none at all) and of no other: any thing
before in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise: notwithstanding, the
Statute of 3. James, chap. 6. which Statute opens and make free, the trade for
Spain, Portugal, and France, with Sir Edward Cooks Coment upon the Statute of
Monopolies, in the 3. part of his Institut. fol. 181. and his sayings upon the
same subject, in his Exposition of Magna Charta, 2. part, Institut. fol. 47. is
extraordinary well worth the judicious Readers serious perusal; for they will
give a great deal of light about these Monopolists, etc. But in case the
Reader have not the books by him, nor cannot furnish himself therewith without
a great deal of money; if he please to furnish himself with my forementioned
Treatise (which for a very small matter he may) called Innocence and Truth
justified, and read the 55, 56, 60, 61, 62. pages thereof: you shall find
there, both the forementioned Statute at large, and the marrow of Sir Edward
Cooks Aaguments; to which I refer you.

But if any man shall propound the question, and ask what is the reason that the
Statute of Monopolies, being a Law of so great concernment, to all the people
of London, is no plainer penned.

I answer (according to that information that I have from every good hand, and
one that knows as much of the hammering contriving, and passing of that
Statute; as I think any one man in England does) that in the Parliament before
this most excellent Law passed, it was in more plainer expressions then now it
is sent up to the Lords, who judged it so prejudicial to the Prerogative, and
diverse great Courtyers, that with scorn and indignation they tare it in their
house, and threw it over their Bar; so that there was an end of it for that
Parliament: But it being of so much use to the Commonwealth, as it was; some
Patrons thereof in the next Parliament, set it on foot again, and prosecuted it
very close: but judging it impossible, purely without clogs to pass the Lords;
and if it did pass the Lords, yet they feared it would stick at the King; and
therefore put in some colorable provisoes, which not one in a hundred could
rightly understand: but it coming into the Lords house with the provisoes, much
all alike, the subtle, crafty, Attorney General, then Sir Thomas Coventry late
Lord Keeper presently found out the fallacy; and being put upon it by his
Master the King, strengthened the five last provisoes as they are, which
principally served his turn, and beating then a good-wil to the Commonwealth
and the Law of the Kingdom, passed by that proviso of London, etc. that so the
Act might be as beneficial for the Kingdom, as possible it could be got to be
then: and to be the promoters of that Statute, were willing to please the King
and his Courtiers, in admitting the five last provisoes, having gained London,
etc. being the main and principal of all the rest, rather then not to have it
pass at all; which then it was impossible to do without them: and therefore
there was an extraordinary great necessity, to pen it so ambiguous and doubtful
as it is, not only for casting a mist over the Citizens eyes, as indeed they
have done it excellently well; who if it had been plain, perspicuous, and easy
to their understandings, would have interposed with all their might and
strength: and if they could not have prevailed to stop it in the House of
Commons; would have gone near to have bribed all the Courtiers about the Court
(in which practices they are very well versed) before it should have passed
either with the Lords, or King.

Now seeing the Patentee-Monopolizers are so pernicious and destructive to the
laws and liberties of England, as by constant experience they are found to be;
that both informer Parliaments, and this present Parliament, the House of
Commons have thrown diverse Patentee-Monopolists, out of the House; as
altogether unfit to be lawmakers, who have been such law-destroyers. It had
been pure Justice indeed, if they had made no exceptions of persons; but swept
the House of all such: and then the King in his Declaration of the 12. August,
1642. Book Declar. page 516. had not had so much cause too justly to hit them
in the teeth, with being partial in keeping, Justice Laurence Whittaker, etc.
who the King there says, has been as much employed as a Commissioner in
matters of that nature, as any man. And by all the information that I can get,
or hear of, from those that knew him well before the Parliament; the King in
this particular has spoken nothing but truth: and I am sure, and will to his
face make it good, secundum legem terrae (that is by the law of the land, but
not by the arbitrary law of Committees, that his estate and head will not make
a sufficient satisfaction to the kingdom for those intolerable In-rodes that
he has made since this Parliament, into and upon, the fundamental and
essential liberties, privileges, and laws of England. Therefore to you my
fellow-Citizens, the Cloke-men of London, I make this exhortation, to make a
petition to the Parliament, to bring him, and all such Delinquents, to condign
punishments: which both the most of you, and the Parliament are bound unto (not
only by your own interest, but also) by your protestation, etc. Book. Declar.
156. 191. 278, 629. And good encouragement you have from their own
Declarations, so to do: For there they say, Book. Decl. 656. The execution of
Justice is the very soul and life of the law. And page 39 they say, They are
very sensible, that it equally imports them, as well to see justice done
against them that are criminous, as to defend the just rights and liberties of
the Subjects and Parliament of England. And in page 497. they say, Woe unto
them if they do not their duty. Therefore never think that the Parliament will
be worse then their words, or throw their own Declarations behind their backs:
and therefore if you want the fruit of them; blame your selves for not pressing
them to make them good unto you. For I am sure it is their own Maxim and
saying, that, of the Parliament there ought not to be thought or imagined a
dishonorable thing, page 28. and therefore, as they would have men to believe
the truth of this Maxim; so undoubtedly they will be very careful and wary not
to do a dishonorable action, much less to protect visible Delinquents and
Offenders amongst themselves in the great Council of the Kingdom, which were not
only a dishonorable action, but would justly open all rational men's mouths
(not only to think, but also) to speak dishonourably of them.

But it may be, you will say, that your Grandees of London tell you, the
Parliament will receive no Petitions from a multitude of Citizens, unless it
come through the Common Counsel.

I answer, true it is, there has been a very strong report of such a thing in
London; but roguery, knavery, and slavery is in the bottom of it: for if the
prerogative-men of London could once bring you to that; they might tyrannize
over you at their pleasure, ten times more then they do. Therefore, an enemy to
the Liberties of England and London in the highest degree; he is that would
persuade you, to believe any such thing: Yea, and I say further, he is an enemy
to the honor, dignity, and safety of the Parliament that so does: for this
were to destroy the fundamental freedoms of England, which the Parliament
themselves cannot destroy, being appointed to provide for our weal, but not for
our woe, Book Decl. p. 150, 81, 179, 336, 361, 382, 509, 663 721, 726. and
themselves say, page 700. that all interests of trusts are for the use of
others, for their good, and not orherwise.

And punishable is he, that shall make the people believe any such thing: the
Parliament judging it the greatest scandal, that can be laid upon them, that
they either do, or ever intended such a thing, as to inslave the people, and
rob them of their liberties and freedoms, Book Decl. p. 264, 281, 494, 496,
497, 654, 694, 696, 705, 716.

And therefore, when the King charge it upon them as a crime, that they have
received Petitions against things that are established by Law; they acknowledge
it to be very true, And further say, that all that know what belongs the
course and practice of Parliament, will say, that we ought so to do; and that
both our Predecessors, and his Majesty's Ancestors have constantly done it,
there being no other place, wherein laws, that by experience may be found
grievous and burdensome, can be altered or repealed; and there being no other
due and legal way, wherein they which are agrieved by them, can seek redress,
Book Decl. page 720.

Yea, and when his Majesty hits them in the teeth, with the great numbers of
people that used to come up to Westminster, the beginning of this Parliament,
calling them tumultuous numbers; They tell him, that they do not conceive that
numbers do make an Assembly unlawful; but when either the end, or manner of
their carriage shall be unlawful. Diverse just occasions (say they) might draw
the Citizens to Westminster, where many public and private Petitions, and
other causes were depending in Parliament, and why that should be found more
faulty in the Citizens, then the resort of great numbers every day to the
ordinary Courts of Justice, we know not, Book Decl. p. 201. 202. And therefore,
page 209. they affirm, that such a concourse of people, carrying themselves
quietly and peaceably (as they did) ought not in his Majesty's apprehension,
nor cannot in the interpretation of the Law, be held tumultary and seditious:

And therefore up and be doing again, as then you did, and also petition for
the exemplary punishment of those amongst themselves, that have robbed you of
your Laws, Liberties, Franchises, and Trades; for besides all that is before
named, a greater is behind, namely, the disfranchising of all you Clokemen of
London, in giving any vote in choosing your Burgesses for Parliament, although I
am confident you are above three hundred, for one Livery-man, and although your
Persons and Estates, I dare say it have been voluntarily ten times more ready
and serviceable, in these late distractions, to preserve the Parliament, and
the Kingdom, and the laws and liberties thereof, then the Gown or
Livery-men; although you be robbed, by them of yours. Truly for my part, I
speak from my soul, and conscience, without fear, I know no reason (unless
it can be proved that you are all slaves and vassals( why you should be
concluded by the determinations, orders, and decrees of those, that you have no
vote in choosing: (for it is a true and just maxim in nature, no man can bind
me but by my own consent) neither do I see how in reason or conscience it can
be expected from you, to pay any taxes, etc. but that the whole charge that is
laid upon this City, should totally be borne by the Aldermen, and the Livery
men till you be actually put in possession, and enjoy your equal share in the
laws, liberties and freedoms thereof; as by the law of nature, reason, God and
the land, yea, and your own ancient and original Charters, the meanest of you
ought to do, as fully and largely in every particular, as the greatest of them.

And now I am upon this theme, I will make bold humbly to propound or declare
to the consideration of the Parliament, an insufferable injury, and wrong, that
is done unto thousands of the freemen of England, by virtue of Prerogative
Charters, and corporations, and the restrictive and unjust statute of the 8. H.
6. chap. 7. First, by Prerogative Charters, the King makes corporations of what
paltery Towns he pleases, to choose two Burg^sses for the Parliament, in diver
of which a man may buy a Burgesship for 40. or 50. l. and in some of which is
scarce, 3. legal men to be found according to the Statute of 8. H. 6 7. that
is to say, men that are worth 40. s. in land by the year, above all charges,
and in others of them, are scarce any but Ale-housekeepers, and ignorant sots,
who want principles to choose any man, but only those, that either some lord, or
great man writes for, and recommends; or else one who bribes them for their
votes; and this undenezing of those Corporations, is an undenezing to all the
towns and villages adjacent; in which live thousands of people, that by name
are freemen of England, and diverse of them men of great estates in money and
stock; which also also are disfranchised, and undenezed, by the forementioned
unrighteous Statute; because they have not in land 40. s. per annum, and so
shall have no vote at all in choosing any Parliament man, and yet must be bound
by their Laws, which is mere vasalage; and besides, unrighteous it is, that
Cornwall should choose almost 50. Parliament Men; and Yorkshire twice as big,
and three times as populous, and rich, not half so many; and my poor Country
the Bishopric of Durham, none at all; and so indeed, and intruth, are mere
vassals and slaves, being in a great measure like the French Peasants, and the
Vassals in Turkey: but the more fools they: for I profess, for my part, I
would lose life and estate, lived I now in that Country, before I would pay 6.
d. taxation; unless it might enjoy the common, and undeniable privilege in
choosing, (as others, and all the Countries in England, besides, do) Knights and
Burgesses, to sit and vote in Parliament: the greatest hinderer of which, at
the present, I judge to be old Sir Henry Vane, the Vain and unworthy Lord
Lieutenant thereof, who has done more mischief to that poor Country, by his
negligence, if not absolute wilfulness, perfidiousnesse, and treachery, (the
discovery of which you may partly read in the 19, 20, 21. pages of Englands
Birthright; and which I understand is likely shortly more fully to be
anatomized (if he turn not the more honester and juster speedily) by them or
him, that to the death will avouch it,) then his life and estate can make
satisfaction. And therefore, me thinks it were a great deal of more Justice
and Equity, to fix upon the certain number of the men, that the House of
Commons should consist of at 500. or 600. or more, or less, as by common
consent should be thought most fit; and equally to proportion out to every
County, to choose a proportionable number, suitable to the rates, that each
County by their Books of Rates are assessed, to pay toward the defraying of
the Public charge of the Kingdom; and then each County equally and
proportionable by the common consent of the People thereof to divide it self
into Divisions, Hundreds, or Wapentakes, and every Division of and within
themselves, to choose one or more Commissioners to sit in Parliament, suitable to
the proportion that comes to their share: which would put an end and period to
all those inconveniences that rarely happen, which are mentioned in the
foresaid Statute of the 8. H. 6, 7. and restore every freeman of England, to
his native, and legal rights and freedoms: Oh! that England might enjoy this
peace of pure Justice; the which if it do not, the freemen thereof may blame
themselves.

But now to return back to the City, and its prerogative-Monopolizers, who, and
their predecessors, I may justly say, have been main and principal Instruments
of all Englands woe and misery; as I dare pawn my life upon it, clearly,
justly, and rationally to demonstrate: for what has brought all the present
wars upon us, but the unjust swelling of the Prerogative, beyond the just
Bounds of the known, and established Law? and who has put the arbitrary
commands thereof in execution; but principally the Monopolizing Citizens? as in
hundred of particulars, might clearly be evidenced, and furnished the King from
time to time, and year to year, with vast sums of money, to supply his
extravagancies, and the extravagancies of his extravagant Courtiers, which did
enable him to break off former Parliaments at his pleasure, and to keep them
off, so long, till this poor Kingdom with oppression and injustice was almost
destroyed.

And sure I am, if the King had found none to obey, or put in execution his
illegal commands; our former miseries, and these present wars had never
been: and impossible it would have been for the King to have kept off
Parliaments so long as he he did, if these men and their predecessors had not
been beginning, original, and ill presidents, illegally (from time to time for
their own particular ends and advantages) to supply his necessities with vast
sums of money: yea, I have heard it from very good hands, of solid and
substantial Citizens, That after the breaking up of the Parliament in the
third of this King, the Corporation of MERCHANT ADVENTVRERS, freely and
voluntarily without any compulsion, made a most unjust, and England-destroying
and inslaving order, in their Company, TO PAY UNTO THE KING CUSTOMS, etc. for
all their Merchandise, contrary unto law, and the liberties of England. Yea,
and in affront of the late, or most excellent Parliament that had made the
Petition of Right, by which all royal impositions, and levies whatsoever, are
damned: and not only enacted, but also declared, to be against the
Fundamental laws of the kingdom; and yet I never heard of any of these men,
whose life and estate was made a just sacrifice there-for; although to my
understanding, they as much, if not more, deserve it, then the Earl of
Strafford, But contrary to their deserts, diverse of the Grandees of this very
Monopoly, and illegal Corporation, are become the great Treasurers of the
kingdoms money, both in the Custom House, and Excise; contrary to law, right,
equity and conscience: which action of the Parliaments, in putting them into
those a grand places, loses the Parliament more in the affections of thousands
of honest people; and will, if not speedily prevented, make a greater breach in
the peace of this distressed kingdom, then all their estates confiscated will
repay: For people do already very much murmr, and begin privately to question
the intentions of the Parliament in reference to these men: and many begin to
say, that this demonstrates unto them, that they shall but only have a change
of Masters, and not of their Bondage, slavery, and oppression; seeing such
Varlets, Vipers, Pests, enemies and destroyers of the laws and liberties of
England employed in the great Places of the kingdom, who must needs act
according to their old and corrupt principles, and drive on their habituated
and destructive designs against the weal, peace, trade, and tranquillity of
this poor bleeding kingdom. And if (say the people) these worst of men, who
eat up men's trades and livelihoods, and so suck their bloods, as Sir Edward
Cook in his forementioned discourse well observes, and destroy men and this
poor kingdom, with a secret destruction, shall possess the Custom House;
are they not enabled thereby to curb every Merchant that has any Principles in
him for the laws and freedoms of England; are they not enabled hereby, to
send their agents, creatures, and servants, to all the Ports and Sea-townes of
England, where, they have an influence into the elections of all the Burgesses
that in any of them are chosen to sit in Parliament. By means of which we may
have (say they) wickedness, bondage, slavery, and all kind of Monopolies
established by a Law: and then our last error will be worse then the first, and
all our money, and blood, and fighting, shed and spent in vain. And have not
the Excise-men the same power in every particular, in their hands likewise: For
can they not, yea do they not sit upon the skirts of every man that hates and
opposes their tyrannizing and monopolizing ways? And do they not authorize,
and send their Sub-commissioners, etc. into all the Counties and Corporations
in England, where they have the same influence into all elections, that their
brethren at Custom House have in Seaports and Havens? Nay, these Blades
strengthen their interest, and make it double. Threfore look about you
Gentlemen, before it be too late. For sure I am, were it not for those unhappy,
unnatural and irrational divisions, that these men (with the help of their
Monopolizing brethren the Clergy) have made amongst us; I am assuredly and
confidently persuaded, that neither the King nor the Scots, nor yet the unjust
Lords, would be so high in the Instep, as they are; which is like to beget a
new war again. For shame therefore unite in affection, though you cannot in
judgment, in matters of Religion, and study and stand for your common
interest, laws and liberties, and take heed the French come not creeping in at
a back door: For they have already got Dunkirk, and so are furnished with a
good Harbor and store of shipping, from whence with a fair wind they can in 6
or 8 hours land in the coasts of Kens, Essex, Suffolk or Norfolk: Therefore
beware of those two dangerous places, Lin, and the Isle of Lovingland, hard by
Yarmouth: therefore up, and as one man, to the Parliament with a Petition, to
displace all those Monopolilize^s, and to put honest Englishmen into their
places, that love the Fundamental laws, and the common and just liberties of
the Nation; And also desire the Parliament to reduce the public treasure of
the kingdom, into the cheap, public, and old good way of the kingdom. The
Exchequer for these obscure clandestine ways of these men's receiving and
paying moneys, is not safe nor profitable for the kingdom, if you will believe
Mr. John Pyms Speech, made at the Bar of the House of Peers against the Duke
of Buckingham, which is a most excellent speech. And also desire the
Parliament, not only to remember, but also cordially, heartily, and really to
put in execution their selfe-denying Ordinance, that they themselves may be
examples of self-denial to all the men in the kingdom. For a hard matter is
it for any Parliament Man whatever he be, in such times of distress as these
are, wherein Soldiers that have ventured their lives for eight pence a day, to
save both the Parliament and the kingdom, and many poor Widows and
fatherless children, that have lost their husbands and Fathers in the wars,
and are now ready to sterve and perish for want of bread; and yet cannot get
their small arreares. And when the kingdom is reduced to that poverty, that
Excise and Taxes must be laid upon poor men, that have wives, children and
families, and nothing to maintain them with, but what they earn with the labor
of their lands, and the sweat of their brows, and yet then for etc. to have
great places of 1000. l. 1500. l. or 2000. l. per annum, and the salaries and
stipends of them paid out of the public stock, when they are able to live in
pomp and gallantry of themselves besides: and it is possible to get honest,
faithful, and experienced men, that have ventured life and all for the common
wealth, to officiat in those places, as well, if not better, for 100. l. or
150. l. or 200. l. per annum: let such men, if there be any profess what
honesty or Religion they will;l I profess seriously, that to me such actions,
at such a time as this; are clear demonstration to me, that such men have
neither honesty, Christianity, nor Religion; but merely make them pretenses for
their own unworthy ends.

And this Parliament being now a standing Parliament, and like so to continue;
it is very hard that the Lawyers thereof should run from Bar to Bar to plead
causes before Judges made by themselves, who dare not easily displease them,
for fear of being turned out of their places by their means. Sure I am, well
and conscienciously to officiate the single place of a Parliament man; is
enough for one.

But to return again to the Monopolizers, the endevourers, and contrivers of
Englands destruction. If Alex. Archb. of York, and Rob. de Veere, Duke of
Ireland, etc. deserved to be prosecuted as traitors, for but endeavoring at
the Kings command to destroy certain members of both Houses: How much more do
these law-and-kingdome-destroying Monopolizers, deserve the same, that have not
only endeavored the destructions of some Parliament Men, but also the very
Being of all Parliaments themselves; and so by consequence; the whole kingdom.
Sure I am, if the Commonalty of London will carefully peruse their own ancient
and just Charters, they shall find, That they within themselves have power
enough not only to disfranchise all these Monopolizers, but also all other
freemen of London that shall endeavor the destruction of their ancient
fundamental and just Freedoms, Liberties and Franchises: And that they,
namely, the Commonalty, have not only liberty to choose their Lord Mayor, and
that not only from amongst the Court of Aldermen; but also if they please,
they may choose a discreet man from amongst themselves: And the Commonalty in
every Ward; upon a fixed day, are enabled once every year to choose an Alderman
in every Ward, with an express Prohibition, that one man shall not be Alderman
two years together. And the Commonalty expressly have a power to choose
Chamberlain, common Sergeant, Bridge-master, etc. and to whom alone they are
to be accountable for the moneys in their offices received.

Now having brought this Discourse to this period; it behooves me a little to
Apologize for my self: because I believe I shall have a whole sea of
indignation to arise against me; which I here profess I fear not, nor value,
if I may have fair play, and have not my hands and feet bound, and then
challeng to fight, and defend my self. And truly I must say, and that in the
presence of God. I have in the singleness of my heart, without ends of my
own; discharged my conscience: the boylings of which I could not withstand,
being at the writing hereof in Jeremies case, when he said, pleading with God,
Thy word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my Bones, and I was weary
with forbearing, and I could not stay, Jer. 20.9.

But yet, because whatever I meet with besides, I persuade my self I am sure
to meet with the revilings, and reproaches of the barking curs of the times,
such as (S. Shipard) etc. who in my close captivity have nibbled at my heels,
like brats of the old Serpent; I shall therefore, for my present apology,
publish to the view of the world, the dealings of Mr. John White, a Warder in
the Tower with me, who lately writ a most false and scandalous book against me,
and with much importuning the Lieutenant of the Tower, (being prohibited Pen,
Ink, and Paper) I obtained leave from him, upon certain conditions made with
him, to write an answer to it; which was, that I should not in the least meddle
with his masters that committed me; and to let him see it, before it was
printed, which I performed. But my Angatonist, old John White, as it appears to
me, hearing the Answer was very plain, and home English; sent me a message by a
Gentleman, my fellow-prisoner, That he desired to put the difference betwixt us
to arbitration: And I being a man of peace, and willing to avoid jangling, if
it were possible; upon agreement to compose it.

I did choose two of my fellow prisoners, strangers to me, and men of opposite
principles; but knowing the Justice of my cause, and being convinced of the
moral Justice of the Gentlemen: I chose Sir Lewis Dive, and Sir William
Morton; and he choose Sir John Strangewayes, and Sir John Glanvill; and the
first day of the hearing of the business was before Col. Francis West
Lieutenant of the Tower at his own house, where we both referred our selves, to
stand to the final award of our foresaid Arbitrators: at which hearing, they
were pleased to give my Antagonist certain days time to procure Witnesses, to
prove the essentials of his Charge; and he out-stripping the time, and I lying
under his public disgrace and calumny; I pressed them for a conclusion: upon
which they issued out this following Warrant.

WE whose names are subscribed, Arbitrators indifferently chosen to end all
differences betwixt Lieutenant-Colonell John Lilburn of the one party, and Mr.
John White one of the Warders of the Tower of the other party, have appointed
to morrow next at three of the clock in the afternoon, at Mr. Lieutenants house
in the said Tower, further to hear, and finally to determine the said
differences; whereof we desire the said parties to take notice, and then to be
present with their Witnesses, and all such proof, as they will use in the
premises. Given under our hands this 5. of October, 1646.

John Glanvill. John Strangewayes. Lewis Dive. William Morton.


But the next day, the Lieutenants office not permitting him to be present at
the final hearing; we all met at Sergeant Glanvils Chamber, where after a
large and fair hearing, they made this award under their hands and seals; the
Copy of which, thus follows:

TO all true Christian people to whom these presents indented shall come; We
Sir John Strangewayes, Sir Lewis Dive, Sir John Glanvill, and Sir William
Morton Knights, Arbitrators, heretofore (that is to say, upon the 26. day of
September. last past, before the date hereof) indifferently chosen by Lieutenant
Col. John Lilburn, "of the one party, and John White, one of the Warders of the
Tower of London, of the other party, for the ending of all differences, and
matters of controversy betwixt them; having entered into the hearing of the
said differences, and matters of controversy, upon the said 26. day of
September, and having upon the 6: day of this instant month of October. 1646. in
the 22. Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, fully heard the
said differences, and matters of controversy; Do find the same to be, and
arise by, and upon the writing and publishing in print, of a certain Book,
entitled, John Whites Defense, in behalf of himself, etc. against a lying and
scandalous Pamphlet, written by John Lilburn, entitled, Liberty vindicated
against Slavery: In the 7. p. of which Book, to written, and published by the
said John White; he intimates, That the said Lieut. Col. Lilburn, was, and is
the Author of another scandalous Libell; entitled, An Alarm to the House of
Lords: and in a Postscript added to the same Book of the said John White, page
the 12; he alleges the said Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, to be the Author and
"contriver of a printed Letter, annexed to the said Book or Treatise, of
Liberty vindicated against Slavery: of which Letter, he rehearses a passage,
reflecting in a scandalous way upon the honorable houses of Parliament: Of
which Book, entitled, John Whites Defense, etc; the said John White
confesses, and acknowledges himself to be the Author and Publisher.

But the said Lieut. Col. Lilburn denied himself to be in any sort the Writer,
Contriver, Author, or publisher of the said other Books, Treatise, and Letter,
or of any of them; or that he had any hand, direction, or approbation, in, or
concerning the writing, printing, or publishing of the same, or any of them.

"And the said John White, did not at our entering into the hearing of the said
differences, and matters of controversy, nor at any time since produce or
offer unto us any sufficient proofs, by witnesses, or otherwise: Whereby it did,
or might appear unto us, That the said Lieut. Col. Lilburn was the Writer,
Contriver, Author, or publisher of the said Books, Letters, and Treatise, so
by him denied as aforesaid, or of any of them: And the said John White being
now offered further time to produce his witnesses, or other good proofs, which
he had to insist upon, for the making good of the several Imputations, in, and
by his the said John Whites book, laid and fixed upon the said Lieut. Col.
Lilburn; He the said John White, absolutely refused to take any further time in
that behalf; expressly saying, he would travel no more in it; We the said
Arbitrators, upon due consideration of the whole premises aforesaid, a^e c^eer
of opinion; That the said John White (as the ca^e has been, and is represented
and appearing before us) had no sufficient ground to write print, or publish,
That the said Lieut. Col. Lilburn was the Writer, or Author of the said Books,
Treatise, and Letter, or any of them: But that the said John White in and by
his writing, p^inting and publishing of his said Book, entitled, John Whites
Defense, etc. in manner and form as aforesaid has unjustly scandalized the
said L. Col. ^ohn ^ilburn; And thefore, we the said Arbitrat^^s do most
unanimously ^ward, That the said John White shall before the 10. day of this
instant month of October, make a public acknowledgment before Col. Francis
West, Lieutenant of the said Tower of London, at his the said Lieutenants house
in the said Tower, That he the said John White has done the said Lieut. Col.
John Lilburn wrong, and shall make and pronounce the said acknowledgment, in
these words following; That is to say, I John White, one of the Warders of the
Tower of London; Do acknowledge, that I have unjustly wronged Lieutenant Col.
I. Lilburn, in, and by my writing, and publishing in print, in such sort as I
did, That he was the Writer, Author, or Contriver of a Book called, Liberty
vindicated against Slavery, And of a Printed Letter thereunto annexed; And of a
Book, called, An Alarm to the House of Lords: For all which, and for all the
unjust, and scandalous matters and language alleged, and used by me, in my
said Book, reflecting upon the said Lieutenant Col. Lilburn; I am heartily
sorry.

We the said Arbitrators do also award, That after the said John White has
so made and pronounced the said acknowledgment before the said Mr. Lieutenant;
He the said John White shall then deliver his said acknowledgment in writing
(subscribed by him the said John White) into the custody of the said
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, to be by him kept and disposed of, for his
better vindication, against the said scandals said upon him by the said John
White, in his the said John VVhites said Book.

Lastly, we the said Arbitrators do award, That this our award shall be a
final end of all differences and matters of controversy whatsoever betwixt
the said Lieut. Col. I. Lilburn, and the said John White, to us, or to our
award in any wise, submitted by the said parties, from the beginning of the
world, unto the day of their said submission to our award; so far as the same
does, or may concern the said parties, or either of them in their particulars:
and that the said parties from henceforth shall* continue lovers and friends,
without any repetition of former injuries on either part.

And for the better clearing of the said John White in his credit, touching
some rumors of couzenage, and perjury by him supposed to be committed, or
touching his being forsworn, lately scattered abroad to his discredit; We the
said Arbitrators, do unanimously declare; that we have not found any color,
much less any just ground to fix upon the said John White any suspicion, of,
or for the same, or any part thereof; But do thereof in our opinions,
absolutely clear him. Given under our hands and seals the 7. day of October.
aforesaid, 1646.

John Strangwaies. Lewis Dives, John Glanvill. William Morton.


But the Lieutenant not being willing, for causes best known to himself, that
the submission or recantation, should be made before, or in his presence; it
was done at Lir John Glanvils chamber: the Copy of which, thus follows:

I John White, one of the Warders of the Tower of London, Do acknowledge, that
I have unjustly wronged Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, in, and by my writing, and
publishing in print, in such sort as I did; that he was the Writer, Author, or
Contriver, of a Book called, Liberty vindicated against Slavery; and of a
Printed Letter thereunto annexed; and of a Book or Treatise, called, An Alarm
to the House of Lords: For all which, and for the unjust, and scandalous
matters and language alleged, and used by me, in my said Book, reflecting
upon the said Lieut. Col. Lilburn; I am heartily sorry: and in testimony
thereof, I have hereunto subscribed my hand, the 8. day of October, 1646.

JOHN WHITE.
Subscribed, pronounced, and accepted, the 9. day of October. 1646, in the
presence of us; Knights.
John Strangwaies, Lewis Dive, John Glanvill, William Morton, Henry Vaughan,
Christopher Comport, Warder in the Tower.


And now to conclude at the present; because there is not any, discourse of
mine own abroad in Prin^ (since I was first locked up so close, as I was by the
Lords in Newgate) by way of Narrative, to state my case to the world; I shall,
it may be, inform and silence, many men's rash censures; by inserting first my
Wifes late Petition to the House of Commons; and because by a Gentleman of the
Committee to whom my cause was referred, it was judged a D^claration, rather
then a Petition, and so unfit to be insisted upon any further, after once
reading there: although I am not apt to think, if I had been a man accustomed
to write Letters to my Lord Cottington, when he was at Oxford at that time;
when by Ordinance of Parliament, it was little less then death so to do, her
Petition, and my cause, would have found more favor from that Gentleman, then
they did, whose cavels necessitated me to send a Petition of my own, to the
same Committee, which I shall also insert. But first of all, my wifes Petition
thus follows:

To the Chosen and betrusted Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, assembled in the
high and supreme Court of PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of ELIZABETH LILBURNE, wife to Lieu. Col. JOHN LILBURNE,
who has been for above eleven weeks bypast, most unjustly divorced from him,
by the House of Lords, and their tyrannical Officers, against the Law of GOD,
and (as she conceives) the law of the Land.
Shows,
THat you only and alone are chosen by the Commons of England, to maintain
their Laws and Liberties, and to do them justice and right; Coll. of decl:
page 264. 336. 382, 508, 613. 705. 711. 716, 721, 724, 725, 726, 729. 730.
which you have often before God and the World sworn to do: Coll. decl. page
^6^ 6^^* protestation ^ and covena^^*
yea, and in diverse of your Declarations declared; it is your duty (in regard
of the trust reposed in you) so to do; Coll. decl. page 81^ 17^* 262, 266,
267, 340, 459. 462, 471, 473, 5^^, 690.
without any private aims, personal respects, or passions whatsoever: Col.
declar p. 464, 490, 750.
And that you think nothing too good to be hazarded in the discharge of your
consciences for the obtaining of these ends: Coll. declar. p. 214. 67.
And that you will give up your selves to the uttermost of your power, and
judgment; to maintain truth, and conform your selves to the will of God; Col.
decla. p. 666.
which is to do justice and Ier. 22.^5.16, 17.
right, and secure the Persons, Estates, and Liberties of all that joined with
you; Col. declar. 666. 673.
imprecating the judgments of heaven to fall upon you when you decline from
these ends: Col. Declar. 4
you judging, it the greatest scandal that can be laid upon you, that you
either do or intend to subvert the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of the
people. Col. decla p 264, 281, 494. 497. 654, 694, 696.
Which Freedoms, etc. you your selves call, The common Birthright of
Englishmen, col. declar. p. 738, 14845.
who are born equally free, and to whom the law of the land is an equal
inheritance: And therefore your confess in your Declaration of 23. October.
1642. Page 660.
It is your duty to use your best endeavors, that the meanest of the Commonalty
may enjoy their own birthright, freedom and liberty of the laws of the land;
being equally (as you say) intiteld thereunto with the greatest subject, The
knowledge of which, as coming from your own mouths, and Pen, imboldned your
Petitioner, with confidence, to make her humble address to you, and to put you
in mind, that her husband, above 2 months ago, made his formal and legal
appeal to you against the injustice and usurpation of the Lords acted upon him;
which you received, read, committed, and promised him justice in: But as yet no
report is made of his business, nor any relief or actual justice holden out
unto him; although you have since found time to pass the Compositions and
pardons, for the infranchising of those that your selves have declared Traitors
and Enemies to the kingdom: which is no small cause of sorrow to your
Petitioner, and many others, that her h^sband, who has adventured his life,
and all that he had in the World, in your lowest condition for you should; be
so slighted and disregarded by you, as though you had forgot the duty you owe
to the kingdom, and your many Oaths, Vows, and Declarations Decl. 460. 498.
666. 673
which neglect has hastened the almost utter ruin of of your Petitioner, her
husband, and small children. For the Lords in a most tyrannical and barbarous
manner (being encouraged by your neglect) have since committed her husband, for
about three weeks, close prisoner to Newgate, locked him up in a little room,
without the use of pen, ink, or paper (for no other cause but for refusing to
kneel at the Bar of those, that by Law are none of his Judges.) Magna ^harta 29
Sir ^. Cook 2. (...) Instit, fol. 28, ^9. Rot. 2. Ed. 3.
The cruel Jaylors all that time refusing to let your Petitioner, or any of
his friends, to set their, feet over the threshold of his chamber door, or to
come into the prison-yard to speak with him, or to deliver unto his hands,
either meat, drink, money, or any other necessaries. A most barbarous and
illegal cruelty! so much complained of by your selves in your Petition and
Remonstrance to the King, 1. December. 1641. col. declar. 6, 7, 8.
and digested and abhorred there, by you, as actions and cruelties being more
the proper issues of Turks, Pagans, Tyrants, and men without any knowledge of
God, then of these that have the least spark of Christianity, Honor, or
justice in their breasts. And then while they thus tyrannized over your
Petitioners husband; they command (as your Petitioner is Informed) Mr. Sergeant
Finch, Mr. Hearne, Mr. Hail, and Mr. Glover, to draw up a charge against your
Petitioners husband, without giving him the least notice in the world of it, to
fit himself against the day of his trial: but contrary to all law, justice,
and Conscience, dealt worse with him, then ever the Star Chamber did; not only
in keeping his Lawyers from him, but even all manner of Counselors and Friends
whatsoever, even at that time when they were about to try him: and then of a
sudden send a Warrant for him to come to their Bar (who had no legal authority
over him) to hear his charge read: where he found the Earl of Manchester his
professed enemy, and the only party (of a Lord) concerned in the business; to
be his chief Judge, contrary to that just Maxim of law, That no man ought to
be both party and judge; (a practice which the unjust Star Chamber it self, in
the days of its tyranny, did blush at, and refuse to practice, as was often
seen in the Lord Coventries case, etc.) And without any regard to the Earl of
Man hesters imment (in your House) of treachery to his Country, by Lieu. Genesis
Cromwell, which is commoely reported to be punctually and fully proved, and a
charge of a higher nature then the Earl of Straffords, for which he lost his
head: And which also, renders him, so long as he stands so impeached; incapable
in any sense, of being a Judge. And a great wrong and injustice it is unto the
kingdom to permit him; and to himself, if innocent; not to have had a legal
trial ere this, to his justification or condemnation. And besides all this,
because your Petitioners husband stood to his apeale, to your Honors, and
would not betray Englands liberties; which you have, all of you, sworn to
preserve, maintain, and defend: they most arbitra^ily, illegally, and
tyrannically, sentenced your Petitioners said husband to pay 4000.l. to the
King (not to the State) for ever to be incapable to bear any Office in Church
or Commonwealth, either Martial or Civil, and to lie seven years a prisoner
in the extraordinary chargeable prison of the Tower; where he is in many
particulars illegally dealt withal, as he was, when he was in Newgate.

Now forasmuch as the Lords as they claim* themselves to be a House of Peers
have no legal judgment about Commoners, that your (Petitioner can hear of,
but what is expressed in the Statute of the 14 Ed. 3. 5. which are, delays of
justice, or error in judgment in inferior Courts only, and that with such
limitations and qualifications, as are there expressed; which are, that there
shall be one Bishop at least in the judgment, and an express Commission from
the King, for their meddling with it. All which was wanting in the case of your
Petitioners husband, being begun and ended by themselves alone. And also seeing
that by the 29 of Magna Charta, your Petitioners husband, or any other Commoner
whatsoever; in criminal cases, are not to be tried otherwise then by their
Peers: which Sir Ed. Cook, in his exposition of Magna Charta, (which book is
printed by your own special authority) says, is meant [equals] fol. 28. In
which, (says he, fol. 29.) are comprised, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Citizens, Yeomen, and Burgesses of several degrees; but no Lords. And in p.
46. he says: No man shall be disseised] that is, put out of seison, or
dispossessed of his freehold; that is, (says he) lands, or livelihood, or of
his liberties or free customs,] that is, of such franchises and freedoms, and
free customs as belong to him by his free Birthright, unless it be by the
lawful judgment (that is, verdict of his Equals; that is (says he) of men of
his own condition:] or by the law of the land; that is (to speak it once for
all) By the due course and process of law. And, says he, No man shall be in
any sort destroyed, unless it be by the verdict and judgment of his Peeres]
that is, Equals or by the law of the land. And the Lords themselves in old
time, did truly confess: That for them to give judgment of a Commoner in a
criminal case, is contrary to law; as is clear by the Parliaments record in
the case of Sir Simon d' Bereford. 4. Ed. 3. Rot. 2. the copy of which is now
in the hands of Mr. H. Martin, and they there record it, That his case who was
condemned by them for murdering King Edw. ^. shall not be drawn in future
time into president, because it was contrary to law, they being not his Peers,
that is, his Equals. And forasmuch as the manner of their proceedings was
contrary to all the former ways of the law publicly established by Parliament
in this kingdom, as appears by several Statutes 5. Ed. 3. ^. 25. Ed. 3 4. 28.
E. 3. 3. 37. Ed. 3. 8. 38. Ed. 3. 9. 42, Ed. 3. 3. 17. Ri. 2. 6. Rot. parli.
43. E 3. Sir Io: Alees case, Number. 21, 22, 23, etc. lib. 10. fol. 74. in case
delar. marshalses, see Cook, 2 part Instit. fol. 46.
which expressly say, That none shall be imprisoned, nor put out of his
freehold, nor of his franchises, nor free customs, unless it be by the law
of the land, And that none shall be taken by Petition, or suggestion made to
the King, or to his Council, unless it be by indictment, or presentment of
good and lawful people of the same neighborhood where such deeds be done, in
due manner, or by process made, or by Writ original at the common law. Which
Statutes are nominally and expressly confirmed by the Petition of Right, by the
Act made this present Parliament for the abolishing the Star Chamber; and
thereby, all acts repealed that formerly were made in derogation of them. But
contrary hereunto, the Lords (like those wicked Justices spoken of by Sir Ed.
Cook 2. Part. Instit. 51.
in stead of trying her husband by the law of the land; proceed against him by
a partial trial, flowing from their arbitrary will, pleasure, and discretion,
etc. Rot. part. 2. 1. H. 4. mem. 2. number. 1.27. Instit. f. 51. Book declar. 58.
39. 278. 845.
For though they summoned him up to their Bar, June 10. 1646. to answer a
Charge: yet they refused to show it him, or give him a Copy of it, but
committed him to Newgate, June 11. 1646. (although he behaved himself then
with respect toward them both in word and gesture), merely for refusing to
answer to their Spanish Inquisition-like Interrogatories, and for delivering
his legal Protestation. Their Mittimus being as illegal as their summoning of
him, and their own proceedings with him. Their commitment running, To be kept
there: not till he be delivered by due course of Law; but, During their
pleasure: which Sir Edward Cook says, is illegal, 2. part. instit fol. 52, 53.
and then locked up close, that so he might be in an impossibility to
understand how they intended to proceed against him.

Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays, to grant unto her husband the
benefit of the law, and to admit him to your Bar himself, to plead his own
cause, if you be not satisfied in the manner of his proceedings, or else
according to law, justice, and that duty and obligation that lies upon you;
forthwith to release him from his unjust imprisonment: and to restain and
prohibit the illegal and arbitrary proceedings of the Lords, according to that
sufficient power enstated upon you, for the enabling you faithfully to
discharge the trust reposed in you, and to vacuate this his illegal sentence
and fine, and to give him just and honorable reparations from the Lords, and
all those that have unjustly executed their unjust Commands: It being a Rule in
law, and a Maxim made use of by your selves in your Declaration 2. November.
1642. col declar. 723.
That the Kings illegal commands, though accompanied with his presence, do
not excuse those that obey them; much less the Lords, with which the law
accords, and so was resolved by the Judges, 16. Hen. 6. See Cook. 2. part.
Instit. fol. 187.
And that you will legally and judicially, exexamine the crimes of the Earl of
Manchester, and Col King, which the Petitioners husband, and others, have so
often complained to you of, and do exemplary justice upon them, according to
their deserts: or else, according to law and justice, punish those (if any)
that have falsely complained of them. 3. E. 33. 2. R. 2.5. 37. E. 3. 18. 38. E
39. 12. R. 2. 11. 17. R. 2. 6. 122. p. and M. 3. 1 El. 6.
And that you would, without further delay, give us relief by doing us
justice. 9 H. 3. 29 2. E. 3. 8. 5. E 3. 9. 14. E. 3 14. 11. E. 2. 10.
All which, she the rather earnestly desiteth, because his imprisonment in the
Tower is extraordinary chargeable and insupportable: although by right, and the
custom of that place; his fees, chamber, and diet, ought to be allowed him, and
paid out of the Treasure of the Crown) he having wasted and spent himself with
almost six years attendance, and expectation upon your Honors for justice and
raparations against his barbarous Sentence, etc. of the Star Chamber, to his
extraordinary charge and damage, and yet never received a penny; and also lost
diverse hundred pounds, the year he was a prisoner in Oxford Castle for you.
Neither can he receive his Arreares for (the price of his blood) his faithful
service with the Earl of Manchester, although he spent with him much of his
own money. And the last year, by the unadvised means of some Members of this
Honorable House, was committed prisoner for above 3. months, to his
extraordinary charges and expenses: And yet in conclusion he was releast, and
to this day knows not wherefore he was imprisoned. For which, according to
law and justice, he ought to receive reparations; but yet he never had a penny.
All which particulars considered, do render the condition of your Petitioner,
her husband and children, to be very nigh ruin and destruction, unless your
speedy and long-expected justice prevent the same. Which your Petitioner does
earnestly entreat at your hands, as her right, and that which in equity,
honor, and conscience, cannot be denied her. col. declar. 127, 174, 244, 253,
282, 284, 285, 312, 313, 321, 322, 467, 490, 514, 516, 520, 521, 532, 533 534,
535, 537, 539, 541, 543, 555, 560.


And as in duty bound, she shall ever pray, that your hearts may be kept
upright, and thereby enabled timely and faithfully to discharge the duty you
owe to the kingdom, according to the Great Trust reposed in you: And so free
your selves from giving cause to be judged men that seek your selves more
then the public good.

To the Honorable, the chosen, betrusted, and representative Body of all the
Freemen of England, in PARLIAMENT assembled.
The humble Petition of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, a legal Freeman of England;
though now unjustly imprisoned by the Lords, in the extraordinary chargeable
Prison of the Tower of London.
SHOWS, THAT
WHereas the Petitioner is a legal and freeborn Englishman, and ought by the
fundamental laws of this Land, to enjoy the benefit of all the laws,
liberties, privileges, and immunities of a freeborn man, and a Commoner of
England: and whereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; no freeman may
be taken and imprisoned, but by lawful judgment of his equals, who are men of
his own condition, and the Law of the Land: and by the Law of the same, no man
ought to be imprisoned, before he be taken upon indictment, or presentment, by
good men of the same neighborhood, or by due process of Law. And whereas,
every man that is taken or imprisoned by the common Laws of the Land, ought to
be bayled: But he that is taken and convicted for Murder or Felony, or for some
other offense for which a man ought to lose life or member. And by the Statutes
of this Realm, every man is baylable; unless he be taken for Treason, Murder,
Felony, or some particular case excepted; whereof the Petitioner is no ways
guilty. But your Petitioner shows, that he being taken and imprisoned above 4
Months, by color of unjust orders, and an illegal sentence of the Lords
pronounced against him in their house (although they have no legal
jurisdiction over him) for supposed contempts and scandals committed against
them, which was nothing else then a defense of his own liberty, and of all the
freemen of England, in a plea and defense put into the said house, which
contained an Appeal to your Honors, against their unjust proceedings: for
which supposed contempts, he is by their unjust sentence committed to the
Tower, there to remain for the space of 7. years, and disabled to bear any
office, either Military or Civil, and to pay 4000.l. Fine: All which
proceedings of their Lordships, the Petitioner does protest against as unjust,
illegal, and destructive to the liberties, immunities, and privileges of all
the Commons of England; which he doubts not to free himself, and all other
freeborn Englishmen, of, by the Justice of this honorable House (to whom he
has formerly, and now also does Appeal) and by the assistance of the Laws of
this Land.

Therefore, your Petitioner does most humbly pray, that he may be enlarged, at
least upon bail, being by Law liable to follow and prosecute his cause
depending before you, and redemption from the said illegal sentence, and to
obtain just and legal reparations from the inflictors and executors thereof.

And he shall pray, etc. JOHN LILBURN.

COurteous Reader, by reason I am prohibited to have Pen, Ink, and Paper; I am
forced now to write a piece, and then a piece, and scarce have time and
opportunity seriously to peruse and correct what I write; and in regard I
cannot be at the Press, either to correct, or revise my own lines (which
besides is attended with many difficulties and hazards,) I must entreat thee,
as thou read, to amend with thy Pen, what in sense or quotations may be
wanting, or false; and I shall rest thy true and faithfu^l Countryman, ready to
spend my blood for the fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, against any
power whatever that would destroy them.

JOHN LILBVRN.
From my prerogative, and illegal imprisonment in the Tower of London, this
present October. 1646.
FINIS.

