TWO LETTERS FROM Col. ROBERT LILBVRNE. The one to the Honorable William
Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Parliament. The other To his Excellency the
Lord General.

CONTAINING The particulars of the total Rout and overthrow of the Earl of
DERBY, and the Forces under his Command in Lancashire on the 25 of August 1651.

By the Parliament forces under the said Colonel Robert Lilburne.

Imprimatur

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.



LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane
end. 1651.

Mr. Speaker:
MY Lord General being pleased to command me to stay here to assist the
well-affected against the Lord Derby, who was then at Warrington in this County
with some considerable Force both from the Isle of Man, and which he had from
the Scots Army, wherewith he did not only much encourage the Enemies, but also
discourage all the well-affected in these Counties of Lancashire and Cheshire,
and whereof he thought himself wholly Master; as indeed he was, and none in
those Counties were able, or durst appear against him, and began to beat
Drums, and raise men in all places where he came, and would have been very
strong in a short time, not only through the access of many Malignants,
Papists, and disaffected Persons, but that assistance the Ministers, and those
who are called Presbyterians afforded, and would have more abundantly appeared,
for they are the men who are grown here more bitter and envious against you
then others of the old Cavaliers stamp, the power of the Almighty was very much
seen in the total overthrow (I hope) of that wicked design which was laid,
and hatched not only here, but through the whole North of England, who was
getting into the like Posture, as you may further understand by those papers I
have here sent you, but that God who has all along appeared with us, and for
us, has showed himself very good, and powerful in the discipating of this
Enemy, who was about fourteen or fifteen hundred strong; I had only three
Companies of Foot, about fifty or sixty Dragoons, and about thirty Horse from
Liver-poole, with my own wearied, and some what scittered Regiment, through
our tedious march from Scotland, and hard duty we had here.

Yesterday morning about 11 or 12 a clock in the night the enemy marched from
Preston, we lying within two or three miles of them, where we expected those
supplies of Forces which came not: some of our intelligence informing us, the
Enemy more running away toward their Army with what they had gotten; we
pursued them hither with some confidence that that Intelligence was true, and
the rather we believed it, because of some discouragement we put upon them the
day before; but upon our approach hither we found it otherwise, for they were
bending their course toward Manchester, where they had not only very great
hopes of surprising my Lord Generals Regiment of Foot, but also great
assurance of the assistance of five hundred men in and about that Town, but
upon the sight of our near appoach they unexpectedly put themselves into a
posture of fighting with us, which then we endeavored to decline, in regard of
the great advantage they had by their many Foot, and Hedges, and the danger we
apprehended my Lord Generals Regiment of Foot at Manchester to be in, we were
drawing off, thinking to have marched in the left flank of them thither, to
have gained a conjunction with our Friends, who had order to march to me that
day toward Preston, we had thought to have met them in the way, having sent
several Messengers to let them know both the Enemies and our motion, but the
Enemy perceiving us to draw off, quickly advanced upon us with their Horse, and
Foot, which we perceiving, and that we could not go off safely enough, we fell
to dispute with them, which lasted almost one hour, our Horse being not able
to do any service but in Lanes, and they over-powering us so much in Foot made
the business very difficult, that we hardly knew whose the day would be for so
long; but therein was the Salvation of God the more seen, and the greater
opportunity we had to destroy them. I desire that he may have the praise and
glory of that happy success he was pleased to give unto us, his poor
Creatures; having given you this Narrative in general, which I thought it my
duty to do, this enclosed List will inform you further of the particulars; I
desire the Lord would teach us to walk in some way answerable to those
manifold and gracious Dispensations he daily gives us experience of, and
manifests his love unto us in that his Name may be magnified in all we do, in
our several places and stations; this great mercy to us here I hope is the
earnest of his further tenderness, to the great concernments of all good
people in this Nation, which is the hearty desire of

Wiggon the 25. of August, 1651. Your faithful and most humble Servant to my
power Rob. Lilburne.
This Bearer was all the while in the Engagement, and is able to give you a
further Relation.

I have not lost an Officer in this Engagement but one Corporal; and not above
ten Soldiers slain, but very many wounded.


Present these: To the Right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, haste.
A List of the Prisoners taken at Wiggon, Aug. 25. 1651.
COl, Fhrogmorton. Col, Rich. Leg. Col. John Robbinson. Col. Baynes. Col.
Ratcliffe Gerret. Adjutant General. Lieut. Col. Creson Rigby. Lieut. Col.
Francis Baynes. Lieut. Col. Galliard. Lieut. Col. Constable. Major Gower. 4.
Captains, 2 Lieutenants, one Quartermaster. 20. Gentlemen and Reformadoes. 400.
Private Prisoners, All their Baggage, and Sumptures, Arms, and Ammunition, the
L. Derbies three Cloaks with Stars, his George, Garter, and other Robes.
Slain and dead since they were taken.
The L. Witherington. Major Genesis Sir Tho. Tilsley. Col. Matthew. Boynton. Major
Chester. Major Trollop, and diverse others of quality, whose names are not yet
brought in, besides sixty private men.
May it please your Excellency,
UPon the receipt of your Orders to stay here with my Regiment, I marched that
day from Stopport to this Town; which was 22 miles before I rested, hearing the
Enemy was here, and thinking I might have a little surprised them, but they
were gone to Chorley; the next day I marched after them toward Preston, and
lay within two miles of them only with my own Regiment, and about 60 Horse and
Dragoones which is all the Country could assist me with, all this while,
(saving only one Company from Manchester of Foot and two from Chest^r which
have been with me two days,) That night I sent 40 Horse to alarm them (who
then wounded Col. Vere) hearing they were to have had a Randezvous at Preston
the next day: I did that to give notice to the Town and Country I was there to
oppose the Earl, and to stay the people from rising with him, who reported it,
that none of our Forces was in that Country, and made the Country believe all
was their own, which the people generally took for granted, and was coming
in a pace, as by these enclosed you may perceive.

The next day in the afternoon, I having not Foot with me, a party of the
Enemies Horse fell smartly amongst us where our Horses were grasing, and For
some space put us pretty hard to it, but at last it pleased the Lord to
strengthen us so, as that we put them to the flight, and pursued them to
Ribble-bridge, this was something like our business at Mussle-burgh, and killed
and took about 30 prisoners, most Officers and Gentlemen, with the loss of two
men that dyed next morning, but several wounded and diverse of our good Horses
killed. That night came the three Companies of Foot, and the next morning
hearing of your Excellencies Regiment coming toward Manch^ster, I only
removed two miles to a more convenient ground, thinking to have stayed there
till your Regiment could come, which I expected this day, but their weariness
frustrated that expectation, and this morning I had intelligence that the Enemy
was upon their march, which I thought was a running away from us, being they
began at 11 in the night, and marched so fast and privately; but their
confidence was much otherwise raised, having increased their number at Freston
and that engagement of the Priests and Manchesterians (who are very Malignant)
to assist them with 500 Men and Arms, and the hopes that they had of
surprising your Excellencies Regiment put them into great heart, that when we
appeared here (thinking we had been (as it were) pursuing a flying Enemy) they
showed a great deal of courage by a mighty shout they gave beyond the Town in
sight of us, in the way toward Manchester, which we observing, together with
the advantage they had of us in these grounds, and hearing their number of Foot
was much increased, and the danger your Regiment was in, put us upon new
thoughts when they were at one end of the town and we at the other, and
resolved rather to decline engaging with them here, then hazard the loss of
your Regiment, and put our selves upon an Engagement upon too much
disadvantage, they exceeding us much in Foot, and we having no grounds to fight
our Horse upon, were were drawing off, thinking to have marched in the Flank
of them toward Manchester to have gained a Conjunction with our^ friends
there) but they seeing it, presently drew through the Town to fall upon us,
which we observing and being so near to them, resolved to trust God with the
issue, and he was graciously pleased to give us a comfortable success to the
praise of his great name, in a total rout of our Enemies, who were increased
to about 14 or 1500. and I had only my own Regiment and those three Companies
of Foot and the sixty Horse and Dragoones; The dispute lasted almost an hour,
and very difficult to us, they overlaying us so with Foot (having not ground
for our Horse but the lain to fight in) the same place where my Regiment beat
up Hambletons Rear, but at last God gave us the day, and I desire that he
alone may have the praise for that great salvation he showed to us a Company of
poor Creatures.

As for the particulars I cannot yet give a very exact account to your
Excellency, but only that the Lord Derby is sore hurt, but escaped though
narrowly, the Lord Widdrington and Col. Sir Will: Throgmorton dying, and
Tildesly and Boynton slain and several other very considerable persons of
great quality, and about sixty Soldiers, and we have taken most of their
Colors and about 400 prisoners.

I thank God I lost not one Officer, nor above ten Soldiers that I can hear
of, but many Horses killed and spoiled with their pikes, which I hope your
Excellency will be pleased to consider and repair. The Country now begins to
bring in prisoners and to show themselves to me, but before but a few
appeared: The Enemies word was Jesu and their signal a White about their Arm,
our word was Providence and signal Greens;

I am (my Lord) Your Excellencies most humble Servant ROB: LILBURNE.
Wiggon 25. August 1651. late in the evening.
30 August 1651.
Imprimatur

Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

