THE Worlds Catastrophe, OR, EUROPES many Mutations until, 1666.

The Fate of Englands MONARCHY until its Subversion.

Government of the World under GOD by the seven Planetary Angels; their Names,
Times of Government.

An exact Type of the THREE SVNS Seen in Cheshire and Shropshire, 3 April 1647.
Their Signification and Portent, ASTROLOGICALLY handled.

By William Lilly Student in ASTROLOGY: Who is, Amicus Patria, and veritatis
Amator.

To which is added, A Whip for Wharton.

London, Printed for John Partridge, and Humphrey Blunden, and are to be sold
at the Cock in Ludg^^e-street, and at the Castle in Cornhill, 1647.

To the READER.
I Had private thoughts of publishing these three succeeding Treatises, some
months since, but my continual employments, and steadfast desire of perfecting
an Introduction to Astrology (now in the Press) silenced my further Notions:
But one day, happily complaining of my want of convenient time, to Translate
these three succeeding Treatises unto Elias Ashmole Esquire, my noble Friend,
and what pretty pieces they were, and how desirous I was, my Country men of
England should be made partakers of them: This worthy Gentleman no sooner heard
my complaint, but offered Balsom to the wound, and most humanely and courteously
proferred his learned endeavors to make Catastrophe Mundi, and Merlini
Prophetiae, render themselves in the English tongue.

A work I assure you, both painful, and full of intricate Lab^rinths, well
becoming that sharpness of wit, wherewith he is naturally endowed: Which
Version of his into our mother tongue he has excellently performed in
significant Language, and terms of Art correspondent to the sense of the first
Author: In Astrology he is well versed, and in Antiquities no mean Student;
for who shall read Merlin in the Latin Copy, shall wonder at the dexterity and
sharp apprehension of this Gentleman, that being in years so young, should
understand and distinguish terms and names, so obsolete, and not frequently
vulgar; and yet has he rendered them in our mother tongue in so compliant and
decent Phrase, as might well have become an Antiquary of double his years.

Motor eram, suasorque operis: mihi satque superque est,
Interpres meritum si ferat ipse decus*
The Author of Catastrophe Mundi, was Spineus, Ph^sition to the Duke of Mantua,
it was Printed 1625. and is since translated into many Languages; if well
understood, it is a piece of excellent Learning, and comes close to the times;
and tells Princes their own, and what they shall expect, as you may read in the
three last leaves compared with other places of his book. He says, he wrote a
Book of great Conjunctions, which I could not attain, though I have sent to all
parts of Europe for it, etc.

Ambrose Merlin, lived in the time of Vortiger; these are the Prophecies, for
which amongst the learned he is so renowned; they were never in the English
before: They were Printed at Franckford 1608. and Commented on, by one Alanus
de Iusulis a German Doctor, who has taken much pains to explain them, etc. But
when he came to the last sixteen lines, part whereof is now in fulfilling, and
beginning thus: The splendor of the Sun shall languish by the paleness of
Mercury, etc. and so to the end, which part of the prophecy cannot be
understood, but by those who have judgment in Astrology, these predictions
being grounded upon the more secret Caball of that Art, wherein Alanus was
nothing versed; he berein failed exceedingly.

Its true this Age is near to the very end of the Prophecy (and so we may fully
expect a grand Revolution) and to that part thereof, which begins, Jupiter
shall leave off his appointed course, etc. The Key follows: Monarchy and Kings
are signified by the Sun: The Law and the Pen by Mercury: War by Mars:
Commotions, cruelty, and bloodshed by Orion: Religion and Episcopacy by
Jupiter. Courtship, Treaties, Queens, Women, by Venus: Famine, sca^city, and
Mortality, by. The Commonaltie by the 12. Houses: Absence of the Planets
predicts the want of Gentry, and their hard fates: Twins signifies London: The
Scales intimate Justice: and the Austrian family: The Ram intends France, and
some parts of England: The Virgin portends the Norman Race of Kings in England,
and a particular King besides: Scotland is deciphered by the Crab: Sagitary,
means an English King.

The tail of the Scorpion, has relation to a family declining, etc. Author of
much mischief in the world, but especially in this Nation: The Scorpion was the
Father, the tail his of spring.

The Zodiac signifies Order, and Government, etc. Plelades, relates as to
mutinies, seditions, and tumults occasioned by the vulgar.

Offices of Janus, point out Courts of Justice: they that abound with more
leisure; let them study for a further Key to unlock these Mysteries: to the
Learned it may suffice; with the illiterate, or envious it sounds as a fable,
but the Key is true.

The Government of the world by Angels, my self Englished; the Author thereof
was a learned Abbot of Germany: The subject being not vulgar, or ever before
this time; being much spoke of amongst us English, will draw the enmity of some
upon me: I intend, God sparing me life, to Write an especial Treatise hereof;
wherein from the beginning of the World to these times, and some hundreds of
years succeeding, I shall endeavor to manifest such Mysteries involved in this
learning, as yet have not appeared; wherein I shall go near to give every
Commonwealth of Europe, a smart conjecture of the continuance, or destruction
of their State and Government.

From some malevolent, churlish, and envious Clergy, I must expect blows,
which I assure them, shall be well returned: Oh men of envy! that for so many
Ages, have envied mankind the knowledge of learning, that formerly Cloistered
up Books, and suffered them to perish in your Closets unopened, because all
should be ignorant but your selves. Had not some Gentlemen of Divine souls, and
many worthy, and gallant Physicians preserved Arts, and published their
admirable conceptions: I am confident to this very day, the Fraternity of
Clergiemen would have kept us at a distance, and without the knowledge of many
learnings we now know; for which, at sometimes they snarl at the Authors. Upon
the Government of the world by Angels, you shall hear the modesty of that
reverend, and knowing Scot, the Lord of Marchiston: In page 6 of his exposition
of the Revelation: There are Books (says he) of the Jews, containing (as they
allege) Doctrines proceeding from the mouths of the Patriarchs, affirming
every great Angel of seven to rule the world, 490. years, which we wanting (the
warrant of Scripture) can neither affirm, or condemn.

Amodest and noble censure; far from the virulency of some Junior Divines now
living, that assume a faculty to meddle with what they understand not; let them
be forgiven now, its hereditary.

The discourse against Wharton, (who lurks like an obscure scurrilous Traitor
to his country now at present in this City, and has the c^rse that God
bestowed upon Cain hanging upon him) came seasonably to my hands, from one that
it seems loves me, though he was yet never within one hundred miles of my face.
It speaks the Gentleman learned, and I thank him for it, I have no leisure as
yet to answer that Asineg^ Vagabond in minutes and Crotchets, which the
Renegado Viper well knows, breeds no error at all in point of Judgment, and
which all Authors except upon Nativities do usually reject: and were he not
foolhardy and frivolously malicious, he could not expect I should be ignorant
in erecting a Scheam by Regiomontanus, the use whereof, I have taught many
years since, to sundry Gentlemen that have learned Astrology from me. Having
two names, he runs into the censure of Ignoramus, who says Duplex nomen,
Duplex nebulo, A double name, a double knave; I think it is well englished,
perhaps not well translated. I call to the vain fellow for an answer, or to
collect the errors of the Starry Messenger, or the Postscript attending it: I
require from him and all his friends one Astrologicall prediction of his, ever
verified, or deduced from the principles of Art: and I require from what
principles of Art in his Naworths Almanac 1645. he called our Parliament, and
their valiant soldiery Rebels above 100 times? Or why in his other Trotting
Progg, wrote under the mock-name of Wharton, (he being the silliest of all
Astrologers) in his own simple name should pronounce victory to those engaged
for his Majesty: Cujus contrarium vidimus? Or why in his Wharton 1647. he
pronounces a good journey to his Majesty, and calls our Parliament abusively
Kings? Or why he having the benefit of those liberal and generous
Oxford-Articles, has traduced the Parliament with perjury concerning the death
of the Earl of Strafford? Or why (the mungrell Irish Wolf) should promise
victory to his brethren the inhumane Irish, and maintain their murdering of our
poor country men? Or why he so vilifies and curses the noble City of London
(and the whole Nation of Scotland) which gives this sneaking fool protection by
some of her Malignant children, who print and publish his curdities?

Or why the envious snarling simpleton so lavishly and lyingly traduces Mr.
Booker, who for so many years maintained the reputation of the Art, almost then
utterly decayed, by his own virtue and abilities?

Or why the senceless Idiot calls me Whelp, or makes me a sometimes-Taylors boy,
or a Scriveners man; When as it is known I was never of any profession but what
I now study? I have both my ears, but whether Wharton being formerly a needy
Scrivener in Newcastle have one, I know not. I have wrote upon the three Suns
sparingly, rather to satisfy the importunities of the country then otherwise.

The generality of people perhaps may expect I should speak a little of his
Majesty; No, being not in Arms, I have no one word to write; had my writings
been observed or credited, he had not been ( statu Quo:) That God who orders
all Monarchies, and whose blessed Angels under him moderate our humane
affairs, bless this Kingdom with so much happiness, that it may behold a
reunion betwixt his Majesty and two Parliaments of England and Scotland, and
render unto him his just rights, and unto us our native and proper liberties
and privileges: many fear our present Army, and traduce those now, that gave
us (instrumentally under G^d) our quiet and being: from men that adventured
their lives so freely and in their actions and deportments have been of so
great civility, shall we expect acts dishonorable? God forbid, any modest
English heart should harbor such an uncharitable opinion against the Army in
general: I do not, I cannot. From the Configurations of heaven, I find n^
evil intentions in the Army (Flattery and witchcraft are equally odious unto
me) did I not see a Lying Angel amongst us raising fears and jealousies
causelessly, I would have been silent in this: having performed their work I
think they well merit their wages. Happy are they that begun with victory, and
end in unity, I am confident our gallant soldiery will so do.

I said publicly as much of the Scots, when most laughed at me and thought
otherways: as the Scots deceived those that imagined ill of their demeanor, so
do I say, will our Army delude the vain thoughts of all such as detract from
their honor and Actions, or labor to convert whatsoever they say or do, into
unjust Quaries: those virtuous soldiers have fought, and such as honest Mr.
Booker and my self have wrote, it were pity we should lose our lives in cold
blood, and by a tame sentence, and after all our service performed for the
liberty of this CommonWealth.

Meliora spero. William Lilly.
Corner-house over against Strand-bridge without Temple Bar. May 7. 1647.
THE Worlds Catastrophe, OR, The Miraculous CHANGES, and ALTERATIONS, (probably
to happen) in the several Kingdoms, and Commonwealths of Europe, until the
Year of our Lord God, 1666. ASTROLOGICALLY Predicted.
THE continual motion of sublunary things, and their variable Flux, has
astonished the understandings of wise men, and in a manner constrained them to
profess, or affirm little or nothing at all. Hence it was, that amongst the
ancient Philosophers their chief Tenet was, that they knew nothing. Wherefore
Hipocrates, the wisest of Physicians, professed it a very hard thing to judge
aright; with whom agrees the Author of the Astronomicall Segments, who in the
first Segment, and first Aphorism says, That life is short, Art long,
experience deceitful, judgment difficult.

Aristotle (in his Posterior. 2. Book de Anima, Text 6.) affirmed, that
Sciences did touch only upon Universals, whereby afterward particulars were
somewhat imperfectly known, of which, as they are ranked under Universals;
general Propositions are compounded. And Ptolomy, that Master of Astrologers,
in the first of his Centiloquy; beholding so great variety of matter, and the
sundry influences of so many and great stars, thought it a hard and difficult
thing, to consider thoroughly, and exactly the Caelestiall Mixture, saying, Abs
te, and a scientia: for, it is impossible that a man, though never so knowing,
should distinguish the particular forms of things; like as sense also receives
not a particular, but a certain general form of sensible matter; and he that
treats of these things must only conjecture, for none but such as are
inspired from above can foretell particulars: And in the 1. Segment, and 22.
Aphorism; There is something super-caelestiall that assisteth a man in
foretelling of future events; for then, by the Synderesis of the Stars, and of
the Intelligences, we are able to prophecy of things to come, according to
that divine sentence, O Lord upon us is sealed the light of thy countenance,
etc.

Wherefore it is manifest, that only those, who have the knowledge of future
things, through the better part of the soul, come nearest to the truth: And in
the 8. Proposition, the same Ptolomy teaches, that none can deliver his
judgment according to the complexion of the Stars, unless he be such a man,
as has well considered the natural complexion of the soul, that deservedly he
may be called a Wiseman; For the soul does assist Caelestial operation, even as
the best Husbandman does Nature in Plowing, and Weeding the earth: and Propos.
7. No man can teach the mixtures of the Stars, who has not first learnt their
Natural differences and tempers.

By which we learn, that although there be infinite (...) and that they all
study the same books; yet they do no^ all collect the truth of things; yea, one
more then another, even as also from many signs in Physic, when the Physicians
do observe signs of diverse diseases, of recovery, and of death; there happens
contrariety amongst them, though all of them read the same Authors. For this
choice cannot be found written in books; but ought to be selected by the
discretion of a fortunate Physician, who was born under a good Position of the
heavens, that so he may know how to find out the truth in Physic, as we have
it from the experience of Hippo^^a^^s, and other Physicians: A Physician ought
to be fortunate and wise by nature, sc. that he be produced from heaven, and
the whole concourse of Nature, so as he may confer health upon men: viz. When
Mars and Venus shall be in Conjunction, or behold one another by some aspect,
they make a good Physician, and even Natures master by the testimony of
Hyeronymus Manfredus, Physician of Bononia, Propos. 3. of his Gentiloq. de
medico and infirmo.

In like manner, when Mars Almu^en of the profession, shall have natural
participation with the Moon, we judge a Physician; and if Venus behold him, he
shall be a Phle^oto^i^^, or a Preparer and giver of Medicines by the 31. (...)
And if Saturn shall behold him, he shall have skill in making of Glisters, so
also in curing of the lower parts of the body, Sc. by cutting of Tumors and the
Hemoroides to the well liking of the Physician: and if Mercury shall aspect him,
he shall be cunning in words, having the force of healing, and by applying
medicines with words.

Neither ought this to be wondered at, for the imaginative faculty fortified by
Heaven, and the influence of Mercury, he may by words uttered heal those that
be diseased: which thing if another with the same words, should endeavor to
do, it were to no purpose, because his words having no force, as not proceeding
from the Caelestiall spirits, nor quickened by their influence, can neither
convey health, nor ease: which Doctrine we have taught at large from the
opinion of Avicenne, Com. 3. lib. 1. Prog. Hipocrat.

To the end therefore that we may foretell future contingencies with some
certainty, we will not rely (only) upon our own judgment, (for by the 3.
Segment, Aph. 158* he that promises much of himself, is the Author of many
errors, and therefore (so much as we can) we will adhere to a divine Spirit;
for those things which to the eye of the world, seem to be matters failing, or
uncertain, to a mind that is Divine, and invariable are firm and sure: For
Socrates did acknowledge, that he knew nothing by a proper and natural light,
but he confessed that his knowledge was derived from, and assisted by a divine
light. Wherefore by adhering to Divine truth, we may be able to prognosticate
many true things: For like as a man that loves riches ( Segm. 1. Aph. 100.)
finds riches, and that in some sort alone: so finds he truth that loves truth.

Upon the contemplation of these things, it has been our endeavor to
transcend the spears of Actives, and to apply our self to the other spears,
and lights; and to lift up our eyes to the first Mover, and to behold and
consider the beauty and harmony of the spears: Whereby our mind begun to be
ravished, and to be delivered from darkness, by contemplating upon their
Creator, whom for his infinite wisdom, we acknowledge to be the Maker and Lord
of the Heavens, and of all sublunary things, and do adore their Mover, at whose
will and command all the Intelligences do wheel about the spears* himself
being enviro^ed on every side (as it were) with an i^fi^i^e multitude of
Angels: from whence making our departure, (being rowsed from humane drowsiness)
let it suffice that we descend to the consideration of a future Catastrophe.
For God has so framed us, that in our aspect toward heaven, we may behold his
divine Majesty, as Ovid has it, in 1. Metamorph.

Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
He with a lofty look, did man indue,
Commanding him the Heavens and Stars to view.
Where he has made impression of the formal virtues of all things, as being
derived from his divine spirit; so that in Heaven (the great Book of God) we
may (as in a glass) foresee and know the pleasure of the most High: For, (by
the 1. Aph. 57) Coelum est instrumentum, quo inferiora agit, impellit,
regitque. The Heaven is Gods Instrument, whereby he works, enforces, and
governs all things. Whence (following the custom of wisemen) we may be
forewarned of, and prepared against future evils; flying (as he said) many
things between the Caelestial Globes, and we need not be ashamed of it; for, 1.
Aph. 24. Stulti negligunt, and contemnunt Astrologiam; qui contradicit
Ambitiosus est, qui Maledicit, Fatuus: Fools neglect and despise Astrology: he
is ambitious that gainsays it, and foolish that slanders it: For it is a Divine
Mystery; for which if any neglecting Natural causes, shall adhere to it only,
he is but of shallow judgment: Therefore it is requisite, that it be otherwise
assisted, especially, for that Astrology (by 1. Aph. 20.) is the most
transcendent of all Sciences, both because it treats of things Caelestiall,
and also of future: the knowledge whereof, is not only Divine, but most
profitable: Therefore to calumniate it, or any other Sciences, is a mere
vanity, for (3. Aph. 146.) Qui Artem aliquam destruit, long deterior est
imperito, neo vacat men's illius malitia, desidia, and ignorantia. He that
destroys any Art, is far worse then he that is unskilful* neither is his mind
empty of malice, deceit, and ignorance. We will make inspection into such
things, as have been looked into (but by a few; and if we intend to proceed
methodically) it behooves us to search out, and consider the principle, and
coadjuting causes.

The principal causes are the great, mean, and lesser Conjunctions of the
superior Planets, concerning which we have said much in our books of great
Conjunctions; yet we will here mention some things, which elsewhere our
occasions did not extend unto, for many things, for some cause, were wrapped up
in silence.

The other principal causes are mock stars, which not long since sparkled for
some years space, and then by little and little vanished away; the changing of
the Abisides of the Planets, Eclipscs, and the like: So likewise the Genitures
of Kings, according to that Adage of Horace, and Segment. 7. Aph. 166. Genitura
valida regna mutant, strong Genitures do change Kingdoms: yet it is nothing,
Ponere os in Coelum, yet it avails not to gaze upon the Heavens only.

Causes Adjutant, are Revolutions, the Progressions of the great Orb, of great
Conjunctions before the flood, the birth of our Savior, Mahomet, and the like;
which things being rightly considered, may not only enable us to foretell the
end of the world, but perhaps the time also: for in the bosom of the heavens
(as we noted in our second part, de vita propaganda et morte retardanda) there
is a Seminary virtue, to be infused upon any for so often as convenience is
bestowed by the sundry Complexions of the Planets, and Ascentions of the
Signs: from this Inferior matter, it raises the Form, from Potentiallity to
Action.

And in the first book and 6. Chap. de Max. Conjunct. We said that the
Celestial bodies do operate, according to the matter disposed; which matter,
if at any time it be found unapt. we must endeavor to prepare, and fit it for
to receive the Celestial form, for according to Aristotle 2 de Anima. Text
26. Agens Natural, non agit in passum nisi secundum materi^m dispositam: A
natural Agent works not upon a subject, but according to the matter
disposed. Wherefore if the effects foretold shall not happen to be verified in
that year, not only in those Universal changes, and conjunctions; but also in
every year, by the particular Revolutions of years, and particular
Constellations; yet in the subsequent years, they shall be verified, after that
the Inferior bodies suscitated by the precedent influences, shall be made
ready: Even as wise men by preceding great Conjunctions, have showed that the
effects thereby signified, were manifested a long time after* as Albumazar
acknowledges in his Iract. of great Conjunctions, but especially in his first
difference cap. 3. viz. That the conjunction which gave signification of the
Flood, happened 379. years before; and that which fore-shewed the birth of
Moses, did precede 80. years, before the effects thereof showed themselves, she
like may be said concerning those Stars, with suddenly appeared in the heavens,
and afterward were dispersed: As that with was observed in the time of
Hypparchus, with signified the transferring of the Greek into the Roman Empire
produced not its effects, till after 63. years: for Hypparchus flourished 10^.
years before Christ; and the Roman Empire (translated from the Greeks) begun
Anno. 42. before the birth of Christ.

The Starr also that was seen in the time of Augustus Caesar, did premonstrate
so many Exiles, and Martyrs, that many took it to be the clear Comet which
should establish the Kingdom of Peace: Others, as it is reported, did conjecture
it to be the Starr, in which Sybilla Tyburtina, showed Augustus Caesar the
Image of a beautiful Virgin, holding a Boy in her bosom, and saying, This
child is greater then thou, worship him. To which Mantuan sufficiently
alludeth, speaking of the aforementioned Sybill.

Haec ( cum Divinos vultus, and sacra pararent
Augusto cum Plebe patres) cito Tiburis Arcem
Liquit, et ingentes veniens ad Caesaris Aulas,
Fulgentem nitido monstravit in aethere circum,
Irideque inclusam, parva cum prole parentem;
Atque manum tendens, vultuque ad Sydera verso
Ille puer quis est? ( inquit) tu desine Caesar
Velle Coli, pueroque Aras, ac Templa relinque,
Ille regit Coelos, atque immortalis Olympi
Possidet imperium, et fatalia temperat Astra.
Pone precor Caesar, fastus Auguste superbos.
Teque ( licet tractes vastae telluris habenas)
Esse sub immenso positum reminiscere summi
Principis imperio, cui rerum aeterna potestas.
Augustus with the Senate, People, All
Fitting themselves for holy mysteries,
She hast's from Tiburs Tower, comes to the Hall
Or Court of Caesar, pointing to the Skies,
Where in a most clear air, she them did show
A mother and her Babe, wrapped round about
In a bright Iris, or most fulgent Bow
Upward her face, and both her hands strecht out,
(Viewing the child, and poynting with her hand)
Who is that Boy? (says she) O Caesar peace,
Worship thou him: The heavens he does command,
The Altars and the Temples now must cease.
Leave them to him, he rules the Firmament,
The immortal heavens he orders, and does guide
The ^atall Stars, under his Government
Are all subjected in the world beside.
Augustus Caesar let thy haughtiness
Be laid aside, what though thou rul'st the earth:
Thou must remember, that thou art much less,
And art his Vassal, bragg not of thy birth.
His power is infinite, and rules on high,
All things are under his Authority.
Yet the effects thereof, ( viz) Preaching of the Gospel, the promulgation and
publication of the Law, the sedition of the people, the troubles, persecutions,
banishments, bloodshed, deaths, wars, etc. had their beginning (God so
pleasing) after many years.

The same we are to understand of other Conjunctions and Mockstarrs, signifying
their effects after many years; and the reason hereof is twofold; the first
Metaphysicall, which we have elsewhere often repeated; the second Physical (by
the first Segm. Aph. 55.) for Quaecunque lentius operantur diutiu^, protrahunt
effect^ suos, All such things as operate slowly, do protract their effects
longer. For neither can the force of a Star lie hid, nor be abolished. Thus
also the Cloud about the Asses plainly shows. Much indeed might be said
concerning these things, yet because we have spoken thereof in another place,
we will therefore (for brevity sake) omit them, only declaring that in this
Age, there was a great Conjunction of and in the first face of Sagittary, now
finished and perfected in the Watery Triplicity: concerning which, mention was
made in our books of great Conjunctions; notwithstanding we will here add
something more, for further explanation.

Seeing therefore that the great Conjunctions of the weightier Planets are wont
to produce great effects, as the changes of Monarchies and Kingdoms, the
coming of Prophets and the like; by them also the dead shall be changed, and
all things shall be renewed, and now shall those Sciences be revealed, which in
ancient time Kings and Princes found out: and regard shall be had to the
Doctrine and Congregations of Learned men. But in our Age new Sciences are not
only found out, but in some measure, men seem to oppose the inventions
themselves.

Indeed from these great Conjunctions, and happy significations of the Planets,
(with respect had to the Lord of the Ninth house,) shall flow Doctrines and
Sciences; and wise men shall be elected, who shall invent new learning: for
like as the causes are, so shall the effects be; for good Conjunctions are wont
to bestow goodness, and good Magisstrate; but evil the contrary, criminal
customs, and conditions: hence also shall wicked rulers be produced for the sin
of the people; deceipts, wars, and Tyrants shall arise, and shall oppose
themselves to peace, tranquillity, and lea^^ing.

For these causes (in ancient time) Learned and wise men were chosen to be
Kings and Princes, and such as were skillful in all Arts and Sciences, and
amongst the Persians, none was elected King, who was not versed in Magic and
the Mathematics, (whence those Kings were called Magi, and wise men) that they
might govern the people rightly. But now adays as well the unlearned, as
learned, are admitted (by inheritance) to the government of Kingdoms.

Besides, in Egypt, Chaldea, Persia, and Greece, where the inventors of
Sciences, and all learning flourished; those that addict themselves to the
study thereof shall now be severely punished, and those Regions at this present
are in a manner quite dispoiled of all Sciences: And it is evident that these
things happened after the great Conjunction in the Fourth house, and false sign
Scorpio, having great force over those Countries.

Which Scorpionisticall Conjunction, and decay of the learning of the
Egyptians being foreseen by the most wise Trismegistus to his unspeakable
grief; he was constrained with a sorrowful and bewailing soul thus to exclaim:

O Egypt! There remains only the Stories of thy wisdom and learning: For
behold, the divinity of Sciences is returned into Heaven, and only perverse,
and ignorant men shall abide on earth. Insomuch that he that would apply
himself to the true study of learning shall be punished with death:

Thus Trismegistus, with how much truth no man is ignorant.

The Roman Empire also, which had been accustomed to elect its King amongst the
valiant Captains of War, stoops now to Clerks, that be strangers to War:
wherefore the great Conjunctions do not only foreshew that; but Kingdoms also
and Cities are governed by the great years of the Planets, which are described
by Wise men; some whereof be 1460. others 520. others 480. others 465. others
428. others 264. and the rest, 260. and the Cities and Kingdoms are in the
height of their Government according to these years: and first they begin to
decline their Government, and then fall into servitude and destruction: so that
it is no wonder, if Cities, and Kingdoms, and Monarchies do change their manner
of Government, and as it were a thing deserted of its presiding Planet, flies
to another nature of other Planets: and so always Kingdoms and Cities, when
they have finished their years, they proceed to worse, and always decline, and
the stars do ruinate and destroy their government and custom, and by that
means the conditions of men become contrary; whereby Seditions, and hatred,
vices, and evil behavior are raised in Cities; and when those things do reign
in Cities, the Portents of the Planets are destructions of government, and so
by those vices flowing from the Planets, Cities and Kingdoms are destroyed, and
led into Captivity, or transferred to a strange Government.

We find also that so often as the Creator of all things has any new Law to
establish in the world, or any other good, for the benefit of man, or any evil
as a scourge for sin; it is his pleasure to admonish all the faithful that
such things are to succeed, yea long before they happen, and this in such
manner as that they should truly acknowledge him to be God, and adore him. The
truth of which is affirmed by so many holy books of the Old Law, wherein the
Prophets foretold all things which were to befall the Hebrews; yea, it was
evermore designed in the Universal Book of Heaven, and demonstrated by the
great Conjunctions, As that Conjunction under the Constellation of Andromeda,
did the Circumcision: The Conjunction in under the image of Cassiopeia, did the
Mosaicall Law; the Conjunction in under the image of Vexillus the first
Emperor: The Sect of the Chaldeans in the Conjunction of and: Whereupon the
Chaldeans did begin their burnt Sacrifices, and worshipped the Divinity believed
by them to be mixed with the fire, and supposing that the fire was changed into
God, it is former accidents still remaining.

So the Sect of the Egyptians by the Congress of,, and the, wherefore they
worshipped the Constellations of Heaven, and the Host of the Sun.

But the Sect of the Sarazens was premonstrated by the application of,, and who
grew in luxury and concupiscence.

So God before the coming of our Savior showed a sign in heaven by the great
of and in the first decade of Virgo with change of Triplicity; concerning which
sign of Virgo, Albumazar in the 6. of his Introduct. Virgo Signum sterile,
tripartitum, biforme, in prima ejus decade, in qua facta fuit talis Conjunctio;
ascendit Puella munda, corpore decora, vultu venusta, habitu modesta, crine
prolixo, manu gemina^ cristas tenens, supra solium aureatum residens, pueruns
nutriens. Virgo is a barren sign, tripertite, double-bodied, in the first
decade whereof (wherein such a Conjunction happened) a^ cendeth a beautiful
Virgin, of a comely body, pleasant countenance, modest attire, long hair,
holding two Plumes in her hand, sitting in a golden Throne, and nourishing a
boy.

The very same did Abraham affirm in his book, called Principium sapientie:
where he says, Ascendiv quoque in prima facie ejus virgo pulchra, and sui
capilli longi, habens in manu sua duas spicas, ipsaque, sedet super sedem unam,
and nutrit puerum parvulum, ipsum lactando ad comedendumque incitando. There
ascends also in the first face thereof a fair Virgin, having long hair,
holding two ears of Corn in her hand, and she sits upon a seat, and
nourishes a little boy by giving him suck, and inciting him to eat.

The Sect also of Mahomet, was premonstrated by the Stars; and we noted lib. 2.
cap. 3. of great Conjunctions, That the of and in with the of the, and the
warlike irradiation of in the year of the world 4271. signified the Law of
Mahomet, and the Turks, and seeing that wherein that happened (by the 2. Quadr.
com. 54.) is the house of, with the of him, and the, for this cause, until
this present time he retains warlike and Lunar manners, and that Law of his
enjoins all kind of rude, gross, and popular things, Pleasures, Vices,
Wickedness, Luxuries, and Rapes, Wars, Conflicts, and Effusion of Blood: and
for that the new place of the is Cancer of which the is Lady, therefore we
conclude the Law of the Mahometans to be Lunar and Martial (by the Authority
of Albumazar, Lib. 1. Differ. 3. and 4. Mag. Con.) and when the Moon shall
signify a rude People, which are secluded from all skilfulness by the
judgment of all Astrologers. Therefore that Law is rude, and gross, popular,
and an enemy to learning, even as the Common people are, for (by reason of the
dominion of Mars) it enjoyneth it self to be protected, not with Arguments, but
Arms: hence it is, that whosoever shall but in the least degree scandalize
their Law, shall be slain with Iron: And because the is exceeding swift in
comparison of the other Planets, therefore shall it vehemently under-value all
other Laws; Nor will it be said to be presidented by another.

In like manner the bringing in of Religion, Letters, and Discipline were
signified in heaven, and men that were excellent in Arts, as we may read 3.
Quadr. So likewise the coming of such men, as should oppose (and wrest things
from) the truth, as Luther, Calvin, and the like, which for brevity sake we
omit, affirming only (and daily experience shows it) That God the Creator of
all things, has written all things in his Universal book of Heaven,
notwithstanding they be hidden from many.

In the interim, we will declare whatsoever we can (darkly) read in that great
book of Heaven: We say [Darkly] because we ought to assure Contingencies,
indeterminate, and by no means with certainty, for by the 1. Segm. Aph. 3.
Arts, que proprus subjectis inherent, nihil certi polliceri de futuris possunt.

An Astrologer ought never to pronounce any thing absolutely, concerning future
events, and it is worse for him to believe that he knows those things, which
he does not know, then to be ignorant of such things as he should know (by 1
Segm. Aph. 78.)

Therefore we will say concerning the corroboration of things, as we have done
in our books of great Conjunctions, and as we have before noted: but before we
come to the great Conjunction of the year. 1603. and to the Mock-star, which
appeared in the fiery Triplicity, Anno 1604. which lasted also for one whole
year, we will first handle the Comet, that appeared Anno 1572. and the great
that happened Anno 1583. in the third Decade of, when there was a change of the
from one Triplicity into another, viz. from the watery into the fiery: Which
Comet and great have not hitherto manifested their effects, by reason of their
gravity, magnitude and slow motion: For the elements and mixed things are not
presently to assume the magnitude of Form, but are disposed in a certain space
of time, and with the time also the form is introduced: so that both by reason
of great Conjunctions, Mockstars, Comets, Eclipses, and other bypast calises
being almost disposed, the form begins to be introduced, and the effects begin
to manifest and lay open themselves, and now we shall begin to taste the first
offerings of great Revolutions.

But before we proceed any further, we conceive this one thing worthy our
notice: that like as the faithful in Christ (laying aside the opinion of
Aristotle, Ptolomy, and others, as well Philosophers, as Astrologers) all those
causes, (which the Philosophers and Astrologers call no causes, but signs of
the mighty and supreme cause) we will enjoin our selves to ascribe for signs,
and will attest the same as formerly we have declared: Therefore we say, that
as well the great Conjunctions, as Mock-stars, Comets, Eclipses, and the like,
ought not to be called the causes of future events, but signs sent from the
Supreme Cause, and from our Savior Christ, for the abomination of the world
(and the same is strongly maintained, in the sayings of Astrologers: especial
by Ptolomy in his Centiloquy, and Apoth. but chiefly in his Apoth. and Aph. 3.)
Because that Arts, which remain in their proper subjects, can affirm nothing
for certain concerning future events: Therefore, an Astrologer ought not
pronounce any thing absolutely concerning future accidents.

But because the hidden secrets of God are impenitrable, therefore we intend
(not as speculators, and screwers out of the secrets of God) to prognosticate
any thing, but (with the Philosophers and Astrologers) it is lawful and
requisite, that we conjecture somewhat about the signs according to the effects
of the Stars, and like one that is parblinde seeing a thing a far off,
discernes only a certain confused shadow, resembling many things, without
knowing certainly what it is by 2 Apot. Com. 5.

The case standing thus, we will come in the first place to the Mock-stars,
which appeared Anno 1572. and 1604. which remained immovable: The first in the
Chair of Cassiopeia, not far from that star in the erection of its seat in the
Milky way, whose Longitude, was degr. 16. 54. of: Its Latitude North degr. 53.
min 45. Its Magnitude exceeded not only the stars of the first light, but also
and ^ in the beginning of its appearance: therefore, we may conclude that this
Mock-star, did exceed the bigness of the earth more then 500. times, and that
this is truth, it is the testimony of Tycho: for although the stars do seem but
very little to us, and appear not unlike little faces in heaven, yet by the
ingenious observations of Mathematitians it is found out that they are not only
equal to the whole Terrestrial Globe, but far exceed it by their greatness,
so that scarce any so little a Star can be seen in the Firmament, but it
exceeds (at the least) 18. times the bigness of the earth; as (not to speak of
others) those Stars that be of the first magnitude, exceed the earth 500. times
in bigness: And though this may seem incredible to many, yet will it not admit
of any doubt in any man that rightly considers their unspeakable distance from
us. Therefore if these little Stars appeared but small to our sight, yet
certainly they were of a huge magnitude.

Wherefore from the beginning, when it far exceeded the Stars of the first
Magnitude, he exceeded the Earth by an incredible quantity: For, if the fixed
Stars of the first magnitude, as it is said, exceed the earth according to
Mathematitians, 500. times, even so this new Star, so much as he was removed
from the Earth had a far greater visible Diameter. It will likewise necessarily
follow that from the beginning it exceeded that quantity which the earth and
water make, much more then 100. times but in progress of time it diminished by
little and little, that at last it vanished to nothing.

Whereby it appears that the opinion of us and others, has hitherto been
erroneous, whilst we thought Vapors to be transmitted into heaven, and
generated Comets, and new Stars: For if this Starr exceeded the earth more
then 500. times, from whence should so many Vapors arise? Therefore we say,
that the matter whereof new Stars are made, is a transparent substance of
heaven, and a Diaphanous or perspicuous corpulency of the heavens; and that it
may be reduced to form: we say, that a new Starr, is the Condensation of the
thin parts of heaven; which indeed is a transmutation of the Diaphanous parts
of the Sky into lightness, of which, here is no place to speak.

As touching the light of the Mock-Starr, Tycho said, it was more fulgent and
radiant then the rest: insomuch, that in the beginning, it was sometimes beheld
in the day time, about noon; the heaven not being obfuscated with the thickness
of the Air. It twinckled also as the other sixed Stars, and for the most part
(but not always) it retained the same color, which was observed from the
beginning, to wax white, and inflamed with a Joviall splendor, but in process
of time the light being pressed together, and thickened: it degenerated into a
fiery red, and Mars-like brightness, like to Aldeboran, or that which shines
ruddily, in the right shoulder of Orion: yet it was not so fiery-red as this on
the shoulder, but came nearer the color of Aldeboran; yet afterward having
lost its Mars-like color, it changed into a pale whiteness; so that in the
end, it became somewhat Saturnine and Venereall.

Another Mock-Starr Anno. 1604. about the beginning of October, until the
month of February 1606. was likewise seen from the most remote and sundry
Climates of the Earth, in the South part of the heavens, in the sign of ^ viz.
Degr. 17. of the same, with North Latitude, concerning which, Kepler said that
the Starr was less then Venus according to its visible quantity; exactly round,
casting no hair, nor beard constantly to any part, like to the fixed Stars,
shooting with beams on every side, like the beams of the fixed Stars, with a
most clear twinkling, with such Glistering, or brandishing so sudden, that
some said they never observed any thing in the heavens, in all their time, to
have so swift a Motion.

The colors changed at every moment, like to a many-angled Diamond, by which
turning the Sun beams upon the eyes of the beholders, will reflect with a
variable brightness; for from a bright Yellow, anon it became Croc^all, in a
moment like unto Purple and Reddish: For the most part it was seen White: after
it was elevated a little higher from the Vapors, it was bigger then the Stars
of the first magnitude, and easy to be distinguished by an amiable and fair
stillness of light, from the turbulent Corruscation of a Starr.

All Astronomers placed it amongst the fixed Stars, because it still kept the
same distance from them: From and is was so much distant every day, as was
their diurnall motion under the fixed Stars, so that this Starr moved not from
them, but they from it; whatsoever point it touched in the rising; it still
moved in the same parallel: wherefore it was not only above the Moon but even
in the high Orb of the fixed Stars, because it had no sensible Parrallax, and
for that also it wanted a proper Motion distinct from that of the fixed Stars.
It remained not all the time of its continuance in the same place, and nigh to
the same Schematismicall Stars, with the Stars in the foot of the Shank; and
in the right Knee of the Serpent, and with the Triangle in the sting of the
Serpent; and occause also it had a most pure light and sudden twinkling, which
the Planets have not, according to that of Aristotle in Post. For that there he
affirms, that higher Stars have a purer light, and greater twinkling.

Therefore we conclude with Tycho, that those New Stars were such: as never
appeared before from the beginning of the world, and that they continued in the
same places of the heaven above a whole year, and were at length successively
dispersed: And therefore are to be accounted miracles in the expectation of all
men* but more in their understanding; and amongst those things which have been
seen since the beginning of the world, in the whole nature of things, and which
be recorded in History, are spectacles to be wondered at, if not the greatest at
least, in respect of those which were prepared; such as was the inhibition of
the Suns course in the time of Jos^^a; or of the Sun returning 10 degrees
backward upon the Dial of King Achaz, whilst Ezechiah King of Judah lay sick.
Or then the Eclipse of the Sun, which happened the day and hours when our
Savior Christ the Son of God offered himself upon the Altar of the Cross, a
sacrifice to his eternal Father for the Redemption of mankind: The Sun then
hiding his face, and sorrowing for the light and beams upon earth; as by which
all things, as well the Sun himself, as all other bodies of the whole world,
both Celestial and Terrestrial were made, disdaining to see him made man for
mankind, and to undergo an ignominious death; a thing so unworthy, and hiding
his face for pity and shame. That this Eclipse of the Sun happened about the
full Moon, when the Passover of the Jews was celebrated, is not to be doubted:
And that then the Sun could not be naturally Eclipsed in regard the, then was
near diametrically opposed to him, and so could not be removed to betwixt the
Sun and our sight, what is he so meanly instructed in the knowledge of heavenly
things, that is ignorant hereof? Wherefore Dionysius Areopagita being then at
Athens, and beholding this miraculous Eclipse of the Sun, Cried out, Aut mundi
Authorem pati, vel Machinam ejus dissolutum iri, That either the God of nature
suffers, or the Fabric of the whole world shall be dissolved: as himself
witnesses, writing to Policarpus.

After such Prodigious wonders (I say) and miraculous works beside the
accustomed order of Nature, which the holy Scriptures do testify to have
happened of old: we hold it requisite, that we demonstrate to the world these
new Stars which appeared in our Age; for that they were truly and indeed such;
we will so certainly manifest that none shall have ground to question it.

For that some Stars like unto the rest, yea, sometime more refulgent, and
which twinkle more, do newly, and suddenly appear unto us, and remain long
unmovable in the highest Region of the Celestial world, is no less miracle
then that the Sun should stand still, go backward, or suffer any Eclipse
without the presence of the: because that any thing which was not before should
appear in heaven ( ex improviso) like as the rest of its moist vapors; is
altogether as strange, as for those things which were lights from the Creation,
to be affected against custom and constant Order.

But what may the great Portents of these Mock-stars signify, (like as also
Tycho said,) seeing that it is unusual, and that we can have but little or no
knowledge therein, for (by the 3. Aph. 129.) Sine exemplo artem condere
temerarium, cum uno vel duobus leve, cum pluribus autem negotiosum, solum
aliquam conjecturam universalem indistinctam, and indeterminatam, and
qu^lisque, sit, in medium afferre non pigebit. To make an Art without any
example were indiscretion, with one or two were of small value, and with many
it is painful, but of ones self to bring some universal, indistinct, and
indeterminate conjecture (of what kind soever it be) into a medium it grieveth
not to declare. For first of all we say (so God illustrating our Intellect)
that before the change of the great was completed from one Triplicity into
another, viz, from the watery into the fiery, from which the mutations of the
world were wont to proceed especially, for and do change and convert things,
and the beginning of the change, shall be when they are changed from one
Triplicity into another in Conjunctions, and from one figure into another
(according to Almanzar Aph. 1^^.) Wherefore seeing that in the watery
Triplicity (as has been said) the Congregation of the Turks, and that now
every Law shall be dissolved by its contrary, (by lib. de Supplem. Almanach
cap. 22 and 20 Apot. Com. 17.) Upon good grounds therefore do they confirm the
observations of the heavens; especially because the Conjunctions in the fiery
Triplicity, as being contrary to the watery, shall dissolve the Laws that were
made in the fiery Triplicity, (as we have said in our books de Max. Con. Where
also we have declared, both the extirpation of the Empire, and the end of the
Turkish Law. I say, that before the embraced Circumgyration of great
Conjunctions in the watery Triplicity, the first Mock-Starr appeared; which
(besides what may be said hereafter) does signify some false Prophet that
shall appear in the world; whose gesture, manners, and power, we shall by and
by demonstrate, so often as we shall consider his site, immobility, color,
and light, and the Applications of the Planets, which being had, we shall look
to satisfy in some measure that 1. Aph. 13. because that the principles of the
Art, are three; Reason, Sense, and experience, but the principles of the
operations be four; the Planets, the parts of Heaven, the fixed Stars, and the
Situation.

But before we will give a reason for what we do (for to such things as are not
according to reason, we must not give trust) nor as they may be of long
continuance are they to be hoped for, therefore (by the 1. Aph. 5.) we say with
Abraham, lib. Conjunct. who writes concerning the world, or an Age cap. 2.
That a great Conjunction has signification upon a Prophet that shall arise to
elevate some Nation, if so be the happen in the 9. or 3. House in respect of
the sign ascending in the Revolution of the year of the, for these two Houses
do signify even wonderful Accidents.

Nevertheless, seeing that we cannot have the precise Horoscope of the great
Conjunction, (because of the slowness of their Motion) nor of the Revolution,
for the reasons alleged 2. de Max. Con. we will take (according to Bonatus,
Albumazar, and other skillful Astrologers) the great Conjunction it self for
the Horoscope, and according to the order of the Signs, we will seek out the
other Houses with their Signs; and doubtless we shall find that wonderful
Mock-Starr, to fall out in the third Mansion of the heavens. Or if we will
consider the Sign ascending at the time of the Revolution of the year 1583. In
Italy, when that great Conjunction happened; the Sign Virgo ascended according
to Copernicus; and the MockStarr was then in the ninth House, and the Sign
Virgo was in the Horoscope of the grear Conjunction which preceded the coming
of oar Savior, as formerly we noted.

Moreover, if we rightly consider, that this Mock-Starr was found not only in
that great Conjunction of the year 1583. in the third House; but that also in
other former great Conjunctions it fell in such Houses, as have signification
of a false Prophet, and change of Laws: and that this is truth (before we come
to the handling there-, of) the foundation is laid Seg. 2. Aph. 206. Cometes
mutantes Leges si in 9 ^el 11 loco apparuerint, seditionem in lege etc. Commets
that appear in the 9 or 11 Houses do change Laws, and cause sedition therein.
And the same thing they signify in the opposite places; and it is reported,
that in the great Conjunction of the year 1583. It was observed to be in the
third House, in the other of the year 1563. in the 11. in that of 154^ in the
seventh. Diametrically opposed to the first house according to that assertion
Seg. 2. Aph. 204. In the other Anno. 1524. It again happened in the third
House; and in the year 1504. it fell out in the eleventh.

And that the Mock-starr was near unto the Aequinoctiall color, none ever
doubted, seeing that also its right Ascension 0 Degr. 26. min. of Aries, and
the Mid-heaven Degr. 0. 29. min. of the same sign in the place of the
Conjunction, was of the eighth and ninth Orb, which is in the Intersection of
the Ecliptique and Aequinoctiall circles: Which also, in regard that the head
of Aries of the little circle of the eighth Sphere, is in the same Longitude
with the head of Aries, which is the Center of the little circle of the ninth
Sphere, at the time of our Saviors coming, does also confirm such a sign,
signifying religion, as we are rightly taught of Ptolomy, 2. Apot. Text 37. Who
affirms, that the Aequinoctials have signification of holy things, and the
Tropicks of divine worship, the Mutation of the Air, and of Laws and customs in
public affairs. And Haly in his Comment, declares the cause thereof,
saying, that in such Aequinoctiall signs, is made an increase of the days and
nights, like as when the Sun is in Aries he increases the day: and whilst he
is in Libra, the night. Therefore he says, that forasmuch as an agreement of
men may be signified by the Aequinoctiall signs; even so also here: But Laws
do more evidently consist by the change of opinions, which is signified by the
Aequinoctiall signs, because while the Sun is in the Aequinoctiall signs he
sometimes makes 24. minutes of declination in one day; wherefore he produces
the less change in humane affairs: But there is no greater alteration then the
Promulgation of the Law, which for the most part is made against the
constitutions of Princes, and the pain of death, and the accord of Senators and
Magistrates; so that its like to a burning Torch in the minds of men which is
carried with a mighty force, like to one gasping with a despised breath for the
fear of death, and favor of Princes, and for the civil Laws (in their
peculiar benefits:) so that some, contrary to all humanity, and for the love
they bear to the Law, (now they submit themselves constantly) rejoice to have
them tormented by the Executioners.

And there is another reason of the similitude, because the beginning of the
Aequinoctiall sign is Common to both Hemispheres: So also those Laws are
Common amongst all humane kind. Therefore are the Laws rightly assimulated and
attributed to the Aequinoctiall signs.

But the Tropicall signs are the chief promoters of the change of Laws;
because the Tropicks are furthest distant from the Aequinoxes, and for that
when the Sun is in them, he changes his course: for if he first go toward the
south, when he enters Capricorn, by the contrary reason he returns Northward
when he enters Cancer. For the chang of customs is performed by the same reason
that the change of Laws is: because the change of Laws and customs are equally
necessary. Therefore this Mock-starr being in the Aequinoctiall color and
point, signisieth some great man that shall alter Laws.

Seeing likewise, that is was of the complexion of or and somewhat exceeded the
clearness of the Comet called Milex, at whose appearance, such men as changed
Laws, and offended Kings and Potentates appeared: (for Comets that be very
clear and conspicuous and also moveable, and of long continuance, presignify a
change of Empires by the 5 Aph. 15.) much more may this Mock-starr signify the
same thing, in regard that it was bigger to our thinking, of longer
continuance, and more fixed then any other Comet; and the end thereof
Tragical, violent, and with much effusion of blood, imprisonments and exiles,
because the same Mock starr was composed of a Ruddy, and afterward of a Pale
white.

Because in the exaltation of the Moon, which helps much in signification of
false Prophets, like as Albumazar teaches Tract. 1. Differ. 3. And at the time
of the great Conjunction, there was in Geminy a square aspect, beholding the
Conjunction applied to the south Node, running through the 3 and 4 Mansion of
heaven, signifying the worst conditions of a false Prophet. But of these
afterward.

Because the last Lunar Religion, even as also (as we have it from Ovid in his
Pook de Vetula) the years number from the beginning of the world, until the
consummation thereof, is divided into 6 parts or ages, the government of every
one of these ages, is attributed to one of 6 Planets, for is excluded, as being
the peculiar significator of Faith, by the doctrine of Albumazar Tract. 1.
differ. 4. viz.

The first Age of the world was attributed to Saturn, because that (the
significator of faith) was first embraced by him, in the 24 degr. of * and at
that time the Jews prevailed; for as Saturn, who applies not to the of the
other Planets, but all of them to the Conjunction of him; so that Law would
acknowledge no other; but all that succeeded believed it: and because is of a
dry nature; and for that the great was in a fixed sign, therefore must that
Law needs be constant and permanent, because that when any impression is made
in that which is dry, it is of a difficult extraction: This the Complexion of
the Hebrews especially shows. And for that is of profound counsel (as has
been said) therefore they uphold their Laws by their stedfastness, prudence,
wisdom, and counsel: And in regard he is the first amongst the Planets,
therefore they reverence one only independent, insociate, first mover; and in
respect of complexion, and the sign of Justice possessing the ninth House from
the Conjunction, it foreshewed them to be a fruitful people, an honest Lineage,
and all certain things, as Fortitude, Temperance, Patience, Wisdom, Justice;
and Prophesies, Temples, and Divine Ceremonies, righteous dealings and Laws.

Other 3 Ages were also finished in the days of Ovid: And (as we have formerly
noted) in the of and was the original of the sect of the Chaldeans: So
likewise the of and the begun the sect of the Egyptians* and with that of the
Sarazens.

Moreover, Ovid was of opinion; that two other Faiths ( viz. of Mercury and the
Moon,) were to succeed, and he flourished in the 5184. year of the World, that
was An. 15. before the Nativity of our Savior, which Law of Mercury is hard to
be believed, by reason of its so many ebbings and flowings, changes, and
doubtings, which may be confirmed by any Arguments, and reasons, speeches and
persuasions: And for that he was assisted by, therefore it beautified the
Temples with Tombs, Images, Musical Instruments, and Harmony: And because has
signification of Women, and Orations, they therefore worship their bodies, and
in regard of the Concession of the Moon, which signifies the people; she
denoted a People that should do much good; But the significations of and
demonstrated of Ptolomy 3. Apot. 12. 13. And because that has dominion over
the Intellect, and wisdom; and that his exaltation and house be in, therefore
has God pointed out by these signs humanity, and annexed Divinity.

But where shall these things happen, may some say? Albumazar, Lib, 6, of his
Introduct. tells us, Quod regiones a virgin illustratae, sunt Judea, Gallilea
cum confinibus Euphratis, and quaedam Persia insulae. That the Regions
illustrated by the Virgin are Judea, Galilea with the Confines of Euphiates,
and certain Islands of Persia.

The last Lunar Law declared by Ovid, which was the last, shall indeavonr to
corrupt and take away all Laws, and shall strive to usurp unto it self divine
worship, because the Orb of the Moon is the lowest, and her motion the most
swift, therefore it cannot continue long, by the testimony of Ovid, by reason
of its agreeableness with the Moon, which quickly and frequently changes both
in her motion and light.

And seeing (as we have said) that in this Mock-star the may avail much,
perhaps she may signify that false Prophet, for she is Lady of the place of
the Tropique, which is of wonderful virtue and influence, in certain
constellations and Conjunctions which have there happened. The Incubi do take
the sperm of men, and emitt it into Hystera, a woman, or Virgin, and thereby
wonderful men are generated, (such as they say Merline was) and he shall be a
false Prophet. So long also as the heart of the North shall Horoscopate the
Lady thereof, and; they shall prepare wise men, working wonders. The Mock-star
also which appeared Anno 1604, so likewise the Conjunction Anno 1603, were
situated in the East, signifying a great man to be born: Therefore (2 Aph.
204.) It is said, Quod Com^tes in Orient maximi exortum significat viri, magni
legum latoris. That a Comet in the East, signifies especially the appearance
of a great man who shall be a maker of Laws.

And forasmuch, as it happened in the Constellation of Cassiopeia, and was
afterward reduced into the 7. degree of Taurus, therefore his arising may be
easily conjectared to pass, under the earthly Triplicity: Or if we will deduce
it from the great Conjunction, his arising shall be in the watery Triplicity:
And for that the sign Scorpio is the 9. from the place of the Conjunction, it
is probable to be in Assyria or Egypt. And being in the first decade of
Taurus, he shall be (according to the learning of the Egyptians) rather of a
short, then long stature, great-eyed, thick-bearded, thick-necked, whereon also
shall be a mark, and another upon his head; a broad forehead, sharp-nosed, of
a black curled hair, and small Members; an eater of an unsatiable appetite*
walking strongly: And by reason that Scorpio falls out in the 9 House from the
Conjunction (whereof Mars is Almuten) he shall acquire Kingdoms by Rapine,
Fortitude, and cruelty: for it should have been by Lature and frand, if it had
been Saturn (by the 5. Aph. 16.) He shall also be terrible to devils, neither
shall he fear want; nor shall banishment, or imprisonment affright him, neither
shall he dread any grief, or regard to undergo the pains of death; he shall,
not only by the power and virtue of words, but even by his own appearance,
drive away evil spirits* with Magical delusions also, eitherby spells, or the
Appellations of certain spirits, and by invocations, he shall attempt
wonderful things. He shall be endued with a most excellent wit, and a
foreknowledge of future events. He shall be brim-full of Hypocrisy, and lies,
and shall have a cauterized Conscience, and shall be the cause of much
bloodshed: He shall know how to distinguish betwixt true Doctrine, and Heresy;
and (if we consider the place of the Mock-star,) he shall seem to incline to
the Faith of the Turks, and Hebrews.

Furthermore, The Indians say: That in whatsoever place of the Zodiaque a
Cornet first appears, from that place shall arise a strong man, having a sword
in his left hand, but in his right hand a staff, and upon his shoulders, 2.
Candles: And in the same manner, a ship shall ascend, upon which shall be a
Lion; and upon the ship a naked man sitting, and under the ship is the one half
of the body of a dead woman.

What is meant by the Sword, Staff, the Candles upon the man's shoulders? What
the Lion upon the Ship, the naked man, or the dead woman, let the lovers of
truth enquire: Notwithstanding if you collocate the star in the 1. and (the
house of and exaltation of) in the ninth House the dominion of the Malevolents
shall be manifested.

But the other Mock-star of the year 1604* which appeared (according to it is
visible quantity) less then, changed its color every moment, like to a
Multiangled Diamond, with which if you turn the unbeams upon the eyes of the
beholders, it will reflect with a variable luster: For from a bright yellow,
anon it became Croceal, again in a moment like unto purple and reddish; for the
most part, it appeared white, and of an amiable, and undisturbed light, and as
formerly we have declared; so that notwithstanding it may portend turbulencies,
and seditions, yet in the end it may portend the Kingdom of peace; and the
rather by reason of the color, and variety of the color of, who was Lord of
the great Conjunction, which preceded the coming of our Savior: Wherefore,
there must needs be some profound mystery in those 2. Mock stars.

1. In respect of the distance of time betwixt the appearance of the one and
the other; in regard the space of 33. years did intervene betwixt them,
measuring the years of our Savior: Therefore like as by the first we
prophesied of the destruction of Monarchy, erected under the watery Triplicity,
viz. that of the Turks, because in Taurus, which is opposite to Scorpio; and
the arising of a false Prophet, and of the last Law which is to come: even so
also may we prophecy of his coming (by the second,) who disposes all things
without second causes: And seeing that this star likewise remained firm, it
demonstrates effects, also long-continuing, and powerful: The wise Indians
say, Circa illam partem in qua Pseudostellarefulxit, ascendere virum aurum visu
representantem: That about the same part of the Heavens in which a Mock-star
first appears shall a man arise, who will in show resemble gold.

From all which, we may gather the great changes of Laws, and customs: For
seeing that the first mock-star, was observed to be in the Constellation of
Cassiopeia, it foretold, Imprisonments, Banishments, Tribulations, heaviness,
and grief of heart, Anxieties, Oppressions, and losses amongst the people; and
being in a fixed sign ( viz.) Taurus, it threatened sterile and dear years, by
the 7. Aph. 34. And a stability, and durability of those effects, by the 2.
Aph. 54. Which is further confirmed by its continuance: For, every Comet or
other star was wont to last (at the most) but the space of six months (by 2.
Apot.) except that Comet, which in the time of Josephus (as himself reports
Bell. Jud.) appeared for the space of a year over the City of Jerusalem,
foreshewing her dest^uction: But this miraculous star lasted more then a whole
year; so that it is not to be doubted, but that its effects will extend
themselves to many future years: And because it was immovable, and in the 12. a
fixed sign, it does not only premonstrate a continuance of misfortunes,
according to Messahala cap. 10. But likewise Seditions amongst men, (by the 3.
Aph. 117.) and very much effusion of blood: And this we will prove in the first
place.

1. Because (as before we noted) from a white, it changed to a ruddy Mars* like
color.

2. Because, until it had appeared above an entire year and certain months,
and in all that time moved through the houses of Mars.

3. For that in every great Conjunction in the watery Triplicity as well the
future, as those that are past, mischief is still done unto it by the
unfortunate aspect of Mars: Wherefore it will be easy to pronounce the
extermination of the Sect of the Turks, not only from the change of the
Triplicity, but also by the stars being opposed to the sign of the great
Conjunction: And that the star (as but now we noted) was always hurt by Mars,
is evident; for, in the year 1583. whilst that great Conjunction happened in
the 3. face of Mars beheld the star with a; for the star (as has formerly been
said) was in the 3. and in the fifth. So in the year 1563. Aug 24. when there
was the same great Conjunction in the last degr. of, Mars was then posited in
the place of the mock-star. And in the year 1544. Sept. 25. when the like great
Conjunction also fell out in the last degree of, although then Mars did not
behold the Mock-star, yet he beheld the great with a Aspect, which is accounted
for a.

Anno 1624. Febr. 1. there was the same great in the end of the first decade
of, with the presence of Mars in to the Mock-star.

And in the year 1504. June 10. was another in the second face of, and then the
Sun was in with, Venus in to; And Mars (for certain) beheld the place of the
Mock-star, that appeared 1572. with a Platique square.

By all which it appears: That Mars did always afflict this mock-star with
public, and manifest enmity, as well before, as after its appearance, so
likewise from hence, and from the change of the Triplicity, by the great
Conjunctions from the watery into the fiery, from the mock-star in opposition
to the sign Scorpio, we pronounce the extermination of the Sect of the Turks,
and of Mahomet, and the turbulent, and violent birth and death of a false
Prophet.

Nevertheless Albumazar ( Tract. 5. Differ. 7. Mag. Con.) affirms that if any
of the Stars shall appear in the sign Taurus having hair, it premonstrateth
misfortune of Wars, and Rumors of terrible things in the Country of the
Romans, and vehement diseases shall afflict the inhabitants of Babylon, and a
dearth of Corn, and Altradenen shall be mingled; and the inhabitants of Italy
shall sustain much misfortune, and shall undergo captivities, and consequently
oppression and mortality: And they shall commit injuries one against another:
And men shall incur dry diseases, as the scab, and the itch, and there shall be
a great death of Oxen, and a decay of Vines; and some part of the Country shall
be made desolate, by a vehement cold, and corruption of their Harvest, and by
the destruction of the fruits of their Trees, and through want of Tillage and
Plantations in the Country, they shall fear the King of their enemies:
Albumazar foretells evil of men, and a decay of such as be good: injuries and
Rebellions amongst them; and when its Declination falls out in the beginning of
Aries it portends much war in diverse Regions, and great effusion of blood, the
destruction of great men, and a choice of such as be evil and infirm, and an
Odium shall fall among the Inhabitants; and they (if not more Regions) shall
subject themselves to the King of Babylon, and Haly lib. 8. Cap. 41. says the
same, affirming that there will be a decay in the territories of Christians,
and of Babylon.

Now if these things (by the authority of Albumazar and Haly,) be signified by
a Simple Comet; How much more (then) by this mock star, which was observed to
be far greater, and of longer continuance?

And in the year 1603. in the end thereof, was a great Conjunction of and (as
formerly we noted) revolved to the fiery Triplicity in the first face of
Sagittary, not far from the Scorpions heart, of the first magnitude, of the
nature of Mars, with the presence of in a ^ of ^ and a long of the: we called
this a great, because by the first Aph. 67. Maxima Conjunctio dicitur cum
permutando se ex aqueo signo Arietem ingreditur, A great Conjunction is said to
be, when by removing it self out of a watery sign, it enters into the sign
dries, therefore the first is no such one, for another happened in Leo, and we
conclude with Albumazar ( Tract. 1. Differ. 2. That the sign Sagittary is the
strongest of the signs of the fiery Triplicity, Leo indifferent, and the
weakest.

This great (as we have it elsewhere) and let the Reader excuse us, if we
repeat it often) for, by the 4. Aph. 85. Repetitio necessaria est in hac
scieentia, vel ob difficultatem, vel ob necessitatem, vel ob utilitatem
ingentem, vel ob contradictionem) Repetition in this Science is requisite,
either by reason of difficulty, necessity, exceeding benefit, or to avoid
contradiction: Signifies the destruction of the Empire of Mahomet, then an
universal peace, with the universal Empire of Christians, yet not without
labor, difficulties, bloodshed, and by infinite infelicities, Rebellions,
Discentions, and Treacherousness, by reason of the presence of the Scorpions
heart, and Mercury, and the Quartile of Mars, and because of the appearance of
the Mock-star in such a Triplicity; concerning which star, (in imitation of
Albumazar Tract. 5. Differ. 7.) we say, That if any of the Stars (having hairs)
shall appear in the Direct of Sagittary; it signifies the vehemence of a King
over his people, and his coveting of moneys, the depression of men, and the
taking of things by violence, injustice, and injuries, with the death of such
Nobles, as had their honor under the fiery Triplicity, and consequently it
foresheweth a drought, and death of the Inhabitants, and the destruction of
their Kings son; and that their cattle shall be raised to great rates in many
parts, a vehemence of heat, and a decay of fruits, the death of Kings, and
Citizens; and much lewdness in sundry places.

And (as we instanced before) If so great effects are signified by Comets,
which last but the space of three or four months; what shall this Mock star
portend, which lasted above a whole year? Moreover, if that moving Mock star of
the third magnitude, in the days of Hypparchus did portend a mutation of the
Monarchy of the Greeks, into that of the Romans: How much more may these
Mock-stars (of the years 1572. and 1604. which remained immovable, and
exceeded all the stars of Heaven in magnitude) foreshew not only their changes,
but even their destruction?

We must now come to the particular times, when these things shall happen, and
in what places; for, in this year, 1625. there begins a preparation for War,
between the Princes in, and without Italy. The Plague likewise rages in sundry
parts of Sicilia, and a dearth of Corn. The effects proceed not only (as some
suppose) from the annual Revolution; for the annual Revolution begins
(according to Ptolomy) when the Sun enters into the first point of, and as well
the preparation for wars, as those Pestilent diseases, had their birth in
former years: wherefore, such wonderful effects cannot be produced from the
simple annual Revolution, without the Eclipses of the Luminaries, and some
other notable Constallations, as the most learned Ptolomy has insinuated 4.
Apot. 2. Therefore we may the rather conclude: that these things have arisen
from former causes; for as it has often been urged, Corpora Coelestia non
agere in instanti, sed cum tempore; The Caelestiall Bodies do not operate upon
a sudden, but with some delay: And, as Aristotle attesteth, Natura ^on facit
saltum, Nature works not by leaps.

Moreover, we (in our 2. book de Max. Con. c. 6.) foretold this year 1625. to
be infortunate^ the words were these [But some may say, where and when shall
these things be? (These things and the former are handled in the preceding
Chapter) for we prophesied of War, of the dearth of Corn, Plague, and
dissentions, which shall be manifested in those Regions, which are subject to
the sign Cancer, and such other signs as be opposite, and in Quartile
thereunto, and those places are mentioned by us, liba. cap. ult. De mutatione
Aeris: As concerning the time when those things shall happen: We say they will
happen in the end of the second year from the, when the malevolents shall come
to the Sun; that is, in the end of the year, 1624. and in 1625.]

And a little after in the same Chapter, Page 79. at the end, and in the
beginning of page 80. we said [But in the year 1625. although there happen four
Eclipses, whereof neither of these horrible ones of the Sun can be seen of us,
nor the latter of the Moon; yet the former of the Moon may be observed in our
Horizon, which shall happen upon Sunday the 23. of May according to the New,
but the 13. of the same month after the old account, not far from the North
Node in the 3. degr. 20. min. of, and the Digits eclipsed shall be 2 and about
15 min. the beginning at six hours 24. minutes, the middle, or true, or the
full moon at seven hours seventeen minutes. The end at eight of the clock, and
ten minutes of the following night: which eclipse happens in the place of the
ship, and in the platique square of an infortune: whereby (besides those
pestiferous diseases now mentioned, from that time, we may easily point out
Ruin, and great alteration of the A^e; and much wars, many conflicts, sudden
deaths, effusion of blood, and assault to be made against some King,
troublesome, and pernicious seditions.]

And in like manner it may be observed, that such effects are enraged, or put
forward by the Eclipses of the precedent year, 1624. (almost) in which year,
there happened likewise an Eclipse of the Sun, to the quantity of eleven Points
and half, in the nineteenth degree of ^.

The 12. of October 1605. it came to the opposition of the glittering Mock-star
1572. Moreover, in the year 1620. there happened an eclipse of the Moon in the
eighteenth degree of Gemini, being 19. points and half, darkened in opposition
to the star, that appeared 1604. and (according to P^olomy) it incontinently
produced its effects:

Whereby it appears, that the future Catastrophe of the world, shall not be
this year; for these effects do not arise from the Mockstars, and great
Conjunctions, but from causes that be less universal: And the present
Accidents of the world, as of wars, the Plague, and such others, are as it were
the first offerings of the great Revolutions of Italy, and the world.

Therefore we will conclude, that the Revolutions of sublunary things may be
produced in future years, sc. when the great Conjunction happens in the
watery Triplicity; that is, in the end of that Triangle, Anno 1583. it shall
come to the Mock-star, which appeared Anno 1562. And such a direction in the
opinion of Tycho (according to the Zodiacall degrees) shall fall out in the
year 1632. near unto which time the great Conjunction that happened in the
fiery Trigon Anno 1603. comes to the square synister of Mars, who beheld that
great Conjunction by a Quartile Aspect in the Radix. Moreover, the great
Conjunction of Leo, Anno 1623. comes (almost at the very same time) by
direction to the Triangle of the Star which resulst in the year 1604.

Besides in the year 1630. The Absis of Saturn is changed from Sagittary, the
house of, to Capricorn his proper house: And it is not to be doubted, but that
the first point of Capricorn, is a place very powerful, because it is the
solstitial point, yet the terms belong to Mercury, who augment drought and
moisture, the Pestilence, scarcity of fruits, and animals, for has
signification of cold and dryness; Mercury portendeth dryness, coagulation, and
deadly winds (by 7. Aph. 69.) and variety of the season: Besides, inundations,
Earthquakes, Frosts, and snow, and extreme cold, by 7. Aph. 67. and when he is
near unto the third stars of Sagittary, of the third magnitude, nigh to the
Shaft, or in the shaft it self, he has greatest force, so that then Traitors,
and Man-slayers are produced.

The permutation likewise of the Absides of the Planets (especially of) do
change Kingdoms, and Regions, and Religious by the 1. Aph. 37. and when it
shall be translated to an earthly sign, and to the Tropique of in the terms of
there shall be great earthquakes by the 7. Aph. 124. For, when the Absides of the
infortunes shall be in watery signs, especially in: and, there will be
inundations; But if in fiery signs, barrenness, and Cons^agrations: If in
Aerie, a general and great destruction; and if in earthly signs, great
Earthquakes shall succeed.

Besides what has been said, this change also of the Absides of, do confirm
what formerly we have delivered touching the false Prophet by the 3 Aph. 136.
In the transmutation of the Angis, and of the Regal and great Conjunctions,
great men are born, although the Genitures do not show it so expressly.

By the change of the Absides of in Mahomet had his growth; Therefore by the
same mutation of the Absis in the opposite sign, he shall suffer detriment,
decay, and come to nothing: And this may be proved by the predictions of
Mahomet, the lying Prophet, in things belonging to the Kingdom of glory; (but
perhaps he may have spoken the truth, in many things touching the success of
the Empire, of such who should follow his Law, and especially when he foretold
the time, wherein the Mahumetan Laws was about to be destroyed) It is reported
by many, that Mahomet had the spirit of Divination; of others, that he was
Lunatique, or oppressed with an evil spirit whereby he foretelling something,
which was to be performed by the Devil, by little, and little, he grew into
great esteem amongst the ignorant people, insomuch that from a driver of
Camels, he became the husband of an exceeding rich Heir; whereupon the spirit
within him grew very haughty; and he begun to prophecy many things, and (by
the help of Serguis Nestorianus the Heretic, he was made Legislator, and
wrote the Alcoran; The which (God suffering it) he knew should have a great
increase for 1000 years, but those being finished, the Mahumetans that
succeeded, grew so faint, for the death of their King, that the Law by him
established was no longer observed. Wherefore the period of the 1000. years of
the Law of Mahomet shall be thus manifested.

The years of Mahomet of Hagira begun, when Mahomet undertook his expedition
for the defense of Religion, which was in the year of Christ 603. and he died
in the year following, when he had 40. years: so that by accounting Hagira from
this year; about the year 1630 when there shall happen so many Revolutions of
the heavens, and when the Aux of Saturn passes into the sign opposite to Cancer
(in which was the increase of his Law) shall be the end and destruction
thereof; but by the word end, we understand not a total extirpation, but a
sensible beginning of its destruction.

Again (to speak Astrologically) seeing that the Faith of Mahomet remains
Martial and Lunar, if we will take the lesser years of these Planets, they
will make up the 40. Mahumetan years, ( sc.) 25. of the Moon, and 15. of Mars:
Lastly, if we will take the lesser, greater, and mean years of these Planets,
and add them to the 591. year from the birth of Christ, in which year Mahomet
was born; his great destruction shall begin about the year 1648. And if to
those years we add also the Fridary years of these Planets, his total, and
last destruction shall be about the year 1663. after great and horrible
slaughters, and ealamities, and after the death of the false Prophet.

The great Revolutions of the world and the unfortunate effects of the by past
Profections of the great Conjunctions preceding the Flood, Christ, and Mahomet,
are nowconfirmed: For, the profection of the great Conjunction, which preceded
the Flood, comes, in the year 1632. to the sign of Scorpio, which is the sign
of the Turks, and of Mahomet (as before we mentioned) and it is confirmed 1.
Aph. 68. by Albumazar, Tract 4. Differ. 8. They foreshew that there shall
appear in those Regions, and Cities, that are under the dominion of Scorpio
(such be Judea, Cappadocea, Assyria, Mauritania, Egypt, Cathalonia, and the
like) Kings of beautiful faces, many monstrous and unnatural things, expending
much moneys, and Venus: The Ptisick, and Palsy; medicines shall be much
desired, and the wits of men shall be slender, and weak, about such things as
they shall endeavor to find out, and excessive plundering shall be multiplied
among the ungodly, and lamentation and imprisonments, distresses, sorrows,
treachery, and accusations, lameness, and feebleness, and diseases, and
darkness shall from time to time possess the air, and rain, snow, hail, thunder,
lightning, and storms, and daily commotions of the Elements shall be increased.

In the same year 1632, the profection of the sign ascendant of the
Conjunction, which preceded the Flood, divolved to the beginning of Aries,
which signifies that in those Regions, which are under the dominion of Aries,
(as Germany, France, Brittany, Basternia, Syria, Palestina, Polonia, Mino, the
upper Burgundy, Swedeland, the upper Silesia, and part of Augusta, shall use
instruments of Iron, and Arms, and the like: and slaughter, contention, and
dirision shall attend men's actions, and speedy change from one condition to
another: and death shall be ^eared amongst them, and their harvest shall be wasted.

In the same year 1632, the sign ascendant of the conjunction, which Preceded
the coming of Christ; voluing to the 17. Degr. of, signifies (according to
Albumazar, Differ. 2. Tract. 4.) that there shall appear in such Regions as are
subject to the sign ( viz. India, Arriana, Gedrosia, Macedonia, Illyria,
Thracia, Albania, Rossina, Bulgaria, Lituania, Saxonia, Massonia, Turingia,
Hessia, Marchia, Styrie, the Orchades Islands) great concupiscence in Women,
whence shall proceed Adulteries, Rapes, preposterous Lust, Wrath, Anguish,
Lies, Injuries, Deceit and wickedness, men routing one another out of their
habitations: And the King of Babylon shall be in danger, by reason of some of
his Enemies; and misfortunes shall happen in his City, through fear and death,
and terrible rumors and discord shall fall amongst men: Afterward the King
shall recon^^^e them, and blood shall be shed about Babylon, and that at the
Aequidistance of the Sun to the third face of Scorpio.

The profection of the Conjunction, which preceded the coming of Christ, to the
24. Degr. of Gemini, signifies (according to Albumazar, Differ. 3. Tract. 4.)
to those Provinces that be subject to that sign (as Hyrcania, Armenia,
Martiana, Cyreniaca, Arme^ia inferior, Egypt, England, Sardinia, Brabant,
Wittenburgh, Flanders, Lumbardy, and the like) that great Consultation will be
had about Supernatural Mysteries, as Divinity, and Celestial Sciences, the
Essence of Faith, and Prophecy; and in those things goodness of Countenance,
and greatness of Spirit shall prevail, moderate and specious pretenses and
actions, and mutual changes of things: And that the King of Babylon shall be
disguised for the Cause of his Princes, and shall be displeased with some of
them: And there shall be an Insurrection in Armenia, and they shall kill one
another; and afterward those that survive shall fly unto foraign Cities, and
their condition shall be changed, and their Enemies shall prevail against them,
and overcome them: And evil shall happen unto the Romans, and they shall dye of
sundry Diseases, and their sorrows shall be multiplied by reason of these
things: And disasters are threatened to befall the Inhabitants of Spain through
Murder, Sickness, much Thunder and Lightning, and Easterly winds, destroying
fruits, and especially in the Southern parts Abortive births, and death amongst
children and young men.

The profection of the Ascendant of that years Conjunction to that in Numidia,
Africa, Bithinia, Phrygia, Ochiden, Carthage, France, Scotland, Granada,
Prussia, Holland, Zeland, Burgundy (according to Albumazar, Tract. above
quoted, Differ. 4.) there will be Death and Poverty, and their fear shall be
increased by their Enemies, and Botches and Death shall befall them; and the
year shall be remarkable to men, by reason of many things that will happen in
it, as slaughter, and multiplicity of destroying Locusts, and other Creatures,
and Wolves shall do hurt unto men.

The profection of the Conjunction, which signified the Law of Mahomet to the
12. degree of Aquarius, his square sinister signifies out of Albumazar, Tract.
4. Differ. 11. that hurt will befall Travelers; Vineyards will be spoiled
through too much wet, and there shall be abundance of Locusts, and all places
on the seashore, or upon the bank, will be fearfully endangered by droughts,
sicknesses, and the like: And much goodness, and joy shall be multiplied in
Arabia, and the Romans shall quarrel with their enemies, and there shall be
loss in Turkey.

The profection of the Sign Ascendant, of the Conjunction, which signifies the
Sect of Mahomet, to the 23. degree of, betokens misfortunes, downfals, and
loss of the Turkish Laws, by reason of deceit, and treachery.

The profection of the sign ascendant, of that year in which the happened,
signifying the Law of Mahomet, to the 24, degree of the opposite sign to, and
Regulus, a star of the first magnitude, and Imperial, signifies great changes,
and warfare amongst the Turks, and of Christians with Infidels, because it is
in the square of and in of, which will produce great oppressions.

Now considering, and weighing, so many, and great influences of the heavens
clashing with one another, and that for so many causes, that one Form may be
drawn out of the heavenly mixture, according to the first doctrine of the first
Aphorism; Scientia causarum tribus modis perficitur, quod futuri sint, quod
accidant tandem, and quod tunc accident, The knowledge of causes is performed
by three manner of ways, the things which are to come, which happen after some
space of time, and which shall fall out at length. Therefore it is a very
difficult thing to understand what is meant by these three; which consideration
is a choice Science, and a granted truth, not any where to be found but in the
Books of Astrology, according to the 1. Aph. 34. It is an excellent Science,
but most laborious and full of difficulty: and therefore (by the 1. Segm. Aph.
105.) many do abandon Astrology as vain, others as thinking it uncertain;
Nevertheless (we duly considering the sundry causes, and influences of the
heavens, as well those that be more rare, as those that happen frequently; and
considering also, that they are wrapped up in the choicest Philosophy: whereas
(by 3. Aph. 155) Astrologers, as they be only Fortune Tellers, are the worst of
men, deceivers, and of corrupt behavior: But Natural Philosophers, studious of
the truth, and virtuous: And for these things only, an Astrologer to be
accounted a speaker of the Truth; and honest, so long, as in his predictions he
adheres to the Principles of Natural Philosophy:) we will adventure, with the
best of our understanding to the judgment of future Revolutions; and shall
declare, that near the year 1632. either a little before, or after the
beginning thereof, there shall be a sensible, and manifest Catastrophe of the
whole world, and the destruction of the Law of Mahomet and the Turks. And then
perchance (as we have often said) shall a false Prophet arise, or a Great man;
for betwixt the Mockstar (a 100. times repeated) Anno 1572. and that other in
1604. The mean years do number the age of our Savior, and if we will add the
same years to the year 1604. they will fall out in the year 1632. wherein the
great Conjunction of the year 1583. (which happened in the watery Triplicity,
and in the end of that Triangle,) shall come to the Mock star, which showed it
self An. 1572. And if (again) we add the same years, they shall happen about
the years 1666. near which time the false miracles of the world shall be
discovered, with the change, and destruction of (almost) all Sects: for in
1662. (it will take 48. degr. half, or 1666. if the whole degr.) the great
Conjunction in 1603. will come to the body of the Star, which appeared Anno
1604. with the rest, according to the operations of the Planets.

In the year 1638. the eclipse of the Sun, which happened in the year 1621. in
the 0. degr., will come to the opposition of the Mock-star, An. 1604. Seeing
also that in the year 1646. the great of the year, 1583. will divolve to the
Mock-star of the year 1572. according to the right ascentions, answering
uniformly (by the Meridian) to all Horizons, according to the operations of the
Planets. And if we will add Venus her greater years, to the year of the Star
1572. when it was found in Taurus, there shall be alterations likewise in the
year 1654. (because in the year 1653. the greatest obliquity of the Zodiaque is
accounted 23. degr. 28. min. which is lesser then it may be found to be by
observation) for about those times (as we have declared lib. 2. cap. 11. of
Great Con.) a lesser Conjunction of the malevolents happens, viz. in the year
1650. in the Month of July about the New Mood in the first face of, not far
from the degree of the Sun. And in August 1652, in the same point of Heaven, in
which the Conjunction of the Luminaries (at the time of the lesser in 1650)
happened; and from the Transite of Anno. 1653. from the South into the North,
when he cut the Ecliptique in the 6 degree and 40. min. of, in the place of the
partile great of and in the year 1623.

Moreover 1659. is the period of the revolution of the 14 Orb, in which the
and shall have dominion: and the revolution of the 15. Orb shall begin, in
which and shall bear rule; which sign of is the sign of the before the coming
of Christ, and is afflicted by wherefore there shall arise great changes in the
World.

So likewise if we add the great years of, to the year of the Mock-starr,
without doubt in the latter years (by 1 Aph. 40.) there shall almost be a
destruction of Monarchies especially; because in those years there will happen
most powerful influences of the Stars. But what the Host of Heaven may portend
after 1630. but much more after 1650. yea, 1660. from the mock-starr 1572. we
conceive not only the final destruction of the Turks; but also that there
shall be a great decay of Christians; and that not only all the Kings and
Potentates of the earth shall be hurt, by the several evil Constellations,
and influences: But take heed all you Kings of Spain and France; you Princes
and Potentates of Italy, behold and dread the sign sent from God, s^il* the
Mock-starr of the year 1604, let down in the fiery Triplicity to provoke wars
and conflicts (by 7. Aph. 34.) Rebellions, Treasons, Desolations, Sudden and
Utter Ruin, and Mischiefs of all kinds,: So that all men living (of what
degree, condition, or age soever) shall be naturally inclined to shedding of
blood: For, by the 4. Aph. 6. Every immoderate constitution of the stars brings
death amongst old and infirm people; but in others, violent Events, and cruel
and utter Ruin.

Oh! how many changes of Kingdoms? Oh! how much lamenting and bewailing the
condition of disgrace? Oh! what sorts and differences of dangers and troubles,
are to be feared? What unspeakable, great, and grievous villainies? Oh! what
turbulent and damnable seditions? Oh! what unlooked and unhoped-for mischievous
kinds of death? Oh! what exalting of wicked and reprobate men, the troubled
stars of heaven, do in abundance belch out? Oh! what wretched and indigent
persons are every where extold? And the rich oppressed and impoverished? How
many Subjects and servants shall rule, whilst Kings and Masters shall obey?
What Princes shall be thrown out of their dominions? Oh! what insolent,
drunken, and luxurious men, who shall have the habit of whoredom; what
inventors of new and unheard* of Lusts, Buggerers, Gluttons, Murderers, Cruel
deceivers, and Traitors, and sheeves (without cause) such as shall deride,
torment, and tear in pieces and kill with very vexation, all men that be
endowed with prudence, knowledge, and wisdom: but they shall be of a constant
and firm mind. And although these things shall be fierce after the year 1630.
yea, more fierce after 1650. yet shall they be most terrible and rigorous after
the year 1660.

Thus have these things been delivered briefly, and with a hasty Quill touching
the most laboursome and difficult matter proposed; which ought to have been
handled in another method, by another Doctrine, and by men most learned in the
Art; and not by me, who am almost ignorant therein, and employed upon other
Sciences, and Physic; and have kept my bed for diverse months upon a Fever.
Notwithstanding as (for those causes, and the shortness of time) they have been
by me finished; if now at length they shall be gratefully accepted, I shall
rejoice that my pains have not been unprofitable* and if any thing be taken not
so gratefully or less pleasing; I hope the Readers (ascribing it to the
beforementioned causes,) will look upon all, with a benign judgment; for
perhaps better things shall one day be added.

A PROPHECY OF Ambrose Merlin, a Britain, From the Translation of Gefferey of
Monmouth: Aenigmatically therein delivering the Fate, and Period of the English
Monarchy.
VOrtiger (king of the Britains) sitting on the brink of an emptied Pool, there
issued thence 2. Dragons one of which was white, but the other red. And when
the one came near the other, they began a terrible fight and by (the vehemence
of) their breath, begot fire. But the White Dragon prevailed, and chased the
Red Dragon to the end of the Lake. But the Red Dragon, after he had bemoaned
himself (thus) expulsed, made a sudden assault upon the White Dragon, and
forced him to give back. The Dragons thus contending, the King commanded
Ambrose Merline to tell him what that Combat of the Dragons meant. Then he
gushing out with tears assumeth the Spirit of Prophecy: (and says) Woe unto the
Red Dragon, for his ruin approaches. The White Dragon shall possess his Dens,
which signifies the Saxons whom thou have invited: but the Red Dragon
designeth the Nation of Britain, which shall be oppressed of the White.
Therefore shall the Mountains thereof be levelled as the Valleys; and the
Rivers of the Valleys shall stream with blood. The purity of Religion shall be
defaced; and the ruin of Churches shall be manifested. At length the oppressed
shall prevail, and shall withstand the Tyranny of strangers. For the Boar of
Cornwell shall assist and shall trample the necks of them under his feet. The
Isles of the Ocean shall be subject to his Authority and shall possess the
French Forests. Rome shall tame his ^yrannie, and his end shall be doubtful.
He shall be famous in the mouth of the multitude, and his actions shall be (as)
meat to those that recount them. Six of his successors shall attain the Scep^^,
but after them shall a German Worm arise. The Sea-wolf shall magnify him, whom
the Affrican Forests shall accompany. Religion shall again be defaced, and
there shall be a transmutation of the chief Seats. The dignity of London shall
adorn Cant^bu^y, and the 7. Pastor of York shall be often in the Lesser
Britanie Anglisea shall be clothed with the garment of the City of Legions;
and the Preacher of Ireland shall be silent by reason of an infant growing in
the Womb. It shall rain blood, and a horrible dearth shall afflict, men. These
things coming on a sudden, the Red Dragon shall fret but with much ado, he
shall flourish: Then shall the white Dragons calamity approach, and the
buildings of his little Villages shall be overthrown. Seven kings shall be
destroyed, and one shall be hallowed. The mothers bellies shall be ripped open,
and the children shall be abortive. There shall be a wonderful great
punishment of men, that the Natives may be restored. He that shall do these
things shall become a Brazen-man; and he shall (for a long time after) keep the
Gates of London, upon a Brazen-horse. From thenceforth the red Dragon shall
return to his peculiar temperature, and shall endeavor to exercise cruelty
upon himself: Therefore shall the wrath of the most high come suddenly upon
him; for the fields shall frustrate the labor of the hasbandman. A sudden
mortality shall snatch away the people, and shall sweep away whole Nations.
Such as be left, shall forsake their Native soil, and shall sow their corn in
Foreign Countries. A blessed King shall prepare a ship, and in a Princes
Court, he shall be numbered among the 12. blessed.

There shall be a lamentable desolation of the Kingdom, and the Barn-floores
full of Corn shall be turned into unprofitable woods. The white Dragon shall
arise the second time, and shall invite the daughter of Germany. Our little
villages shall once more be replenished with a strange generation, and the red
Dragon shall languish in the end of the Lake. Afterward shall the German Worm
be crowned, and the Brazen Prince shall be humbled. A bound is set him, which
he cannot pass: For, he shall remain 150. years in disquiet, but he shall be in
subjection 300. years. Then shall the North wind rise against him, and shall
snatch away the Flowers, which the west wind begot. Churches shall be
beautified, yet shall not the sword depart. The German Worm shall hardly keep
his den, because vengeance shall suddenly come upon him for his treachery: at
length, he shall flourish for a while, but the Decimation of the Normans shall
offend him: for the people shall ru^h in upon him, in wooden horses, and Iron
coats, who shall be revenged of his naughtiness. He shall restore to the former
inhabitants their possessions, and the destruction of the Aliens shall (then)
appear: the branches of the White Lion shall be cut off from our Territories,
and the remainder of his generation shall be tenth'd. They shall undergo the
yoke of perpetual servitude; and they shall wound their mother with mattocks,
and ploughs. Two Dragons shall succeed, whereof one shall be choked by the
dart of envy, but the other shall return under the shadow of a Kingly name. The
I yon of justice shall follow, at whose roaring the French ^owers, and the
Island Dragons shall tremble. In his days shall gold be squeazed out of the
Lilly and Nettle; and silver shall be extracted out of the hoofs of the lowing
beasts. The spruce Fantasticks of the times shall put on changeable garments,
and their outward habits shall bewray the vanity of their minds. The greedy
hounds shall be ham-string'd, the Beasts of the Forest shall rest in quiet,
humanity shall bewail the punishment: the coin shall be cleft, and each half
shall be made round. The ravenousness of the Kites shall be consumed, and the
teeth of the Wolves shall be broken: the Lions whelps shall be turned into
Seasithes, and his Eagle shall build her nest upon Mount M^riana. Vendoria
shall be dyed red with her mothers blood, and the house of Corim^^, shall slay
fix brothers. The Isle shall be damp with her mighty tears, whereupon all men
shall be provoked to all things. Woe unto thee Normandy, for on thee shall the
brain of the Lion be wasted, and his Members being torn in pieces, shall be
thrown out of his Native soil. They that succeed shall endeavor to remove the
Crown, but the love of new Kings shall be extolled. For his goodness he shall be
abused by the wicked, until he become a Father. Therefore being armed with the
teeth of the Boar, he shall pass over the tops of the Mountains, and the shade
of the helmet: the Highlanders of Scotland shall be displeased, and having
assembled their Collaterals shall proc^^m war. He shall put a bridle in the
jaws of him, which shall be established in the (very) bosom of little Britany.
The Eagle of the broken truce shall beautify it, and shall rejoice in his
third building. The whelps of the roaring Lion shall awaken, and (the Forests
being forsaken) shall be hunted beneath the walls of the Cities, and shall
commit great slaughter upon such as withstand them, and shall cut out the
tongues of the Bulls: they shall load the necks of the roaring Lions with
chains, and shall renew the ancient times. Afterward, the Regal unction shall
pass from the first to the fourth, from the 4. to the 3. from the 3. to the
second.

The sixth shall overthrow the walls of Ireland, and shall turn the forests
thereof into plain fields. He shall reduce diverse kingdoms into one, and he
shall be crowned with the head of a Lion. His beginning shall be in a restless,
and wavering affection, but his end shall be blessed; for he shall repair the
decayed Monasteries throughout the Country, and shall place Preachers in
convenient places: He shall cloth two cities with two garments, and he shall
bestow Virgins gifts upon Virgins, for which he shall me^^ the favor of God,
and shall be numbered among the blessed.

A Woolf-like beast shall come out of him penetrating all things, who shall
endeavor the ruin of his own Nation, for by him the Normans shall lose both
the Isles, and shall be bereaved of their Pristine dignity. From thenceforth
shall the ancient Inhabitants return to their own Isle, for variance shall
arise among the aliens. Likewise, a venerable old man, upon a white horse,
shall divert the river of Periton, and with his white Scepter shall dispose of
the Mill thereon standing. Cadwalader shall call home the ^inani, and shall
receive the Highlanders into fellowship. Then shall there be great slaughter
committed on the Forraigners, then shall the rivers stream with blood, then
shall the mountains of little Britain burst out, and shall be crowned with the
Diadem of Brute. Wales shall be filled with joy, and the Oaks of Cornwall shall
wax green. The Isle shall be called by the Name of Brute, and the memory of the
strangers shall be forgotten.

From Conanus shall come a warlike Boar, who shall exercise the sharpness of
his teeth, within the French Forests: for he shall hew down all the greater
Oaks, but he shall give protection to the lesser. The Arabians, and Affricans
shall quake for fear of him, for the violence of his motion shall threaten the
further Spain. A Goat of the Venerean house shall succeed him, having golden
horns, and a silver beard, who shall breath forth such a cloud from his
Nostrils as that the surface of the whole Isle shall be obscured. There shall be
peace in his days, and by the fruitfulness of the earth, all sorts of grain
shall be multiplied.

Women by reason of their Lewdness shall be made Serpents, and every step they
make shall be filled with pride. The tents of V^us shall be renewed, neither shall
the darts of Lust leave off to wound. The Rivers shall be turned into blood, and
two Kings shall fight a duel for the Lyoness of Stafford. Every one shall
wantonize, and civility (it self) shall not forbear to admit of contraries. All
these things three ages shall see fulfilled, until the interred Kings within the
City of London shall be discovered. Famine shall again infest, mort^lity shall
once more return, and the inhabitants shall lament the desolation of their
Cities. A ^ear of commerce shall unexpectedly arise, who shall bring back his
scattered droves, to their forsaken Pastures. His breast shall be food to the
Hungry, and his tongue shall appease the thirsty: Rivers shall flow from his
mouth, which shall refresh men's dried cheeks.

Afterward a Tree shall be procreated upon the Tower of London, which, having
only three ^oughs, shall obscure the face of the whole Isle, with the breadth
of its leaves. From hence the North wind (its enemy) shall suddenly arise, and
by its cruel blast shall snatch away the third bough thereof. The other two
shall supply the room thereof, until (by the multitude of their leaves) one
shall cover another. But afterward it shall obtain the room of two, and shall
sustain Birds of Foreign Nations. It shall be accounted obnoxious to the
Native Birds, for through the fear of its shadow, they shall lose their
flying-young.

An unprofitable Ass shall succeed ready in punishing counterfeiters of gold,
but slow in revenging the ravening of Wolves. In those days, the Oaks
throughout the Forests shall burn, and Accorns shall grow upon the boughs of
Lindens.

The Severn shall run through seven Gates, and the river Osca shall wax hot for
the space of seven months. The Fishes therein shall die by the heat thereof,
and of them shall Serpents be engendered. The Baths of Bado shall frieze, and
their wholesome waters shall become poisonous. London shall lament the slaughter
of 20000. men, and the river of Thames shall be turned into blood. Monks shall
be compelled to marriage, and the noise of them shall be heard in the Mountains
of the Alps. Three Fountains shall burst out in the City of Winchester, whose
little brooks shall divide the Isle into three parts; he that shall drink of
one, shall prolong his life, neither shall he be afflicted with any sudden
feebleness. He that shall drink of the other, shall perish with hunge, and a
wanuess and horror shall possess his face. He that shall drink of the third,
shall die a sudden death, neither shall his body be bu^ied* But if his dead
body shall be thrown upon the water, the ashes thereof shall be turned into
water. Her upon a Damos^ll shall come from the City of Can^^us of the Forest,
to prepare a Medicine, whereby, as she shall understand all Arts, she shall dry
up the obnoxious Fountains by the only virtue of her breath. Afterward, to
refre^h her self with the wholesome Liquor, she shall carry the Calidonian
Forest in her right hand, but in her left hand, the Bulwarks of the Walls of
London. What way soever she shall pass, she shall leave sulphurous tracks
behind her, which shall smoke with a double flame. That smoke shall stir up
the Ruche^s, and shall destroy the Fithes of the Sea. She shall continue in
lamentable sorrows, and shall fill the Isle with her hortible out-^ry. A^tagg
of ten branches shall slay her, four of which branches shall carry together the
golden Diadems* But the other six shall be turned into the Horns of the wild
Oxen. which by a horrible noise shall shake the three Isles of Bri^^nie. The
Forest of Daneum shall be stirred up and (with a gentle voice) shall call,
Come Wales, and join Cornwall to thee, and say to the City of Winchester, The
Earth ^^all (...) a^^ow thee up. Transfer the seat of thy Pastor, whither the
Birds do flock and the other Members shall follow their head.

For the day draws near, whereon the Inhabitants shall be destroyed for the
sin of perjury. The whiteness of their Wool, and the diversity of their
Tincture has offended. Woe be to that perjured Nation, by whose means a noble
City shall be destroyed. The Birds shall rejoice at so great an increase, and
two shall be made one. And a Hedghogg (laden with fruit) shall rebuild it, to
the smell whereof, Birds of diverse Forests shall fl^ck. He shall adjoyn
thereto a wonderful great Palace, and shall strengthen the same with 600
Towers. In every of which a Senator shall be appointed, who shall give Laws
unto the Subjects. Therefore shall London envy her, and shall increase her
Walls th ice so much as formerly they were. The river Thames shall incompass
her on every side, and the rumor of the works shall trans^end the Alps. The
Hedghog shall hide his fruits within her, and shall plot secretly (against her.)

In that day the stones shall speak, and the Sea that leads to France, shall be
contracted into a narrow room. One man shall hear another from either shore,
and the whole Isle shall be enlarged: The wonders of the do^^ shall be
revealed: France shall quake for fear. After these things a Hearn shall
proceed from the forresh Callaterio^, which shall fly about the Isle the space
of two years; by her night clamor she shall call the other birds, and all
other birds shall associate her: they shall fall upon men's Tillage, and shall
destroy all man^er of grain. A famine shall pursue the people, and a dire
mortality shall ensue the famine: but when so great mortality shall be ceased,
a detestable fowl shall betake himself to the utmost bounds of Wales, and shall
raise it up to a high mountain, and in the top thereof she shall plant an Oak,
and shall build her nest in the boughs thereof, three eggs shall be laid in
the nest, from which a Fox, a Wolf, and a Bear shall come. The Fox shall
devo^re his mother, and shall bear an Asses head. Therefore being become a
Monster, he shall affright his brethten, and shall banish them into Normandy:
but they shall excite the shorn Boar against the Fox, and being returned in a
ship, they shall enceunter with the Fox; who, so soon at the combat shall
begin, will fain himself dead, and shall move the Boar to pity him,: a while
after he shall go to the dead Carkase, and whilst he shall stand over it, he
shall breath upon the eyes, and face thereof: But he not forgetful of (his
former falsehood) shall bite his right foot, and shall tear it quite from the
body; and also at one leap shall snatch to him his right ear and his tail,
and shall hide himself in the holes of the mountains: therefore the deluded
Boar shall require the Wolf, and the Bear, to restere unto him his lost
members who (as they shall begin they Quarrel) shall promise him two feet, and
two ears, and a tail and of them they shall compose the Boars members: so he
shall be pacified, and expect the promised restoration. In the interim the Fox
shall come from the mountains, and shall change himself into a Wolf; and as if
he were to have some discourse with the Boar, he shall go craftily to him, and
shall wholly devour him. Then shall he transform himself into a Boar and (as
if he wanted his members) he shall ^ake for his bret^ren, and after that they
shall be come, even them also shall he suddenly s^^y and shall be crowned with
the head of a Lion. In his days a serpeat shall be engendered, which shall
ende^^o^^ the destruction of all mortals; he shall by his length environ
London, and shall destroy all the passengers. A Bull of the ^^ou^^ain shall
assume the head of the Wolf, and shall cleanse his teeth in the shop of
Sabtina: he shall gather to him the Highlanders and the Welsh who shall drink
the Thames dry. The Ass^ shall call a Goat with a long beard, and shall change
his shape: therefore shall the Bull be displeased, and having called the Wolf,
the horned Bull shall make at them; and the more to manifest his cruelty, he
shall devour their flesh and bones: but he shall be burnt in the top of
Uria^^^. The ^^^ber^ of the fire wherein he shall be burnt, shall be changed
into Swans, which shill swimas well upon dry gound as on the water. Fishes
shall swallow Fishes, and men shall devour men: but old are coming on
submarine lights shall be ingendered, and they shall devise submarine deceipts.
They shall sink shipping, and they shall gather much money. The River Thames
shall flow again, and the united ^^ters shall exceed the bounds of the
Channel: it shall overflow the neighboring towns, and shall overtune the
opposite mountains. It shall incorporate with the fountain Galaber full of
deceit and naughtiness; whence shall arise seditions, provoking the Ve^^^t^a^s
to wars. The Oaks of the Forests shall unite, and shall encounter with the
stones of the G^^visey. The Crows and the Kites shall devour the bodies of the
slain. The C^le, faill build her nest upon the walls of Gl^^^^s^^; and in her
nest shall am Ass be ^e^crated. The Serpent of Mal^^^^i^ shall ed^^ate him,
and shall hatch more tre^^eries. Having got the Crown he shall s^^ on high, and
with a horrible noise shall affright the people of the country: in his d^ies
the mountains of Pa^^^^^ shall s^^gger, and the Provinces shall be deprived of
their Forests: for a Wo^me of a ^i^ry breath shall suddenly come, who shall
burn the trees with his sent-out vapor* S^aven Lions shall come out of him,
disgraced by the heads of Goats: they shall destroy women by the s^inch of
their nostrils, and shall make wives wantons. The Father shall not know his own
Son, because their wives shall play the beasts, therefore shall a Giant of
wi^kedness rush upon them* who by the sharpness of his eyes shall terrify all.
The Dragon of Worcester shall rise against him, and shall strive to rout him
out, but an encounter being made, the Dragon shall overcome, and the
ungodliness of the victor shall be repressed; for he shall subdue the Dragon,
and having put off his garment, shall remain naked. The Dragon shall carry him
alo^^, and with his tail (erected) shall beat the naked Giant. But the Giant
reassuming his vigor, shall break his jaws with a sword: at length the Dragon
shall sold himself under his tail, and (poisoned) shall die.

The Boar of ^olenesius shall succeed him, and by his terrible tyranny shall
oppress the people. Gloucester shall cast out the Lion, who shall disquiet the
Serpent with several Wars. He shall ^ed him under his fe^t, and shall affright
him with his open jaws. At length the Lion shall contend with the Kingdom, and
shall climb upon the backs of Noble men. The Bull shall rush into the strife,
and shall smite the Lion with his right foot. He shall drive him throughout all
the parts of the Kingdom, but he shall break his horns in the Walls of Exon. The
Fox of Ka^^du^^lus shall be revenged of the Lion, and shall wholly devour him
with his teeth. For the Serpent of Lin^^^n shall surround him, and by a
horrible hissing shall intimate his presence to many Dragons. The Dragons shall
gather together, and shall tear one another in pieces. The winged shall oppress
those that want wings, and shall fasten their poisoned claws upon their
Eyelids, the rest shall consent to combating, and shall one kill another.
These being dead, a fifth shall succeed, and shall break the remainder by
sundry devices* he shall crush the back of one in pieces, and (with his sword)
shall separate his head from his body. Having put off his garment, he shall
ascend another, and shall throw upon him the right and left side of his tail.
One that is naked shall keep him at a distance, when one that is clothed shall
not de^err him. He shall torment the rest upon the back, and shall drive them
to the uttermost part of the Kingdom. A roaring Lion (and one to be feared for
his outrageous c^u^lty) shall suddenly come. He shall reduce fifteen Provinces
into one, and he alone shall enjoy the people. A Giant shall shine with a white
color, and shall germinate a wh^te people. Pleasures shall make Princes
feeble, and the Subjects shall become savage. A Lion (with his belly full of
blood) shall arise among them, a sickle shall be given him in the corn, which
(whilst he shall grieve in mind) shall be oppressed of him. A Carter of York
shall quiet them, and (his master being thrust out) he shall ascend into the
Cart which he drove, and shall threaten the East with a drawn sword, and he
shall fill the Track of his Cart wheels with blood. Afterward a Fi^^ shall be
procr^ated in the ^^a, which being allured by the hissing of the Serpent shall
copulate with him, betwixt whom three glistering Bu^^ shall be generated, who
(having eat up their pastures) shall be turned into Trees. The first shall
carry a vi^^rous whip, and shall turn his back of him that is born after him.
The second brother shall endeavor to snatch the wh^p from him, but he shall be
rebuked by the youngest. They shall turn away their faces mut^ally from one
another, until they shall pour forth a poisoned cup. A Prince of the
Highlanders shall succeed him, whom (also) the Serpent shall seek to destroy.
He shall apply himself to Tillage, so that the Countries shall be white with
Corn. The Serpent shall endeavor to diffuse poison, to hinder the growth of
the grass and corn. The people shall waste by reason of a deadly famine, and
the Walls of their Cities shall be made desolate. The City of Gloucester shall
be given for a Medicine, which shall render sustenance to those that be under
the lash, for she shall bear the balance of the medicine and the Isle shall be
renewed in a short space. After which, two shall sue for the Scepter* to whom
the horned Dragon shall submit himself. Another shall come armed, and shall
ride the flying Serpent; being naked he shall sit upon his back, and shall cast
the right side of his Tail upon him. The neighboring Nations shall be awakened
by his clamor, and shall st^t^e other Nations Therefore shall the second be
united to the Lion, but (dissenting betwixt themselves) they shall encounter
one another; and (after mutual wounds) they shall lie down together, but the
fierceness of the Lion shall prevail. There shall one suddenly come with the
Timbrell and Harp, and shall assuage the fierceness of the Lion, therefore
shall the people of the Kingdom be pacified, and shall provoke the Lion to
Justice. Being settled in his Throne, he shall think of Rewards; but his power
shall extend into the Highlands. Therefore shall the Northern Provinces be
sorrowful, and shall open the doors of the Temples. The Standard-bearer-Woolfe
shall raise Troops, and shall environ Cornwall with his tail. A Soldier (in
a Cart) shall withstand him, who shall change that people into a Boar.
Therefore the Boar shall waste the Provinces, but he shall be drowned in the
deep of Severn. A man (in Wine) shall be as a Lion, and the luster of his Gold
shall dazzle the eyes of the beholders: He shall gild his silver-wine-bowles,
and shall trouble sundry Wine-presses. Men shall be drunk with Wine, and having
laid aside the thought of heaven, shall be wedded to the Earth. The Stars shall
withold their influence from them, and shall confound their wonted motion.
The Heavens being thus averse, their Cornfieldsd shall be dried up and the dew
of heaven shall be denied them. The roots and branches shall change their
offices, and the novelty thereof shall be miraculous. The splendor of the Sun
shall languish by the paleness of Mercury, and it shall be dreadful to the
beholders. Mercury of Arca^ia shall change his shield, and he shall call Venus
the Helmet of Mars; the Helmet of Mars shall cast a shadow, and the rage of
Mercury shall exceed its limits. Hard-hearted Orion shall unsheath his
Falchion. Phoebus of the Sea shall disturb the Clouds. Jupiter shall leave off
his appointed course, and Venus shall forsake her Orb. The malice of Saturn
shall be poured down grievously, and with his crooked Sithe shall he destroy
mankind. The 12. Houses of heaven shall bewail the absence of the Planets. The
Twins shall leave off their accustomed Embraces, and shall exchange Summer for
Winter. The Scales shall hang un^avenly, until the Ram support them with his
crooked Horns. The Scorpions tail shall engender Lightening, and the Crab
shall contend with the Sun. The Virgin shall ascend the back of the Archer, and
shall ob^^scate the pure and beautiful Flowers. The Orb of the Moon shall
trouble the Zodiac, and the Pleiades shall gu^^ out with tears. The Offices of
Janus shall no more be restored, but (the Gate being shut) he shall lurk in the
Creeks of A^^ad^^. In the twinkling of an eye shall the Seas arise, and the
Ashes of the dead shall be renewed. The Winds shall contend with a terrible
su^^^ation, and shall terminate their sound amongst the Stars.

JOHN TRITEMIVS, Abbot of Spanheim, of the heavenly INTELLIGENCIES, governing
the Orbs under GOD.
REnowned Caesar, it is the opinion of very many of the Ancients, that this
inferior World* by ordination of the first Intellect (which is God) is
directed and ordered by Secundarian Intelligences, to which opinion Conciliator
Medicorum assents, saying, that from the Original or first beginning of heaven
and P^t^us App^^^^sis.
earth, there were 7. Spirits appointed as Presidents to the 7. Planets.

Of which number every one of those rules the world 354. years, and four
months in order.

To this Position, many, and they most learned men, have afforded their
consent; which opinion of theirs my self no affirming, but delivering, do make
manifest to your most sacred Majesty.

The first Angel or Spirit of Saturn is called Orifiel, to whom God committed
Orifiel, An. mundi 1.
the government of the World from the beginning of its Creation; who began his
government the 15, day of the month of March, in the first year of the World,
and it endured 354 years and 4 months.

The name.
Orifiel notwithstanding is a name appertaining to his Office, not Nature.
Attributed to the Spirit in regard of his action: under his dominion men were
rude, and did cohabite together in desert and uncouth places, after the homely
manner of Beasts. This needs not any manner of proof from me, since its so
manifest out of the Text in Genesis.

The second Governor of the World is Ana^l the Spirit of Den^, who after
Orifiel Anael, began Anne (...) 354. ^4 Jun.
began to rule according to the influence of this Planet, in the year of the
world 354. the fourth month, that is, the 24 day of the month of June, and he
ruled the world 354 years, and 4 months, until the year from the Creation of
the world 708, as it appears to any that shall Calculate the Age thereof.

Under the Regiment of this Angel, men began to be more Civilized, built
Houses, erected Cities, found out Arts Manual ( viz. Ma^sfactury) the Art of
Weaving, Spinning, and Clothing, and many such like as these, did indulge
themselves plentifully with the pleasures of the flesh, took unto themselves
fair women for their wives, neglected God, Receded in many things from their
natural simplicity; they found out Sports, and Songs, sang to the Harp, and
did excogitate whatsoever did belong to the worship and purpose of Venus. And
this wantonness of life in men did continue until the blood, receiving the
Arguments of its pra^ity Zachariel angel of, began 708. 25. O^ob.
from hence.

Zachariel the Angel of Jupiter, began to govern the world in the year of the
Creation of Heaven and Earth 708. the eighth month, that is, the 25 day of the
month of October, and he did regulate the World 354 years, 4 months, until
the year of the worlds Creation 1063 inclusively. Under whose moderation, men
first of all began to usurp Dominion over one another, to exercise Hunting, to
make Tents, to adorn their bodies with several garments: and there arose a
great Division betwixt the good and evil men; the Pious invocating God, such
as Enoch, whom the Lord translated to Heaven; the wicked running after the
snares and pleasant allurements of the Flesh.

Men also under the Dominion of this Zachariel began to live more civilly, to
undergo the Laws and Commands of their Elders, and were reclaimed from their
former fierceness. Under his rule Adam the first man died, leaving to all
posterity an assured Testimony, that necessarily once we must dye.

Various Arts and Inventions of men did about this time first appear and
manifest themselves, as Historians have more clearly expressed.

The fourth Rector of the World was Raphael, the Spirit of Mercury which began
Raphael angel of Mercury began 1063. Feb. 24.
in the year of the Creation of Heaven and Earth 1063 the 24 day of February,
and he reigned 354 years 4 months, and his Government continued until the year
of the World 1417 and fourth month. In these times writing was first found
out, and letters excogitated of Trees and Plants, which notwithstanding
afterward and in process of time received a more graceful shape, and the
Nations varied or changed the Face of their Characters according to their own
fancy. The use of Musical Instruments* under the time and rule of this
Raphael, began to be multiplied, and Commerce or Exchange betwixt man and man
was now first invented: A presumptuous, rude* and simple Audacity in these
times begot Navigation or the manner of Sailing from one place to another, and
many such like things in one kind or other, etc.

The fifth Guber^^tor of the World was Samuel the Angel of Mars, who began
Samuel the angel of Mars began An. mundi, 1417. June* 26.
the 26 day of the month of June in the year of the World 1417. and swayed the
rule of this World 354 years 4 months, until the year of the World 1771. and
eighth month, under whose Empire and Government men imitated the nature of
Mars, also under the Dominion of this Angel, the Universal deluge of waters
happened Anno Mundi 1656. as evidently it appears by History out of Genesis.
And its to be observed, what the ancient Philosophers have delivered, that so
often as Samuel the Angel of Mars is ruler of the World, so often there arises
notable alterations of Monarchy. Religions and sects do vary, Laws are changed,
Principalities and Kingdoms are transferred to Strangers, which we may easily
find out in order by perusal of Histories.

Notwithstanding Samuel does not immediately in the very beginning or entrance
of his Dominion manifest the disposition of his behavior or custom: but when
he has exceeded the middle time of his Gubernation which very thing is
likewise to be understood concerning the Angels of the other Planets, (as it
may be manifested from Histories) all which do send down their influence
according to the Proprieties of the natures of their Stars, and operate upon
the inferior bodies of this World.

The sixth Governor of the World is Gabriel the Angel of the Moon, who began
Gabriel angel of the moon, began 1771. October. 28.
after Samuel the Angel of Mars had finished his co^^se: the 28 day of the
month of October in the year of the World 1771 and eighth month: and he
ordered the affairs of the World 354 years and 4 months, until the year of
the World 2126. Again in these times men were multiplied, and builded many
Cities: and we must note: that the Hebrews do affirm that the General deluge,
was Ann^ Mundi 1656. under the moderation of Mars: But the Septuagint
interpreters, I^do^^^ and Beda confirm the Deluge to be in the year of the
World 2242. under the Regiment of Gabriel, the Angel of the Moon, which seems
unto me by multiplication to be rather consentaneous unto truth, but to express
my further conception hereof, is not the work of this present discourse.

Michael Angel of the Sun, began Anno mundi 2126. 24 Feb. Original of King^.
Michael the Angel of the Sun was the 7. Ruler of the World, who began the 24.
of February, in the year of the World according to common computation 2126. and
he governed the world 354. years and four months, until the year of the age of
the world 2480. and four months.

Under the Dominion of the Angel of the Sun even as Histories consent with
truth, Kings began first to be amongst Mortal men, of whom Nimrod was the
first, that with an ambitious desire of Sovereignty, did Tyrannize over his
Companions.

The worship of several Gods by the foolishness of men, was now instituted, and
they began to adore their petty Princes as Gods.

Sundry Arts also about this time were invented by men; to wit, the
Mathematics, Astronomy, Magique, and that worship which formerly was
attributed to The Spring of Idolatry.
one only God* began now to be given to diverse Creatures: the knowledge of the
true God, by little and little, and the superstition of men became forgotten.

About these times Architecture was found out, and men began to use more policy
both in their civil institutions, and manners, or customs of living.

Orifiel the second time governs the world, begins 2480. 26. Iun^.
From henceforth the eighth time in order, again Orifiel the Angel of Saturn
began to govern the World the 26. day of the month of June, in the year from
the beginning of the world 2480. and four months; and he continued his
government of the world this second return, 354. years and four months, until
the year of the world 2834. and eight months. Under the regulation of this
Angel, the Nations were multiplied, and the earth was divided into Regions;
many Kingdoms instituted; the Tower of Babel was built, the confusion of
Tongues then fell out, men were dispersed into every part of the earth, and men
began to Till, and Manure the earth more acurately, to ordain Fields, sow Corn,
plant Vineyards, to dig up Trees, and to provide with greater diligence, what
ever was more convenient for their food, and raiment.

From that time forward, first of all, amongst men, the discerning of Nobility
begun to be taken notice of; which was, when men in their manner of living, and
in wisdom did excel the rest of men, undertaking Trophies of glory from the
great ones of the earth, as rewards for their merits: From hence first of all,
the whole world began to come into the knowledge of men, whilst every where
the Nations being multiplied, many Kingdoms did arise, and various differences
of tongues did follow.

Anael the secondtime. His rule begins 2^. October. 2834. Increase of Idolatry.
The ninth time in order and course, Anael, the Angel of Venus began again to
sway the world the 29. day of October, and in the year of the Creation of
Heaven and earth 2834. and 8* month: and he presided 354. years, four months,
until the year of the World 3189.

In these times men forgetting the true God, began to honor the dead, and to
worship their Statues for God, which Error has infected the World more then
two thousand years: Men did now devise curious and costly Ornaments, for better
trimming, and adorning their bodies: found out diverse kinds of Musical
Instruments; again, men prosecuted too much the lust and pleasures of the
flesh, instituting, Zachariel the second time; his rule, Ann^ 3189.
and dedicating Statuas and Temples to their Gods. Witchcraft, and Incantations
in these times were first excogitated by Zor^^ster King of the Bactria^s (and
diverse others as well as he) whom Nim^ King of Ass^^ia overcame in War.

In order the tenth time Zachariel the Angel of Jupiter, again began to rule
the world the last day of February, in the year of the building, or framing the
heaven and earth, 3189. and he moderated according to his custom, and manner
354. years, and four months, until the year of the world 3543. and fourth
month.

These were joyful times, and might truly be called golden, wherein there was
plenty of all manner of useful things, which much conduced for the increase of
mankind, giving thereby exceeding beauty and adornment to the things of this
World.

In like manner about this time, God gave to Abraham the Law of Circumcision;
The restoration of mankind promised.
and first of all promised the Redemption of Mankind by the Incarnation of his
only begotten Son.

Under the Government of this Angel, the Patriarchs, first Founders of Justice,
were famous, and the righteous were divided from the ungodly, by their own
proper endeavor and consent.

About these times in Arcadia, Iup^ter grew famous, who was styled also
Lisania, Jupiter king of Arcadia.
the Son of Heaven and God, a King, who first of all gave Laws to the
Arcadians, made them very civil in their manners and behavior, taught them
the worship of God, erected them Temples, instituted Priests, procured many
advantageous benefits for mankind, for which his so great benefits, he was by
them termed Jupiter, and after his death accounted for a Deity or God.

He had his Original from the sons of Heber, viz. Gerar, as ancient Histories
do record to posterity.

Prometheus also the son of Atlas is reported under the Government of this
Angel Promet^^us.
to have made Men; only, because of rude and ignorant, he made* them wise and
knowing, humane, courteous, accomplished in learning and manners: he made
Images by Art to move of themselves.

He first found out the use of the Ring, Scepter, Diadem, and all kingly
ornaments.

In or about these times other joviall men did excel; men most wise, and women
also, who by their own understanding delivered many profitable inventions to
mankind; who being dead, for the greatness of their wisdom, were reputed as
Gods* viz. Phoroneus, who first of all instituted amongst the Greeks, Laws, and
judgments, as also, Sol, Min^rva, Ceres, Setap^^ amongst the Egyptians, and
very many besides.

In order the 11. time Raphael the Angel of Mercury again undertook the
ordering Raphael the Angel of Mercury the second time returns, An. 3543.
of the world the first day of the month of July, in the year of the world
3543. and fourth month; he continued in his Commands 354 years, and four
months, until the year of the Creation of heaven and earth 3897. and 8.
month.

Verily in these times* as it evidently appears from the Histories of the
Ancients, men more earnestly applied themselves to the study of wisdom, amongst
whom the last learned and most eminent men, were Mercurius, Bacchus, Om^gy us,
Isis, Inachus, Argus, Apollo, Ce^^ops, and many more, who by their admirable
inventions, both profited the world then, and posterity since.

Several Superstitions also about these times, concerning the worship of their
Idols were instituted by men.

Sorceries, Incantations, and Arts of framing Diabolical Images, were now in a
mavelous manner increased, and whatsoever either of subtilty, or wit, that
could possibly be attributed to the invention, or cunning of Mercury about
these times, did exceedingly increase.

Moses the wisest Commander of the Hebrews, expert in the knowledge of many
Moses.
things and Arts, a Worshipper of one only true God, did deliver the people of
Israel from the slavery of the Ae^ypt^a^s, and procured their liberty.

Ianus.
About this time Janus first of all reigned in Italy, after him Saturnus* who
instructed his people to fat their grounds with soil or dung, and was
accounted or esteemed for a God.

^^^mus inventor of the Greek Letters* Manifestation of Divine Law.
Near these times Ca^mus found out the Greek Letters, or Characters, and
C^ment^^, the daughter of Evander, the Latin.

God Omnipotent, under the Government of this Ra^h^^^, the Angel of Mercury,
delivered by the hands of Moses, to his people a Law in writing, which gives a
manifest testimony of our Savior Jesus Christ, his future birth and nativity
to be born in the flesh.

Here arose in the World a wonderful diversity of Religions: During these
times, here flourished many Sybills, Pr^^hets, Diviners, Soothsayers, or such
as used inspection into the entrals of Beasts, Magitians, or Wisemen, Poets,
as Sybills, Eryth^^^, she of the Isle of Del^hos, she whom we call the
Phrygian, because she lived in Phrygia with the rest.

Samuel the Angel of Mars his second Government, A^. 38^7.
Again in order the twelfth time Samuel the Angel of Mars, began to exercise his
Dominion upon the world, the second day of the month of October, in the year
of the world 3897* and eighth month, and his time of ruling, was 354* years,
and four months from thence, until the years 4251* under whose Empire and
rule, was that great and most famous Destruction of Troy in A^^a the less: as
also an admirable mutation, and alteration of Monar^hy, and many Kingdoms
together with Destruction of Troy.
new institutions, or moldings of many Cities, as Paris, Mogunce, Carthage,
Naples, and very many besides these.

Many new Kingdoms were newly erected, or now had their first beginning, as
that of the ^acede^^^^an^, Corinthians, Hebrews, and diverse more.

Here in these times all over the whole world, there was very great wars, and
B^t^ls of Kings and Nations, and several alterations of Empires.

Original of Venetians.
The Venetians from this time, do compute and reckon the original both of their
people and City from the Trojans.

And its observable that very many other Nations, as well in Europe as in A^^a,
pretend to have taken their original from the Trojans, to whom I thought good
to give so much credit, as they themselves were able to persuade me was truth,
upon sufficient testimony and proof.

The Arguments they produce concerning their Nobility and Antiquity are
frivolous, being desirous to magnify themselves openly, as if there were no
People, or Nation in Europe, before the Destruction of Troy, or as if there had
been no Pesant, or Clown amongst the Trojans.

Saul.
Under the moderation also of this Planet, Saul was made first King of the Jews,
after him David, whose son King Solomon, built in ^erusalem the Temple of the
true God, the most famous and glorious of the whole world: from hence the
Spirit of God illustrating, and enlightening his Prophets with a more ample
illumination of his grace, they did not only foretell of the future incarnation
of our Lord and Savior, but also many other things, as holy Scriptures do
testify, amongst whom were Natha^ son of King David, G^d, A^ap^, Achias,
Se^^i^s, A^arias, Anan, and many others.

Homer* Gabriel Angel of the Mo^n, his second time of ruling, An. 4^52.
Homer the Greek Poet, Writer of T^^ys Destruction, Dares, Phrygius, D^^^^
C^e^e^sis, who were themselves at the rasing, and sacking thereof, and have
likewise described it, are supposed to have been alive near about these times.

The thirteenth time in order, Gabriel the Spirit of the Moon, again undertook
the ordering of this world the 30* day of January in the year from the
beginning of the Universe 4252* and he presided in his Government 354 years, 4
months, until the year of the World 4606, and fourth month,

In this time many Prophets were famous and excelled amongst the Jews, viz.
Helias, Helis^us, Micheas, Abdias, with many others: There were many
alterations of the Kingdom of the Jews: L^c^^g^^ gave Laws and Ordinances to
the Lacedaemonians, Heliah.
Ca^^tus Sylvius, Lyberius Sylvius, Romulus Sylvius, Pr^^^s Sylvius, Nu^it^r,
Kings of Italy flourished, during the moderation of this spirit: more Kingdoms
also had their Original or foundation under him, as those of the Lydians,
Medes, Macedonians, S^a^tans, and others: the Monarchy of Assyrians under
Sardanapalus Decay of Assyrian monarchy.
now ended. And in like manner the Kingdom of the Macedonians was consumed, or
worn out.

Sundry laws are imposed on men, the worship of the true God is neglected, and
the Religion of false Gods too much p^opagated: the City of Rome is built City
of Rome.
under the Dominon of this Spirit, in the year 1484, which year in order, was
the 239 of the Angel Gabriel, the Kingdom of the Sylv^a^s in Italy now ended,
and that of Rome began in these times, Thales, C^^lon, P^^iander, Cleobulus,
Bias, and Pitta^us, Seven wise men of Greece.
the s^aven wise men of Greece flourished, and from thence ^hilosophers and
Poets came into request. At Rome, Romulu the first founder of the City reigned
37, years being a Fratricide, and a stirre^ up of Sedition. After whom Nu^^
Pompilius continued that Kingdom in peace full 42 years: he amplified the
worship of the Gods, and lived in the time of Hezektah King of Judea. About the
expiration N^buchad^nozor.
of this Angel of the Moon his government: Nebuchad^nozor King of Babylon,
took Hi^rusalem, and destroyed Zed^bia^ the King and carried away all the
people Captive.

Hieremiah the Prophet was now famous, who foretold this destruction, as also
their future delivery from Babylon.

When Gabriel had finished his co^^se, again Michael Angel of the Sun did
assume Michael the Angel of the sun his second return, A^^^ 4606.
the 14. government of the World, who began the first day of the month of May,
in the year of the World 4606. the fourth month, and did rule the World
according to his own order 354. years, until the year of the Worlds Creation
4960. and eighth month.

In the time of this Angels moderation Evil Merodach King of Babylon, did
restore both their Liberty and King to the people of the Jews, according to the
direction of the Angel Michael, who as Daniel wrote, stood for the Nation of
the Jews, unto whom they were committed by God.

In these times likewise the Monarchy of the Kingdom of Persians began, whose
Persian monarchy, destroys the Assyrian.
first King Darius: and the second Cyrus did bring to nothong or utterly ruin,
that most powerful Kingdom of Babylon in the days of Bal^^azar, (as Daniel
and the Prophets had predicted)

In these times Sybilla Cuma^a was much spoken of, and grew famous; who Sybilla
Cuma^a.
brought 9 books to Tarqui^^^^ Pris^us the King to be bought for a certain
price; in which were contained the reason, order, and succession of future
Avisements, of the whole commonwealth of the Romans. But when the King refused
to give her the price demanded, Sybilla (the King seeing it) burnt the three
first books, demanding the same price for the other six; which when again he
had denied to give her, she committed to be burnt three of those remaining, and
would have done so by the rest; unless the King by persuasion and Council of
others, had not redeemed them from consuming, giving the same price for the
three last, for which he might have had the whole nine.

Moreover the Romans having abrogated Government by Kings constituted two
Consuls to reign every year. Phalaris the Tyrant in these times occupied
Sicilia: Magique or natural Philosophy was also in these times highly esteemed
amongst the Kings of Per^^.

Pythagoras.
Pythagoras the Philosopher, and very many others flourished amongst the
Greeks; the Temple and City of Jerusalem are a new reedified.

Esd^as.
Esd^as the Prophet repaired the books of M^ses, burned by the Ch^lde^ns; who
were also called Babylonians, and committed them to memory for example.

X^^xes King of the Persians brought his Army against the Greeks, but had no
success Socrates and Plato.
therein. The City of Rome is taken, burned, and destroyed, by the Ga^^es; the
Capitol only preserved by a Goose, stirring up the weary Champions. The
Athenians had eminent wars in these times: Socrates and Plato Philosophers
lived now.

Tribunes, Aediles.
The Romans lessened the power of their Consuls, instituted Tribunes and Aedils,
and were also about these times involved in many calamities: Alexander the
great Persian monarchy overth own
after the expiration of the rule of Michael, reigned in Macedonia, destroyed
the Monarchy of the Persians in Darius: conquered all Asia, and annexed it with
part of Europe to his own Empire.

He lived 33 years, reigned 12. after whose death infinite wars and many
mischiefs followed, and his Monarchy became divided amongst four.

Now amongst the Jews, first of all, they began to contend for the Priesthood:
the Kingdom of Syria began.

After the Spirit of Michael had finished his course, then the 15 time in
order, Orifiel Orifiel, angel of Sa^urn, his 3. return, An* 4960. Punick War.
Calamity of Rome. Colossus destroyed.
the Angel of Sa^urn, the third time assumed the regulating of this World, the
last day of the month of Sept^mber, in the year from the building of the
Universe 4960. and eighth month and he did rule in Chief 354 years, 4
months, until the year of the World 5315. Under whose moderation, the Punick
war began betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians the City of Rome was almost
wholly consumed by fire and water. The Brazen Molten Image called Colossus, in
length one hundred and twenty six foot fell down, being shaken by an
earthquake. At, or near this time the City of Rome enjoyed peace one year after
the Punick War: which Commonwealth had never been without War in 440 years
before.

Jerusalem together with the Temple is burnt and destroyed by Anti^^bus and
Epiphanes, the History of the Machabees and their Wars were now acted.

Carthage ^^^^d.
In these times Carthage 606 years after its first foundation is destroyed, and
burned continually by the space of 17 whole days. In Sicilia seaventy thousand
slaves made a Conspiracy against their Masters.

many prodigies. Mithridates
Many Prodigies in these times were beheld in Europe; tame domestical cattle
fled to the Woods, it reigned blood, a fiery Ball shined, appeared, and
glistered out of heaven with great noise and crackling. Mithridates King of
P^ntus, and Armenia held Wars with the Romans 40 years. The Kingdom of the
Jews is restored, which had interruption 575 years from the time of Zedechia,
until Arist^^ulu^. The people also of Germany called the Theutones, invaded
the Romans, and after many fights are overcome and one hundred and threescore
thousand of them slain, besides innumerable others of them, who slew themselves
and familiars under Casus and Manlius the Consuls: notwithstanding this, many
of the Romans were before this cut off by them: after which time. Civil Wars
did much shake Three Suns.
the Roman Commonwealth, which endured full 40 years. Three Suns appeared and
were seen in Rome, but not long ere they were reduced into one.

A very few years succeeding, ^ulius Caeju^ Caesa^ usurped the government of
the Romans, which Octavius Augustus after him amplified, and ^oyned Asia Africa
and Europe into one Monarchy, he reigned 36 years by whom, or whose means, God
gave peace to the whole World* In the year from the building of the City 751*
and of Caesar Octavius Augustus 42. and in the 24^ year and eighth month, the
25 of December, of the government of the aforesaid Orifiel the Angel of
Saturn: ^esu^ Christ the Son of God is born in Bethe^^n of Judea, of Mary the
Virgin. Note, how fair and wonderful the Ordination of Divine providence is;
For the World at first was created under the rule of Saturn his Angel Orifiel:
and mercifully redeemed, instaurated, and made new again under his third
government; so that the great number and agreement of concurring Actions, may
seem to administer no small belief to this manner of description, or setting
forth, that this World is governed by the seven Angels of the Planets: for in
the first Gubernation of Orifiel, there was one only Monarchy of the whole
World, under his second (as we mentioned before) it was divided amongst many.

Again, during his third, (as is manifest) it was reduced into one, although,
if we consider or measure time aright, it is manifest also that in the second
government of Orifiel, there was but one only Mon^rchy, when the Tower of Babel
was built. From this time forward the Kingdom of the Jews was quite taken
away, and the sacrifice of meat offerings ceased, nor shall liberty be restored
to the Jews before Increase of of Christian Religion.
the third Revolution of the Angel Michael, and this shall be after the
Nativity of Christ, in the year 1880* the eighth month, viz. In the year of
the World 7170. and eighth month. Many of the Jews in those times, and of the
Gentiles also, shall embrace Christian Religion, most plain and simple men
preaching the word of God, whom no humane institution, but a divine spirit has
inspired. The World shall then be brought to its first innocence of its
simplicity, the Angel of Saturn Orifiel governing the World every where.

Celestial things are mixed with earthly, many of the Christians for that
^aith which they did Preach, shall be slaughtered by the rulers of this World.
About the ending of the Moderation of Orifiel, Jerusalem is destroyed by the
Romans, and the J^^s are dispersed into every Nation, there being massacred of
them eleven hundred thousand, and four score thousand sold for slaves, the
residue of them fled; Judea destroyed. Anael Angel of Venus* his third return
and Government.
and so the Romans wholly destroyed Judea.

After that Orifiel had finished his government, Anael the Angel of Venus, the
sixteenth in order, the third time reassumed his Regiment of the World: the
last day of January, in the year of creating the Heaven and Earth 5315. but
from the year of the birth of Christ 109. and he regulated the affairs of the
World 354 years, 4 months, until the years of the World 5669. 4 months, but
of the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh 463. And its
remarkable, that almost during the whole rule of this Anael the Angel of Venus,
the Church of Christians did flourish in her persecutions, and prevailed; many
thousands, of men being Butchered for the Faith of Christ. Moreover in these
times very many Heresies began to be broached in the Church, which were not
extinguished, but after some time and with labor and the blood of good men.

Many men were eminent about these times in all manner of learning, and such as
were learned and Eloqu^nt Divines, Astronomers, Physicians, Orators,
Historiographers, and men of like quality, not only amongst the Gentiles, but
Christians. At length the persecution of I^fidels ceased, after that
Constantine Caesar the great, had assumed the Christian faith, in the year of
the World 5539* after the middle of the Government of the aforesaid Anael the
Angel of Venus. Although those pre^essing the Religion and faith of Jesus
Christ in some measure, were now and then disturbed and molested by the
Ungodly; Yet notwithstanding the peace of the Church did remain free from
molestation a long time.

From this time forward, Mankind which from the time of Ninus the King, for
almost the space of two thousand and three hundred years, had most miserably
gone astray about the worship of Idols, was now revoked mercifully to the
knowledge of one only God.

Various Arts of Subtilty in these times were augmented, and had increase and
reputation according to their conveniencie unto the nature of Venus.

For the manners of men are changed with the time, and the inferior bodies are
disposed according to the influence of the superiors.

The mind of man (verily) is free, and receives not the influence of the Stars,
unless it does too much commaculate his affection, by inclining its self with
the commerce which it has with the body. For the Angels who are the movers of
the Orbs, do neither destroy nor subvert any thing, which nature it self has
constituted or framed.

A Comet of unwonted and unusual greatness did precede the death of
Constantine.

Arrian Heresy.
The Arrian Heresy in many Countries disturbed the holy Church.

Toward the end of this Angels Government, in the time of Iulianus Caes^r,
Crosses appeared in lines, and Crosses in the garments of men.

Crosses in Garments.
In Asia and Palaestina wars followed, Pestilences and Famine in those places
where the Crosses appeared.

In these times also about the year of our Lord 360. the Franks or Franconians
in Original of the Franc^nia^s in Germany
Germany had their Original; who afterward wasting Gallia, gave the name unto
it of France, having first overcome and conquered the people thereof. The
description of Francia in greatness is long and wide, or of great circuit,
whose Metrop^^^ Moguntia sometimes was; now truly and only Herbipolis.

The Bava^^ans, Suevians, the people of Rhine, Saxons, Thuringers, this day do
occupy a great part of France in Germany, under jurisdiction of the Papacy in
some places. Moreover in the 280 year of the Gubernation of this Angel Anael,
the Roman Empire began to decline, whilst the City was taken and burned by the
Goth the Imperia^ seat being first translated into Greece under Constantine,
which was very mischievously done, and the only cause of the declining of that
whole Monarchy: for nee^ the determination of this Angel Anael his Regiment,
there did arise R^^igifus* Alaricus, Atholfus, Kings of the Goths: Also after
this, Genserick of the Vandals and Attllas of the Hunni who running all over
Europe, did most miserably tear the Empire in sunder, as is evident in these
Histories.

Zachariel Angel of Jupiter his third retu^ne and Government Ann^ 5669.
When Anael the Angel of Venus had finished his Regiment, then Zachariel the
Spirit of Jupiter did reassume the Universal Government of this World the
seventh time, the first day of June, in the year of the World 5669. the fourth
month, but in the year of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 463. four months;
and governed in his tu^ne 354 years and four months until the year of the
World 6023. and eighth month: but of our Lord God 817.

Many men in these times out of their affection to Christian Philosophy, betook
themselves to live in the Wilderness: many Prodigies appeared, Comets,
Earthquakes, Comets* Earthquakes Blood reigned.
it reigned blood.

Merlin born in Tumbe, predicted wonderful things in the beginning or entrance
of this Angels Government.

Merlins.
A^thur^ who commonly is called Arthur, the most glorious King of great
Britain, who overcame the Barbarians, restored peace to the Church, went away
conqueror Arthur^.
in many battles: propagated the Faith of Christ, subdued to his dominion all
Gallia, Norway, Denmark, and many other Provinces. He was the most glorious of
all Kings that lived in his time, who after many famous actions performed, did
never more appear, being expected to return by the Britains for many years, of
whom in times past many praiseworthy songs were published by the Bardes of
that people of wonderful Poesy; for whilst he reigned, England was in its
most flourishing condition, unto whom thirteen kingdoms were subject.

In or near these times the several Orders of Monks began to multiply in the
Monks.
Church of God: Theodoric King of Go^hes being an Arrian did possess all Italy,
slew Boe^ius their Consul.

All manner of Estates were full of preturbation, as well the Empire as Church
affairs, or Church and Commonwealth were now in great distress.

Zenon and Ana^lasius, Arrian Emperors in the East, Theodoric and his
successors in Italy, Honorius King of the Vandalls in Africa did exercise no
small Tyranny.

Clodoue^s King of France at length in Gallia being turned Christian, both
overcame the Goths, and restored peace in many places, though not in every
Country and Kingdom.

In the time of St. Benedict, and year of Christ 500. or thereabouts, in the
beginning of the government of this Angel Zachariel the Spirit of Jupiter,
whose spirits property it is, to change Empires and Kingdoms, which was done in
this Revolution, as histories do manifoldly declare; and what himself could not
perform, he ordained Raphael the Angel of Mercury, his successor, to perfect in
Charles King of the Francks.

Many Kingdoms came to their periods under these 350. years both of the Goths,
In Carolo Francotu^:
Vandalls, Burgundians, Lumbards, Thuringers, Alm^ius, Bavarians, and very many
besides.

Iustinianu^ the Emperor first of all about these times beautified the
Commonwealth very deservedly with his Laws.

Many gallant and most admirable men flourished under Zachariel

Iustinianus built the Temple of St. Sophia in Constantinople consisting of
400. Towers. The Empire is divided and made Bi-partite, and ever and anon is
more and more oppressed with mischiefs.

Many signs in heaven appeared about these times, as is easily collected from
Histories.

Gosdroes king of the Persians took Jerusalem, whom Heracliu^ the Emperor
afterward slew.

Mahomet the Arabian in these times about the year of Christ 600. introduced
the Mahomet.
Sect of Sarazens, by which Sect the Roman Empire in Asia is now quite
extinguished.

Dagobert King of France slew the English, at that time called Saxons (whom in
Dagobert.
battle he overcame) Its remarkable, that by little an^ little Christianity
about these times began to fail in Asia and Afric, upon entrance of the Sect
of the ^arasins therein, which now had almost poisoned the whole world.

About the years of our Lord God 774. Crosses appeared in the garments of men,
and not long after the Roman Empire is divided, a translation of the Mona^^hy
being made to Charles who was of the Frankcs Nation in Germany, who preserved
Westphalia.
the Empire and Church from perishing, and fought many famous battles.

The name of Western Galls, or Westpha^^^ns in (...) after his victory, first
had Raphael Angel of Mercury his third return.
its beginning.

In the 18. place after finishing the rule of Zachariel, the Angel of Jupiter,
Raphael the spirit of Mercury undertook the disposing of this worlds affairs.
the third time, the second day of November in the year of the Creation of the
World, 6023. Ann^, ^^^3
Roman (...) who inhabit a Country in Germany b^^wixt Su^^^ and Hassia Blo
draig^ad
eighth month, and he swayed the scepter of the World 354* years, four months,
until the years of the world 6378* and of our Lord God 1171.

In the first beginning of this revolution of Raphael the Angel of Me^cu^y, the
Monarchy of the Roman Empire (^s we mentioned before) was translated to Charles
the great.

After Charles his son Lodowick ruled 25. years, who being dead, his sons
contending amongst themselves, did again extenuate the strength of the Empire.

The Normans harrowed France: Rome is twice scourged by the Saracens: under
Lodowick the second it reigned blood from Heaven in Italy, by the space of
three whole days.

In Saxo^y, a certain village with all its buildings, and inhabitants was in a
moment swept away by an horrible gaping or opening of the earth.

Othos Emperors, Translation of the Empire to the Germans. Hungaria conve^ed.
Orig^nall of the Princes Hestors, Henry the ^^^st sounder of the Church of
Bamburg*
About the year of our Lord God 910, there were many great motions in Italy, and
Italy sell from the Empire of the Franks or Franconians, and ordained proper
kings for themselves of their own election; the first whereof was Berengarius
the Duke of Fo^olivium, after whom seven in order succeeded, near upon fifty
years, until the translation of the Empire unto the Germans: The first
Emperor that was thereof was Otho, from which time the Empire began to be
reformed; unto whom Otho his son, and his Nephew Otho after succeeded in the
Empire: under whose Government the Hungarians are converted to the Christian
Faith. But the third Otho dying without children, instituted after his death
Electors of the Empire in the year of Christianity 1002. even as they remain to
this present day.

Jerusalem is again taken by the Saracens: many strange sights are seen in the
air, in the Heavens, in the Earth and sea, and in waters: But Otho the third
being dead, Henry the first by election of the Princes succ^eded, reigned 20.
years, who founded the Church of Bamburg, and dying a Virgin, together with his
wife Kunigunda he shone gloriously in miracles; ister whom Co^^ade first Duke
of the Francks is chosen, and ruled 20. years.

Godsrey Ea^l of Bullen also recovered the holy Land, and City of Jerusalem
from the hands of the Infidels.

Before the end of this Revolution many signs and Prodigies were seen, and a
little time after the Nation of the Tartars exceeded the bounds of their own
Country, and did many mischiefs to the Empire of Rome.

There was Famine, Pestilence, Earthquakes in the Empire: Three suns were seen
in the East; and as many Moons. In the year of our Lord God 1153. Frederick
first called Barbarossa began to reign, and ruled 33. years, the beginning of 3
S^nns scen.
whose Government was in the 336. year of Ra^ha^l: He did many noble exploits,
and enlarged the strength of that Empire, performed sundry wars with great
success, in whose ninth year the Egians and Lituotrians were converted to the
Faith Samuel Angel of Mars (...) to govern the third time Anno 6378.
of Christ.

Samuel the Angel of Mars in order, the nineteenth time came to accept of the
Gubernation of the universal world, it being now his third return, and this
he did the third day of Ma^h, Anno Mundi, 6378. and he regulated mundane
affairs 354. years four months, until the years of the World 6732. fourth
month; and of our Lord God 1525. under whose predominancy many wars were all
over the whole world, by which means infinite thousands of men perished, and
sundry (...)
Kingdoms lost their former bounds: betwixt Frederick the first Emperor and
the Roman Nobility, many controversies arose, sundry great battles were
fought, and many thousands of Romans perished.

The aforesaid Frederick did wholly subvert Mediolenum: Liege is destroyed,
Hierusolem Liege.
is again taken by the Saracens, the Empire of the Tartarians the greatest in
the whole World about these times took its beginning, occasioned a very great
plague in the World, nor yet do they cease*

After Frederick, Henry his Son is elected Emperor. Who being dead, Schism
Rumors of Wars.
confounds that Empire; under Philip and Otho many battles followed in the
confines of Germany, ^rgentin^, Cullen, Liege, Worms, Sp^res, and all over the
Kingdom. The sect of begging or Mendicant Friars began in these times, in the
40 year, or thereabouts of Samael: from whence it is most apparent, that all
things are done by providence. The Sarazens fought many battles against the
Christians in Asia and Africa* Constantinople is taken by the Germans: Baldwin
Earl of Flanders is instituted Emperor. In ^lmain more then twenty thousand
young men are drowned in the Sea by Pirates, who seduced by a vain spirit, did
give forth they would recover the holy land.

From Spain many shepherds or keepers of cattle united themselves together,
coming to Paris dispoiled the clergy of their livelyhoods, the common people
taking part with them, or being well pleased with it.

But when they extended their hands to take away the goods of the Layity, they
were quite cut off and destroyed.

In the year of Christ 1212. Frederick the second is elected, he reigned 33.
years, Eclips and Earthquake*
and did many acts against the Church. In the year 1238. an Eclipse and a
continual Earthquake undid many thousands of men.

Frisia also by continual incursions of the sea, was almost wholly drowned,
and there did perish more then one hundred thousand of men and women.

The Tartars waste Hungaria and Polo^ia, Arme^ia the greater being first
subdued, Irruption of Tartars.
and many regions besides.

In the year of Christ 1244. a certain Jew digging in the ground at To^^do in A
book found by a Jew.
Spain, found a book, in which it was written, In the third World Christ shall
be born of the Virgin Mary, and shall suffer for the salvation of man, not long
after the third World believing, shall be baptized.

It was the third Revolution of the Angel of Saturn, concerning which, what is
spoken is intended: in the beginning of whose reign, Christ was born of a
Virgin.

The Popes of Rome deposing Frederick, it is said the Empire was vacant 28
years* until the Election of Rodolph Count of ^abspurg, constituting Kings by
turns in he Intervals or vacancy. First Henry Count of Schuvartzerburg at
Thuring by election of the Princes; then Wiliam Earl of Holland, Conrade the
Son of Frederick Alsonsus King of Castile Richard Earl of Cornwall brother to
the King of England, many evils were multiplied upon the face of the Earth.

At or near this time about the year of our Lord God 1260* the Confederacy of
the Switzers began, a small people in number, but have increased with the time,
Switzers.
who have slain many of their Nobility, and being a Warlike people have
banished and frighted away many others of their Nobles from their proper
habitations, whose Common wealth is now known to all the people of Germany.

In the year of Christians 1273. Rudolphus of Habspurg is consti^u^ed Emperor
by Election of the Princes: he reigned 18 years, the best of men, prudent in
all manner of affairs, from whom afterward descended all the Dukes of
Austria. The Tartari^ns invading the Lands of Christians, Constantinople and
Greece, brought insinite Original of the Dukes of Austria
damage to the Christians.

The Saracens do occupy many Cities in Asi^, kill and destroy more then four
Adolphus of Nassau King, Albert the Emperor.
hundred thousand Christians: Rudolph^a being dead, Adolph of Nass^^ is elected
King, he governed six years, whom Albert the son of Rudolph, afterward
overcame and slew in fight near Wo^mes and was chosen Imperator in the year of
Christ 1298. he governed ten years and was slain by his brothers son. The Order
of the Order of Templats subverted.
Knights Templats by command of Pope Clement the fifth is destroyed, the Isle
of Rh^de is recovered by Christians out of the hands of the Sarazens, after the
War and si^ge thereof had continued four whole years. Albertus being slain by
his Nephew; Henry is constituted the eighth Emperor, being Count of Luxenburg,
who rei^ned 5 years; he being dead Lodowick the fourth of Bavaria reigned 32
years, beginning in the year 1315 unto whom the Popes of Rome gave a Crown.

Carolus forth King of Bohemia Imperator.
Frederick Duke of Austria opposes himself against Lodowick, but is overcome
by him.

After Lodowick, Charles the fourth King of Bohemia is constituted Emperor;
who converted the Bishopric of Prague into an Archbishopric; he reigned 31
years: there were most fearful Barthquakes. This Charles did institute many
things in favor of the Princes Electors, concerning their Customs and
Tallages, which were not in use formerly. Gunther Count of Schuartzinburg
stiling himself King, opposed Charles the Emperor, but prevailed naught at all
against him.

After Charles, his Son Winceslaus governed 22 years: after whom Jodocus
Marquis of Moravia succeeded, Sigismund Cozen German of Winceslaus.

Winceslaus was deposed, Leopold Duke of Austria, 8 Earls, and more then 4000
soldiers fighting against the Switzers, were all by them slain.

John Hust Opinion.
During the government of Winceslaus King of Bohemia Emperor: the Tenets of
John ^uss had their beginning. Winceslaus being deposed, Rupert Count (...) of
^hine, and Duke of Bavaria was elected, and ruled 10. years. In the year of our
Miserable slaughter of Christians.
Lord God 1369 the Christians did engage themselves in a war against the
Sarazens, which succeeded ill by reason of the French men's Arrogance: because
more then one hundred thousand of our men did dye in that war; besides such as
were made Captives, amongst whom was John Duke of Burgundy; many were the wars
of those times*

Sigismund made Emperor.
In the year of the World 1407 Sigismund is made Emperor, and governed 27 years
he endeavored to wast and destroy the Kingdom of Bohemia thereby to
extinguish Heresy, but it little availed him. The Kingdom of France is most
grieyously wasted and consumed by the English and Burgundians: Sigismund being
departed this life, Albert Duke of Austria, Sigismunds son in Law, succeeded in
the year of Christians 1438, and only reigned two years, an admirable man and
worthy of the Empire. He being deceased, Frederick the third Duke of Austria,
the Son of Ernestus, by election of the Princes, is chosen Emperor: and
reigned 56 years, a man of a Divine soul and peaceable conversation, who began
to rule Anno Dom. 1440.

Frederick the third Emperor, Tumults of Wars.
In the year of Christians 1453. Constantinople is taken of the Turks by
^reachery of a certain Genoway, and a little after by degrees all Greece fell
from their Christian faith. For a little time after many Kingdoms and Provinces
of the Christians were harrowed, wasted, and taken by the Turks. Many and most
grievous wars the Christians had amongst themselves about this time, in France,
England, Saxony, Westpha^ia, Prusia, Flanders, Sweden, and other places. In
these times the Printing.
Art of Printing was newly found out, and invented at Mogunce the Metropolis of
Almain, by a wonderful industry, and not without the specialll gift of the
Deity.

In the year of Christ 1456. the Turks were overthrown in Hungria by the
faithful Earthpuake,
Christians, whereof many of them perished. The Pilgrimage of young men to
Saint Michael was wonderful. There were Earthquakes in the Kingdom of Naples,
and more then forty thousand people perished thereby.

In the year of the World 1462 M^guntia is taken and spoiled being the
Metropolis of the Franconians or Francks in Germany.

Charles Duke of Burgundy overcame the Franconians in Anno 1465. after that in
Duke of Burg^ndie^ War.
1467 he destroyed the cities Dinant and Lieg^, An. 1473. he entered
^elderland, and with much valor obtained it, and in like manner all the whole
Dukedom of Loraigne.

A Comet during all the month of January 1471 appeared. Charles Duke of
Burgundy not long after besieged the Town of N^ssicum one whole years space,
viz. in about 1474. which Magnanimous Prince was afterward slain in war 1467.
The Turks took away from the Christians about these times* many of their
cities, Nigrepont in Eu^oia, the Kingdom of Bosnia, Dukedom of Speta, (...)
Mysia, and more Kingdoms besides these in the Eas^.

Anno 1476 a convocation of fools was in Franconia of Germany near
Niclaushausen, full of errors.

Anno 1480 the Turks besieged the Rhodians with a powerful Army but prevailed
not; departing the same year from Rhodes, they took the city Hydruntum, more
then twelve thousand Christians being slain there, only 22 soldiers escaping.
The next year Mahomet Emperor of the Turks died; to whom Bajaz^t his first
born succeeded in the Kingdom, having reigned now at this present 27 years. In
the year of Christ 1486. Maximilian the Son of Frederick was instituted King
of Romans maximilian Emperor.
at Frankford, and saluted Caesar by Julius the Pope 1508. who instituted the
Order of warfare of Saint George purposely against Heretics and Turks: he
brought the Switzers low by war, and even to this ^ay makes war against the
R^bellious Sicambrians; he will be fortunate against all such as break their
Leagues or Covenants with him.

The King of France after his wonted manner, a constant persecutor of the
Empire, is discovered to plot new devices against it. The Omnipotent protects
those assigned to the Government of ^amael: An^o 1508. the V^netians Rebels to
the Empire of Caesar, are threatened with War and Banishment. Punishment of
stubbo^nness Aenign^^.
will be the reward of an advised sausfaction. About the end of this third
Revolution of Samael, the Image of alteration shall pass to the first and shall
be the Perdition of many men for unless Y be reduced again, (God assisting) (
al algos) there will be translation of one Monarchy, or of some great Kingdom.

A strong sect of Religion shall arise, and be the overthrow of the Ancient
Religion.

It Is to be feared least the fourth beast lose one head.

Mars first of all in the Government of Samael foretold the Flood, in his
second return, the siege and destruction of Troy: in his third toward the end
thereof will be found great want of Unity: from matters preceding may be Judged
what will or ought to succeed. This third Revolution of Mars shall not be
consummated without Prophecy, and the institution of some new Religion, from
this year of our Lord 1508. here yet remains until the end of the Government
of Samael 17. years wherein signs and figures shall be given, fore-shewing the
beginnings of evil. For in Anno 1525. Crosses were seen in the garments of men
by the space of ten years before, what is past already shall show their
effects: but 13 years from hence being justly summoned away, thou shall
surrender thy place to the ( non Intelligent) thou shall revive again far
greater to me, after the ^^tes in the third; unless it be lawful thou obscure
thy self in a cloud. Gabriel Angel of the moon his third return An^^ 6^^^


The twentieth time in order, Gabriel Angel of the Moon received the
moderation of the World, in the year of the World 6732. the fourth month, and
fourth day of June: in the year of Christ 1525. and he shall regulate the world
354. years, and four months, until the year of the world 7086. eighth month
but of our Lord Christ 1879. and 11. month.

The future Series of this Revolution requires Prophecy.
Most sacred Caesar, I have not wrote these things assertively, or that we must
believe it by any means whatsoever with the injury of Orthodox Divinity.

There are some that in these things have supputed Lunar months, which if thou
hold fit to consent unto, then those things I have wrote must be varied.

I protest with my own proper hand, and confess with my own mouth, that in all
these things delivered, I believe nothing, or admit of any thing, unless what
the Catholic Church does hold: the rest, I resute and contemn as vain, saigned
and superstitious.

Finis Joh. Trit.
This Method observed by Triumius, has found some obstruction; for, why the
Angels of the Planets should not in order succeed one another, has much
stumbled the understandings of some few in Europe versed in this manner of
traditionall learning; I shall not now in this discourse deliver my further
opinion hereof, leaving that to the discourse I have promised to publish of
this Subject my self in a more copious manner, if God shall prolong my life.

In the mean time, I thought fit to acquaint thee, that some (versed in the
more secret learning) do say, and with great reason affirm, that every Angel
does rule in order successively, and not 354. years, and odd months, but only
286. years, and nine months, and they affirm Orisiel began in the first year
of the world, on the 18. of March: by a continual addition, of 286. years, and
nine months, its casie for any to find under whose Government we now are: For
if Gabriel, whom they call the Angel of Mercury, not of the Moon, began the 11.
of July 1466. then are we in 1647. In the 181. year of Gabriels Government,
perhaps a sign we are afflicted with so many Novell opinions, etc.

Having this convenient opportunity of the Press, I thought it requisite to
publish this ensuing Discourse, sent me from a Learned Gentleman out of the
Country, and a Stranger, altogether unknown unto me: whose love unto me, if I
should conceal, I might be reputed very uncivil.
Mr. Lilly defended against George Wharton.
It is an Adage of Theognis,
(...),
(...).
WHich if true in great Jove himself, much less may we expect, that his
Messengers, or those Mercuries of our times (that we may use the Dialect of the
Stars) should in the Hermetick delivery of his Embassages to the world with all
men, find a mutual reception by the trygonall rays of true affection: but
that some carping Zoilus by the Cynicall inventions of his combust wits would
with Envies Saturnine square, endeavor to afflict them: but that truth's more
near conjunction, like Phoebus in his exaltation, has wrought an utter
prohibition of those malevolent beams, from working any impression upon wise
men's understandings.

Such (that I may stoop to vulgar capacities) is the condition of this
Malignant age, that we sure are fallen into the very dreggs of the times; when
there is not only an endeavor that truth may be trampled down, but also Arts
must be defamed; Artists scandalized, and men for speaking truth must be
detracted:

As may appear by the scandalous exclamations of that Arts defamer George
Naworth or Wharton, in his late Satyricall Libels put forth against those
famous Ptolomies of this Nation Mr. Lilly and Mr. Booker: and all out of mere
malice and madness, that they have by their hitherto-unparralleld skill, so
wonderfully proved themselves more able and more approved Artists then he; that
they for the truth of their predictions have born away the credit of the Art,
when he for his fabulous delusions must become the Ludibrium of the Kingdom,
and scorn of the Learned on either side.

But is he this very Asinego, so simple as to imagine, that he shall now
recover by his malice, the credit he long since lost by his ignorance. It does
but render him in the eye of the world, the more ridiculous, to see him put to
so poor shifts, as to act a scolds part to help himself; when he has had the
worse by fighting, to get a good way of and chide, as if that would recruit his
lost credit; whereof he was never much guilty.

What fault of Mr. Lilly or Mr. Booker was it, that his predictions failed?
That he must needs inveigh against them with his scurrilous language, Aesops
dog suffers not the Ox to eat Hay. So Noworth just like a bleezing traveller,
that by his buzardly clumsiness tumbles in* to a quick-sand, and there
sticking, raileth and rages against those that hit the right way by the same,
better then he, calling them all to pieces, because they were not as very
buzzards as himself to plunge into the same puddle for company.

Thus because Corporal Wharton has overwhelmed himself in such gross errors
in Judgment, therefore Mr. Lilley is a whelp, and Mr. Booker a barking
mungrill, (as he is pleased to term them) this is wise Logic.

But let any Judge, whether such titles do not more properly belong unto
himself, seeing he (though it be shame to use his so absurd terms, qut that he
fastens them on himself; and it is fit ( ut faber quas fecit compedes, ipse
gestet) like a slow-footed mungrell has run himself off his legs to catch a
prey, and missing thereof, is contented to sit upon his tail and snatch at
flies; a good employment for Publican Wharton.

Who does not behold how he having strayned himself out of breath and out of
credit, to purchase fame from that famous Art, and having through his
unskilfulness (the matter being above the sphere of his capacity) quite mist of
that honor he so eagerly pursued; is feign for spite that Mr. Lilly and Mr.
Booker have born away from him the trophies of renown, to fall upon trivial
and frivolous matters; as to tax them with mistakes in Arithmeticks, which were
they true as he alleges, were matters so inconsiderable, and of so small
concernment, that they cannot in point of Judgment produce any sensible
error, and therefore can obfuscate the effulgencie of their fame no more, then
an Attome can ecplise the Sun.

What praise or applause can he purchase, for presuming so much upon his
computations, being but the very Theorick principles of the Art, wherein very
Tyro*s are not ignorant, much less experienced Artists? When in the Judiciary
Praxis, wherein all the credit of the Art consists, he has so utterly shamed
himself. Let him show me one true prediction of his, since he first wrote.

Shall not that Scrivener be rather exploded by all, then applauded by any,
that vaunteth how he has ruled his lines right, when all men see he has
written never a true letter. Sure George Wharton is very simple to think there
is any that will heed his vain boasts, unless is be to hiss at his folly, for
advancing his own accurat scrupulossity, and vilifying Mr. Lillyes and Mr.
Bookers labors; when the whole Kingdom to his perpetual shame testifies
against him, how wonderfully the successes of the English affairs have
answered their predictions to their everlasting renown; when his great vapors
proved but mountains of smoke that are vanished, and come to nothing.

Sure, brass-fac'd Wharton has learned Vulcans craft from that great thief
Cacus; who being driven into a straight by Hercules, is reported to disgorge
out of his sulphurious stomach, great clouds of smoke and fire, only to dazzle
the eyes of the besiegers, for the better accomplishment of his evasion. But
although Snarling VVhartons late smoakie vapors belched forth from the
ranckour of a Malignant heart, have been only intended to delude the World, and
to eclipse the splendour of the Art and Artists, only for his Errors escape of
their deserved censures: Yet have we those experienced Atlantes, that would
soon discover the deceit, but that it is needless, in regard his own erroneous
pen has to all men been the sufficient Index of his folly.

What credit gets an Archer to boast that he took his aim directly at the
white, when indeed he has mist the Butt? Or what an ass does he make of
himself to go up and down bragging how his Adversary laid not his level so
right at the mark as he; when all the standers by see and know, that his
Adversary has wonn the game? Thus Cobbler- Wharton planted fairly his great
Cannons of commination, and Thunderclaps of threats against the Parliament, and
City of London, and against their forces, when they hit Oxford, York,
Newcastle, Salop, etc. shot down their own garrisons, dispersed their Ju^to, and
destroyed their Armies. And he sure is a wise Gunner, that when his great Guns
have mist, is fain to go learn to make squibs, and thinks by foysting them out
to terrify and destroy his enemies, ( sed fulgura ex vitro quis reformidabit?)
Oh brave Gregory Noworth.

But questionless he would never have insisted upon such needless
s^rupulosities, wherein he knows well enough (would his conscience but speak
impartially) that neither of them are ignorant, but that he must needs play the
Cynick, (though to his greater shame) in carping at any thing in others, in
regard he has been overwhelmed in such a Sertes of gross errors himself. For
who is so simple as to conceive that they See Mr. Lillyes prophetic Merline.
whose accomplished judgments have effected the Arts so great advancement,
should be ignorant in the principles thereof, or be now to learn either by
common Arithmeticall, Logorithmeticall, or Sinicall computations, how to
perform their calculations?

So that had there been in their schemes such slender defects, as he suggest*
eth, this were all the construction could be made thereof: that thereby it
appears how Mr. Lilly and Mr. Booker have for their fame been taken up with
so great acquaintance, and their companies so by Nobles and Gentlemen
frequented, that it were no marvel, therefore no disparagement, if they having
so little time to perfect their accounts, should incure some oversights
therein, seeing they are forced so hastily, and with their studies so often
interruption, to perform the fame: so that it could not be imputed to any
ignorance in them, but only hasty oversights, if they had committed such small
mistakes: when on the contrary, it likewise hereby appears how this poor
Renegado Wharton who for being too monarchical, is now become monachall, is
so far from having his studies interrupted, that he is for his erroneous and
delusive writings by all deserted and derided; and therefore has leisure
sufficient to peruse and revise his accounts; who had he for any great esteem,
or request he had been in, had such continual conflux to him, as Mr. Lilly and
Mr. Booker have, of ingenious and noble Spirits, he had had as little leisure
to insist upon such toys in Art as they have: the truth whereof may the more
manifestly appear, in that while he was at Oxford, and while some small glimpse
of hopes, which his friends had of his skill, did somewhat support his credit,
he could not at all answer their writings by insisting on such scruples, till
now that he is cashiered and exiled from all society, and now he may take time
enough to pick straws against those judicious Artists: so that to tax them with
such trifles does but add to their honor, and his own disgrace.

Yet will no man blame Mr. Lilly for suspecting his insufficiency in Art, when
he corrected him of those errors by him committed in his calculations, in
regard the same (although they could not disparage one, whose predictions,
real verifications have sufficiently declared him an able Artist) yet might
well aggravate the suspicion of ignorance of the very principles of Art, in one
whose unskilful judgment was so far from being in any particular answered by,
that it proved altogether contrary to all events succeeding.

But it seems plundering Wharton by his own confession being shrouded under the
counterfeit name of Naworth, had like to have cheated the world with his
forgeries undiscovered. I cannot blame him therefore indeed to be angry at Mr.
Lilly for pulling off that vizard, and making him so unluckily known to his
Country, seeing thereby he is like not only to become a ludibrious contempt
to all that know him, but also to remain upon record to all posterity, not
Wharton anagrammatiz'd, but Wharton stigmatized with the brand of Englands
lying Prophet, and Astrologies defamer to his perpetual shame, and infamy.

So that, seeing he had proved himself that Philosopher ( Qui dum contemplatur
coelum, incidit in puteum) by confounding himself in such gross errors of
judgment: he was worse then mad to go now again to stir up a new those puddles
of disgrace, from whence nothing but a greater stinck of reproach, and obloquie
will fly into his face.

And for the Art, what credit or esteem had Astrology been in by this time in
England, had there been no better judgments, than Ignoramus VVhartons to rely
upon for its advancement? And yet will he be so ill a friend to the Art he
pretends to, that can neither advance the fame thereof himself, nor is willing
it should retain that fame, it has obtained from profounder judgments: What
credit I marvel in any one particular has either the Art by him, or he by the
Art at any time received? yea, rather what discredit has that rare and worthy
Science sustained by means of his unworthy, and unskilful pen: insomuch, as
partly among weak, and partly among disaffected judgments Astrology began to
be vilified, and undervalued, and had by this time been utterly exploded and
rejected by all, and all through his ignorance, had not the truth of Mr.
Lillies and Mr. Bookers predictions to their no less commendations then
admiration of all, dissipated those vapors of error, and maintained the Art
in its resplendent luster.

It is wondered therefore by all, which read his late books, seeing he has
deluded the world so by his former ignorance and folly, with what face he can
so impudently intrude himself upon the theater of the world to act another
feels part in a new scene of ignorance and malice to move the people to
laughter: and that he had not rather for very shame of himself, sequestered
himself from humane society, or mewed himself up in some Dungeon of
solitariness, and pined himself to death for very grief and anguish, that he
had so unluckily by his sycophantique fables betrayed his Sovereign, and the
Royal tarty.

Whether was more the Kings friend, and deserved better of the Cavaliers^
ignorant George Wharton for singing to them his Sirenian songs, and soothing
them on with lies totheir destruction, or Mr. Lilly for advising his Majesty to
adhere to his Parliament, or telling them otherwise in plain terms (which
accordingly fell out) what successes the Almighty by his Instruments the Stars
had destinated, and intended against them.

Seeing therefore this blind Ass Wharton like an unskilful Musician piped
so long to this Kingdom, and could hit never a true note; it had been far more
wisdom now, even to have put up his pipes and been silent, than to squeak out a
new his disgraces to the world, which happily by this time might have been
forgotten.

But any impartial eye, that peruses his late pamphlets, must needs read every
word therein, but as so many characters of his malios, seeing in the last pages
of his Almanac, he can confess the Prutenick, and Rudolphine Tables, etc. very
erroneous and defective, without any impeachment to the credit of the Authors
thereof, which indeed they in no kind deserved; but in Mr. Lillies, and Mr.
Bookers computations, would needs fusten errors of ignorance on them which are
not so: Why had he not reputed Copernicus, Alphonsus, Lansberg, those famous
computations, to whom all Astrologers are so much beholden? Why had he not
reputed them ignorant in the principles of Art, seeing ther^ are such errors,
and mistakes in their Tables, but that the aim of his envy is only at Mr.
Lillies, and Mr. Bookers fame and skill: he would seem to plead excuse for his
own absurdities in point of Judgment from the deficiencies of those Tables,
and to palliate his own defects, for want of judgment, by complaining: How can
we find out (they are his own words) the true time and nature of the influence
of the Heavens, and Celestial Orbs, when as yet no man ever attained to the
exact knowledge of their motion, site, and aspects? but Master Lilly, and
Master Booker, if they commit any mistakes must be inexcusable. Behold the Map
of malice, and partiality! but we may discover his malicious rancour also, if
we look but upon Regiomontanus himself, whom all men so highly, and indeed most
deservedly commend, seeing we shall find him not regarding such strictness, or
preciseness in his Tables, which are the very platform of Astrologers
calculations, as to complete the same with such exactness (although he perform
as much as is requisite) but that we may find some difference therein, in his
several ways of working his computations: for if we would gather the Oblique
Asc. of the 4. gr. II sine lat: for the lat. 53. gr. by the 10. Problem we
shall find it 31. gr. 23. min. but if we do the same by the 7. Probl. we shall
have it 31. gr. and but 22. min. which is 60. sec. or one minutes difference in
the fundamentals: now must we therefore account Regiomont a Novice in Art, to
whom we hardly find his equal?

Yet there is one pretty piece of policy observable in Dull-man Wharton, which
is this: Forasmuch, as Mr. Lilly has forborne to make every one as skillful as
himself, in that he has concealed his reasons in Art for some of his
judgments in his Ephemeris delivered: now ignoramus George Wharton knows not
how to screw out the same, and to learn his skill (it being not (as he
confesses) within the Perimeter of his apprehension) but by possessing the
world that he has no ground in Art for what he says, as if Mr. Lilly must
upon necessity in every particular make him as wise as himself, least if he
conceal any thing, which he knows not, he presently tells him, he speaks
without authority* But were not this Buzzard Wharton too ungrateful and
discourteous, he would not offer to extort instruction in Art from him, by
reproaching him, if he will not teach him all his skill, to whom he and the
Kingdom are obliged for his learned and judicious labors in that Art.

An Astrologicall Discourse OF THE THREE SVNS, Seen the 3. of April, 1647.
SUch is the incredulity of some, and so great the malignancy of others, that
whereas in 1645. Ipublished a small Treatise concerning the Portents of those
three Suns seen in London the 19. of November. 1644. by many hundreds of
unquestionable credit: it has been endeavored by many disaffected to our
present welfare, and to that happiness we enjoy by the blessing of Almighty God
upon the endeavors of this Parliament, and valor of our Army, to question the
verity of those three-Suns appearance, thereby to make people believe there was
no such thing (in Rerum natura) visible, and so by consequence my prediction,
or judgment grounded on their appearance must be invalid: but time has
deluded my adversaries, and thereby manifested the truth of those judgments
delivered upon that Subject, to the eternal shame of all such as shall
contradict of set purpose such Manifest Truths. Posterity may justly question
our present actions, while^^ those that now live, suspect the verity of what is
so uncontradictably true.

The consideration hereof, had almost silenced my further engagements upon any
the like Subject; for although I have had several Letters from sundry parts of
this Kingdom; intimating a visibility of sometimes three Suns, then of two, or
three Moons, with the frequency of those admirable appearances, and other
Prodigious sights in the Air, yet did I willingly refrain, either communicating
those Papers, or writing any thing upon those, or such like Subjects.

But toward the middle of April 1647. receiving the Letter subsequent, from an
unknown hand, and from a far Country, and near the same time Mr. Booker
receiving another out of Shropshire, containing in effect the same things
intimated in mine, with a desire of satisfaction from either of us concerning
the effects depending thereupon, (which the people of those Countries do
earnestly desire) I then cast off all vain fears, either of displeasure like to
happen unto me from virulent tongues, or self-content, and have adventured the
Discourse ensuing, for my spirit is totally public.

The Form and mauner of 3. Suns, seen April 3. 1647.


Some Naturalists do hold that the Parelii or Mock-Suns, are nothing but Images
of the Sun, represented in an equal, smooth, watery Cloud placed on the sides
of the Sun, into which the Sun beams being received as in a glass* express the
likeness of fashion and light that is in the Suns and than they naturally
betoken, tempest and rain to follow, and tha^ the storm or tempest is greater
when they appear on the South Side of the Sun, then when on the North.

Others do hold (although no friends ^o Astrology) that they portend contention
amongst Princes for Kingdoms, producing for examples hereof, Gal^a, Otho,
Vite^iu^, and they further say, that a little before their so great wars, three
Suns appeared: it is also affirmed that not long before the sl^ghter of Lewis
King of H^agaria three Suns were seen, so also near the time when John the
V^yvod, Ferdinando, and the great Turk strove for H^^garia.

That there is something of nature in the unusual Apparitions of three Suns, I
do verily believe, but that Nature her self solely without commotion or
disturbance of the ministering Aeriall Spirits does enforce such Prodigies, I
cannot assent in opinion.

Let me enjoy my own understanding herein without tincture of Heresy; but to
the purpose, these mock-Suns of which I now treat have signification of things
Political and Ecclesiastical.

They are as to our present Parliament, in things Political, the admonishers
or Monitors of some fraud, deceit, or clandestine Councels now, or suddenly to
break forth against them, and even so it was after the civil War between C^sar
and Pompey, a little before the Triumvirat-ship of Octavius, Anto^i^s, and
Lepidus: Monent de conspirationibus and insidiis, quae stru^nturinter eas* qui
gubernacula rerum te^dunt. So also in Hungary did three Suns appear a while
before the death of Lewis, and the hot wars that John, Ferdinand, and Soliman
the Turk made each against other for that miserable Kingdom. Breviter
significant amulationem, ant concertatione^ inter aliquos de summa rerum.

In matters Ecclesiastical, they prenote a Sophistical depravation of the
purer doctrine, and calumnies and slanders which shall be spread abroad under a
colorable honest pretext, variously to misreport and deforme those who are
really and worthily accounted religious, pious. Orthodox and sincere
christians; they signify a strong desire in many to distract us in Religion,
to spread Heresies and corruptions in doctrine. Pa^^lii, sunt ambitiose illi,
qui and summis vi^^ and pr^clar^ meritis de Ec^lesi^ vel ^pponunt and ^quare se
volunt, a^t per calumnias and falsas criminationes obscurare illorum de^us
contendunt. Sed ut nativus splendour evi^cit ^ucat as and evanescentes imagines,
ita tand^^ ex omnibus certa^^i^ibus feliciter el^ctatur veritas, and discussis
fugatisaque omnium mendaciorum fucis, tanquam purissimui Sol enitet, and
clarissimum jubar ostendit. viz. As the native Splendor does overcome
counterfeited and vanishing Images, so at length truth is happily more
beautiful through all her hard contentions; and the Sun having dispersed and
vanquished the foggy mists of lies, does most purely shine and show forth his
most pleasant rays.

These mock-suns appearing so often in this Kingdom of England, and almost in
every County thereof; are the infallible and assured heavenly messengers of
some more then ordinary Contingencie near at hand; and of so eminent and
universal a mutation and Catastrophe, as neither this present age is, or the
preceding was sensible of.

astrological map 30 Apr: 1647

7:14 A. M.

D'n's diei

D'n's hor:

a

in

ad

Lat: 5



In a moment of time these variations shall not be apertly manifested: for in
the Lunation preceding being on the 25 of March, no Planet appeared above the
earth, and in our figure of Heaven we find ^ in the twelfth house, the other
Planets all being Subterranean; we have five of the 7 Planets fixed, and in
their exaltations, the matter intended is lofty, significant and admirable, the
time when not at hand: If we run in the path way of Vulgar Astrologicall
Judicature, solely without mixture of the Caball thereof. Then the figure of
heaven informs us, that as the was lately in with, so the wars, and distempers
of this Commonwealth had been terrible and great; and as she stands at
present in of Lord of the ascendant in the figure she portends our head pieces
or understandings had as much need to be refined, and as piercing as formerly
our swords, and that we have now as great and as urgent necessity of good and
sound Council, as formerly of soldiery: for as is weak, so does he argue, our
spirits are stupefied and amazed, our Conceptions sluggish, our Councels
contradictory and unprofitable (for and are in out of such signs as hatefully
aspect each other:) we have now come near to the place of the eclipsed 10
Jannuary last, and to his place; is now locally with many violent fixed stars
having great Septentrionall Latitude from the Ecliptic; his influence and
virtue being thereby much more strengthened, and the soldier whom he generally
signifies, animated: from hence we shall be sensible of the male-contented
soldiery, nor will the Commonalty in many parts of this Kingdom be any thing
satisfied: and if you will know wherefore, we find Lady of the second
afflicted; that is, their purses are empty, or they discontented by too much
exhausting of their moneys, or that they are jealous the soldier will devour
all by free quarter: yet notwithstanding all these difficulties and their most
heavy undergoings; no uproar, tumult, or bloodshed shall arise from hence: for
and the are in reception, and hastens to enter the sign Leo, and the makes
great have from to a more benevolent Planet, all which say council and
discretion will moderate the distractions amongst us.

This very month of May toward the latter end thereof shall discover much
accordingly as we predicted in our Anglicus 1647. to which months Judgment I
referr those that desire to know more, and shall warily read and understand it,
and compare it with our judgment upon the Eclipse Lunar in January, and the
remainder of the effects of the Solar Eclipse in 1645. not yet determined.

The malevolent Planet in this present May meets with the Quadrature of in
signs fixed, transiting near the degree ascending of this years Revolution and
his influence fomented by his access to the Virgilie and Pleiades, an argument
sometimes of violent and unsufferable motion, sudden combustions, pitiful and
plentiful discontents, great commotions, and sturdy hurliburlies with sharp
invectives against some great Persons, or malicious and heady, or giddy
accusations, they shall not prevail, for malice must not prevail against
generous and noble souls.

We find three planets in Taurus the Ascendant of Ireland, the transferring
the virtue of to them all three: the heavens tell us what is fit, what is
convenient to be done, that it is high time we dispatch our forces away for
that kingdom, to revenge the blood of our murdered and slaughtered
countrymen: but we may see the is in with: and he lately in with: who is Lord
of the twelfth, and partly of the sixth. Either some secret practices, or
politic Agents, or self ends in some for a time, do clandestinely retard our
supplies from Ireland* had not the Noble Scot made more have to assist us,
where had we been? Indeed our supplies will and must move slowly, for the
significators are all fixed, and posited in the 1^. but they shall, they must,
and they will move (notwithstanding some private conspiracies to the contrary)
for applies to seperating from who herein has relation to the Governors of
our Commonwealth; and she, viz. is in her own house, we shall one day effect
our desires, though at present not with such strength as is justly requisite
for such an action, and of so great concernment. It may be conjectured that
about 12 weeks from the time of this Prodigies appearance, assistance of men
and money shall either be gone, or very near upon going for relief of that
distressed Kingdom.

These mock-suns intend no calamity either to the Inhabitants of Shropshire or
Cheshire, more then their sufferance in a general way, for in regard they were
not vertical to those Counties, they show the lesser mischief toward them:
and indeed these Parelii are rather the fore runners of many such things, as
finally shall be concluded, and were signified by the three suns in November
1644. for as was then the ascendant of the figure, so now is its opposite sign,
whereby we see the concurrence of heavenly bodies, with humane accidents: for
as in the figure of the former three suns we had Angular in the West* so now we
have him nee^ the Angle of the fourth not visible: whereby I do not conceive it
is intended any wars shall happen within our selves (as some disaffected would
have it) but a just questioning of such amongst us, as shall by due proof be
found worse enemies, knaves and cheats to the Commonwealth, then our violent
professed adver^aries; these have undone many hundreds of the unfortunate
Gentry of this Kingdom, as well friends as enemies, under the notion and
color of serving the Parliament.

Let us proceed and observe the progress of, he hastens first to of thereof and
lastly entering his own house, he therein meets with the of, from hence will
arise this Prognostic, that during two whole months, our grand consultations
shall leasurely proceed with often interruptions, but determine at last to the
benefit of the whole Kingdom: from that time and until about January, our
councels will proceed ( lento p^de) with many backslidings and
tergiversations, but will conclude with grand deliberations, gravity and
resolvedness, and if you will know, whereupon, or upon what Subject these so
tedious consults shall fall; consider applies to Lord of the tenth: it shall
really be concerning his Majesty within the space of 25 Months, it shall
appear to the whole world the honorable intentions of the two Parliaments of
England and Scotland and that they are lovers of monarchy: and full to the brim
of Loyalty to their Sovereign. And this shall not be manifested by them in
words only, but in Famous and Honorable Acts, well becoming the Nobility and
Gentry of both Nations. So that the Nations of Europe shall admire, and the
Commonalty of both Kingdoms shall rejoice in the prudence and wisdom of both
Nations; and their very Antagonists shall be converted and hang down their ears
like Asses, being ashamed the malevolent Episcopal Clergy have so long time
missed and blinded their understandings: for if the inevitable fate of monarchy
in this Kingdom and an higher Providence then at present I am sensible of, do
not supreamly contradict it, I do confidently averr, and upon greater
deliberation deliver, that i^ conclusion we shall (I mean this Parliament)
settle all things with that integrity and honor, which may be required from
men fearing God, and Cordially affecting their countries welfare. And as the
sign of being the ascendant of this Kingdom, has in our Scheame the most
fortunately placed therein; and ascending into the eleventh, from thence I do
de^ie any prevalency of a forraigner amongst us; (yea though Wharton that arch.
Traitor, Renegado, and Irish mungrell predict other ways) for the good Angels
of God will be this Commonwealths Protectors.

A word of the honorable Scots, I see placed in the ascendant of their
Kingdom, is departed out of: I am confident Scotland shall overcome her home
bread Traitors, and yet assist potently against that Varlet Nonsense Noworth
his brethren, the inhumane Irish: I only fear some of that Kingdoms great ones
are not downright honest Scots; they smell of corruption, but God who has
hitherto directed that Nation with much fame and reputation in their general
affairs, I hope will detect those Malcontents to their shame, and good of
the Scottish Nation.

I Desire you to Certify Mr. Booker, or Mr. Lilly of a strange Apparition that
was seen with us the 3. of April 1647. about 8 of the Clock in the morning
there appeared three Suns at one time very round, and in about an hours
distance, in their gate one from another, all of one bigness; and remaining so
for a quarter of an hour, to the great amazement of the beholders: and at the
last the two outmost vanished away, and the middlemost remained; they were seen
by diverse men some 10. miles distance, but in some places there were seen but
two: the night before being very clear, we saw the and not a hand breadth
assunder, which many took notice of: and the next night following was very
tempestuous: our country are very fearful of some great danger toward us:
there was another strange thing; a Calfe with two heads taken out of the Cows
belly, and the Cow saved alive: the Calfe was carried to VVhitchurch and
Drayton Fair to be showed: I heard of strange and fearful sights seen the
night after the appearance of the three Suns, but I spoke not with the Parties,
therefore I leave it; I desire to hear of their Astrologicall predictions upon
these Verities, and so I rest their affectionate Scholar:

A C

Mr. Lilly.
MY love remembered to you, in the best respect: I am unknown to you by face;
yet have longingly desired to see you, but still kept back for want of ability,
yet hope in time to speak with you in London, and to receive instructions from
you, concerning that noble Science you profess, etc. Now these are to certify
you, that there appeared to the view of our Inhabitants this third of April,
three Suns, and two Apparitions like Rainbows over the true Sun: I saw it, so
did five Laborers I had at work. It was first seen of us about seven in the
morning, and a little before 8. I showed it to my whole Family, but by eight
they were all closed in one; yet the two Rainbows remained longer. Now the
reason I am so bold as to write to you is, because you have sent many learned
and true predictions into the world, and I hope will give your opinion on this
also. I have some ancient Prophecies, I think you have not seen, and one figure
of a Nativity, the Native not yet forty, which I suppose would be more
available to show the truth of Astrology, then any I yet see in your Books,
for it is a miraculous one: if you please to make use of it, in the book,
called An Introduction to Astrology, I can procure it brought you for nothing;
if you do send for it, direct your Letter to be left at the Eagle and Child in
Woore six miles short of Nantwitch. My Teem now stands loose: I would be more
large, but for have, Rest your loving friend,

The Hall of Woore Apr. 3. 1647. M. H.

FJNJS.

