Lilli's Prophetical History Of this years ACCIDENCE, 1642. OR, News from
the Grammar School, taken suddenly sick all over with Conceit, occasioned by
the Doctors desperate opinion of her state, finding HOC REGNVM in the second
Declension.

WHEREIN Is found a preposition for the Kings returning Londinum versus, going
imediately before the Concord.

The misery of the times beating into our brains the memory of our first Rules,
all in one method, for an everlasting impression of both, never to be
forgotten.

The Author to the Reader.
What means these tears, sobs, sighs, the land all over?
Why? Grammar's sick. Was It ever so before?
W.S.



Nouemb 4

London printed in the year. 1642.

News from the Grammar School
WHat? Speechless Grammar? Boads this silence death?
Thou that were always more In Speech then breath?
Mirth of the Land adieu: For Music of all Arts,
Has greatest loss in thee, to lose Eight Parts,
Science looks sable, very School-boyes whine,
Re- Form must they, or they must still Decline.
Like Bonitas, such ruined Nounes there be,
Some by Themselves stand, some supported be.
A desperate crew now left, Numbers of Nounes,
Some gone to set up Cyphering Schools in Towns,
Some to the Temple e're they had their Graces,
Like to prove Lawyers; for they have Six Cases.
If e're you saw at Sessions, or at Size,
A troop of clamorous Clients with loud cries.
In Cases of all sorts, and Nominations,
Some Genitive, Dative, and some Accusations;
Some loud for mercy cry, Magister O,
Others Oblated Coram Magistro.
This makes the Lawyer laugh, quem nos amamus,
A bad as Grammar laughed at Ignoramus.
In time this needs must prove a Malum Omen,
If Articles be not borrowed of Pronomen
In some new Spiritual Court for to recover
That which in Common law the Bar's cast over.
Once Hic, Haec, Hoc, in their Bum Courts would bear it,
Recovering all, now Vocativo caret.
But since 'twas Cado that made Case a Noune,
Wonder no more that these came tumbling down,
Beneath whose rotten ruins (so Fame renders)
Of deadly sins no less then seven Genders.
Some Mals 2. Common with the Feminine,
Some stand as Newters, doubtful, Epicene.
Hic mulier's false and damned, but out alas Sir,
If this world hold, there will another Hic Pass-er.
As for Declensions there were Five before,
If Bishops down, there is one Declension more.
God grant the learned Mus-a new refining,
It Is bad with them: for they are first declining.
Their Masters next, whose Vocative exclamation
Goes near to touch the Kingdoms Declination.
But no help found in Regnum of Iacobus,
We must Decline ambobus ambabus ambobus.
There Is hopes good Founders may repair this loss,
If King and Council do'nt each other cross.
These Parens, manus (must pile) Lapides.
To bring about declining Meridies.
Or else what Grammar faith, you will find too true,
Decline once more, and Meri-dies adieu.
Then ends our substance: Next must be remembered
The Land's Noune-Adjective, or a thing dismembered.
O woeful chance! of Bonus, bona, benum,
Not so much left, as unus, una. unum.
Felix comes trembling (as delinquent) he
Charg' dis which Articles no less then three.
These days are doleful, and our learned Mistress
Has no Declension left but mournsull Tristis.
Whe're this be for her pride, I will be sparing,
The world may judge; for she is still comparing
These learned confusions heaped up together.
Good, had, great, little, lofty with the nether.
In one degree is found now worst and best,
Maximus the great, and Minimus the least.
But in revenge of Grammars sad deiection,
Pronomen's up in Chevalier complexion,
With 15. Noune-like Lads all of one Nation.
Eight prime ones were indeed, six have relation
(To this sad Tragedy) then these none more,
Rehearse the thing that is spoken of before.
Others like Heralds, derive their pedigree
From Ego, Ille, is, and ipse he.
But here is our fate in it, I, thou, and one more,
Must be declined in manner as before.
These Pronounes plunder, ransack, rend and tear it,
The Vocative never held, and Nominativo caret.
Numbers fell (down from Grammars latin cazements)
2. into one (the Muses great amazements)
The country shakes, as frighted Duckes ab aqua,
Fly gagling homewards quic quid, quoquo quaqua.
Here Is to be noted, how these desperate fractions
Made Gentiles, Nations, fall to Sects and Factions.
These had preferred three persons to one Tense,
That brought our Church to this sad Accidence.
(Gods) Verbum part of speech (come from above)
Declines from doing, as Amo I do love.
Some think these ruins rose from Cathedrals,
And such as have no Persons called Impersonals,
Who means these shall be heard or understood,
Must give them Time, or take them in the Mood.
Gerunds Do Di, (or else like Bulls live some)
Who certain voices had, but they were Durn.
Supines a world, but Doceo and Lego.
Such active (Preachers) make their end in O.
These doleful times present, Perfect-ion nusquam,
But what is grown imperfect, past, or plusquam.
What Is in the Future was of truth foretold,
Love in these last days shall or will grow cold.
Now Mufes sons, some new invention have ye,
For to refine Amo, amas, amavi.
Not in command am I, but wishing mood
Potentia had sub-joyn'd loves brotherhood.
To love is infinite, yet some set about it;
But it is in Rus then, (for in Town I doubt it)
Where 'twixt the active and the passive voice,
We know sum newter stand, jeere and rejoice.
Professed Sufferers whose minds stand right,
Are known by Or (an Hebrew word for light.)
Diverse revolt while Grammar groaned aegrotans,
Away runs from her rule strong possum potens,
Malo more willing (fled then all the rest)
Ferendus borne to suffer, (suffered least.)
All voluntaries for their own will stood,
Possum, volo, mal' have no Imperative Mood.
The stout Impersonall this ruin never righteth,
Who s'ere declines Delectat it delights.
At last a part of Speech (came in by fate)
With these sad fortunes to participate.
Kin both to Noune and Verb, for whose dear sake,
Made some Declensions, and in pieces brake,
Whose splinters were took up as ing and Ens,
The Emblemes of our English present Tense.
Old Authors (here lie buried) in Rus and Dus,
No use of'm now, unless of learned Amandus.
Pretenses intricate, each man's thoughts transcending,
Like Adjectives have their threefold diverse ending.
Ad-verbs (a crew came running, not Ad Nounes,
As people flock to Lecturers in Towns,
All of all sorts, some scoffing, some comparing,
Some flattring, asking, doubting, and some swearing.
Some choosing, parting, gathering, (alms diminished)
Some only come to see a thing not finished.
Unless the Muses do forthwith send hither
A part of speech to join these things together,
Such bad Conditionals must never look to thrive,
Whose copulate Conjunctions prove so dis-junctive.
Never such confusion since the Babylonian,
All Is out of order, Quando set for Quoniam.
In Grammar-schoole now you may hear a noise
Of mirth and sorrow an imperfect voice.
Some calling, jeering, cursing of their brothers,
Some do keep silence, as Au and such others.
Such Interjections (now the learned find)
Has caused this sudden passion of the mind,
If worse diseases may be, some exclaiming,
Srme scorning, shunning, dreading, some disdaining.
A Preposition Mountebank that mocked us,
Made a (Divine) compusure of Indoctus,
Whose help (though much admired in diverse places)
Could serve (in all the world) but for two cases.
Some learned Doctor in the world, si quis est,
Now show your skill; for now sub judice lis est.
Our penes great, the cure can none rehearse us.
Till our great King return Londinum versus.
Grammar has three, but then we will beseech
Charles for one Concord in the English speech.
When Englands hosts like heavens, moves on one axis
Then we will take further forth in our Syntaxis.
Isa. 1st. the 4th. Ah sinful Nation!
Must God fetch blood er'e there be reformation?

Pardon the stout, page 7. l. 3.

FINIS.

