The peoples Prerogative and Privileges, asserted and vindicated, (against all
Tyranny whatsoever.) By Law and Reason.

BEING A COLLECTION of the Marrow and Soul of MAGNA CHARTA, And of all the
most principal Statutes made ever since to this present year, 1647. For the
preservation of the peoples Liberties and properties.

With clear proofs and demonstrations, that now their Laws and Liberties are
nigher Subvertion, then they were when they first begun to fight for them, by a
present swaying powerful Faction, amongst the Lords, Commons, and Army, that
have already de facto, levelled our Laws and Liberties to their Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Wills and pleasures, so that perfect Vassilage and Slavery (by
force of Arms) in the nature of Turkish Ianisaries, or the Regiments of the
Guards of France, is likely (to perpetuity) to be settled, if the people do
not speedily look about them, and act vigorusly for the preventing of it.

Compiled by Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, prerogative Prisoner in the Tower of
London, and published by him for the instruction information and benefit of all
true hearted Englishmen.

LONDON, Printed in the year, when some of the mercinary Officers and
Soldiers of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army, that were pretendedly raised for to
fight for the Liberties and Freedoms of England, avowedly drew their Swords at
the House of Commons door, to destroy those that really stood for their Laws
and Liberties, 1647.

To all the peaceable and well minded people of the Counties of Hartfordshire
and Buckinghamshire, who desires present peace, freedom, justice, and the
common right and good of all men, but more particularly, to all those honest
Nown substantive men, that were the promoters and managers of that affectionate
Petition for my self, and Mr. Richard Overton, to the House of Common, (about
12. months ago, which is printed in the 10. and 11. page of the second edition
of our book called the Outcryes of oppressed Commons.) But in a most especial
manner to my honest friends, in and about Watford, that lately were in trouble
several Sessions at St. Alb^ns, for not coming to their parish Church to
hear Common prayer, etc.
WOrthy Gentle men, and dearest Countrymen.
The sencible knowledge of the sufferings of you last named, by your several
times sending to me, and coming to me for advice, drew out my heart according
to my weak talent, to bend my brains to the study of something that might be
for the effectually future good of yours, (to whom I have so many indeared
obligations,) and all the rest of your neighbors, which I here present unto
your courteous acceptance in this following discourse, or small collection of
Statutes, being necessitated to acquaint you, that J have not a little been
tossed and tumbled by the malice of corrupt minded men (who because their
deeds are evil, and therefore cannot endure they should come to the view of
the Sun) and the presses have been as much us I, or else you had some weeks ago
had it presented in print to your view, but being (upon the 19 of Ian. last,)
by the House of Commons clapped by the heels for traitorous and seditious
practices against the State, that is to say (is I interpret it) for my earnest
and honest endeavoring to promote a righteous, just, and gallant petition (for
the good of my poor Country) which I sent unto you some weeks ago with a
letter, which letter partly for my vindication, I am necessited here to insert;
which thus follows virbatum.

WOrthy Gentlemen and dear Friends. The fervency of your love to me, and your
endeavors for my freedom, by petitioning the Parliament, has taken such deep
impression upon my heart that I cannot but often renew my thankful
acknowledgement, and study to serve you in particular, while I endeavor to
serve my whole Country in General. And truly the best service that I can do
you in this iuncture of time, in my opinion is to study your peace: For if the
red Horse of War should again enter into our gates, the paile Horse of
famine will certainly tread upon his heels, and then nothing can be expected
but desolation, now the only effectual means to establish your peace, is the
healing of divesions, and that only can be effected by uniting in the common
principles of freedom and justice, and for that end is the Petition which I
have sent you framed, certainly if all the people did but hear the freedom
which we petition for opened. And if you did inform them, that those you
account the price of your blood, and that you should never disagree nor think
any thing worth a war, if those principals of freedom and justice were settled,
and if it were cleared to them of how great concernment it is to ga^ie the
spec^^ settlement of those, if I say some pains were taken in this way, I am
persuaded al people would join together as one man, to cry uncessantly to the
Parliament for establishing those foundations of justice and freedom, that
their peace might be secure to them.

O my friends, that God would give you light and power, to see and endeavor
after the things which belong to your peace and freedom, before they be bid
from your eyes, there is now an opportunity and if this be neglected, I fear
God will not betrust us with another, and in reason if we do not act speedily
and vigorusly, it will be impossible to prevent War and confusion. Now in
your actings in this business, I desire if my advice might be of any weight
with you.

First, that in such places as you cannot gain liberty to have the Petition
read on the first day in the week in the meeting house, there desire as great a
meeting of the people some other day as you can get, and read the Petition, and
explain it, and then select some active men as Trustees, to take care for
gaining subscriptions. 2. Engage as many persons as possible you can, to come
to London with the Petition, and to cry resolutely to the Parliament, Justice,
Justice, and we intend to give you notice when we intend here to deliver it,
that at the same time you may come up. 3 If you can choose an Agent to reside
here at London constantly to give you constant Intelligence of all affairs and
to send you books for your information, bought by a public stock, which you
should be trust with your Agent, J conceive this would be of great concernment
to your peace and welfare. I have no more to trouble you with at present, but
only to tender you the service of.

Your most faithful servant that now again earnestly desires you with all
your might to promote the Petition. John Lilburne.
London this 8th. of Janu. 1647.
A proeme, to the following collection and discourse.
WHen Israel would turn their backs upon God, (who alone was their King, 1 Samuel 10.19. and chap. 12. v. 12.17.19.) and be like all the Heathen and Pagan
natitions round about them, to have a King to rule over them. Deuteronomy. 17.14. God
himself lays this express command upon them, that they shall in any wise set
a King over themselves, from amongst their brethren, and that they shall not in
any wise set a stranger over them, which is not their brother, but (says God)
he shall not multiply Horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to
Egypt (that is to say, to vassalage, slavery, or the house of bondage.)
Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away,
neither shall he greatly multiply to himself, silver and Gold.

And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a copy of this law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests
the Levits. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days
of his life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the
words of this law, and these statutes and do them. That his heart be not lifted
up above his brethren, (mark that well) and that he turn not aside from the
commandment, to the right hand or to the left. Deuteronomy. 17, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20.

Here is a clear declaration by God himself, that Kings (the single greatest
of Magistrates,) are not to walk (and act upon the people) by the rules of
their own wills, but by the law of God, which is as binding to them as the
meanest of the people, (and for my part I say and aver, that, that man (whether
King or Parliament man that declares himself to be lawless, was never in that
condition of Gods creation but of the Divils (And pertinent to this purpose is
the comp^aint of our ancient English Lawyer Andrew Horn, in his Mirror of
Justice in English, chapter 5. Sect. the first, division the first, and second,
page 225. where complaining of the abusions of the Common law, he says, the
first and chief abusion is, that the King is above the law, whereas he ought
to be subject to it, as it is contained in his oath. Which as Sir Richard
Hutton, one of his own Judges in his Argument in Mr. John Hampdens case against
Sip-money, page 32. (which argument was made before this Parliaments doctrine
was broached) says, that by the Kings Oath, he agrees to give consent to such
laws, as shall (in Parliament) be propounded for the profit and good of the
Kingdom, and be further declares, that he is to rule and govern thereby, see
also the petition of Right in the following pages, 1. 2, So that by this it
clearly appears, that in his own imagination, nor the opinion of his Judges,
he is neither omnipotent nor unlimited, but his office is an office of trust,
conferred upon him for the good of the people. And therefore says our
forementioned Author ( Andrew Horn ibim) the second abuse of the common Law
is, That whereas Parliaments ought to be for the salvation of the souls of
Trespassors, twice in the year at London, that they are there but very
sildome, and at the pleasure of the King, for subsidies and collections of
Treasure, etc. And the Act made the first year of this Parliament, in the 16.
of the present King, called an Act for the preventing of inconveniences happening
by the long intermission of Parliaments, expressly says.

Whereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Parliament ought to
beholden at least once every year, for the redress of Grievances etc. Which
Laws and Statutes are the 4. Ed. 3. 14 and 36. Ed. 3. 10. (which are printed
virbitum in the following discourse, page 9 12,) and which are expressly
ratified and confirmed to be duly kept and observed. In which Acts the
Parliament are prescribed their work what to do, which is to maintain the
Laws, and redress the mischiefs and grievances that daily happen, but not in
the least to our destroy Laws, unless they give us Letter for them, nor to
make our mischiefs and grievances greater, nor to rob and poule the Kingdom
of their treasure by taxations, Excize, etc. and then share it by thousands and
ten thousands amongst themselves, which i^ expressly against the Laws of the
kingdom, for Feesies in trust, (and they are no more at most,) by the Law of
this Land, can give nothing to themselves, and therefore their sharing (as
daily they do) the Common wealths money amongst themselves, is no better then
absolute state robbery, against whom an indictment, or an Action of recovery,
(if not of death For Andrew Horn declares p. 239 that it is an abuse of the
common Law, that Justices and their Officers, who kill people by false
judge^ent, be not destroyed, as other murderers, which King Alfrid caused to
be done, who caused 44 Justices in one year to be hanged as murderers, for
their false judg^ments, and page 241 he says, that he hanged Arnold because he
saved Boylife, who robbed the people by color of distresses, whereof some
were by selling distresses, some by extortions of fines, etc.
, ought in equity and reason to lie as well as against robbing and cheating
servants and stewards. And for them for ever to shelter themselves from the
lash and stroke of justice, or for ever from being called to account, for all
their Cheats, Robberies, and murders, by getting the Kings hand to an Act to
make them an everlasting Parliament, no more lies in the Kings power Justly and
legally to do, then to give them power to make us al absolute Vassels and
Slaves, and to destroy all our Laws, libertys and propertys, and when they
have so done, then to cut the throats of all the men in England besides
themselves, therefore it behooves the people to keep up the interest of a
Parliament, but yet annually at least to choose new Parliament meant, to call
their predicessors to a strick account, and for my part J conceive that not
only by the rules of equity and reason, but by the strength of the Law of the
land, ( which requires a Parliament to be chosen and held at least once every
year) the people that are willing in the several Sheires, Cities and
Burrowes, may call home their Parliament men; and send new ones in their places
to call them to account; and to make Laws to punnish such betrayers of their
trust, as men, as full of unnaturalness, as those that murder and kill their
own fathers; which is an act abhorred even amongst bruts, and yet this very
thing is acted upon us by the grandees amongst our trustees; who themselves
have told us, that it is as old a law, as any is in the Kingdom, that the
Kingdom never ought to be without a means to preserve it self, 1. part book
decl. page 207. and page 690. And that those things which are evell in their
own nature, cannot be the subject of any command, or induce any obligation of
obedience upon any man, by any authority whatsoever, 1. par book p. cl. page
201. and page 150. And therefore, the conclusion that I draw from Gods
subjecting of all men equally alike to his law, is by way of advice to all my
Countrymen, earnestly to prosecute the obtaining the things desired in the 3
first heads of our great Petition especially (for promoting of which, I am
lately as a trayter committed by the House of Commons) that the powers of King,
Parliament and people may be destinctly and particularly declared and settled,
that we may be no longer in confusion, by having the little ones ^o be subject
to the punishment of the law, and the great ones to be (subject to none, but
their lusts and ^he law of there own wills, and therefore I do with confidence
believe those expressions of my imprison^d Comrade Mr. John Wildman in the 11.
page of his late masculine English peace called truths try^mph, or treachery
anatomized, where he saich, that he believes the freedom of this Nation will
^ever be secured, until the extent of the power and trust of the peoples
representatives, and the peoples ^eservations to themselves be clearly declared
in reference to the Legislative power.

And for my particular, after the grand and superlative Apostacy of so tall a
Caeder as Lievt. Genesis Cromwell See that notable discourse of him in ^urney
Projects, and also in a little book, ^alled the Grand Design, and the
justi^^cation of Sir John Maynard prisoner in ^e Tower called the Royal
Quarrel.
pretended to be, for the liberties and freedoms of the people of this nation:
I shall never hereafter in state affairs, (for his sake) trust either my
father, brother, or any other relations I have in the world, but shall always
to all I converse with, incultate the remembrance of that dear experienced
truth or maxim, recorded in the margent of our forementioned large Petition,
which is. That it has been a maxim amongst the wisest Legislators that
whosoever means to settle good laws, must proceed in them with a sinister
opinion of all mankind, and suppose that whosoever is nor wicked, it is for
want only of the opportunity, And that no state can wis^ly be confident of any
public Ministers continuing good, longer then the ^ods is held over their
heads.

Now as God has made all men subject to his laws alike, so in the.

Second place, he has been very sha^^, positive, and plain to his laws: see
Genesis 2.17. and 9.5.6. Ex. 20. see also the 10.11.13.14. pages of my Epistle to
Judge Reeves edition the 2. where these particulars are largely and pithly
discursed.

But Iuglers, deceivers, deluders, and Tyrants^ study how to make their Laws
ambiguous and doubtful, that so the people may continually be together by the
ears, in the true understanding of them, that so the mysterious and juggling
lawyers (who are the principal makers of them) may under pretense of opening
them, continually pick the peoples pockets, with a kind of Hocus Pocus or
Clenly conveiance; and have made them so voluminous, that it shall be almost
impossi^le for an ordinary man ever to read them over, or if he do read them
over yet, it shall be impossible for an ordinary brain to carry all the
contradictions of them, one against an other in his head.

Thirdly, God gave all his laws, and the proceedings therein to his people, in
their own mother tongue, and commanded them to teach them to their Children
and Servants (and that their Judges that did execute them, should sit openly in
the Gates) and judged it far below, and beneath that Justice that is inherant
in him, to give his Laws, or any proceedings in them; so unto his people, that
it was impossible for the most of them, to know them, read seriously so proof
hereof. ^the forementioned pages of my Epistle to Judge Reeves, for writing of
which al my present troubles are come upon me.

But juglers, deceivers, deluders, and tyrants, will have their laws not in
the peoples mother tongue, but will have them put into Lattin, or French; that
so the people that are governed by them, may never come to understand them, But
says the aincient Lawyer Andrew Horn, in his Mirror of justice, chap. 5. Sect
1. de. 3 page 225. it is an abuse of the common Law of England, that the Laws
and customs of the Realm, with their occasions are not put in writing,
whereby they may be known, so as they might be known by all men.
that so their lives liberties and estates may be at the wills of those the
ride and tyrannise over them, (as Mr. Daniel in his history well observes the
people were in Will. the conquerours time,) and if possible they g^t their
pleadings to be it English, as the people of this Kingdom did theirs (with
much struggling in Edward the third time) as appears by that remarkable statute
of the 36. Ed. 3. chap. 15. printed in the following discourse page 12^ yet
they shall be fettered with this bondage, that their ent eyes process, and
procedings shall be in Lattin, and that in such a hand, that not one lattin
scholar in twenty shall read them, and if any follow the command of God, to
teach the people the understanding of their Laws; O cry the knaves and tyrants
like Bishop Gardener in the book of Marters, open this door and we are all
destroyed; and therefore by any means suppress all such schools as Henry the
third did those schools, that were in his days set up to teach the people the
knowledge of Magna Charta; as Sir Edward Cook well declares, ^n the 3. page of
his proeme to his 2. part instit^tes. And therefore it is that those makke bate
firebrand Lawyers in the House of Commons; have bin so transendently active, to
burn and truth in pieces all such honest, and just petitions as have desired
our laws and proceepings therein, may be put into a short plain and easy to
be understood method in the English tongu, yea an have made it their study, to
grind to powder the promoters of all such just and honest petition as they and
their accomplisses lately did in Mr. John Wildmans case and mine, and indeed to
speak truly without fear, they are the grand supporters of all corrupt
interests in the Kingdom, that make it their study to keep the people in
bondage, and vassolage, and therefore O ye Commons of Enland as one man cry out
by petition, speedily to the Parliament; to throw them all out of the House as
unsavery salt never to sit there any more unless as assistance, who I will
maintain it with my life, have been and still are, (for the preservation of
their own corrupt interest) no small instruments, in the by past and present
subversion of our liberties; and occasion of the blood shed, and late war in
the Kingdom, and the main hinderers of the granting, settling and
accomplishing, of those many just and righteous things that has so often bin
petitioned for to the Parliament, though hitherto all in vain. O therefore
cry, and cry mightily against them as the vermin of the House and
Commonwealth.

But because I have longed and still do, to have this collectio abroad, I
shall draw toward a conclusion: and let my Country men here reap the benefit
of the answer I sent to the querys of some of my friends, mentioned in the
Epistle Dedicatory (which was the original and principal occasion of my
compiling this book) which thus follows.

By the statute of Westminster the first, made in the 3. of Edward 1. chap. 26.
(which you may read verbatim in the 7. page of the following collection) their
are no fees due from any free man of England to any Officer of Justice
whatsoever, but what they have immediately from the public treasure of the
Kingdom, for there sallories or wages; and it is aginst a Judges Oath to take
any: whose oath you may at large read in the 10. page following, read also that
remarkable page in the merror of Justice page 258. 233. for the proof of this,
but especially read the marginall notes in the 69. page following and he that
exacts any, shall by the formencioned statue pay back again twice as much etc.
but it is true by some latter statues (as the 23. Hen. 6. chap. 10. which you
may read verbatim in the 18.19. following pages) and 33. Hen. 6.12. and 21.
Hen. 7.17. etc.) there are some small fees to be paid. And also Sir Edward Cook
in the 1. part of his institutes (lib. 3. chap. 13. sect. 70. fol. 368.) says
such reasonable fees as have been allowed by the Courts of justice of an
ancient time, to inferior ministers and attendants of Courts for their labor
and at^tendance if it be asked and taken of the subject it is no extortion.

But there is none at all due for entering and recording of apperance, nor for
the removing upon a Certionary.

But against Sir Edward Cooks opinion in this particular, I offer this to
consideration, that by the Petition of right the King himself with all his
Lords, cannot justifiably lay a penny upon; (nor take a penny from) the meanest
man in England, without common consent in Parliament and if the King etc. the
greater cannot do it, then undeniably the Judges or justices the lesser can
much less do it. And besides by the same right, that under pretense of dues
or fees by their arbitrary wills and pleasures, they take one farthing from you
or me, they may take a penny, yea a shilling, ye a pound, yea a thousand pound,
and so ad infinitum, and so Level and destroy al properrity of meum and tuum;
[see for the power of an act of Parliament, the notable arguments of Judge
Hutton and Judge Crook in the case of ship money, but especialy the Parliaments
votes annexed to those arguments] for which very thing diverse of the Judges in
the case of ship money, were this very Parliament impeached of Treason, and the
Bishops for making their cannons by the Kings single authority to bind their
Cleargies pursses without authority of Parliament, were for that and the like
defunct of all their power.

See Mr. Not. Fines his notable speech against the Bishops Cannons made 1640
and printed in a book called Speeches and passages prsnted for Will-Crook at
Furnivals Inn gate in Holborne 1641. page 49. 50. 51. and the house of Commons
vote Dec. 15. 1640. ibim page 328. and the statute made this Parliament that
abolished Eccelesiasticall Jurisdiction.
2. The presentment is often brought in English; but it it must be entered and
recorded in lattin by the statute of the ^6. Ed. 3. 15. which you may read in
the 12. following page and no process is to be awarded, but af- the
presentment is entered and recorded in lattin; and the presentment must mention
the offense, and so must the writ or process, as clearly appears in the last
foremencioned most notable and remarkable statute; see also Sir, Edward Cooks
second part instituts upon the 29. chap, of Magna Charta fol. 51. 52. 53. see
Vox plebis page 37 and the merror of Justice chap. 5. sect. 1. division 98.
page 238, nay the last author (in his 233 page division 71.) says that it is
abuse of the Common Law, that any plaint is received to be heard without
sureties present, to testify the plaint to be true.

3. The Justices siting upon the bench, may verbally commit a man for an
offense lying under their cognizance, but there must be a Mittitur, or
Commitment entered upon Record: See the 14. Henry 7. fol, 8. in Sir, Thomas
Greenes case. See also the 70. page of the following discourse.

4. The Justices of peace cannot continue a man bound above two or three
Sessions at most, and if they continue him more, they may as well continue him
for thirteen, and so for thirteen score, for it is a vexation, and the Law
gives him remedy, by an action of the case, against the Justices, wherein they
shall be sined to the King for the vexation, and pay damages to the party
Plaintiff.

5. An Indictment for extortion, must be in the proper County before the
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of the peace.

6. Upon an arrest, the Officer must declare at whose suit, for what, and what
return the process has, see the Countess of Rutlands case of arrest, in the
sixth part of Cooks Reports.

7. For a Plea against an Indictment, for not coming to Church to hear Common
Prayer, etc. It is framed to your hand, in the 20, 21, 22, ^3. pages of my
large Epistle to Col. Henry Martin of the 31. of May, 1647. called Rash Oaths,
to which I refer you.

8. Thou go you be committed justly and legally, be sure as soon as you are
committed (if possible you can) proffer legal Bail, in person to those that
commit you, but for this I wholly referee the Reader to the 70, 71, 72. pages
of the following discourse, in which I have given some directions to my Country
men, how to guide themselves by the rules of the Law of England, in all
ordinary molestations that can befall them, by Knaves, malicious men, or
Tyrants, saving in the point of panniling of Iuries upon them, in case they
come to any trial for their lives, etc. and for that point, I do wholly
refer the Reader to the 24, 25, 26. pages of my notable book called the
Resolved man's resolution (where also the cheats and illegallities of Committees
procedings are anotamised) and to the 1. part of Sir Edward Cooks Inst. lib. 2.
chap. 12. Sect. 234, fo. 156, 157, and his 3. part fo. 32. 33. My labors
herein I desire may find a courteous acceptance at the hands of my oppressed
friends and Countrymen, and I have my reward, and shall therein rejoice, and
be encouraged for the future improvement of my poor talent to do them further
service.

John Lilburne.
From my causeless captivity in the Tower of London, upon a now account, this
17, of Feb. 1647.
For upon the 19. of Ian. last, the House of Commons committed me to prison, as
their prisoner, for treasonable and seditious practices against the state. And
unto the power of the House in committing me J stooped, but at their door
desired to be committed by a legal Warrant, which by their own Law (published
in Sir Edward Cooks institutes) Votes, and Ordinances, all warrants of
commitments whatsoever ought expressly to contain the certain particular case,
wherefore a man is committed, and ought to conclude, and him safely to keep
till he be delivered by due course of Law, and for the full proof of this, read
the 68, 69. pages of the following discourse, and the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, pages
of Mr. John Wildmans late defense, called Truths Triumph, or Treachery
anotamised.

But if the Warrant be in general words, and be also to keep him during their
pleasure, and made by the Parliament, the prisoner is murdered and destroyed
by such an imprisonment. For he must either stoop to their wills, and so betray
his liberties and sin against his own soul, or else he must remain in prison
till he starve and rot, before any Judge in Westminster Hall will grant him a
Habeas Corpus to bring him up to the bar of Justice, either to receive his
punishment according to Law, or else his liberties as uniustly imprisoned, and
this made me the other day at the House of Commons, to contest for a legal
warrant, before I would go to Prison; but that mercinary Turkish Ianisary, Col.
Baxster laid violent hands upon me, telling me expressly he was not either to
reason or dispute the Houses commands, but to obey them; and caused his
Soldiers to draw their swords upon me, and in halling of me away by force and
violence he stabed Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right etc. to the very
heart and soul, and did as much as in him lies, by that act destroy all our
Laws and liberties, for if authority must be backed with the sword, to put in
execution all their unjust commands, then farewell all law and liberty forever,
and accursed be the day, that ever the Parliament raised an Army to fight for
the preservation of our laws and liberties, if now they convert their power,
and turn their swords and guns against us by force of arms to destroy our
laws and liberties.

John Lilburne.
6. Feb. 1647.
In the third year of the reign of Charles, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland.
AT the Parliament begun at Westminster the seventeenth day of March. An. Dom.
1627. in the third year of the reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lord,
Charles, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And there continued until the 26. day of June
following, and then prorogued unto the 20. day of October now next ensuing: To
the high pleasure of Almighty God, and to the weal public of this Realm,
were enacted as follows.

The petition Exhibited to his Majesty by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, concerning diverse Rights and
Liberties of the Subject; with the Kings Majesty's royal answer thereunto, in
full Parliament
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
HVmbly shows unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, That whereas it is declared and
inacted by a Statute made in the time of the reign of King Ed. the first,
commonly called Statutum de Tallagio non concedento, 34. Ed. 1. chap. 1.
That ^o tallage or aid shall be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in
this Realm, without the good will and assent of the Arch Bishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other the free men of the Commonalty of
this Realm. And by authority of Parliament holden in the five and twentieth
year of the reign of King Edward the third, 25. Ed. 3 Rot. Par.
it is declared and inacted. That from thenceforth no person should be
compelled to make any loanes to the King against his will, because such loanes
were against reason, and the franchise of the Land. And by other Laws of this
Realm it is provided, that none should be charged by any charge or imposition,
called a Benevolence, nor by such like charge, 25. Ed. 1. 6. 1. Ed. 3. 6 11. R.
2. 9. 1. R. 3. 2.
by which the Statutes before mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this Freedom. That they should
not be compelled to contribute to any tax, tallage, aid, or other like charge,
nor set by common consent in Parliament. 1. R. 3. 2.

Yet nevertheless of late, diverse Commissions, directed to sundry
Commissioners in several Counties, with instructions have issued; by means
whereof your people have been in diverse places assembled, and required to lend
certain sums of money unto your Majesty, and many of them upon their
refusal so to do, have had an oath administered unto them, not warrantable by
the Laws or Statutes of this Realm, Oaths Ex Officio unlawful.
and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance, and give
attendance before your privy Council, and in other places; and others of them
have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry otherwise molested and
disquieted. And diverse other charges have been laid and levied upon your people
in several Counties, by Lord Lievtenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners
for Musters, Justices of Peace, and others by command or direction from your
Majesty, or your privy Council, against the Laws and free customs of the
Realm. All Magistracy in England is bounded by the law thereof.


28. Ed. 3. 3.
And where also by the Statute called THE GREAT CHARTER OF THE LIBERTIES OF
ENGLAND, 9 H. 3. 29.
It is declared and enacted, 25. Ed. 3.
That no free man may be taken or imprisoned, St. 37. Ed. 3. 18. St. 38. Ed. 3.
9. St. 42. Ed. 3. 3. St. 17. R. 2. 6.
or be disseized of his Free hold, or Liberties, or his free Customs, or he
outlawed or exiled, or in any manner distroyed, but by the lawful judgment of
his PEERS, or by the Law of the Land.

And in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the third, e
it was declared and enacted by authority of Parliament, That no man of what
estate or condition that he be, should be put out of his Land, or Tenements,
nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death without being
brought to answer by due process of Law.

Nevertheless against the tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good
Laws and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, f diverse of your
Subjects have of late been imprisoned without any cause showed: Imprisonment
without cause showed is illegal. See also Cook 2. part institutes, upon the
29. chap Magna Charta.
And when for their deliverance they were brought before your Justices by your
Majesty's Writs of Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court
should order, and their Keepers commanded to certify the causes of their
detainer, no cause was certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's
special command, signified by the Lords of your privy Council, and yet were
returned back to several prisons without being charged with any thing to which
they might make answer according to law.

And whereas of late great companies of Soldiers and Mariners have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the inhabitants against their
wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourne, against the Laws and Customs of this Realm,
Compulsive billiting of Soldiers unlawful, and it is very observable that the
King at the time of this complaint had wars with France.
and to the great grievance and vexation of the people.

And whereas also by authority of Parliament, in the five and twentieth year
of the reign of King Edw. the third, 25 Edw. 3. 9.
it is declared and inacted, that no man should be fore judged of life or limb
against the form of the Great Charter and the Law of the land; And by the said
Great Charter, and other the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm, no man
ought to be ad^udged to death, but by the Laws established in this your
Realm, No man ought to be adjudged but by the established laws. 9. H. 3. 29.
5. Ed 3. 9. 25. Ed 3: 4. 28. Ed. 3. 3.
either by the Customs of the same Realm, or by acts of Parliament. And
whereas no offender of what kind soever, is exempted from the proceedings to be
used, and punishments to be inflicted by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm: Nevertheless, of late diverse Commissions under your Majestes great
Seal have issued forth by which certain persons have been assigned and
appointed Commissioners with power and authority to proceed within the land,
according to the Justice of Martial Law, against such Soldiers and Mariners,
or other dissolute persons joining with them, as should commit any murder,
robbery, felony, mutiny, or other outrage or misdemeanor whatsoever, and by
such summary course and order, as is agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used
in Armies in time of war, to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such
offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death according to the
Law Martial,

By pretext whereof some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the
said Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes
of the Land they had deserved death, by the some laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed. Marshall law
altogether unlawful in England in times of peace especially, and therefore
that Soldier of Col. Robert Lilburnes Regiment that was lately shot at the
Rendezvous near Ware, was merely murdered.


And also sundry grievous offenders by colou^ thereof, claiming an exemption,
have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your officers and Ministers of Justice have
uniustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such offenders according to
the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said offenders were
punishable only by Martial law, and by authority of such Commissions as
aforesaid, which Commissions and all other of like nature are wholly and
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent Majesty, that no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any gift, loan, benevolence, tax, The
Petition.
or such like charge, without common consent by act of Parliament. And that
none be called to make answer, or take such oath, or to give attendance, or be
confined, or other ways molested or disquieted concerning the same, or for
refusal thereof. And that no Freeman, in any such manner as is before
mentioned, be imprisoned or detained. And that your Majesty would be pleased
to remove the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your people may not be so
burdened in time to come. And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by
Martial Law, may be revoked and annulled. And that hereafter no Commissions of
like nature may issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever to be executed
as aforesaid, lest by color of them any of your Majesty's Subjects be
distroyed or put to death contrary to the laws and franchise of the land.

All which they most humbly pray of your most excellent Majesty, as their
rights and liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare that the awards, doings and
proceedings, to the prejudice of your people, in any of the premises, shall
not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example. And that your Majesty
would be also graciously pleased, for the future comfort and safety of your
people, to declare your royal will and pleasure, That in the things aforesaid
all your officers and Ministers shall serve you according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, All the administrators of the law, are to execute
their places according to the law and not otherwise.
as they tender the honor of your Majesty, and the prosperity of this
Kingdom.

Which Petition being read, the second of June, 1628. The Kings answer was thus
delivered unto it.
THe King willet^ that right be done, according to the Laws and customs of
the Realm; And that the Statutes be put in execution, that his Subjects may
have no cause to complain of any wrong or oppression, contrary to their just
Rights and Liberties, to the preservation whereof, he holds himself in
conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative.

But this answer not giving satisfaction, And the reason was because in this
his first answer he does not grant that the things claimed in the Petition as
they are laid down, are the laws, rights, and liberties of England, and so had
left it in the Judges breasts to have given their Judgments as well against as
with the Petition, but his second answer, let right be done as is desired, is
full to the purpose.
the King was again petitioned unto, that he would give a full and
satisfactory answer to their Petition in full Parliament.

Whereupon the King in person, upon the seventh of June, made this second
Answer.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe answer I have already given you, was made with so good deliberation, and
approved by the judgments of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined
but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to avoid all ambiguous
interpretations, and to show you that there is no doubleness in my meaning, I
am willing to please you in words, as well as in substance; Read your Petition,
and you shall have an answer that I am sure will please yo^.

And then causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the
Crown, The clerk of the Parliament read the Kings answer thereunto in these
words.

Soit droit fait come est desire. Which is in English, Let Right be done as is
desired.

Which being done, the King in person said thus.
THis I am sure is full, yet no more then is granted you in my first Answer;
for the meaning of that was, to confirm all your Liberties: knowing according
to your own Protestations, that you neither mean, nor can hurt my Prerogative:
And I assure you my Maxim is, That the peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings
Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative is to defend the peoples Liberties.

Ye see now how ready I have showed my self to satisfy your demands, so that J
have done my part, wherefore if this Parliament have not a happy conclusion,
the sin is yours, I am free of it.

And on the last day of the Session, being June 26. 1628. His Majesty's speech
to both Houses before his Royal assent to the Bills, was this.

My Lords and Gentlemen:
IT may seem strange that J come so suddenly to end this Session, therefore
before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the cause, THOUGH I MVST
AVOW THAT I OWE AN ACCOUNT OF MY ACTIONS TO NONE BUT GOD ALONE. It is known to
every one, that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance, how
acceptable every man may judge, and for the merit of it I will not call that in
question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it.

Now since I am certainly informed, that a second Remonstrance is preparing for
me to take away my profit of Tonnage and P^undage (one of the chief
maintenance of the Crown) by alleging, that I have given away my right
thereof, by my answer to your Petition.

This is so prejudicial unto me, that I am forced to end this Session some few
hours before I meant it, being willing not to receive any more Remonstrances,
to which I must give a harsh answer.

And since I see that even the House of Commons begins already to make false
Constructions of what I granted in your petition, lest it be worse interpreted
in the Country, I will now make a declaration concerning the true intent
thereof.

The profession of both Houses, in the time of hammering this petition, was no
ways to trench upon my Prerogative, saying they had neither intention nor
power to hurt it.

Therefore it must needs be conceived, that I have granted no new, but only
confirmed the ancient Liberties of my subjects. Yet to show the clearenesse of
my intentions, that I neither repent, nor mean to recede from any thing I have
promised you, I do here declare. That those things which have been done,
whereby men had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the subjects to be
trench't upon (which indeed was the first and true ground of the petition)
shall not hereafter be drawn into example of your prejudice: And in time to
come (IN THE WORD OF A KJNG) you shall not have the like cause to complain.

But as for Tonnage and Poundage, it is a thing I cannot want, and was never
intended by you to ask, never meant ( I am sure) by me to grant.

To conclude, I command you all that are here, to take notice of what I have
spoken at this time, to be the true intent of what I granted you in your
petition: But especially you, my Lords, the Judges, for to you only, under me,
belongs the interpretation of Laws: for none of the Houses of Parliament,
joint or separate (what new doctrine soever may be raised) have any power,
either to make or declare a Law without my consent.

This Petition of Right, with the foregoing answer unto it, you shall find
printed verbatim in the 1431, 1432, 1433, 1434. pages of Francis Pultons
collection of the Statutes at large, printed Cum Privelegio, 1640. And unto
this I shall annex diverse of the most materiallest Statutes for the people^
liberty, so that those that have not 40. s. to lay out for the Book of
Statutes, nor time to read it over, may for a few pence in this following Plea,
or Collection read their chiefest freedoms, that the Statute law of England
gives them, which I must confess are very slender and short to what by nature
and reason they ought to be, and so dear to come by, that they rather seem
bondages then freedoms, by reason of pleading them by Hackney, mercenary
Lawyers, (whose riches and livelihood are got by hood-winking the law, and
breeding strife and contentions) among the People, and by the corruptions of
the Judges in all ages in executing of them, who continually rather serve the
will and lust of the King, or other great men, that help them to their places,
then the rules of either law, equity, reason, conscience, or justice, and the
misery of the people of this Land it is, that there is so many Lawyers in the
H^use of Commons the Lawmakers, that it is a vain thing to expect while it is
so, (especially they being suffered to plead causes before Judges of their own
making, and being Parliament men, they dare not displease them, which brings in
a manner all the fat and large grifts in Eng. to their mills) a remedy or
relief against all those inslaving and distroying abuses of the law, and the
execution thereof; and slaves you are, and slaves you must be, do the best you
can, till you take a particular and effectual course to provide a thorough
remedy for these insufferable maladies, and if my advice may be of any weight
with you, I desire you seriously to read and weigh it, a^ I have said it down
in my former books Especial in the 2. Edition of my Plea in bar, to Judge
Reeves reprinted Aug. 1647. and called the just man's justification, and my book
called the resolved man's resolution, page 19, 20. 21, 22. and my epistle to Mr.
Martin of the 31. May, called r^sh oaths unwarrantable, page 27. 28. 48, 49,
50. See also Englands Birth Right, page 30. 31. 32, 33.
and put it but in execution, and I am sure it will cure you. But to go on to
the main thing I intend, which is to give you the foregoing promised collection
out of the foresaid book of Statutes at large, I shall begin with the 14. 26.
28. and 29. chaps of Magna Charta, confirmed in the 9. year of Henry the
third, which you shall find in the said book of Statutes, fol, 3. 4. which thus
follows, chap. 14.

How Men of all sorts shall be amerced, and by whom.
A Free man shall not be amerced for a small fault, but after the manner of the
fault. And for a great fault after the greatness thereof, saving to him his
continement. And a Merchant likewise saving to him his merchandise. St. 3. Ed.
1. 6. Regist fo. ^86. 184. 187. V. N B. fo. 47. Fitz. N. B. f. 75. a.
And any others villain then ours shall be likewise amerced, saving his
wainage, if he fall into our mercy. And none of the said amerciaments, shall be
assessed, but by the oath of honest and lawful men of the vicinage. Earls and
Barons shall not be amerced but by their PEERS, and after the manner of their
offense. No man of the Church shall be amerced after the quantity of his
spiritual Benefice, but after his lay tenements, and after the quantity of his
offense. Fitz Act. sur. lest. 34. Br. Amercement. 2. 25. 33. 32. 53. 65. 10. H.
6. fo. 7. 7. H. 6. fo. 13. 19. Ed. 4. fo. 9. 21. Ed. 4. fo. 77. 28. Ass. pl.
26. Cook l. 8. fo. 28, 59.
3. Ed. 1. 6.

Chap. 26. Inquisition of Life and Member.
NOthing from hence shall be given for a ^^it of Inquisition, nor taken of him
that prays Inquisition of Life or Member, but it shall be granted freely, and
not denied, Stat. 3. Ed. 1. 11. Stat. 13. Ed. 1. 29. Regist. fo. 133. 134.

Chap. 28. Wager of Law shall not be without Witness.
Fitz. Ley 78. Bro. Ley 37. Co. inst. fo. 168. a.
NO Bailife from henceforth shall put any man to his open Law, nor to an oath,
upon his own bare saying, without faithful witnesses brought in for the same.

Chap. 29. No man shall be condemned without trial. Justice shall not be sold
or deferred.
10. Ed. 4. fo. 6. Dyer fo. 104. Cook li. 5. fo. 64, lib. 10. fol. ^4. lib. 11.
fo. 99. Regist. fo. 186. Col. pla. fo. 456.
NO Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
distroyed, nor We will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
judgment of his PEERS, or by the law of the land. We will sell to no man, We
will not deny or defer to any man either justice or right Stat. 2. Ed. 3. 8.
Stat. 5. Ed. 3. 9. Stat. 14. lid. 3. 14. 28. Ed. 3. 3. Stat 11. R. 2. 10.

Cook li. 8 f. 38. 59. Bro. Amerciame^t 6. 9. 11. 13. 20. 25. 27. 28. 31. 32,
35. 37. 39. 43. 44.
The 3. Edward the 1. fol. 25. There shall be no disturbance of free Election.
And because Elections ought to be free, the King commands upon, great
forfeiture, that no man by force of Arms, nor by malice, or menacing shall
disturb any to make free, Election St. 9. Ed. 2.14.

The 3. of Edward the 1. Chap. 6. fol. 25. Amercement shall be reasonable and
according to the offense.
ANd that no City, Borough, nor Town, nor any man be amerced without reasonable
cause, and according to the quantity of his Trespass, that is to say, every
freeman, saving his freehold, a Merchant saving his Merchandise, a Villain
saving his waynage and that by his or their PEERS. St. 9. H. 3, 14. V. N. B.
fo. 47. Regist. fo. 187.

The 3. Edward the 1. Chap. 15. fol, 27. Which prisoners may be made
mainpernable, and which not. The penalty for unlawful bailement.
ANd forasmuch as Sheriffs, and other, which have taken and kept in prison
persons detected of felony, and incontinent have let out by replevin, such as
were not replevisable, and have kept in prison such as were replevisable,
because they would gain of the one party, and grieve the other: And forasmuch
as before this time it was not determined, which persons were replevisable, and
which not, but only those that were taken for the death of man, or by
commandment of the King, Bro. Mainprise 11. 56. 78. Dyer fo. 170. Fitz.
Mainprise 1. 40. Bro. Mainprise 54, 57, 59, 60, 75, 78. Cook li. 11. fo. 29.
Fitz. Mainprise 39. Bro. Main. 6. 9. 11. 19. 22. 30. 48. 50. 51, 53. 58, 63,
64. 73. 78, 91. 94. 97,
or of his Justices, or for the Forest: It is provided and by the King
commanded, that such prisoners as before were outlawed, and they which have
abiured the realm, provers and such as be taken with the manner, and those which
have broken the Kings prison, thieves openly defamed and known, and such as be
appealed by provers, so long as the provers be living (if they be not of good
name) and such as be taken for house burning feloniously done, or for false
money, or for counterfeiting the Kings seal, or persons excommunicate, taken
at the request of the Bishop, or for manifest offenses, or for treason touching
the King himself, shall be in no wise replevisable by the common Writ, nor
without writ. But such as be indicted of Larceny by Enquests taken before
Sheriffs or Bailifes by their office, or of light suspicion, or for petty
Larceny, that amounts not above the value of 12. pence, if they were not
guilty of some other Larceny aforetime, or guilty of receipt of felons, or of
commandment or force, V. N. B. fo, 40. V. N. B. fo. 41. Regist. fo. 83. 268.
or of aid of felony done, or guilty of some other trespass, for which one
ought not to lose life or member, and a man appealed by a prover after the
death of the prover (if he be no common thief nor defamed) shall from
henceforth be let out by sufficient surety, whereof the Sheriff will be
answerable, and that without giving ought of their goods. And if the Sheriff
or any other, let any go at large by surety that is not replevisable, if he be
Sheriff or Constable, or any other Baylife of fee, which has keeping o^
prisons, and therefore be attainted, he shall lose his fee and office for ever.
And if the under Shereffe, Constable, or Baylife of such as have fee for
keeping of prisons, do it contrary to the will of his Lord, or any other
Baylife being not of fee, they shall I have three yearet imprisonment, and make
fine at the Kings pleasure. And if any withhold prisoners replevisable, after
that they have offered sufficient surety, he shall pay a grievous amerciament
to the King. And if he take any reward for the deliverance of such, he shall
pay double to the prisoner, and also shall be in the great mercy of the King,
St. 27. E. 1. 3. St. 3. H. 7. 31, and 2. P. and. M. 13.

The 3. of Edward 1. Chap. 26. fol. 30. ^one of the Kings Officers shall commit
extortion.
ANd that no Sheriff nor other the Kings Officer, take any reward to do his
office, Rast. pla. fo. 317. Cook Inst. 308. b.
but shall be paid of that which they take of the King, and he that so does,
shall yield twice as much, and shall be punished at the Kings pleasure St. 33.
H. 6. 10. 4. ^. 3. 10.

The 25, of Edward the 1. Chap. 2. 3. 4. fol. 75, 76. Judgment given against
the said Charter, shall be void.
ANd we will that if any judgment be given from henceforth contrary to the
points of the Charters aforesaid by the Justices, or by any other our Ministers
that hold Plea before them against the points of the Charters, it shall be
undone and holden for naught.

Chap. 3. The said Charters shall be read in Cathedral Churches twice in the
year.
ANd we will that the same Charters shall be sent under our Seal to Cathedral
Churches throughout our Ralme, there to remain, and shall be read before the
people two times by the year. 28. Ed. 3. 1.

Chap 4. Excommunication shall be pronounced against the breakers of the said
charters.
ANd that all Arch Bishops and Bishops, shall pronounce the sentence of
Excommunication against all those that by word, deed, or council, do contrary
to the foresaid Charters, or that in any point break or undo them. And that
the said curses be twice a year denounced and published by the Prelates
aforesaid. And if the same Prelates or any of them be remiss in the
denunciation of the said sentences, the Arch Bishops of Canterbury and York
for the time being, shall compel and distrain them to the execution of their
duties in form aforesaid.

The 28. of Edward the 1. Chap. 1. fol. 80. A confirmation of the great
Charter, and the Charter of the Forest.
THat is to say, That from henceforth the great Charter of the Liberties of
England granted to all the Commonalty of the Realm, and the Charter of the
Forest in like manner granted, shall be observed, kept, and maintained in every
point, in as ample wise as the King has granted, renewed, and confirmed them
by his Charters. And that the Charters be delivered to every Sheriff of
England, under the Kings Scale, to be read four times in the year before the
people in the full County that is to wit, the next County day after the Feast
of St. Michael, and the next County day after Christmas, and at the next County
after Easter, and at the next County after the Feast of St. John. And for these
two Charters to be firmly observed in every point and article (where before no
remedy Chap. 8. and 13.
was at the Common Law) there shall be chosen in every Shire Court by the
Commonalty of the same Shire, three substantial Men, Knights, or other
lawful, wise, and well disposed persons which shall be Justices sworn and
assigned by the Kings Letters Patents under the great Scale, to hear and
determine (without any other Writ, but only their Commission) such Plaints as
shall be made upon all those that commit or offend against any Point contained
in the foresaid Charters, in the Shires where they be assigned, as well within
Franchises as without: And as well for the Kings Officers out of their places,
as for other: and to hear the Plaints from day to day without any delay, and
to determine them, without allowing the delays which be allowed by the Common
Law. And the same Knights shall have power to punish all such as shall be
attainted of any Trespass done, contrary to any point of the foresaid Charters
(where no remedy was before by the Common Law) as before is said, by
Imprisonment, or by ransom, or by Amerciament, according to the Trespass, etc.

The 28, of Edward the 1. Chap. 8. fol. 83. The Inhabitants of every County
shall make choice of their Sheriffs being not of Fee.
Stat. 9. E. 2. Stat. 14 E. 3. 7. 28. Ed. 1. 1.
THe King has granted unto his people, that they shall have election of their
Sheriffs in every Shire (where the Shrivalty is not of fee) if they lift.
Chap. 13.

The 28. of Edward the 1. Chap. 13. fol. 83. What sort of persons the Commons
of Shires shall choose for their Sheriffs.
ANd for as much as the King has granted the election of Sheriffs to the
Commons of the Shire, the King will that they shall choose such Sheriffs, that
shall not charge them, and that they shall not put any Officer in authority for
rewards or bribes. And such as shall not lodge too often in one place, nor with
poor persons or men of religion. St. 9. E. 2. The Statute of Sherifes.

The 34. Edward the 1. Chap 4. fol. 91. All Laws, Liberties, and Customs
confirmed.
WE will and grant for us and our heirs, that all Clerks and lay men of our
land, shall have their laws, liberties, and, free Customs as largely and
wholly, as they have used to have the same, at any time when they had them
best. And if any Statutes have been made by us or our ancestors, or any
customs brought in contrary to them, or any manner article contained in this
present Charter: we will and grant that such manner of statutes and customs
shall be void and frustrate for evermore.

The 34. of Edward the 3. Chap. 6 fol. 92. The curse of the Church shall be
pronounced against the breakers of this Charter.
ANd for the more assurance of this thing we will and grant that all Arch
Bishops and Bishops for ever, shall read this present Charter in their
Cathedral Churches twice in the year, and upon the reading hereof in every of
their Parish Churches shall openly denounce accursed all those that willingly
do procure to be done any thing contrary to the tenor, force and effect of
this present Charter in any point and article. In witness of which thing we
have set our Scale to this present Charter, together with the Seals of the
Arch Bishops. Bishops, etc. which voluntarily have sworn, that as much as in
them is, they shall observe the tenor of this present Charter in all causes
and articles,, and shall extend their faithful aid to the keeping thereof, etc.

The 1. of Edward the 3. Chap. 5. fol. 115. None shall be compelled to go to
war out of the Shire where he dwells: But etc.
ITem, the King will that no man from henceforth shall be charged to arm
himself, otherwise then he was wont in the time of his progenitors Kings of
England. And that no man be compelled to go out of his shire, but where
necessity requires, and sudden coming of strange enemies into the Realm.
And then it shall be done as has been used in times past for the defense of
the Realm. St. 15. Ed. 3. 7. St. 4. H. 4. 13. 25. Ed. 3. 8.

The 2. Edward the 3. Chap. 8. fol. 118. No commandment under the Kings seal,
shall disturb or delay justice.
ITem, it is accorded and established, that it shall not be commanded by the
great Seal nor the little Seal, to disturb or delay common right: and that
though such commandments do come, he Justices shall not therefore leave to do
right in any point. St. 9. H. 3. 29. St. 5. Ed. 3. 9. St. 14. Ed. 3.14.

The 4. of Edward the 3. Chap. 2. fol. 120. The authority of Justices of
Assise, Jail delivery, and if the peace.
ITem, it is ordained, that good and discreet persons, other then of the
places, if they may be found sufficient, shall be assigned in all the Shires of
England to take Assizes, Iuries, and certifications, and deliver the Gaoles.
And that the said Justices shall take the Assizes, Iuries, and certifications,
and deliver the Gaols at the least three times a year, and more often if need
be. Also there shall be assigned good and lawful men in every County to keep
the peace. And at the time, of the assignments, 33. Ed. 1 30. 20. Ed. 3. 6.
Fitz. N. B. fo. 251. 1. Ed. 3. 16. 18. Ed. 3. ^. 34. Ed. 3. 1. 13. R. 2. 7.
mention shall he made, that such as shall be indicted or taken by the said
keepers of the Peace, shall not be let to mainprise by the Sheriffs nor by
none other ministers, if they be not mainpernable by the Law. Not that such us
shall be indicted, shall not be delive^ed but at the Common Law. And the
Justices assigned to deliver the Gaoles, shall have power to deliver the same
Gaoles of those, that shall be indicted before the keepers of the peace. And
that the said keepers shall send their indictments before the Justices, and
they shall have power to inquire of Sheriffs, Gaolers, and other, in whose
ward such indicted persons shall be, if they make deliverance or let to
mainprise any so indicted, which be not mainpernable, and to punish the said
Sheriffs, Gaolers, and others if they do any thing against this Act.

The 4. of Ed. 3. Chapter 10. fol. 122. Sheriffs and G^olers shall receive
offenders without any thing taking.
ITem, whereas in times past Sheriffs and gaolers of Gaoles, would not receive
thieves, persons appealed, indicted, or found with the manner taken and attached
by the Constables, and townships, without taking great fines and ransomes of
them for their receipt, whereby the said Constables and Townships have been
unwilling to take thieves and felons, because of such extreme charges, and the
thieves and the felons the more encouraged to offend: It is inacted that the
Sheriffs and Gaolers shall receive and safely keep in prison from henceforth
such thieves and felons, 3. E. 1. 26. 11. Ed 4. fol. 4. 32. H 6 10.
by the delivery of the Constables and townships, without taking any thing for
the receipt. And the Justices assigned to deliver the Jail, shall have power
to hear their complaints that will complain upon the Sheriffs and Gaolers in
such case, and moreover to punish the Sheriffs and Gaolers ^f they be found
guilty.

The 4. of Edward the 3. Chap. 14. fol. 122. A Parliament shall be holden once
every year.
ITem, it is accorded, that a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and
more often if need be Stat. 36. ^d. 3. 10.

The 14. of Edward the 3. Chap. 5. fol. 133. Delays of judgment in other
Courts shall be redressed in Parliament.
ITem, because diverse mischiefs have happened, for that in diverse places, as
well as in the Chancery as in the Kings Bench, the common Bench, and in the
Eschequer before the Justices assigned, and other Justices to hear and
determine deputed, the judgments have been delayed, sometime by difficulty,
and sometime by diverse opinions of the Judges, and sometime for some other
cause: It is assented, established, and accorded, that from henceforth at every
Parliament shall be chosen a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, which shall
have commission and power of the King, 2 H. 7. fo. 19 and 22. Ed. 3. fo. 3.
to hear by petition delivered to them, the complaints of all those, that will
complain them of such delays or grievances done to them, and they shall have
power to cause to come before them at Westminster, or else where the places of
any of them shall be, the ^^nor of records and processes of such judgments so
delayed, and to cause the same Justices to come before them, which shall be
then present to hear their cause and reasons of such delays. Which cause and
reason so heard, by good advice of themselves, the Chancellor, Treasurer, the
Justices ^f the one Bench and of the other, and other of the Kings Council, as
many, and such as they shall think convenient, shall proceed to take a good
accord, and make a good judgment. And according to the same accord so taken,
the tenor of the said record, together with the judgment which shall be
accorded, shall be remanded before the Justices, before whom the plea did
depend. And that they hastily go to give judgment according to the same
record. And in case it seems to them, that the difficulty be so great, that
it may not well be determined, with out assent of the Parliament, that the said
tenor or tenors shall be brought by the said Prelates, Earls, and Barons unto
the next Parliament, and there shall be a final accord taken, what judgment
ought to be given in this case. And according to this accord, it shall be
commanded to the Judges, before whom the plea did depend, that they shall
proceed to give judgment without delay. And to begin to do remedy upon this
ordinance: It is assented, that a commission and power shall be granted to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earls of Arundell, and Huntington, the Lord of
Wake, and the Lord Raise Basset, to endure till the next Parliament. And though
the ministers have made an oath before this time, yet nevertheless to remember
them of the same oath: It is assented, that as well the chancellor, treasurer,
keeper of the privy seal, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, the
Chancellor, Barons of the Eschequer, as the Justices assigned, and all they
that do meddle in the said places under them, by the advice of the same
Archbishop, Earls, and Barons, shall make an oath well and lawfully to serve
the King and his people. And by the advice of said Prelate, Earls and Barons,
be it ordained to increase the number of Ministers when need shall be, and them
to diminish in the same manner. And so from time to time when officers shall be
newly put in the said offices, they shall be sworn in the same manner, St. 27 El.
8 Regist. fo. 17. Rast. Pla. fo. 30^

The Oaths of the Justices, being made Anno, 18. Ed. 3. and Anno Domini 1344.
fol. ^44.
YE shall swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our Lord the King, and
his people in the office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall council the
King in his business, and that ye shall not council, nor assent to any thing,
which may turn him in damage or disherison by any manner, way, or color. And
that ye shall not know the damage or disherison of him, whereof ye shall not
cause him to be warned by your self, or by other, and that ye shall do equal
Law, and execution of right to all his subjects, rich or poor, without having
regard to any person. And that ye take not by your self or by other prively nor
apartly, gift nor reward of gold nor silver, not of any other thing which may
turn to your profit, unless it be meat or drink, and that of small value of
any man that shall have any plea or process hanging before you, as long as the
same process shall so be hanging, nor after for the same cause. And that ye
take no see, as long as ye shall be Justice, nor robes of any man great or
small, but of the King himself. And that ye give none advice nor council to no
man great nor small, in no case where the King is party. And in case that any
of what estate or condition they be, come before you in your sessions with
force and arms, or otherwise against the peace, or against the form of the
Statute thereof made, to disturb execution of the common law, or to menace the
people, 2. Ed. 3. 3.
that they may not pursue the Law, that ye shall cause their bodies to be
arrested and put in prison. And in case that be such, that ye cannot arrest
them, that ye certify the King of their names, and of their misprision
hastily, so that he may thereof ordain a convenable remedy. And that ye by your
self nor by other, privily nor apertly, maintain any plea or quarrel hanging
in the Kings Court, or elsewhere in the country. And that ye deny to no man
common right, by the Kings letters, not none other man's, not for none other
cause, and in case any letters come to you, contrary to the law, that ye do
nothing by such letters, but certify the King thereof, and proceed to execute
the law, notwithstanding the same letters. And that ye shall do and procure
the profit of the King, and of his Crown, with all things where ye may
reasonably do the same. And in case ye be from henceforth found in default in
any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the Kings will of body, land and
goods, thereof to be done as shall please him, as God you help and all Saints.

The 20. of Edward the 3. Chap. ^. fol. 14^. The Justices of both Benches,
Assise, etc. shall do right to all men, take no fee but of the King, nor give
council where the King is party.
FIrst, we have commanded all our Justices, that they shall from henceforth do
equal Law and execution of right to all our subjects rich and poor, without
having regard to any person, and without omitting to do right for any letters
or commandment, which may come to them from us, or from any other, or by any
other cause. And if that any letters, writs, or commandments come to the
Justices, or to other deputed to do law and right, according to the Usage of
the Realm, in disturbance of the Law, or of the execution of the same, or of
right to the parties, the Justices and other aforesaid shall proceed and hold
their Courts and processes where the pleas and matters be depending before
them, as if no such Letters, Writs, or Commandments were come to them: And
they shall certify us and our Council of such Commandments, which be
contrary to the Law, as before is said. And to the intent that our Justices
should do even right to all people, in the manner aforesaid, without more
favor showing to one then to another, we have ordained and caused our said
justices to be sworn, that they shall not from henceforth, as long as they
shall be in office of Justice take fee nor to be of any man, but of our self,
and that they shall take no gift nor reward by themselves, nor by other privily
nor apertly of any man, that has to do before them by any way, except meat
and drink, and that of small value, and that they shall give no council to
great men or small, in case where we be party, or which do or may much us in
any point, upon pain to be at our will, body, Lands, and goods, to do thereof
as shall please us, in case they do contrary. And for this cause we have
increased the fees of the same our Justices, in such manner as it ought
reasonably to suffice them. St. 2. Ed. 3 8. St. 11. R. 2. 10. Regist fo. 1^6.

The 25 of Edward the 3. Chap. 8. fol. 155. None shall be bound to find men of
arms, but by tenure or grant by Parliament.
ITem, it is accorded and assented, that no man shall be constrained to find
men of Arms, hoblers nor Archers, other then those which hold by such
services, if it be not by common assent and grant made in Parliament, St 1. Ed.
3. 5. St. 4. H, 4. 13.

The 28. of Edward the 3. Chap. 7. fol. 172. No Sheriff shall continue in his
office above one year.
ITem, it is ordained and established, that the Sheriff of the Counties shall
be removed every year out of their offices, so that no Sheriff that has been
in his office by a year, shall abide in the same office the year next
following. 2. H. 7. fol. 5.
And that no Commission be made to him thereof, or renewed for the same ye^^e
following. St. 14. 8. 3 7. 32. Ed. 3. 9. 23. H. 6. 8. Rast. pl. fo. 202.

The 34. of Edward the 3. Chap. 4. fol. 180. What sort of people shall be
returned upon every Iur^.
ITem, because that Sheriffs and other ministers often do array their panels
in manner of Inquests of people procured and most far of from the Counties,
which have no knowledge of the deed whereof the Inquest shall be taken, it is
accorded that such panels shall be made of the next people, which shall not be
suspect nor procured. And that the Sheriffs, Coroners, and other ministers,
which do against the same, shall be punished before the Justices that take the
said Inquest, according to the quantity of their Trespass, as well against the
King as against the party, for the quantity of the damage which he has
suffered in such manner. St. 21, (...) 1. St. 28. E. 1. 9. 20. Es. 3. 6. 42. Ed.
3. 11. Regist. fo. 178. Regist. pla. fo. 117.

THe 36, of Edward the 3. chap. 10. fol. 186. A Parliament shall be holden once
in a year.
ITem, for the maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes and redress of
diverse mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, d Parliament shall be
holden every year, as an other time was ordained by a Statute. St. 4 Ed. 3. 14.

The 36. of Edward the 3. chap. 15. fol. 187. Pleas shall be pleaded in the
English tongue and enrolled in Latin.
ITem, because it is often showed to the King, by the Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and all the Comminalty, of the great mischiefs which have happened to
diverse of the Realm, because the Laws, Customs, and Statutes of this Realm,
be not commonly holden and kept in the same Realm for that they be pleaded,
showed and judged in the French tongue, which is much unknown in the said
realm, so that the people which do implead or be impleaded in the Kings Court,
and in the Courts of other have no knowledge nor understanding, of that which
is said, for them or against them by their Sergeants and other Pleaders: And
that reasonably the said Laws and Customs the rather shall be perceived and
known and better understood in the tongue used in the said Realm, and by so
much every man of the said Realm may the better govern himself without
offending of the Law, and the better keep, save, and defend his heritage and
possessions: and in diverse regions and countries, where the King, the Nobles,
and other of the said Realm have been, good governance and full right is done
to every person, because that their Laws and Customs be learned and used in
the tongue of the Country: The King desiring the good governance and
tranqullity of his people and to put out and eschew the harms and mischiefs
which do or may happen in this behalf, by the occasions aforesaid has
ordained, and established, by the assent aforesaid, that all Pleas which shall
be pleaded in any Courts whatsoever before any of his Justices whatsoever, or
in his other places, or before any of his other ministers whatsoever, or in the
Courts and places of any other Lords whatsoever, within the Realm, shall be
pleaded, showed, defended, answered, debated, and judged, in the English
tongue, and that they be entered and enrolled in Latin. And that the Laws and
Customs of the same Realm, Terms and Processes be holden and kept, as they
be and have been before this time, and that by the ancient terms and forms
of Pleaders, 46 Ed. 3. fo. 21. Dyer fo. 2 99. Cook li. 8. fo. 163. li. 10 fo.
132. Co. inst. 304.
no man be prejudiced, so that the matter of the action be fully showed in the
Declaration and in the Writ. And it is accorded by the assent aforesaid, that
this ordinance and Statue of pleading, begin and hold place at the fifteenth of
S. Hillary next coming.

The 37. of Edward the 3. chap. 18. fol* 190 The order of persuing a Suggestion
made to the King.
ITem, though it be contained in the great Charter, that no man be taken or
imprisoned, nor put out of his freehold, without process of the Law, never the
less diverse people make false suggestion to the King himself as well for
malice as otherwise, whereof the King is often grieved, St. 9. H 3.29.
and diverse of the Realm put in damage, against the form of the same Charter:
Wherefore it is ordained, that all they which make such Suggestions shall be
sent with the same suggestions, before the Chancellor, Treasurer and his grand
Counsel, and that they there find surety to pursue their suggestions, and
incur the same pain that the other should have had if he were attainted, in
case that his Suggestion he 'found evil. St. 38. Ed. 3. 9.
And that then process of the Law be made aganst them without being taken and
imprisoned against the form of the said Charter and other Statutes. St. 25.
Edward. 3. 4. 42. Ed. 3. 3.

The 42 of Edward the 3. Chap 1. ^093 A confirmation of the great Charter, and
the Charter of the Forest: And a repeal of those Statutes that be made to the
contrary.
AT the Parliament of our Lord the King, holden at Westminster the first day of
May, the two and fortieth year of his reign: It is assented and accorded.
That the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest be holden and kept in all
points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, that shall be holden for
none.

The 8. of Richard the 2. Chap. 2. fol. 217. No man of Law shall be a Justice
of Assise, or Jail delivery in his own Country.
ITem, it is ordained and assented, That no man of ^^w shall be from henceforth
Justice of Assizes, or of common deliverances Gaoles in his own Country. And
that the chief Justice of the common Bench be assigned amongst other to take
such Assizes, and deliver gaoles, but as to the chief Iust^ce of the Kings
Bench it shall be, as for the most part of an hundred years last past was wont
to be done. St. 13. H. 4 2.33. H. 8.24.

The 8. of Richard the 2 Chap. 4. fol. 218* The penalty if a Judge or Clerk
make any false Entry, raze a Roll, or change a verdict.
ITem, at the complaint of the said Communalty made to our Lord the King in the
Parliament, for that great disherison in times past was done of the people, and
may be done by the false entering of Pleas, rasing of Rolls, and changing of
verdict: It is accorded and assented, that if any Judge or Clerk^ be of such
default (so that by the same default there ensues disherison of any of the
parties,) sufficiently convict before the King and his Council by the manner
and form, which to the same our Lord the King and his Council shall seem
reasonable, and within two years after such default made, if the party
grieved be of full age, and if he be within age, then within two years after
that he shall come to his full age, he shall be punished by sine and ransom at the
Kings will, and satisfy the party. And as to the restitution of the inheritance
desired by the said Commons, the party grieved shall sue by Writ or otherwise
according to the Law, if he see it expedient for him. St. 8 H. 6.82.

The 12 of Richard the 2. Chap. 10. fol. ^23. How many Justices of peace there
shall be in every County: and how often they shall keep their Sessions.
ITem, it is ordained and agreed, that in every Commission of the Justices of
Peace, there shall be assigned but six Justices, with the Justices of Assizes,
and that the said six Justices shall keep their Sessions in every quarter of
the year at the least, and by three days if need be, upon pain to be punished
according to the discretion of the Kings Council, at the suit of every man
that will complain: And they shall inquire diligently among other things
touching their offices, if the said Majors, Bailifes, Stewards, Constables and
Gaolers have duly done execution of the said Ordinances of servants and
laborers, beggars and vagabonds, and shall punish them that be punishable by
the said pain of an hundred sh^llings, by the same pain, and they that be
found in default, and which be not punishable by the same pain, shall be
punished by their discretion. And every of the said Justices shall take for
their wages four shillings 36. Ed. 3. 12. 14. R. 2. 11. See also the wages of
the Clerk of the peace, in the Statutes of 27 H. 8. 16. and 5. Eliz. 12. and
13. Eliz. 25.
the day, for the time of their foresaid Sessions and their Clerk two
shillings of the fines and amerciaments, rising and coming of the sa^e
Sessions, by the hands of the Sheriffs. And that the Lords of franchises,
shall be contributary to the said wages, after the rare of their part of sines
and amerciaments aforesaid. And that no Steward of any Lord be assigned, in my
of the said Commissions. And that no association shall be made to the Justices
of the peace after their first Commission. And it is not the intent of this
Statute, that the Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, nor the Sergeants
of the Law, in case that they shall be named in the said Commissions, shall be
bound by force of this Statute, to hold the said Sessions four times in the
year, as the other Commissioners, the which be continually dwelling in the
Country, but that they shall do it, when they may best a^ound it.

The 13. of Richard the 2. Chap. 6. fol. 225. How many Serieants at Arms there
shall be, and with what things they shall meddle.
ITem, at the grievous complaint made by the Commons to our Lord the King in
this Parliament, of the excessive and superfluous number of Sergeants at Arms,
and of many great extortions and eppressions done by them to the people: The
King therefore does will that they shall be discharged, and that of them and
other there shall be taken of good and sufficient persons to the number of
thirty, and no more from henceforth. And more over the King prohibiteth them to
meddle with any thing that touches not their office. And that they do no
extortion nor oppression to the people, upon pain to loose their office, and to
make a fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure, and full satisfaction to the
party.

The 20. of R^chard the 2. Chap. 3. folio 243. No man shall sit upon the Bench
with the Justices of Assise.
ITem, the King does will and forbid, that no Lord, nor other of the Country,
little or great, shall sit upon the Bench, with the Justices, to take Assizes
in their Sessions in the Counties of England, upon great forfeiture to the
King: and has charged his said Justices, that they shall not suffer the the
contrary to be done.

The 2. of Henry the 4. Chap. 23. fol. 253. The fees of the Marshall of the
Marshallsey of the Kings house.
ITem, whereas the Marshall of the Marshallsey of the Court of our Lord the
Kings house, in the time of King Edward, grand father of our Lord the King that
now is, and before was wont to take the fees, which do hereafter follow, that
is to say, of every person that comes by Capias to the said Court, four
pence: and if he be let to mainprise till his day, two pence more: and of every
person which is impleaded of trespass, and finds two mainpernors to keep his
day, till the end of the plea, to take for that cause two pence of the
defendant: and of every person committed to prison by judgment of the Steward,
in whatsoever manner the same be, four pence: of every person delivered of
felony, and of every felon let to mainprise by the Court four pence: which
fees were wont to be taken and paid in full Court, as the King has well
perceived by the complaint of the said Commons thereof made in the said
Parliament: The same our Lord the King, to avoid all such wrongs and
oppressions to be done to his people, against the good customs and usages made
and used in the time of his progenitors, by the advice and assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and at the supplication of the said Commons has
ordained and established, that if the said Marshall or his Officers, under him,
take other fees then above are declared, that the same Marshall and every of
his Officers, shall loose their Offices, and pay treble damages to the party
greeved, and that the party greeved have his suit before the Stewards of the
said Court for the time being.

Also it is ordained and established, that no Servitor of Bills that bears a
staff of the same Court, shall take for every mile from the same Court to the
same place, where he shall do his service any more then one penny, and so for
12. miles twelve pence, and for to serve a Venire facias 12. homines, etc. or a
Distringes out of the same Court, the double. And if any of the said Servitors
of Bills do the contrary, he shall be punished by imprisonment, and make a
fine to the King after the discretion of the Stewards of the same Court, and
also be fore judged the Court, and the same Steward shall have power to make
proclamation at his coming to the said Court, in every Country from time to
time of all the articles aforesaid, and thereof to execute punishment as before
is said. 9. R. 2 5.

The 4 of Henry the 4 Chap. 23. fol. 259. Judgments given shall continue
until they shall be reversed by attaint or error.
ITem, where as well in plea real as in plea personal after judgment given
in the Courts of our Lord the King, the parties be made to come upon grievous
pain, sometime before the King himself, sometime before the Kings Council, and
sometimes to the Parliament, to answr thereof of new, to the great impoverishing
of the parties aforesaid, and in the subversion of the Common law of the land:
it is ordained and established, that after judgment given in the Court of our
Lord the King, 19. H. 6 fo. 39. Dyer fo. 315. 321. 376.
the parties and their heirs shall be thereof in peace, until the judgment
be undone by attaint or by error, if there be errors, as has been used by the
Laws in the time of the Kings progenitors.

The 5. of Henry the 4. Chap. 5. fol. 261. It shall be felony to cut out the
tongue, or pull out the eyes of the Kings liege people.
ITem, because that many offenders do daily heat, wound, imprison, and maime
diverse of the Kings liege people, and after purposely out their tongues, or put
out their eyes. It is ordained and stablished, that in such case the offenders
that so cut^eth tongues, or puts out the eyes of any the Kings liege people,
and that duly proved, and found, that such deed was done of malice prepensed,
they shall incur the pain of felony.

The 5. of Henry the 4. Chap. 10. fol. 263. Justices of peace shall imprison
none but in the Common Jail.
ITem, because that diverse Constables of Castles, within the Realm of England
be assigned to be Justices of Peace, by Commission of our Lord the King, and by
color of the said commissions they take people to whom they bear evil will,
and imprison them within the said Castles, till they have made sine and ransom
with the said Constables for their deliverance: It is ordained and established,
Cook li. 9. fo. 119.
that none be imprisoned by any Justice of the Peace, but only in the common
Jail: Saving to Lords and other (which have Gaoles) their franchise in this
case.

Now comes in some Statutes of palpable Bondage, about choosing Parliament men,
etc. The first I shall give you is the 1. of Henry the 5. Chap. 1. fol. 274
What sort of people shall be chosen, and who shall be the choosers of the
Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament.
FIrst, that the Statuts of the election of the Knights of the Shirs to come to
the Parliament be holden and kept in all points: adjoining to the same, that
the Knights of the Shires, which from henceforth shall be chosen in every
Shire, be not chosen unless they be resident within the Shire where they shall
be chosen, the day of the date of the Writ of the summons of the Parliament.
And that the Kni^hts and Esquires, and other which shall be choosers of those
Knights of the Shires be also resident within the same Shires in manner and
form as is aforesaid. Rast. pl. fo. 446.
And moreover, it is ordained and established, that the Citizens and Burgesses
of the Cities and Boroughs be chosen men, Citizens and Burgesses resiant,
dwelling and free of the same cities and boroughs, and no other in any wise. 7.
H. 4. 15. 8, H. 6. 7. 10. H. 6. 2. 23. H. ^. 15.

The 2. of Henry 5. Chap. 1. and 3. fol. 282. What sort of men shall be
Justices of the Peace.
FIrst, that the Justices of the peace from henceforth to be made within the
Counties of England, shall be made of most sufficient persons dwelling in the
same counties, by the advice of the Chancellor and of the Kings Council,
without taking other persons dwelling in forain Counties to execute such
office, except the Lords and Justices of Assizes now named, and to be named by
the King and his Council. 1. Ed. 3. 16. 34. Ed. 3. 1.
And except all the Kings chief Steward of the Land and Seigniories of the
Duchy of Lancaster, in the North parts and in the South, for the time being.
13. R. 2. 7.

Chap. 3. Of what estate those Jurors must be, which are to pass touching the
life of man, plea real, to forty marks damages.
ITem, the King considering the great mischiefs and disherisons, which daily
happen through all the realm of England, as well in case of death of a man, as
in case of freehold, and in other cases by them which pass in enquests in the
said cases, which be common Jurors and other, that have for little to live
upon, but by such inquests, and which have nothing to loose, because of their
false oaths, whereby they offend their conscience the more largely: and willing
thereof to have correction and amendment, 2. H. 7. fo. 13. 10. H. 7. fo. 14. 9.
H. 5. fo. 5. 10. H. 6. fo. 7. 8. 18. 7. H. 6. fo. 44. Dyer fo. 144 Cook Inst.
part 1. 272. a. Rast. pl. fo. 117.
has ordained and established by assent of the Lords and Commons aforesaid,
that no person shall be admitted to pass in any enquest upon trial of the
death of a man, nor in any enquest betwixt party and party, in plea real, nor
in plea personal, whereof the debt or the damage declared, amount to forty
marks, if the same person have not Land, or Tenements of the yearly value of
forty shillings, above all charges of the same, so that it be challenged by the
party, that any such person so impanelled in the same cases, has not Lands or
tenements of the yearly value of forty shillings above the charges as before is
said. 28. Ed. 3. 13. 8. H. 6 29.

The 8. of Henry the 6. Chap. 7. fol. 304. What sort of men shall be choosers,
and who shall be chosen Knights of the Parliament.
ITem, Whereas the election of Knights of Shires, to come to the Parliament of
our Lord the King, in many Counties of the Realm of England, have now of late
been made by very great outrageous and excessive number of people, dwelling
within the same Counties of the Realm of England, of the which most part was of
people of small substance, This is a Statute of bondage and less of liberty.
1. H. 5. 1. 10. H. 6. 2. 6. H. 6. 4. 11. H. 4. 1. 23. H. 6. 15. Rast. pla. fo.
440.
and of no value, whereof every of them pretended a voice equivalent, as to
such elections to be made, with the most worthy Knights and Esquires dwelling
within the same Counties, whereby manslaughters, riots, batteries, and
divisions among the Gentlemen, and other peoples of the same Counties shall
very likely rise and be, unless convenient and due remedy be provided in this
behalf: Our Lord the King considering the premises, has provided, ordained,
and established by authority of this present Parliament, that the Knights of
the Shires to be chosen within the same Realm of England, to come to the
Parliaments of our Lord the King, hereafter to be holden, shall be chosen in
every County of the Realm of England, by people dwelling and resident in the
same Counties, whereof every one of them shall have land or tenement, to the
value of forty shillings by the year at least, above all charges, and that they
which shall be chosen shall be dwelling, and resident within the same Counties.
And such as have the greatest number of them, that may EXPEND FORTY SHILLINGS
by year, and above, as before is said, shall be returned by the Sheriffs of
every County Knights for Parliament, by Indentures sealed betwixt the said
Sheriffs, and the said choosers so to be made* And every Sheriff of the Realm
of England shall have power by the said authority to examine upon the
Evangelists every such choos^^, how much he may expend by the year: And if any
Sheriffs re^urn Knights, to come to the Parliament contrary to the said
Ordinance, the Justices of Assizes in their Seasions of Assizes shall have
power by the authority aforesaid, thereof to enquire. And if by enquest the
same he found before the Justices, and the Sheriffs thereof be duly attainted
that then the said Sheriff shall incura^^ pain of an hundred pound, to be paid
to our Lord the King, and also that he have imprisonment by a year, without
being le^ to mainprise or bail, And that the Knights for the Parliament
returned contrary to the said Ordinance, shall loose their wages. 10. H. 6. 2.

Provided always, that he which cannot expend forty shillings by year, as
before is said, shall in no wise be chooser of the Knights for the Parliament.
And that in every writ that shall hereafter go forth to the Sheriffs, to
choose Knights for the Parliament, mention be made of the said Ordinances.

The 18. of Henry the 6. Chap. 11. fol. 332. Of what yearly value in lands a
Justice of Peace ought to be.
ITem, whereas by Statutes made in the time of the Kings noble Progenitors, it
was ordained, that in every County of England, Justices should be assigned of
the most worthy of the same counties, to keep the peace, and to do other
things, as in the same Statutes fully is contained, 1. Ed. 3. 16 18. Ed. 3. 2.
13. R. 2. 7. 17. R. 2. 10.
which Statutes notwithstanding, now of late in many Counties of England the
greatest number have been deputed and assigned, which before this were not wont
to be, whereof some be of small behavior, by whom the people will not be
governed nor ruled, and some for their necessity do great extortion and
oppression upon the people, whereof great inconveniences be likely to rise
daily, if the King therefore do not provide remedy; The King willing against
such inconveniences to provide remedy, has ordained and established by
authority aforesaid, That no Justice of peace within the Realm of England in
any County, shall be assigned or deputed, if he have not lands or tenements to
the value of 20. l. by year: and if any be ordained hereafter to be Justices
of peace in any County, which has not lands or tenements to the value
aforesaid, that he thereof shall give knowledge to the Chancellor of England
for the time being, which shall put another sufficient in his place, and and if
he give not the said knowledge (as before) within a month after, that he has
notice of such Commissions, or if he sit or make any warrant or precept by
force of such Commissions, he shall incur the penalty of 20. l. and
nevertheless be put out of the Commission as before, and the King shall have
the one half of the said penalty, and he that will sue for the King the other
half, and he that will sue for the King, and for himself, shall have an action
to demand the same penalty by writ of debt at the common Law.

Provided always, that this Ordinance shall not extend to Cities, Towns, or
Boroughs, which be Counties incorporate of themselves, nor to cities, towns, or
boroughs, which have Justices of peace of persons dwelling in the same by
commission or warrant of the King, or of his progenitors. Provided also, that
if there be not sufficient persons having lands and tenements to the value
aforesaid, learned in the Law, and of good governance within any such County,
that the Chancellor of England for the time being, shall have power to put
other discreet persons learned in the Law, in such Commissions, though they
have not lands or tenements to the value aforesaid, by his discretion. 27. H.
8. chap. 24.

The 20. of Henry the 6. Chap. 8. fol. 336. In what case the Kings Purveyors
that would take Cattle, may be resisted.
ITem, it is ordained by the authority aforesaid, that the Statutes before this
time made of Purveyors and buyers, shall be holden and kept, and put in due
execution. And in case that any purveyor, buyer, or taker, will take and make
purveyance, or buy any thing to the value of forty shillings, or under of any
person, and make not ready payment in hand, that then it shall be lawful to
every of the Kings liege people to retain their goods and cattels, and to
resist such purveyors and buyers, 28. Ed. 3. 12.
and in no wise suffer them to make any such p^rveyances, buyings, or takings:
And to keep the peace better, every constable, tithingman, or chief pledge of
every town or hamlet, where such takings or purveyances shall be made, shall be
helping or assistant to the owner, or seller of such things, to be taken
against the form of this Ordinance, to make resistance in the manner
aforesaid, in case that such constables, tithingmen, or chief pledges be
required so to do, upon pain to yield to the party so grieved the value of the
things so raken with his double damages: and that none of the Kings liege
people be put to loss or damage by the King or any officer for such
resistance. And that none of the Kings officers shall cause to be arrested,
vexed, or impleaded in the Court of the Marshalsey or else where, any of the
Kings liege people for such detaining, or not suffering to be done, upon pain
to loose 20. l. the one moity thereof to the King, and the other moity to him
which will in such case sue: and that the Justices of peace in evety County,
shall have power by authority of this Ordinance, to inquire, hear, and
determine as well at the suit of the King, as of him that will sue, of any
thing done against this Ordinance, and thereof to make due punishment, and
execution, and to award damages to the party plaintiff, when any defendant is
thereof duly convict, and that upon every action to be taken upon this
Ordinance, every party defendant shall be put to answer unto it without the aid
of the King, and in such actions to be taken, process shall be made as in a
writ of trespass, done against the peace, and that in every Commission of
Purveyors, buyers, or takers to be made, this Ordinance shall be contained and
expressed. And moreover that this Ordinance among other Statutes of purveyors,
buyers, or takers before this time made, shall he sent to the Sherifes of every
County of England to proclaim and deliver the said Statutes, and Ordinances in
the manner and form contained in the Statute of purveyors and buyers, 2. H. 6.
2. 36. E. 3. 6.
made the first year of the reign of our said Lord the King, upon the pain
contained in the Statute. And moreover the King will and commands, that the
Statute made the 36. year of King Edward, late King of England, the third after
the conquest, touching the purveyors of other persons then of the King, shall
be put in due execution. 2. H. 4. 14.

The 23. of Henry the 6. Chap. 10. fol. 340. No Sheriff shall let to Farm his
County or any Bailiwick. The Sheriffs and Bailiffes fees and duties in
several cases.
ITem, the King considering the great perjury, extortion, and oppression, which
be, and have been in this realm, by his Sherifes, under Sherifees and their
Clerks, Coroners, Stewards of franchises, Bailifes and keepers of prisons, and
other officers in diverse counties of this realm, has ordained by authority
aforesaid, in eschewing of all such extortions, perjury, 20. H. 7. fo. 12. 21.
H. 7. fo. 36. 4. H. 4. 5. Kel. fo. 108. ^1. H 7. fo. 16. Rast. pla. fo. 318.
Coke. pla. 365. 3. E. 1. 26. Dyer. fo. 119.
and oppress^ion, that no Sheriff shall let to farm in any manner his county,
nor any of his Bailiwicks, Hundreds, nor wapentakes, nor that the said
Sherifes, under Sheifes, baili^ffes of Franchises, nor any other Bailiffe,
shall return upon any writ or precept to them directed to be returned, any
inquests in any panell thereupon to be made, any Bailiffes, officers, or
servants to any of the officers aforesaid, in any panell by them so to be made,
nor that any of the said Officers and Ministers, by occasion or under color of
their office, shall take any other thing by them, nor by any other person to
their use, profit, or avail, of any person by them, or any of them, to be
arrested, or attached, nor of any other of them, for the omitting of any arrest
or* attachment to be made by their body, or of any person by them, or any of
them, by force, or color of their office arrested or attached for fine, fee,
suit of prison, mainprise, letting to bail, or showing any ease or favor to
any such person so arrested or to be arrested for their reward or profit, but
such as follow, that is to say. For the Sheriff twenty pence, the Bailiffe
that makes the arrest or attachment four pence, and the Jailer, if the
prisoner be committed to his Ward, four pence. And that the Sheriff, under
Sheriff, Sheriffs Clerk, Steward, or Bailiffe of Franchise, servant or
Bailiffe, or Coroner shall not take any thing by color of his office by him,
nor by any other person to his use, of any person, for the making of any return
or panell, and for the copy of any panell, but four pence, and that the said
Sheriffs and all other officers and Ministers aforesaid, shall let out of
prison all manner of persons by them or any of them arrested, or being in their
custody by force of any writ, bill, or warrant, in any action personal, or by
cause of indictment of trespass, upon reasonable sureties of sufficient
persons, having sufficient within the counties where such persons be so let to
bail or mainprise, to keep their days in such places as the said writs, Fitz
N. B. fo. 251. B. Plow. fo. 60. Coke. l. 10. fo. 101. 37. H. 6. fo. 1. Plow.
fo. 60. Dyer fo. 118. 323. 364. 7. Ed. 4. fo. 5. Coke li. 3. fo. 59. li. 10.
fo. 99. Rast. pla. fo. 371. 31. El. 9. Dyer fo. 25.
bells, or warrants shall require. (Such person or persons which shall be in
their Ward by condemnation, execution. Capiat utlagatum or excommunicatum,
surety of the peace, and all such persons, which be or shall be committed to
ward by special commandment of any Justices, and vagabonds refusing to serve
according to the form of the Statute of Laborers only except.) And that no
Sheriff, nor any of his officers or Ministers aforesaid, shall take or cause to
be taken, or make any obligation for any cause aforesaid, or by color of their
office, but only to themselves, of any person, nor by any person, which shall
be in their Ward by the course of the law, but by the name of their office, and
upon condition written, that the said prisoners shall appear at the day
contained in the said writ, bill or warrant, and in such places, as the said
writs, bills, or warrants shall require. And if any of the said Sheriffs or
other Officers or Ministers aforesaid, take any obligation in other form by
color of their offices, that it shall be void. And that he shall take no more
for the making of any such Obligation, Warrant, or precept by them to be made,
but four pence. And also that every of the said Sheriffs shall make yearly a
deputy in the Kings Courts of his Chancery, the Kings Bench, the Common Place,
and in the Exchequer of Record, before that they shall return any Writs, to
receive all manner of Writs and Warrants to be delivered to them: And that all
Sheriffs, under Sheriffs, Clerks, Bailiffes, Gaolers, Coroners, Stewards,
Bailiffes of Franchises, or any other officers or ministers, which do contrary
to this Ordinance in any point of the same, shall loose to the party in this
behalf indamaged, or grieved his treble damages, and shall forfeit the sum
of 40. l. at every time that they or any of them do the contrary thereof in
any point of the same, whereof the King shall have the one half to be employed
to the use of his house, and in no otherwise, and the party that will sue the
other half. And that the Justices of Assizes in their Sessions, Justices of
the one Bench and of the other, and Justices of the Peace in their County,
shall have power to enquire, hear and determine of office without special
Commission, of and upon all them that do contrary to these Ordinances in any
article or point of the same. And if the said Sheriffs return upon any person
Cepi corpus or Reddidit se, that they shall be chargeable to have the bodies of
the said persons at the days of the returns of the said Writs, Bills, or
Warrants, in such form as they were before the making of this Act.

The 1. of Richard the 3. Chap. 3. fol. 385. Every Justice of peace may let a
prisoner to mainprise. No Officer shall seize the goods of a prisoner until he
be attainted.
FOrasmuch as diverse persons have been daily arrested and imprisoned for
suspection of Felony, sometime of malice, and sometime of a light suspection,
and so kept in prison without bail or mainprise to their great vexation and
trouble: Be it ordained and established by authority of this present
Parliament, that every Justice of peace in every Shire, City, or Town, shall
have authority, and power by his or their discretion, to let such prisoners,
and persons so arrested, to Bail or Mainprise, in like form as though the
same prisoners or persons were indicted thereof of record before the same
Justices in their Sessions: and that Justices of Peace have authority to
enquire in their Sessions of all manner escapes of every person arrested and
imprisoned for felony. Rep. 3. H. 7. 3. 1. and 2. P. and M. 13. 7. H. 4. fo.
47. 44. Ass. Pl. 14. 43. Ed. 3. fo. 24. Cook li. 1 fo. 171. 26. Ass. pl. 32.
And that no Sheriff, under Sheriff not Escheater, Bailiffe of franchise, nor
any other person, take or seize the goods of any person arrested or imprisoned
for suspicion of felony, before that the same person so arrested and
imprisoned, be convicted or attainted of such felony according to the Law, or
else the same goods otherwise lawfully forfeited, upon pain to forfeit the
double value of the goods so taken, to him that is so hurt in that behalf, by
action of debt to be pursued by like process, judgment and execution, as is
commonly used in other actions of debt sued at the Common law. And that no
essoin, or protection be allowed in any such action: Nor that the defendant in
any such action be admitted to wage or do his Law.

I shall here give you a clause of the 2. and 3. of Edw. 6. Chap. 13. fol. 867.

And be it further inacted by authority aforesaid, that if any person do
substract or withdraw any manner of tyths, obventions, profits, commodities, or
other duties before mentioned, or any part of them contrary to the true meaning
of this act, or of any other act heretofore made, that then the party so
substracting, or withdrawing the same, may or shall be convented and sued in
the Kings Ecclesiastical court, Suits for withholing of tyths shall be in the
Eccllesiasticall Court and no where else.
by the party from whom the same shall be subtracted or withdrawn, to the
intent the Kings Judge Ecclesiastical shall and may, then and there, hear and
determine the same according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And that it
shall not be lawful unto the Parson, Vicar, Proprietory, Owner, or other their
Fermors, or deputies contrary to this act, to convent or sue such withholder of
tithes, obventions, or other duties aforesaid, before any other Judge, than
Ecclesiastical. And if any Archbishop, Bishop, Chancellor, or other Judge
Ecclesiastical, give any sentence in the foresaid causes of tithes,
obventions, profits, emoluments and other duties aforesaid, or in any of them
(and no appeal no prohibition hanging) and the party condemned do not obey
the said sentence, that then it shall be lawful to every such Judge
Ecclesiastical, to excommunicate the said party, so as before condemned, and
disobeying, in the which sentence of excommunication, if the said party
excommunicate wilfully stand and endure still excommunicate, by the space of
40. days next after, upon denunciation and publication thereof, in the Parish
Church, or the place, or Parish where the party so excommunicate is dwelling,
or most abiding, the said Judge Ecclesiastical, may then at his pleasure
signify to the King in his court of Chancery, of the state and condition of
the said party so excommunicate, and thereupon to require process De
excommunicato capiendo, to be awarded against every such person, as has been
so excommunicate.

The 13. of Elizabeth, Cha. 12. fol. 1099. Reformation of disorders in the
Ministers of the Church.
THat the Churches of the Queens Majesty's Dominions may be served with Pastors
of sound Religion: be it inacted by the authority of this Present Parliament,
That every person under the degree of a Bishop, which does, or shall pretend to
be a Priest or Minister of Gods holy word and Sacrament, by reason of any other
form of institution, Consecration, 3. Ed 6. 12. 5. Ed. 6. 1.
or ordering, than the form set forth by Parliament in the time of the late
King of most worthy memory, King Edward the sixth, or now used in the reign of
our most gracious Sovereign Lady, before the feast of the Nativity of Christ
next following, shall in the presence of the Bishop or Guardian of the
spiritualities of some one diocese, where he has, or shall have
Ecclesiastical living, declare his assent, and Dyer fo. 377.
subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the confession
of the true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a
book imprinted, entitled, Articles, whereupon it was agreed by the Arch
Bishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London in the year of our Lord God, a thousand five
hundred sixty and two, according to the computation of the Church of England,
for the avoiding of the diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of
consent touching true Religion, put forth by the Queens authority: and shall
bring from such Bishop or Guardian of spiritualties, in writing under his seal
authentic, a testimonial of such assent and subscription, and openly on some
Sunday in the time of some public service afternoon, in every Church where
by reason of any Ecclesiastical living he ought to attend, read both the said
testimonial, and the said Articles upon pain that every such person which shall
not before the said Feast do as is above appointed, shall be Cook l. 6. fo. 29.
(ipso facto) deprived, and all his Ecclesiastical promotions shall be void,
as if he then were naturally dead.

And that if any person Ecclesiastical, or which shall have Ecclesiastical
living, shall advisedly maintain or affirm any doctrine directly contrary or
repugnant to any of the said Articles, and being convented before the Bishop of
the Diocese, or the Ordinary, or before the Queens Highness Commissioners in
causes Ecclesiastical, shall persist therein, or not revoke his error, or
after such revocation eftsoons affirm such untrue doctrine: such maintaining
or affirming, and persisting, or such eftsoon affirming, shall be just cause to
deprive such person of his Ecclesiastical promotions: And it shall be lawful
to the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Ordinary, or the said Commissioners, to
deprive such persons so persisting, or lawfully convicted of such eftsoons
affirming, and upon such sentence of deprivation pronounced, he shall be indeed
deprived.

And that no person, shall hereafter be admitted to any Benefice with Cure,
except he then be of the age of three and twenty years at the least, and a
Deacon, and shall first have subscribed the said Articles in presence of the
Ordinary, and publicly read the same in the Parish Church of that benefice
with declaration of his unfeigned assent to the same. And that every person
after the end of this Session of Parliament to be admitted to a benefice with
Cure, except that within two months after his induction, he do publicly
read the said Articles in the same Church, whereof he shall have Cure, in the
time of Common Prayer there, with declaration of his unfeined assent thereto,
and be admitted to minister the Sacrament within one year after his induction,
if he be not so admitted before, shall be upon every such default, ipso facto,
immediately deprived.

And that no person now permitted by any dispensation or otherwise, shall
retain any Benefice with cure, being under the age of one and twenty years, or
not being Deacon at the least, or which shall not be admitted as is aforesaid,
within one year next after the making of this act, or within six months after
he shall accomplish the age of 24. years, on pain that such his dispensation
shall be merely void.

And that none shall be made Minister, or admitted to preach or administer the
Sacraments, being under the age of 24. years, nor unless he first bring to the
Bishop of that Diocese from men known to the Bishop to be of sound Religion, a
Testimonial both of his honest life, and of his professing the doctrine
expressed in the said Articles: nor unless he be able to answer and render to
the Ordinary an account of his faith in Latin, according to the said Articles,
or have special gift and ability to be a Preacher: nor shall be admitted to
the order of Deacon or Ministry, unless he shall first subscribe to the said
Articles.

And that none hereafter shall be admitted to any Benifice with Cure, of or
about the value of thirty pounds yearly in the Queens Books, unless he shall
then be a Batchelour of Divinity, or a Preacher lawfully allowed by some Bishop
within this Realm, or by one of the Universities of Cambridge or Oxford.

And that all admissions to Benefices, Institutions, and inductions to be made
of any person contrary to the form or any provision of this Act, and all
tolerations, dispensations, qualifications, and licenses, whatsoever to be made
to the contrary hereof, shall be merely void in law, as if they never were.

Provided always, that no title to confer or present by Dyer fo. 377. 346.
369. Co. ll 6. fo. 29.
lapse, shall accrue upon any deprivation, ipso facto, but after six months
after notiec of such deprivation given by the Ordinary to the Patron.

The 1. of James Chap. 10. fol. 1262. Nothing shall be taken for the report of
a Case referred by any Court
FOrasmuch as all exactions, extortions and corruptions are odious, and
prohibited, in all well governed Commonweals, Be it inacted, that no person,
to whom any order or cause shall be committed or referred, by any of the Kings
Judges, or Courts at Westminster, or any other Court shall directly or
indirectly, or by any art, shift, color or device, have, take, or receive, any
money, fee, reward, covenant, obligation, promise, agreement, or any other
thing, for his report or Certificate by writing, or otherwise, upon pain of the
forfeiture of 100. l. for every such Report or Certificate, and to be deprived
of his office and place in the same Court: the one moity of the said
forfeitures to be our Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors, the
other moity to the party grieved, which will sue for the same, at any time
during the said suit, or within one year after the same cause discontinued or
decreed, and in his default of such suit to him or them that will sue for the
same, by original Writ, Bill, plaint, or Information in his Majesty's high
Court of Star Chamber, or in any his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster,
in which suit, by Writ, Bill, plaint, or Information, no wager of Law, Essoin,
Privilege, Supersedeas, Protection, or any other delay, shall be suffered or
admitted.

Provided nevertheless, that it shall be lawful for the Clerk to take for
his pains for writing of every such Report or Certificate, 12. d. for the
first side, and 2. for every side after, and no more, upon pain to forfeit 10.
s. for every penny taken over and above the said sum, to be had and recovered,
as aforesaid.

Having given you the most material Statutes, that I conceive at present makes
for your most advantage, that I can find in the Statutes at large, I shall here
insert three or four Statutes made this present Parliament, that in my
judgment is extraordinary well worth your knowledge and understanding, the
first thus follows.

Anno 17. Caroli Regis. An Act for regulating of the Privy Council, and for
taking away the Court commonly called, the Star Chamber.
WHereas by the GREAT 9. H. 3. 29.
CHRTER many times confirmed in Parliament, It is inacted, that no freeman
shall be taken or imprisoned or disseised of his free hold or Liberties or free
Customs, or be Outlawed or exiled or otherwise destroyed, and that the King
will not pass upon him, or condemn but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or
by the Law of the Land; And by another Statute made in the 5. E 3. 9.
fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the third, It is inacted, That no man
shall be attached by any accusation, nor fore-judged of life or lim, nor his
Lands, Tenements, Goods, nor Chattels seized into the Kings hands against the
form of the GREAT CHARTER, and the law of the land. And by another Statute
made in the five and twentieth year 25 E. 3. 4.
of the reign of the same King Edward the third, It is accorded, assented and
established, that none shall be taken by petition, or suggestion made to the
King or to his Council, unless it be by Indictment or Presentment of good and
lawful people of the same Neighborhood where such deeds be done, in due
manner, or by Process made by Writ original at the Common Law, and that none
be put out of his Franchise or Freehold, unless he be by duty brought in, to
answer, and fore-judged of the same by the course of the Law, and if any thing
be done against the same, it shall be redressed and holden for none. And by
another Statute made in the 28 year 28. E. 3. 3.
of the Reign of the same King Edward the third, It is amongst other things
inacted, that no man of what estate or condition soever he be, shall be put out
of his Lands or Tenements, nor taken nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, without
being brought in to answer by due process of Law. And by another Sta^^te made
in the 42. year 42. Ed. 3. 3.
of the Reign of the said King Edward the third. It is enacted that no man be
put to answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by
due Process and Writ original, according to the old Law of the Land, and if
any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for
error. And by another Statute made in the 36. year of 36. Ed. 3.
the same King Edward the third, It is amongst other things inacted, That all
Pleas which shall be pleaded in any courts before any the Kings Justices, or in
his other places, or before any of His other Ministers, or in the Courts and
places of any other Lords within the Realm, shall be entered and enrolled in
Latin. And whereas by the Statute made in the third year of King Henry the
seventh, power is given to the Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer of England for
the time being, and the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or two of them,
calling unto them a Bishop and a Temporal Lord of the Kings most honorable
Council, and the two chief Justices of the Kings Bench and common Pleas for
the time being, or other two Justices in their absence to proceed, as in that
Act is expressed, for the punishment of some particular offenses therein
mentioned. And by the Statute made in the one and twentieth year of King Henry
the eighth, The President of the Council is associated to join with the Lord
Chancellor and other Judges in the said Statute, of the third of Henry the
seveth mentioned, But the said Judges have not kept themselves to the points
limited by the said Statute, but have undertaken to punish where no law does
warrant, and to make Decrees for things having no such authority, and to
inflict heavier punishments then by any law is warranted.

And forasmuch as all matters examinable, or determinable before the said
Judges, or in the Court commonly called the Star Chamber, may have their proper
remedy and redress, and their due punishment, and correction by the Common Law
of the Land, and in the ordinary course of justice elsewhere; And forasmuch as
the reasons and motives inducing the erection and continuance of that Court do
now cease, and the proceedings, Censures, and Decrees of that Court, have by
experience been found to be an intolerable burden to the Subject, and the
means to introduce an Arbitrary power and Government, And forasmuch as the
Council Table, has of late times assumed unto it self a power to intermeddle
in Civil causes and matters, only of private interest between party and party,
and have adventured to determine the Estates and Liberties of the Subject,
contrary to the Law of the Land, and the rights and privileges of the Subject,
by which great and manifold mischiefs, and inconveniences have arisen and
happened, and much incertainty by means of such proceedings has been conceived
concerning men's rights, and estates; For settling whereof, and preventing the
like in time to come.

Be it Ordained and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament. That the
said Court commonly called the Star Chamber, and all Jurisdiction, power, and
authority, belonging unto, or exercised in the same Court, or by any of the
Judges, Officers, or Ministers thereof, be from the first day of August, in the
year of our Lord God, 1641. clearly and absolutely dissolved, taken away, and
determined, and that from the said first day of August, neither the Lord
Chancellor, or Keeper of the great Seal of England, the Lord Treasurer of
England, the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or President of the Council,
nor any Bishop, Temporal Lord, Privy Councellor, or Judge, or Justice
whatsoever, shall have any power, or authority to hear, examine, or determine
any matter, or thing whatsoever, in the said Court commonly called the
Star Chamber, or to make, pronounce, or deliver any Judgment, Sentence, Order,
or Decree, or to do any Judicial, or Ministerial Act in the said Court; And
that all and every Act, and Acts of Parliament, and all and every Article,
clause and sentence in them, and every of them, by which any Jurisdiction,
power, or authority is given, limited, or appointed unto the said Court
commonly called the Star Chamber, or unto all^ or any the Judges, Officers, or
Ministers thereof, or for any proceedings to be had, or made in the said Court,
or for any matter, or thing to be drawn into question, examined, or determined
there, shall for so much as concerns the said Court of Star Chamber, and the
power and authority thereby given unto it, be from the said first day of August
repealed, and absolutely revoked and made void.

And be it likewise enacted. That the like jurisdiction now used and exercised
in the Court before the President, and Council in the Marches of Wales, and
also in the Court, before the President, and Council established in the
Northern parts: And also in the Court, commonly called the Court of the Duchy
of Lancaster, held before the Chancellor, and Council of that Court: And also
in the Court of Exchequer, of the County Palatine of Chester, held before the
Chamberlain and Council of that Court; The like jurisdiction being exercised
there, shall from the said first day of August 1641; be also repealed, and
absolutely revoked and made void, any Law, prescription, custom, or usage, Or
the said Statute made in the third year of King Henry the seventh; Or the
Statute, made the one and twentieth of Henry the eighth, Or any Act, or Acts of
Parliament heretofore had, or made to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding; And that from henceforth no Court, Council, or place of
Judicature shall be erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed within this
Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall have, use, or exercise the
same, or the like Jurisdiction, as is, or has been used, practiced, or
exercised in the said Court of Star Chamber.

Be it likewise declared, and enacted by authority of this present Parliament,
That neither his Majesty, nor his Privy Council, have, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, power or authority, by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libell,
or any other Arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine or draw into question,
determine, or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, or
Chattels, of any the Subjects of this Kingdom; But that the same ought to be
tried, and determined in the ordinary Courts of justice, and by the ordinary
course of the law.

And be it further provided, and enacted, That if any Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the great Seal of England, Lord Treasurer, Keeper of the Kings
privy Seal, President of the Council, Bishop, Temporal Lord, Privy
Councellor, Judge, or Justice whatsoever, shall offend or do any thing
contrary to the purp^rt, true intent and meaning of this Law, Then he or they
shall for such offense, forfeit the sum of five hundred pounds of lawful
money of England, unto any party grieved, his Executors, or Administrators, who
shall really prosecute for the same, and first obtain judgment thereupon, to
be recorded in any Court of Record at Westminster, by action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoine, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid,
Prayer, Privilege, Injunction, or Order of restraint shall be in any wise,
prayed, granted, or allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance. And if any
person, against whom any such Judgment, or Recovery shall he had as aforesaid,
shall after such Judgment, or Recovery offend again in the same, then he, or
they for such offense, shall forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds, of
lawful money of England, unto any party grieved, his Executors, or
Administrators, who shall really prosecute for the same, and first obtain
Judgment thereupon to be Recorded in any Court of Record at Westminster, by
action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in which no Essoine, Protection,
Wager of Law, Aid, Prayer; Privilege, Injunction, or Order of Restraint, shall
be in any wise prayed, granted, or allowed nor any more then one Imparlance.
And if any person against whom any such second Judgment, or Recovery shall be
had as aforesaid, shall after such Judgment, or Recovery offend again in the
same kind, and shall be thereof duly convicted, by Indictment, Information, or
any other lawful way, or means, that such persons so convicted, shall be from
thenceforth disabled, and become by virtue of this Act incapable, Ipso facto,
to bear his, and their said Office, and Offices respectively, and shall be
likewise disabled to make any Gift, Grant, Conveyance, or other disposition of
any his Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, or Chattels, or to make any
benefit of any Gift, Conveyance, or Legacy to his own use.

And every person so offending shall likewise forfeit and loose unto the party
grieved, by any thing done contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Law,
his trebble damages, which he shall sustain, and be put unto by means, or
occasion of any such Act, or thing done, the same to be recovered in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Essoine, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid, Prayer,
Privilege, Injunction or Order of Restraint, shall be in any wise Prayed,
Granted, or Allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance.

And be it also provided and enacted, That if any person shall hereafter be
committed, restrained of his liberty, or suffer imprisonment by the Order or
Decree of any such Court of Star Chamber, or other Court aforesaid, now, or at
any time hereafter having, or pretending to have the same or li^e jurisdiction,
Power or Authority to commit, or imprison as aforesaid, Or by the Command or
Warrant of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors in their own person,
or by the Command or Warrant of the Councell-board, or any of the Lords, or
other of his Majesty's Privy Council, that in every such case every person so
committed, restrained of his liberty, or suffering imprisonment upon demand or
motion made by his Council, or other employed by him for that purpose, unto
the Judges of the Court of Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, in open Court, shall
without delay, upon any pretense whatsoever, for the ordinary Fees usually paid
for the same, have forthwith granted unto him a writ of Habeas Corpus to be
directed generally unto all and every Sheriffs, Jailer, Minister, Officer, or
other person in whose custody the party so committed or restrained shall be,
and the Sheriffs, Jailer, Minister, Officer, or other person, in whose custody
the party so committed or restrained shall be, shall at the return of the said
writ and according to the command thereof, upon due and convenient notice
thereof given unto him, at the charge of the party who requires or procures
such Writ, and upon security by his own bond given, to pay the charge of
carrying back the prisoner, if he shall be remanded by the Court, to which he
shall be brought, as in like cases has been used, such charges of bringing up
and carrying back the prisoner, to be always ordered by the Court, if any
difference shall arise thereabout, bring or cause to be brought the body of the
said party so committed, or restrained, unto and before the Judges or Justices
of the said Court, from whence the same writ shall issue in open Court, and
shall then likewise certify the true cause of his deteinour, or imprisonment,
and thereupon the Court within three Court days after such return made and
delivered in open Court, shall proceed to examine or determine whether the
cause of such Commitment appearing upon the said return be just and legal, or
not, and shall thereupon do what to justice shall appertain, either by
delivering, bailing, or remanding the prisoner. And if any thing shall be
otherwise wilfully done or omitted to be done by any Judge, Justice, Officer,
or other person before mentioned, contrary to the direction and true meaning
hereof, That then such person so offending shall forfeit to the party grieved,
his trebble damages, to be recovered by such means and in such manner, as is
formerly in this Act limited and appointed for the like penalty to be sued
for and recovered.

Provided always and be it enacted That this Act, and the several Clauses
therein contained shall be taken and expounded to extend only to the Court of
Star Chamber, and to the said Courts holden before the President and Council
in the Marches of Wales, and before the President and Council in the Northern
parts; And also to the Court commonly called the Court of the Duchy of
Lancaster, holden before the Chancellor and Council of that Court: And also in
the Court of Exchequer of the County Palatine of Chester, held before the
Chamberlain and Council of that Court; And to all Courts of like Jurisdiction
to be hereafter erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed as aforesaid, And
to the warrants and Directions of the Councell-board, and to the Commitments,
restraints, and imprisonments of any person or persons made, commanded, or
awarded by the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors in their own person,
or by the Lords and others of the Privy Council, and every one of them.

And lastly, provided, and be it enacted, That no person or persons shall be
sued, impleaded, molested, or troubled, for any offense against this present
Act, unless the party supposed to have to offended, shall be sued or impleaded
for the same within of two years at the most after such time wherein the said
offense shall be committed.

Anno XVII. Caroli Regis. An Act for the declaring unlawful and void the late
proceedings touching Ship money, and for the vacating of all Records and
Process concerning the same.
Whereas diverse Writs of late time, issued under the Great Seal of England,
commonly called Shipwrits, for the charging of the Ports, Towns, Cities,
Boroughs, and Counties of this Realm respectively, to provide and furnish
certain Ships for his Majesty's service. And whereas upon the execution of the
same Writs, and Returns of Certioraries thereupon made, and the sending the
same by Mittimus into the Court of Exchequer, Process has bin thence made
against sundry persons pretended to be charged by way of contribution, for the
making up of certain sums assessed for the providing of the said Ships, and in
especial in Easter Term, in the thirteenth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord the King that now is a Writ of Scire facias was awarded out of
the Court of Exchequer, to the then Sheriff of BVCKINGHAM-SHIRE, against JOHN
HAMDEN Esquire to appear and show cause, why he should not be charged with a
certain sum so assessed upon him, upon whose appearance and demurrer to the
proceedings therein, the Barons of the Exchequer, adiourned the same case into
the Exchequer Chamber, where it was solemnly argued diverse days and at length
it was there agreed by the greater part of all the Justi^es of the Courts of
Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, and of the Barons of the Exchequer there
assembled, that the said John Hambden should be charged with the said sum so
as aforesaid assessed on him; The maine grounds and reasons of the said
Justices and Barons which so agreed, being that when the good and safety of the
Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, the King
might by writ under the Great Seal of England, command all his Subjects of
this his Kingdom, at their charge to provide and furnish such number of Ships
with Men, Victuals, and Munition, and for such time as the King should think
sit, for the defense and safeguard of the Kingdom, from such danger and peril,
and that by Law the King might compel the doing thereof, in case of refusal,
or refractarinesse, and that the King is the sole Judge both of the danger, and
when, and how the same is to be prevented, and avoided, according to which
grounds and reasons, a^ the Justices of the said courts of Kings Bench, and
Common Pleas, and the said Barons of the Exchequer having bin formerly
consulted with by his Majestis command, had set their hands to an
extraiudiciall opinion expressed to the same purpose, which opinion with their
names thereunto was also by his Majesty's command enrolled in the Courts of
Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, and likewise entered among
the Remembrances of the Court of Star Chamber, and according to the said
agreement of the said Justices, and Barons, judgment was given by the Barons
of the Exchequer, that the said JOHN HAMPDEN should be charged with the said
sum so assessed on him; And whereas some other Actions and Process depend,
and have depended in the said Court of Exchequer, and in some other Courts
against other persons, for the like kind of charge, grounded upon the said
Writs, commonly called SHIPWRITS, all which Writs, and proceedings as
aforesaid, were UTTERLY against the Law of the Land.

Be it therefore declared and enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, That the said charge imposed upon the Subject, for the
providing and furnishing of Ships, commonly called Ship Money, and the said
extraiudiciall opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs, and
every of them, and the said agreement or opinion of the greater part of the
said Justices and Barons, and the said Judgment given against the said JOHN
HAMPDEN were, and are contrary to, and against the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, the right of property, the liberty of the Subjects former resolutions in
Parliament, and the PETITION OF RIGHT made in the third year of the Reign of
his Majesty that now is.

And it is further declared and enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all
and every the Particulars prayed or desired in the said PETITION OF RIGHT,
shall from henceforth be put in execution accordingly, and shall be firmly and
strictly holden and observed, as in the same PETITION THEY ARE PRAYED AND
EXPRESSED, and that all and every the Records and Remembrances of all and every
the Judgment, Inrolements, Entry and proceedings as aforesaid, and all and
every the proceedings whatsoever, upon or by pretixt or color of any of the
said Writs, commonly called Shipwrits, and all and every the Dependents on any
of them, shall be deemed and adjudged to all intents, constructions, and
purposes to be utterly void and disannulled, and that all and every the said
Judgment, Inrolments, Entryes, Proceedings, and Dependents of what kind
soever, shall be vacated and cancelled in such manner and form as Records use
to be that are vacated.

Anno XVII. Caroli Regis. An Act for the prevention of vexatious proceedings
touching the Order of Knighthood.
Whereas upon pretext of an ancient custom, or usage of this Realm of
England, That men of full age being not Knights, and being seized of Lands or
Rents, of the yearly value of forty pounds, or more (especially if their
seizing had so continued by the space of three years next past) might be
compelled by the Kings writ, to receive or take upon them the order or dignity
of Knighthood, or else to make Fine for the discharge or respite of the same;
Several Writs about the beginning of his Majesty's reign issued out of the
Court of Chancery, for Proclamations to be made in every County to that
purpose, and for certifying the names of all such persons, and for summoning
them personally to appear in the Kings presence before a certain day, to be
there ready to receive the said Order or Dignity: Upon return of which writs,
and transmitting the same with their Returns into the Court of Exchequer, and
upon other Writs for further inquiry of the names of such persons issuing out
of the said Court of Exchequer, Process by Distringas was thence made against
a very great number of persons, many of which were altogether unfit, in regard
either of estate or quality, to receive the said Order or Dignity, and very
many were put to grievous Fines and other vexations for the same, although in
truth it were not sufficiently known how, or in what sort, or where they, or
any of them should, or might have addressed themselves for the receiving the
said Order or Dignity, and for saving themselves thereby from the said Fines,
Process, and vexations: And whereas its most apparent that all and every such
proceedings, in regard of the matter therein pretended, is altogether useless
and unreasonable; May it therefore please your most Excellent Majesty that it
be by authority of Parliament declared and enacted.

And be it declared and enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons in this Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, That from henceforth no person or persons of what condition, quality,
estate or degree so ever, shall at any time be distrained or otherwise
compelled by any writ, or process of the Court of Chancery, or Court of
Exchequer, or otherwise by any means whatsoever, to receive or take upon him
or them respectively, the Order or Dignity of KNIGHTHOOD nor shall suffer or
undergo any fine, trouble, or molestation whatsoever, by reason or color of
his or their having not received, or not taken upon him or them the said order
or dignity: And that all and every Writ or Process whatsoever, and all and
every proceeding which shall hereafter be had or made contrary to the intent of
this Act, shall be deemed and adjudged to be utterly void: and that all and
every Process proceeding, and Charge now depending by reason or color of the
said pretended custom, or writs aforesaid, or of any the dependants thereof,
shall from henceforth cease and stand, be and remain discharged and utterly
void; Any former Law or Custom, or any pretense of any former Law or Custom,
or any other matter whatsoever to the Contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

I shall conclude this collection at present with the Bill of Attainder, past
against Thomas Earl of Strafford this present Parliament, as I find it printed
in the 303. page of a book printed for Will. Cook at Furnifalls Inn gate in
Holbourne 1641. called Speeches and Passages of this Parliament, from the 3.
November. 1640. to this instant Inn 1641. which thus follows.

The Bill of Atainder that passed against Thomas Earl of STRAFFORD.
WHereas the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, in this
present Parliament assembled, have, in the name of themselves, and of all the
Commons of England, impeached Thomas, Earl of Strafford of high Treason, for
endeavoring to subvert the Ancient and Fundamental Laws and Government of
his Majesty's Realms of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government against Law in the said Kingdoms; and for exercising a
tyrannous and exhorbitant power, over and against the Laws of the said
Kingdoms, over the Liberties, Estates, and Lives of his Majesty's Subjects;
and likewise for having by his own authority, commanded the laying and
asseising of Soldiers upon his Subjects in Ireland, against their consents, to
compel them to obey his unlawful commands and orders made upon paper
Petitions, in causes between party and party, which accordingly was executed
upon diverse of his Majesty's Subjects in a warlike manner, within the said
Realm of Ireland; and in so doing did LEVY WAR against the Kings Majesty
and his liege people in that Kingdom; And also for that he upon the unhappie
Dissolution of the last Parliament did slander the House of Commons to his
Majesty, and did council and advise his Majesty, that he was loose and
absolved from the rules of Government, and that he had an Army in Ireland, by
which he might reduce this Kingdom; for which he deserves to undergo the
pains and forfeitures of high Treason.

And the said Earl has been also an Incendiary of the wars, between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland: all which offenses have been sufficiently
proved against the said Earl upon his impeachment.

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords
and Commons, in this present Parliament, and by authority of the same, that the
said Earl of Strafford for the heinous crimes and offenses aforesaid, stand,
and be adjudged and attainted of high Treason, and shall suffer such pain of
death, and incur the forfeitures of his Goods, and Chattells, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of any estate of freehold or Inheritance in the
said Kingdoms of England and Ireland, which the said Earl, or any other to his
use, or in trust for him, have or had the day of the first sitting of this
present Parliament, or at any time since.

Provided that no Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices whatsoever, shall
adiudge or interpret any Act or thing to be Treason, nor in any other manner
than be or they should or ought to have done before the making of this Act, and
as if this Act had never been had or made. Saving always unto all and singular
persons and bodies, politic and corporal, their Heirs and Successors,
others then the said Earl and his Heirs, and such as claim by, from, or under
him, all such right, title, and interest, of, in, and to all and singular, such
of the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as he, they, or any of them,
had before the first day of this present Parliament, any thing herein contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided that the passing of this present act, and his Majesty's assent
thereunto, shall not be any determination of this present Sessions of
Parliament, but that this present Session of Parliament, and all Bills and
matters whatsoever depending in Parliament, and not fully enacted or
determined. And all Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which have their
continuance until the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall remain,
continue, and be in full force, as if this Act had not been.

Now after these small collection of Statutes. I shall give you some general
heads of things that I conceive are very necessary for you to know, for the
preservation of your lives, liberties, and estates, in this murdering robing
plundering, and law and liberty destroying age, and because tithes are of such
concernment to all the honest and nown substantive free men of England; and so
daily a grievance to the conscientious and moral just men of this Kingdom, by
reason of the Priests and persons coveteous endeavoring to rob the people of
there truly come by goods, which they have no right unto, either by the Laws
of God, reason, equity or nature, against which that you may be the better
fortified, I shall insert here the plea and answer of William Brown unto the
bill of the parson of Stepny, with some marginall notes upon it, and some other
things depending upon it. The plea thus follows.

The Plea and answer of William Brown, one of the defendants to the Bill of
complaint of Josuah Hoyle, entitled by the said bil Doctor of Divinity, and
vicar of the Parochial church of Stepney, alias Stichen heath in the County of
Midlesex pretended debtor to the Kings Majesty that now is.
THe said defendant by protestation not confessing nor acknowledging any thing
in the said bil of complaint material against the said defendant to be true,
but rather devised and set forth of purpose to put him this defendant to
wrongful vexation costs and charges, and expenses in Law; for plea says, that
by the plantifes own showing forth, the complainant has no just cause to sue
this defendant upon his said bill in this honouable Court, neither is this
defendant compellable to answer the same, for that the said complainant by his
said bil alleges and says, that there is and time out of mind (where of
the memory of man is not to the contrary) has been an ancient custom and
usage that the inhabitants of the said parish, have always paid unto the
Vicars of the said parish for the time being, a composition rate for milch
Cowes, orchards, gardens, lands, and sowes, and oblations of poultry, as in the
said bil of complaint is set forth, which if any such custom and usage be, the
same is triable at the COMMON law, This is a mistake of the council that drew
the plea, for tithes by the statute law of this Kingdom, are only recoverable
in the ecclesiastical courts, and not at the common law, as fully and clearly
appears by the 1 of Ed. 6. chap. 13. and the ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is
totally abolished by act of Parliament, this present Parliament anno Caroli
Regis 17. so that by law the Parsons can recover no tithes.
and not in this honorable Court upon the said bill of Complaint: And
therefore this Defendant humbly prays judgment of this honorable Court,
whether he shall make any further answer to the said complainants, Bill of
Complaints. Nevertheless if he this Defendant shall be ordered to make any
further, or other answer unto the said Complainants Bill of Complaint, then and
not otherwise, this Defendant, all benefit and advantage of exception to the
uncertainties and insufficiencies of the said Complainants said Bill, still to
this Defendant now, and at all times hereafter saved, for further answer
thereunto, this Defendant says; That he verily believes it to be true, that
for some hundred of years while the Kingdom groaned under the Papal yoke,
and was subject to the Popes supremacy, Tyths and certain manner of Tything
and other oblations were exacted and taken by the PAPAL Bi^hops, Parsons,
Vicars, and Curates of many Parishes, and of a great part of this Kingdom,
until ^he Popes supremacy and jurisdiction within this kingdom, and all
appeal to the sea of Rome were abrogated and annulled by diverse several
Statutes. Penalty for maintaining the authority of the Bishop of Rome 5. Eliz.
chap 1. Penalty to draw any subjects from their ^bedience to the King to the
Roman religion. Idem.
And this Defendant verily believes, that the Popish Bishops, Parsons, and
Vicars, and their substitutes, since retained and continued in the Church of
England, did afterward receive and take tithes, and certain manner of tything
and other oblations of several parishes within this kingdom, for their wages,
Cure and reading the Book of Common Prayer. And this Defendant says, that the
said Inhabitants of the said Parish, in the said bill mentioned or any of them,
did never ^ay or were ever accustomed to pay unto any Vicars of the said
parish, the said composition for milch Cowes, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, and
Sowes, or other oblations as in the said bill is, and set forth, or any other
composition or rate for the same, but only to such Vicars thereof as were made
and ordained Ministers by the Bishops, some or one of them. The names,
functions and styles of Bishops are taken away. Ord. 9. October. 1646. and their
Episcopal jurisdiction and power with their tithes, vicarages, personages, etc.
And what composition or rate for milch Cowes, Orchards, Gardens, Lands or
Sowes, or other oblations the said Inhabitants or any of them did pay unto any
of the said Vicars for the time being of the said parish in the said Bill
mentioned, since the abolishing of the Popes supremacy, the same was paid for
officiating, reading the book of Common Prayer, and administering, the
Sacraments, and preaching according to the Canons and constitutions of the
Bishops and their Clergy. See the 13. Eliz. chap. 12.
And what composition rate for tithes or other oblations this Defendant or any
of the said Inhabitants have paid unto the said Complainant, the same was
unduly exacted by the Complainant, so as the said complainant has no right nor
title by color of any such prescription or custom to have and demand the said
composition rate, for the premises or any of them, on this Defendant, as in the
said bill is set forth and demanded, for that by authority of this present
Parliament the function and Miniministrie of Bishops, Parsons, and Vicars are
abrogated and avoided. Hierarchy exterpated root and branch, and government by
Prelacy, whereof Vicars be part. See the Ordinances of the 9. of October. and the
16. November. 1646 2. part book decl. fol. 922. 932. see also the Covenant.
And likewise the book of Common prayer, and the administering of the
Sacraments, and preaching according to the Bishops Canons and injuctions by
authority of this present Parliament, utterly taken away and disannulled. See
the Ordinances of the 3. Ian. 1644. and 23. August, 1645. Parl. Decl. 2. part
fol. 715. 716.
And this Defendant does conceive no tyth or composition rate for tyth, nor any
other oblations for Poultrie are due by law, but have been taken no otherwise
then by Jewish or Popish institution, Tyths are not due iure divino, and at
this present there is no law to compel their payment. Cook Rep. 2. Quen. d.
Winchester.
and provision, as by the Statute made for the payment of tithes, and
oblations, whereunto reference being had will appear, the same being made only
for the maintenance of the Popish and prelaticall Clergy and Ministry and no
other. And he this Defendant believes is to be true, and hops to prove, that
neither by the law of God nor man, any tyths, composition, rates for tyths, or
other oblations for poultrie ought to be paid to any persons or Vicars or other
Ecclesisticall Minister, or Ministers whomsoever, for this Defendant says,
that by the Parliaments Protestation made by authority of this present
Parliament the 5. day of May, 1641. against popery and popish innovations, all
Laws, Customs, Acts and Ordinances for the payment of tyths or manner of
tything, ra^e or composition for tyths or other oblation to any parson or
Vicars of any parish within this Kingdom, their names and offices being
Popish, and Antichristian, the same having no foundation in the word of God are
utterly void and null. And this Defendant denies that he ever did, nor now
does combin, practice, or confederate with the other Defendants named in the
said Bill or any of them, or with any other person or persons whatsoever to
wrong the said Complainant, as in the said Complainants bill is untruly
suggested. And without that this defendant had and depastured within the said
Parish, eight and twenty Cowes within the said parish, as in the Complainants
bill is alleged, or that the Complainant is Debtor or Accountant to the King,
or that the said Complainant is unlawfully entitled to have, receive, and take
the Viccarage, tyth, or the composition, rate for tyth, and the said oblations
as were formerly paid to the POPISH VICCARS, HIS PREDICESSORS if in case the
same had been paid, as in the said bill is alleged. And without that any
other matter or thing in the said bill of complaint contained material or
effectual to be answered unto, and not herein fully answered unto, confessed
and avoided, traversed or denied is true: therefore this Defendant humbly,
prays to be dismissed out of this honorable Court, with his reasonable costs
and expenses in this behalf wrongfully had and sustained.

Mr Fage Senior Councellor.

But what just proceeding Mr. Brown had upon this Plea before the present
Barons of the Exchequer, his own Petition to themselves, and to the House of
Commons against them, will very fully demonstrate, the first of which thus
follows.

To the Right Honorable His Majesty's Barons of the Court of Exchequer.
The humble Petition of William Brown.
SHOWS,
THat Joshua Hoyle now Vicar of the Parish of Stepney, ever since he got the
Vicarage has been very troublesome, and vexatious, to your Petitioner, and
other the Parishioners there, endeavoring by illegal, forcible and indirect
ways and meaness, to extort from them tithes, and certain manner of tything,
which by law he could not demand nor they compelled to pay, as by their learned
council, they are informed and hope to prove, if they may have the benefit of
the Law, which is the inheritance of every freeborn, Englishman.

That under color of the Ordinance for tithes the said Mr. Hoyle did take from
your petitioner goods of a considerable value, for which your petitioner has
no satisfaction.

That the said Mr. Hoyle the more to vex your petitioner, causelessly served
your petitioner with a Subpena to answer a bill in the Court of exchequer for
pretended tithes, and other duties to which Bill your petitioner in Michaelmas
term last, answered by advise of his Council learned in the Law, diverse other
of the said parishioners being named defendants in the said Bill, but not
served till Easter term last, of purpose to put them to the more charges, and
weary them out with Multiplicity of Suits, and unnecessary Expenses in Law.

That the said Mr. Hoyle procured an Order of this Court that your Petitioner
should show cause by a certain day in the last Term why your petitioners
Plea, and Answer, should not be taken of the file as scandalous, and your
Petitioner ordered to pay cost, and make a further and better answer.

That your petitioner in obedience to the order of the Court by his council
Mr. Norbery and Mr. King, attended several days to show cause for allowing his
plea and answer, but when that cause was called upon, your petitioners
Councillors were not suffered to show forth to the Court the sufficiency in
Law of your petitioners said plea and answer, Baron Atkins telling your
petitioners counselors that Mr. Fage who subscribed the same, his hand should
never be received again in that court, and further threatened your petitioners
councillors saying that if they or any other Councillors should appear in
any such cause, should be debarred from pleading in that Court, whereupon
though the said Mr. Norbery and Mr. King were prepared able and ready and had
undertaken to maintain your petitioners said plea and answer to be good and
sufficient in law, was so overawed by Baron Atkins that for fear to offend him
and the Court they were silenced, and so without further debate, or Council
heard, your petitioners Plea was over ruled, and this Answer Judged scandalous,
and insufficient, and your petitioner further, ordered to pay forty shillings
cost, and make further answer.

That your petitioner is a freeman of England, and by the great Charter of
Liberty ought to be under the protection of the Law, and ought not to be
condemned unheard, neither agrees it with the honor and justice of this Court
to deny Council to plead and open their Clyents cases as was done in your
petitioners case, which your petitioner hopes you will rectify, and allow his
Council to be reheard, and to set forth the sufficiency in Law, of his Plea
and Answer, whereby your petitioner may not have cause, or occasion, to Appeal
from this Court, or complain of you to the Parliament for obstructing of
Justice, which if your petitioner receive not timely redress, and relief, in
the Promises, he must be constrained to do.

That without ever any order, or further process serving the said Mr. Hoyle
for want of further answer has prosecuted several processes of contempts
against your petitioner, and threatened to lay your petitioner in Goal, upon a
Commssion of Rebellion for the same, and has served your petitioner with a
Subpena for forty shillings cost upon your petitioners first plea, and answer,
which Mr. Hoyle will without doubt do, if your honor give not present order
for stay of further proceedings upon the said last Subpena, and process of
contempt already taken out against your petitioner.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, that you will be pleased for the love
and honor of justice and removeing the cause of your petitioners appeal from
this Court and complaining of you, that you will give direction for stay of the
said cost and proceedings upon the said processes of contempts against your
petitioner, and that you will declare and order that your Petitioners council
may be reheard without check or offense and allowed freely to show out to the
Court the sufficiency in Law of your petitioners plea and answer to the end
there may not be a failer of justice through you, and your petitioner left
without relief or remedy, by being denied to be heard upon the mirit and equity
of his cause according to Law, which in the worst of times, by the worst Judges
was never done to any either in the case of ship money, or any other cause as
Burton, Prinn, and Bastwicks cases, all which your petitioner refereth to your
honorable consideration. And prays as before he has prayed. etc.

William Brown.

To the right honorable the Commmons assembled in Parliament, the humble
petition of Will. Brown of Stepney alias Steben heath in the County of Midlesex.
SHOWS
THat Josua Hoyle, Vicar of the parish of Stepney aforesaid, in Michaelmas
term last, exhibited his bill in the Court of exchequer against your
petitioner, and diverse other parishioners there, for substraction of tithes, to
which bill your petitioner by his learned council pleaded and answered the
same term, but the said Mr. Hoyle obtained an order from that Court, for your
petitioner to show cause, why his plea, and answer should not be taken of the
file as scandalous.

That your petitioner according to the order of that Court, the 18. May last,
by his counsel Mr. NORBERY and Mr. KING offered to the Court to maintain his
said plea and answer, to be good and sufficient in Law, but Baron Atkins one of
the Barons of that Court, would not suffer your petitioners council to open
your petitioners cause, in a threatening manner telling them, that the
Counselor who subscribed your petitioners Plea and answer, should never be
allowed in that Court, and if they (meaning Mr. NORBERY and Mr. KING) or any
other Counselor did appear in any such cause, they should never again plead
in that Court, and so your petitioners said council were overawed, and
silenced, that without further heareing, or debate, the Court adjudged your
petitioners plea, and answer scandalous; and futher ordered Mr. Fage who signed
the same, his hand should never be allowed to any pleadings in that Court, and
your petitioner to pay forty shillings cost to Mr. Hoyle as by the order in the
Court in that cause will appear, which doing of the said Baron Atkins and the
said last recited Order are contrary to the rule of justice, and the great
Charter of Liberty, wherein it is said Justice and Right shall de denied to no
man.

That the said Mr. Hoyle since, without ever serving the said Order upon your
Petitioner, having procured several processes of contempts against him, for
want of further answer, and served him with a Subpena for the 40. s. cost, your
petitioner thereupon having petitioned the Barons of that Court for justice,
and to have liberty to show forth to the Court, the sufficiency in law of the
said plea and answer, which Mr. NORBERY and Mr. KING had before undertaken to
your petitioner to do, and offered to the Court if they might have been heard,
(as they were not) to have maintained for good and sufficient in law, which
petition hereunto annexed, Baron Trevers having read and acquainted his Brother
Atkins with the contents thereof, Baron Atkins replied and said, let Brown
complain if he will, I have done him justice, his business shall be no more
heard. And thus your Petitioner being deprived, and destitute of all means of
obtaining right and justice in that Court, is constrained for his own safety,
to forsake his own house and family, and live as an exile and fugitive, Mr.
Hoyle threatening to cast him into prison, upon the said Barons Order, which
doubtless he will do to your petitioners undoing, unless your petitioner be
protected by the justice of this honorable house.

That your petitioner has largely and many ways manifested his good affection
to the Parliament, in his free and voluntary gifts and contributions, over and
above his ability, and by his ready payment of all taxes and assessements,
having long voluntarily served the Parliament in this war against the enemy, to
the often endangering his life, and the much impoverishing his estate, having
lost 16. Horses in the Parliaments service, for which he has not had one penny
satisfaction, besides almost 200. l. due to him in Arrears for his service as a
Wagoner.

That as your Petitioner is informed Mr. Hoyle by law, cannot sue your
petitioner in any Court for substraction of Tyths, then in the Court Christian
so called, 2. and 3. Ed. 6. 13. Coo. li. 2. fol. 43.
the same being now taken away by authority of Parliament. See the act of the
17. of C.R. for abolution of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
And so Mr. Hoyle if in case the same were due, as they are not, he has no
means or the recovery of the same, but by the Ordinance of this present
Parliament, which your petitioner did never oppose whenever the said Mr.
Hoyle did take your petitioners goods upon the same, as sometimes he did
amounting to a considerable value.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays this honorable House will be pleased
to take your Petitioner under protection, to stay the contempts and illegal
proceedings of Mr. Hoyle in that Court against your petitioner, and to call the
said Barons of the Exchequer, and in particular Baron Atkins before you, to
answer this Petition, to the end according to your many Declarations, Promises,
and Protestations, justice may not be obstructed, or your Petitioner denied the
benefit of the law, or privilege of a free borne Denizon. And the said Barons
receive such condign punishment for their unjust dealing and proceedings
against your Petitioner, as shall seem meet and agreeable to the wisdom and
justice of this honorable House. The like not any of the Judges in the worst
of times durst ever do, that ever your Petitioner heard of: And your
Petitioner if he may be protected and allowed by this honorable House, to
prosecute this Petition, he will give security to make good the contents
thereof. And as in duty bounden, your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

Will. Brown.
Take notice and mark it well, that though tyths are by law to be sued for in
Ecclesiastical Courts only, yet trebble damages for none payment of tyths, are
to be sued for by the same Statute of the 2. and 3. Ed. 6 13. in Civil Courts
at the Common Law, and therefore the best plea to a bill of trebble damages, is
that you owe the Parson, etc, no tyths at all, and put him to prove the first.



Here you see what gallant Justice is to be found amongst the Judges at
Westminster Hall that the pleaders of honest causes cannot be suffered to
press the law freely for their Clyents, but must be threatened and commanded to
hold their peaces before they have pressed fully either law or reason for those
that hire them to be their mouths to do it for them.

Is this to perform their oath? which you may read before, page 10. In which
they swear to do equal law, and execution of right to all kinds of men, rich
and poor, without having regard to any person, or persons whatsoever; And that
they shall deny to no man common right, by the Kings letters, nor none other
man's, nor for no other cause, and in case any letters or commands shall come to
them, contrary to the law, that they shall do nothing by such letters or
commands, but proceed to execute the law notwithstanding.

Or is not this their dealing, with Mr. Brown and his Council a clear
demonstration of their breaking their Oaths? and absolutely forswearing
themselves. And therefore seeing neither Mr. Brown, not no man else that
complains to the parliament against the injustice of the Judges, can get the
least justice against them, is not this, and other of their visible breaking of
their Oaths a true and legal cause to indict them for perjury? upon which if
conviction follow, they are ipso facto, disabled for ever to sit Judges any
more, or to be witnesses in any causes whatsoever, betwixt party and party.

For this is to be taken notice of, that if a Jury bring in a false verdict
against the express evidence given in unto them, that thereupon by law, they
are to have their houses rased down to the ground, and never to be built
again, their trees pulled up by the roots, their ground to lie follow and wast,
without tillage or use, their names and their childrens to be infamous,
reproachful, and contemptable, etc. And therefore without doubt, the Judges
punishment for palpable injustice, must needs be much more then theirs. And an
excellent piece of justice, and worth the highest commendation, it was in King
Alfred, to hang 44* Justices in one year as murderers, for their false
judgments See Andrew Horns mirror of justice in English, chap. 5. Sect. 1. page
239 240 241. 242. etc printed for Man. Walbank at Grays Inn gate, 1646 where
all their crimes are set down, which book is most extraordinarily well worth
your reading.
.

But seeing the Parsons, Vicars, and curates cannot recover their tyths by law,
they have unjustly and illegally got up a custom, to come or send their
illegal Agents into men's grounds or houses, to take away their goods and
chattells, and men are so foolish as to let them, although by law, if any man
under any pretenc of authority whatever, shall dare to endeavor by force to
come into a free-mans house, unless it be under pretense of Treason or Felony
committed, or suspicion of Treason, or Felony, or to serve an execution after
Judgment for the King, the free man may stand upon his guard, as against so
many Thieves and Robbers; and if he shoot or kill them every one, I know
nothing to the contrary, but they have their mends in their own hands, and
they, nor none for them, can justly requ^e any of him or them, that so in his
or their own legal defense destroys them.

And if they take away your goods as usually they do, you have your remedy at
law by way of Replevie to get Which writs of Replevy, you may have out of the
Cusitore office belonging to every County, but get at one and the same time a
writ of Replevin, a writ of Al as and a writ of Pluries, which last Writ runs
with a penalty, and if the Sheriff do not execute it, there lies an
attachment against him, and in case he return that the goods are sold, and gone
before he could repleve them, or drove into another County, then you may have a
Capias in withernam to distrain and take the parties own goods, that caused the
first goods to be distrained, or any of those that had a hand in distraining,
and no supersedeas whatsoever will lie to control, or dam the writ, or hinder
the execution of it, which writs with all other in force, you may read in the
Law book called the Register, by the help of which, you may make all the
Parsons in England go whistle for their Tyths Which Register does very well
deserve your care and pains by authority to be translated into English.
your goods again, putting in bail to the Sheriff to answer the law against
him that distrained your goods, and so you shall bring him to a trial at law to
prove his title or clame to your goods, and this I conceive to be clear from
the Statutes of Marle bridge, in the 52. H. 3. Anno 1267. Chap. 1, 2, 3, 4. 15,
21. and 3. 8. 3. Chap. 17. Compared with Sir Edward Cooks Exposition upon those
several Statutes, in the 2. part of his Institutes, fol. 103, 104, 105, 106,
107. 131, 132, 133. 139 140, 141. 193, 194. and his discourse in his first part
Institutes, lib. 2. chap. 12. Sect. 219. fo. 143.

But that you may not rest in an implicit belief, I shall give you the fore
mentioned Statutes verbatum, which thus follows.

Chap. 1. fol. 16. The penalty for taking a distress wrongfully.
WHereas at the time of a commotion late stirred up within this Realm, and
also sithence many great men, and diverse other refusing to be justified by the
King and his Court, like as they ought and were wont in the time of the Kings
noble progenitors, and also in his time, but took great revenges and distresses
of their neighbors, and of other, until they had amends and fines at their
own pleasure. And further some of them would not be justified by the Kings
Officers, nor would suffer them to make delivery of such distresses as they had
taken of their own authority: It is provided, agreed, and granted, That all
persons as well of high as of low estate, shall receive Justice in the Kings
Court. And none from henceforth shall take any such revenge or distress of his
own authority without award of our Court, though be have damage or injury,
whereby he would have amends of his neighbor either higher or lower. And upon
the foresaid Article it is provided and granted, that if any from henceforth
take such revenges of his own authority, 11. H. 4. fo. 2. 47. Ed. 3. fo. 7. 18
Ed. 3. fo 48. 41. Ed. 3. fo. 26. 17. Ed. 3. fo. 9.
without award of the Kings Court, (as before is said) and be convict thereof,
he shall be punnished by fine, and that according to the trespass. And
likewise if one neighbor take a distress of another without award of the
Kings Court, whereby he has damage, he shall be punished in the same wise, and
that after the quantity of the trespass. And nevertheless sufficient and
full amends shall be made to them that have sustained loss by such distresses.

Chap. 2. None but suitors shall be destrained to come to a Court.
MOreover none (of what estate so ever he be) shall distrain any to come to his
Court, 41. E. 3. fo. 26 47. E. 3. fo. 7. Fitz. Bar. 281.
which is not of his Fee, or upon whom he has no Jurisdiction, by reason of
Hundred, or Bayliwick, nor shall take Distresses out of the Fee or place where
he has no Baliwick or Jurisdiction. And he that offends against this
Statute, shall be punished in like manner, and that according to the quantity
and quality of the Trespass. 3 Ed. 1. 16. Regist fo. 97.

Chap. 3. A Lord shall not pay a Fine for distraining his Tenant.
IF any, of what estate soever he be, will not suffer such Distresses as he
has taken, to be delivered by the Kings Officers, after the Law and Custom of
the Realm, or will not suffer summons, Attachments, or Executions of
Judgments given in the Kings Court, Fitz. Rascous 20. Bro Trespass 16. 384.
Fitz. Dan. 10. Fitz Heriot. 5.5. H 7. fo. 9.9. H 7. fo. 14.10. H. 7. fo. 2.10.
Ed. 4. fo. 7.9. H. 6. fo. 20. Fitz. Trespass 196. S. Ed. 1.17. Fitz. N. B. fo.
102. c. V. N. B. fol. 48.
to be done, according to the Law and Custom of the Realm, as is aforesaid,
he shall be punished in manner aforesaid, at one that will not obey the Law,
and that according to the quantity of the Offense. And if any, of what estate
soever he be, distrain his Tenant for Services and Customs being due unto him,
or for any other thing, for the which the Lord of the Fee has cause to
distraine, and after it is found, that the same services are not due, the Lord
shall not therefore be punished by Fine, as in the cases as foresaid, if he do
suffer the Distresses to be delivered according to the Law and Custom of the
Realm, but shall be amerced as hitherto has been used, and the Tenant shall
recover his damages against him.

Chap. 4. A distress shall not be driven out of the County. And it shall be
reasonable.
Fitz Bar 120. 275 Fitz. Distress 1, 2. 16. Fitz. Avowry 192. 30. Ass. pl,
38 29. Ed. 3 fo. 23 Kel. fo. 50. 41. Ed. 3. fo. 26. 29 Ed. 3. fo. 24. 42. Ed.
3. fo. 26. 3. Ed. 1. 16. 1. and 2. Ph. and M. 12. 51. H 3. 28. Ed. 1. 12.
NOne from henceforth shall cause any distress that he has taken, to be driven
out of the County where it was taken. And if one neighbor do so to another of
his own authority, and without judgment, he shall make fine (as above is said)
as for a thing done against the Peace. Nevertheless, if the Lord presume so to
do against his Tenant, he shall be grievously punished by amerciament.
Moreover, Distresses shall be reasonable, and not too great. And he that takes
great and unreasonable distresses, shall be grievously amerced for the excess
of such distresses. Regist. fo. 97.

Rast pla. fo. 216. Regist fo. 98. 183. St. 9. Ed. 2. 9 Fitz. N. B. fo. 90. 173
Co. lib. 8. fo. 60. 7. H. 7. fo. 1. 22. Ed. 4. fo. 49. Fitz. Bar 281. Fitz.
Trespass 188. Fitz. brief 511. 842. Fitz. Avowry 87. 221. 231.
Chap. 15. fol. 20. In what places Destresses shall not be taken.
IT shall be lawful for no man from henceforth, for any manner of cause, to
take Distresses out of his Fee, nor in the Kings high way, nor in the common
street, but only to the King or his Officers, having special authority to do
the same.

Chap. 20. fol 21. None but the King shall hold plea of false Judgment.
NO^e from henceforth (except our Lord the King) shall hold in his Court any
Plea of false judgment, Fitz. Faux Judgment 7, 8.10 14.26.1^ Ed. 3. chapter 6.
given in the Court of his Tenants: For such Plea specially belongs to the
Crown and Dignity of our Lord the King Regist. fol. 15. V. N. B. fo. 16. Fitz.
N. B. fo. 17. Rast. pla. fo. 342 Coke pla. fo. 305.

Chap. 21. fol 21. who may take Replevins of Distresses.
Dyer. fo. 245. Bro. Riots 2^3 Bro. Parl. 108 Fitz Return de Viscount 17 Co.
Inst. 145 b. 3. Ed. 1 chapter 17. Fitz. N B fo. 68. V. N, B. fo. 44.
IT is provided also, that if the Beasts of any man betaken, and wrongfully
withholden, the Sheriff, after complaint made to him thereof, may del^ver them,
without (...) gainsaying of him tha^ took the Beasts, if they were taken out
of Liberties. And if the Beasts were taken within any Liberty, and the
Bailiffes of the Liberty will not deliver them. then the Sheriff, for default
of those Bailiffes, shall cause them to be delivered, Regist. fo. 82. etc.

The 3. of Edward the 1. Chap. 17. fol. 27. The remedy if a destresse be
impounded in a Castle or Fortress.
IT is provided also, that if any from henceforth take the Beasts of other, and
cause them to be driven into a Castle or Fortress, and there within the close
of such Castle or Fortress, do withhold them against gage and pledges,
whereupon the beasts be s^lemnly demanded by the Sheriff or by some other
Bailiffe of the Kings at the suit of the plaintiff, the Sheriff or Bailiffe
taking with him the power of the ^here or Bayliwck do assay to make Replivin
of the Beasts, from him that took them, or from his Lord, or from other being
servants of the Lord (whatsoever they be) that are found in the place,
whereunto the beasts were chased: if any deforce him of the deliverance of the
Beasts, or that no man be found for the Lord or for him that took them, Bro.
Riot. 2. 3. 52. H. 3. 3. 13. Ed. 1. 39. V. N. B. fo. 43. 44 Regist. fo. 85. 52.
H. 3. 21. Regist. fol. 81. Fitz. N.B. fo. 68. F.
for to answer and make the deliverance, after such time as the Lord or taker
shall be admonished to make deliverance by the Sheriff or Bailiffe, if he be
in the Country, or near, or there whereas he may be conveniently warned by the
taker, or by any other of his to make deliverance, if he were out of the
Country when the taking was, and did not cause the Beasts to be delivered
incontinent, that the King for the trespass and despite shall cause the said
Castle or Fortress to be heaten down without recovery: And all the damages
that the plaintiff has sustained in his beasts, or in his gainure, or any
otherwise (after the first demand made by the Sheriff or Bailiffe of the
beasts) shall be restored to him double by the Lord, or by him that took the
beasts, if he have whereof: and if he have not whereof, he shall have it of the
Lord, at what time or in what manner the deliverance be made after that the
Sheriff or Bailiffe shall come to make deliverance. And it is to wit, that
where the Sheriff ought to return the Kings writ to the Bailife of the Lord of
the Castle, or Fortress, or to any other to whom the return belongs, if the
Bailife of the Franchise will no^ make deliverance after that the Sheriff has
made his return unto him, then shall the Sheriff do his office without
further delay, and upon the foresaid pains. And in like manner deliverance
shall be made by Attachment of the plaintiff made without writ, and upon the
same pain. And this is to be intended in all places where the Kings writ
lies. And if that be done in the Marches of Wales, or in any other place where
the Kings Writs be not current, the King which is sovereign Lord over all,
shall do right there unto such as will complain.

Now after this business of Tyths, which by the universal complaint against
it all over the Kingdom, appears to be an intolerable, and insupportable
burden, I shall a little open unto you, another mischief of far more
dangerous consequence, and that is the subvertion of our fundamental laws and
liberties; and the exercising of an Arbitrary, Tyrannical government, which I
find to be the principal crime laid to the charge of the late Earl of
Strafford, for which he lost his head upon the Tower Hill at London, in the
year 1641. And that it was his principal crime, appears clearly to me by his
Bill of Attainder, which you may read before. page 29. and by the first Article
of his impeachment, which as I find it printed in the 117. page of a book
called Speeches and Passages of this Parliament, from the 3. of November. 1640.
to June 1641. printed for Will. Crook at Furnifalls Inn gate, in Holbourne.
1641. The very words of which thus follows.

That he the said Thomas Earl of Strafford, has traitorously endeavored to
subvert the fundamental laws and government of the Realms of England and
Ireland, and in stead thereof to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against law, which he has declared by traiterous words, counsels,
and actions, and by giving His Majesty advice by force of Arms, to compel
his loyal Subjects to submit thereunto.

Now whether this very traitorous crime of the Lord of Strafford, be not really
acted since the wars ended, both by the present House of Lords, and by the
present Grandees in the Army, I think is obvious to every knowing, rational,
understanding, unbiosed man's eye in England; in that both of them have taken
upon them to meddle with things not within their cognizance or jurisdiction,
and to out men of their lives, liberties and properties, without any legal
process and proceeding, all the ordinary Courts of Justice in England being
open, where only and alone all causes whatsoever between party and parties
desidable by the laws of this land, are to be tried and determined and no
where else, it being as lawful for a Judge, Justice of peace, or a Constable
to make Laws, as for a House of Lords to execute Laws, their legal and proper
work, at most upon their own usurped principalls being to make new laws and
repeal old laws, to give their consent to raise money for the preservation of
the public, and to see it be rightly disposed of, (but they themselves ought
not in the least to finger it, much less by votes to give it to each other. it
being contrary to the Law of England for Fofees in tru^t (which they would have
us to believe they And it ^ but a b^ belief, s^ I say an^ will maintain it
against a^ the proc^ers of the present ^ House o^ Lords have in England, tha^
they have no more right to their pretended legislative ^ power the^ a thief
that by force tak^ my purse^ from me. Nor no more right to b^ called the
legislator^ of England, the^ a man to be called an honest woman's husband, that
by force and violence robs her of her virginity, and so commits a rape upon
her, and by threat to save her life compells her to hold her peace. And I
desire all the Commons of England seriously to consider how the Lords that flow
from William the Conquerers sword, and the mere will of his successors can
rationally pretend to a legislative power, when in their joint Declarations
with the present House of Commons they have declared the King their Creator
has none, but is bound by his Coronation oath to pass^ all such laws as the
folk or Commons shall choose, and what greater evil can there be in the world,
the^ seeing that all legislative power in the nature of it is Arbitrary, that
for life an arbitrary power should b^ placed in the Lords, and heriditary in
their sons, be they fools or knaves, therefore up with them by the roots, and
let no power hereafter be exercised in England, but what acknowledgly flows as
a trust from the people, or their Representatives, and who are subject as other
men to the Laws.
are) to give any thing to themselves, to punish all mayle Administrators of
Justice, and to hear and redress all appears upon eronious judgments, given
or made in any of the Courts in Westminster Hall, or elsewhere.

Yet notwithstanding have they Arbitrarily and Tyrannically summoned and
convened men before them (for things desideable, and determinable only at
Common Law) without any due process of Law, and have taken upon them, contrary
to all law, Justice* equity, and conscience, to be both Informers,
Prosecutors, Witnesses, Parties, Jury, and Judges, and thereupon have past
most illegal, arbitrary, and tyrannical censures upon the free Commons of
England, and thereupon have distroyed and outted them of their lives,
liberties, properties, free holds and estates, when as by the fundamental law
of the Land, no Judge whatsoever, can be Judge of matter of Law and fact both,
it being the proper right of the Jury of 12. men, of a man's Peers or Equals to
be Judge of matter of fact, which must be proved by legal witnesses duly
sworn, and not by the Complainer, Prosecutor, or Party, and then the Judge is
only to be Judge in matter of Law.

But in the first place I shall begin with the Grandees or Council of war of the
Army, who have the most desperatest apostatised from their principles, that it
is possible for men to do, and from their pretended patronising of the peoples
liberties, and Arbitrarily, and Tyrannically have sought the ruin and utter
destruction of all those amongst themselves, that have stuck close to the
interest of the People, although they themselves made use of the very same
persons and Principalls, to preserve themselves against that which they
themselves called Tyranny in Mr. Hollis, and Sir Phillip Stapleton, etc. And
that they have so done, I prove by the Pleas of Will. Thompson a late Corporal
in the Army, John Crosman a Trooper, John Engram late Capt. Lievt. of the Life
Guard, and the Plea for the late Agents, made in November. 1647. Which thus
follows.

A Defense for the honest Nown substantive Soldiers of the Army, against the
proceedings of the Genesis Officers to punish them by Martial Law.
First. THe arbitrary Government of the Army by Law Martial (which is only
necessary when an Army is marching against its enemy, or when no other Court^
of Justice in a Land are open and free) was wholly dissolved at the Rendezvous
at New market, upon the 4. and 5. of June last, and this I prove by these
following reasons.

1. They associated themselves only as a company of free Commons of England, to
stand together upon the just principles, and law of nature and nations, to
recover their own and all the peoples just rights and liberties. See the solemn
Engagement upon June 4. The words are these We the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army subscribing hereunto, do hereby declare, agree, and promise to and with
each other, that we shall not willingly disband, nor divide, nor suffer our
selves to be disbanded nor divided, until we have security, that we as private
men or other the freeborn people of England, shall not remain subject to the
like oppression, injury, or abuse as have been attempted. Compare the latter
end of page the 4. with page 5. And upon their march toward London, in
prosecution of this design, whereupon they associated, the General declared in
his letter to the City, that they as English men insisted upon the settlement
of the peace of the Kingdom, and the liberty of the Subject, which they had
right to demand. See the letter from the General, and the General Officers at
Royston upon June 10. page 2. 3. And in their further opening of their meaning
and intentions in their agreeing together, or associating as before, they
declared upon June 14. That they were not a mercenary Army, hired to serve the
arbitrary power of a State, but continued in arms in judgment and conscience
for the defense of their own and the peoples lust rights and liberties. Now the
Army thus refusing to serve the Arbitrary power of the State and agreeing
together as English men, to stand upon Principles of Right and Freedom. From
hence.

1. Its clear, that the Officers and Soldiers kept in a body, and so were an
Army not by the will of the State, but by their own mutual Agreement.

2. From thence its as clear, that they not being an Army by the States will,
they were not under those rules of Martial Government, which were given by the
will of the State to rule those which were a Military body or Army by their
will and power.

3. From thence its also as clear, as they continuing an Army at that time,
not by the States will, power or Command, but their mutual Agreement, they
could be under no other government as an Army but such as they did constitute
or appoint for themselves by mutual agreement, and this leads to 22. Reason,
proving the dissolution of the Armies government by Martial Law.

4. The Soldiers with some Officers of the Army, having by mutual agreement
gathered themselves into, or at least continued themselves a Military body or
Army, to stand upon principles of right and freedom, did by the same mutual
agreement with or engagement to each other frame, constitute or appoint, a
form of government for themselves in their prosecuting that just design of
common right and freedom for themselves and the nation.

The words of the Engagement, page 4. 5. are these. We do hereby declare,
agree, and promise to and with each others that we shall not willingly
disband, nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded or divided without
satisfaction in relation to our grievances and desires heretofore presented,
and security that we as private men or other the free born people of England,
shall not remain subject to the like oppression and injury as have been
attempted, and this satisfaction and security to be such as shall be agreed
unto by a Council to consist of those general Officers of the Army (who have
concurred with the Army in the premises) with two Commission Officers, and two
Soldiers to be chosen for each Regiment, who have concurred and shall concur
with us in the promises and in this agreement. Hereby a new Council was
constitutes contrary to all Martial Law, and Discipline, by whom only they
engaged to be ordeered in their prosecution of the ends for which they
associated, and by consequence seeing they continued an Army by their own wills,
and only to prosecute those ends of common right and freedom, this Engagement
to be ordered only by that new Council in their prosecution of those ends,
extends to a whole rule of them as an Army.

Now that this Council was wholly new, and in a way diverse or different from
all Martial Courts or Councels of War, that ever the Sun beheld in a
mercenary Army, and as different from the Council by which this Army was
formerly governed appears thus.

1. The Members of this Council by which they engaged to be ordered, are
different wholly from the Members of all former Counsels in the Army.

1. The quallity of them is different, none but such as concurred in disobeying
the Parliament, and in the Principles of common right and freedom, upon which
they stood, were to be Members of this Council, neither the General, nor the
Lieutenant General themselves were to be Members of this Council unless they
had concurred in owning the Regiments refusal to disband, and in their
engagement or association, and by consequences they had been no Officers, as
will appear hereafter.

In this all the Orders of War and Martial Laws were broken, for if the
General, Lieutenant General, and Commissary Genesis Ireton, had not concurred
they could not all have cashiered one Officer that did concur, all the
Soldiers had been Engaged to oppose them, pay they could not have cashiered
one Soldier that joined in the Engagement, for they promised each to other, not
to suffer themselves to be divided before the ends of their Engagements was
accomplished.

2. The station of the Members of this new council in this Army was different
from the station of al M^mbers of former Councels, by the Engagement there was
to be two Soldiers in no office out of every Regiment to have voices equal to
the General himself in all votes, a thing never practiced nor heard of in an
Army serving the will of a State.

3. The number of the Members of this Council is different from al customs and
rules of Martial Discipline.

In this Council, there was to be but four of every Regiment with the General
Officers which concurred, thus this Council differed from all Customs in any
Army in respect of the Members whereof it was constituted.

2. This new Council differed from the rules of War in the manner of its
constitution, this was not to be constituted by the Gens. will or according to
the degrees or offices of men in the Army, but in a Parliamentary way by the
Soldiers free election, the Genesis is bound from calling an Officer to the
Council unless he be chosen by his Regiment.

3. Reason, proving the dissolution of Martial Government in the Army.

The Genesis in associating with the Soldiers did in the very Engagement, give
away all his power of exercising Martial Discipline, he engaged to them and they
to him, that they would not suffer themselves to be disbanded or divided, till
the ends of their uniting were obtained. Hereby he divested himself of his
arbitrary power of cashiering Officers and Soldiers at his pleasure, the
cashiering one Officer, or Soldier which associated with the body of the Army
in the engagement, is a disbanding, at deviding on part of the Army from
another, which he and the Army mutually ^^ciprocally engaged, neither to
attempt nor suffer; likewise by this engagment he divested himself of power to
command the Soldiers to march to what distance he pleases one from an other,
this is an other kind of dividing the Army which he enaged neither to effect,
nor suffer.

4. Reason, proving the dissolution of the Government of the Army, by Law
Martial.

The whole Army by agreement or joint consent cashiered all Officers at New
maket Heath, that would not associate with them, and engage to stand for common
right and freedom, though against the Parliament, and so they houted diverse
Officers out of the field, unhorsed some and rent their clothes, and be at
them: and this in the face of the Genesis al which acts wear death by Martial
Law; but this was an actual declaration that the Army did admit of Officers by
mutual agreement only, and therefore Government by law Martial was dissolved
unless it had been established by mutual consent throughout the Army, for
Officers at that time being only admitted by mutual consent they could have no
power, but what was betrusted to them by the Soldiers.

2. Plea, But in case the Government of the Army by Law Martial had not been
dissolved by a mutual engagement, yet the very being of peace did dissolve its
for in the Petition of See Poultons collection of statutes p. 1431. 1432.
Right its declared that ^^ person ought to be adjudged by Law Martial except
in time of War and that all Commissions given to execute Martial Law, in
time of peace are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, and it
was the Parliaments complaint that Martial Law, was then commanded to be
executed upon Soldiers for robbery, mutiny, or murder.

And it was settled as the undoubted right of every English man, that he should
be punishable only in the Ordinary Courts of justice, according to the Laws
and Statutes of the Kingdom By all this it appears that it is illegal and
unjust for the Officers of the Army to try or punish any Agent, or other by Law
Martial, upon pretense of Muteny or any other offense: the whole Army stand as
Englishmen, and if they offend are not exempted from the proceeding against
them, and punishments to be inflicted upon them, by the laws, and statutes of
the Kingdom, and therefore cannot in Justice be subject also to law martial,
so that all Agents and Soldiers now accused for mutiny, for their late
prosecution of public freedom, according to the agreement of the people,
without their Officers content shall unworthily betray their own and their
Countries Liberty, if they shall submit to be tried in any other way then by
the known Laws and statutes of the Land.

The forementioned Plea of William Thompson (who was lately a Corporal in
Colonel Whaleyes Regiment, and was formerly cashiered at the head thereof, and
yet after that imprisoned and endeavored to be hanged for his honesty) thus
follows.

Englands Freedom, Soldiers Rights: Vindicated against all Arbitrary unjust
Invaders of them, and in partcicular against those new Tyrants at Windsore,
which would destroy both under the pretense of Marshall Law. OR, The just
Declaration, Plea and Protestation of William Thompson, a free Commoner of
England, unjustly imprisoned at Windsore. Delivered to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and that which is called his Council of War, the 14. of
December, 1647. Unto which is annexed his Letter to the General, wherein the
said Plea was enclosed. Also a Petition of the rest of his Fellow Prisoners to
his Excellency.
May it please your Excellency,
I Am by birth a free Commoner of England, and am thereby intailed or entitled
unto an equal privilege with your self, or the greatest men in England, unto
the freedom and liberty of the Laws of England, as the Parliament declares in
their Declaration of the 23. of October, 1642. 1 part book Decl. page 660. And
the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta expressly says, That no man shall be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties, or free customs, or
be outlawed or exiled, or any other ways destroyed, nor pest upon nor
condemned, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers (or Equals) and that by
due course, or process of the Law of the Land See Sir Edw. Cooks Exposition
hereof in his 2. part Institut. fol. 46, 47, 50, 51.
, which expressly says, that no man shall he taken or restrained of his
liberty, by petition or suggestion (made unto whomsoever in authority) unless
it be by indictment or presentment of good and lawful men where such deeds be
done: and that no man whatsoever be put to answer (any crime whatsoever)
without presentment before Justices or matter of record or by due process and
writ orinall, according to the old law of the land, and if any thing from
henceforth be done to the contrary it shall be void in law, and holden for Se
the 5. Ed. 3.9. and 25. Ed. 3.4 and 28. Ed. 3.3. and 37. Ed. 3.18. and 42. Ed.
3.3. and the Petition of Right in the third of the King, and the Statutes that
abolished the Star Chamber and Ship money, made this present Parliament; and
Lieutenant Col. John Lilburnes Book called the Resolved man's Resolution, p. 2.
3, 8, 9. and his Grand Plea against the Lords, page 7, 8, 9.
error.

Therefore Sir, for you who are a General of an Army, and other of your
Marshall Officer's who are are no Civil Court of Justice, nor authorized with
the least legal power in the world to administer Justice, and execute the law
of the land, upon, or unto any of the Commoners of England, to dare or presume
to restrain, imprison, try or meddle with me as you have done, who am in no
other capacity in the world but barely and altogether as a Commoner of
England, is the height of arbitrary tyranny, injustice and Well says Sir
Edward Cook in the 2. part of his Institutes fol. 48. that every oppression
against law by color of any usurped authority, is a kind of destruction: for
when any thing is forbidden, all that tends to it is also forbidden: and it is
(says he) the worst oppression that is done by color of justice. See also
Lib. 10. fo. 74. in the case of the Marshalsea.
oppression, and an absolute destruction of the very fundamental Laws of
England, the bare endeavoring of which cost the Earl of Strafford his head.
And what the doom of him is that destroys the fundamental Laws of the Land,
I shall give you out of the very words of your own friend Mr. St. John, in his
Argument of law concerning the Bill of Attainder of high Treason of Thomas Earl
of Strafford, at a conference in a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
printed by G. M. for John Bartlet at the sign of the gilt Cup near St. Austins
Gate in Paul's Church Yard. 1641, who in the 70. page thereof says, That the
destruction of the Laws d^ssolves the arteries and ligaments that hold the
body together ^he that takes away the Laws, takes not away the allegiance of
one Subject alone, but of the whole Kingdom it was (says he) made treason by
the Statute of the 13. El. for her time, to affirm, that the Laws of the
Realm do not bind the descent of the Crown; no Law, no descent at all: No
Laws, (says he,) no Peerage, no ranks or degrees of men And therefore you,
with your dealings with me, that am merely a free Commoner of England, and so
not in the least under your Marshall Discipline (but solely and only under the
discipline of the known declared, and established Laws of England) by your
arbitrary, tyrannical actings upon me, have absolutely as much as in you lies,
destroyed the fundamental Laws of England, and therefore are as absolute
Hedge breakers and Levellers as ever were in this Kingdom.
; the same condition to all. It Is treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench, this
kills not the Judge, but the Judgment. And in page 71. he says, Its felony to
imbezell any of the Judicial Records of the Kingdom; this, (viz. the
destruction of the law,) sweeps all away, and from all.

Its treason to counterfeit a twenty shilling piece, here is a counterfeiting
of the Law, we can call (...) the counterfeit, not the true coin our own.

Its treason to counterfeit the great Seal for an Acre of Land, no property
hereby (viz. the destruction of the Law) is left to any Land at all: nothing
treason now, either against King or Kingdom no law to pun^sh it.

And therefore I advise you as a friend to take heed that you go no further on
in your illegal, arbitrary, tyrannical and law-destroying practices with and
toward me, least when for your own lives you claim the benefit of the Law,
you be answered in the words of your foresaid friend in page 72. That he in
vain calls for the help of the Law, that walks contrary unto Law, and from
the Law of like for like; (he that would not have others to have law, why
should he have any himself? why should not that be done to him, that himself
would have done to another? it is true, (says he Ibid.) we give law to Hares
and Deers, because they be beasts of chase, but it was never accounted either
cruelty or foul play to knock Foxes and Wolves on the head, as they can be
found, because these be Beasts of Prey; the Warrener set; traps for Poulears
and other vermin, for preservation of the Warren.

And in page 76. he says, in the 11. R. 2. Trisilian, And some other attainted
of treason for delivering opinions in the subvertion of the Law, and some other
for plotting the like Read also to this purpose Mr. John Pyms Speech against
the Earl of Strafford, the 12. of April, 1641. printed for John Battler, but
especially p. 5. 6. 8. 9. 13. 18. 23. 24.
.

But if you shall object, that you deal with me as you are a General and
Officers of an Army by Marshall Law, for endeavoring to make mutinies or
tumults in your Army, or by bi^^^ing and defaming your reputations, and so
drawing your Soldiers from their affection and obedience unto you.

I answer in the first place, there can in this Kingdom be no pretense for
Martial Law, but when the Kingdom is in a general hurly burly and uproare,
and an Army or Armies of (...) enemies in the Field, prosecuting with the
sword the destruction of the whole, and thereby, stopping the regular and
legal proceedings of the Courts of Justice from punishing offenders and
transgressors.

But now there being no Army nor Armies of declared enemies in the field, nor
mo^^ prisons in the possessions of any such men, nor no general hurly-butlies
and uproars by any such men in the Kingdom, but all such as are visibly
subdued and quieted, and all Courts of justice open and free to punish
offenders and transgressors; and therefore even to the Army is self and the
Officers and Soldiers therein, there is no reason or ground for exercising of
Martial Law, much less over Commoners that are not under the obedience of the
Army, which is my case.

And that in time of peace, there neither is, nor can be any ground of
exercising and executing of Martial Law; I prove out of the Petition of Right,
which was made in the third year of the present King, and is printed in
Pultons Collection of the Statutes at large, fol. 1431, 1432. And in the 1. 2.
3. pages before.
which expressly says, that by authority of Parliament, in the 25. year of the
Reign of King Edward the 3. it is declared and enacted, That no man shall be
forejudged of life or limb against the form of the great Charter and the law
of the land, and by the said great Charter, and other the laws and Statutes of
this Realm, no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the law established
in this Realm See the 9. H. 3. 29. 5. Ed. 3.9. and 25. Ed. 3.4. and 28. Ed. 3.3.
.

And whereas no offender of what kind soever is exempted from the proceedings
to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by the laws and Statutes of this
your Realm: Nevertheless of late diverse Commissions under your Majesty's
great Seal have issued forth, by which certain persons have been assigned and
appointed Commissioners, with power and authority to proceed within the land,
according to the justice of MARTIAL LAW, against such Soldiers and Mariners,
or other diss^lute persons joining with them, as should commit any MVRDER,
ROBBERY, FELONY, MVTINIE, or OTHER outrage or misdemeanor whatsoever, and by
such summarie course and order, as is agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used
in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such
offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death according to the
Law Martial. By pretixt whereof your Majesty's Subjects have bin by some of the
said C^^mission put to death, when and where, if by the laws and Statutes of
the land they had deserved death, by the same laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no OTHER ought to have been been judged and executed Yet it is
very observable, that at the very time when this Martial Law complained of was
executed; the King had wars with France, a foreign enemy, but there is no
such thing now; and therefore the Army, or the grand Officers thereof have not
the least shadow or pretense to execute it in the least, or to deal with me a
free Commoner, as they have done.
. And also sundry grievous offenders, by color thereof claiming an exemption,
have escaped the punishment (...) to them by the laws and Statutes of this
your Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers and Ministers of Justice
have uniustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such offenders, according
to the same laws and statutes, upon (...) that the said offenders were
publi^able only by Martial Law, and by authority of such Commissioners as
aforesaid. Which Commissions AND ALL OTHER OF L^^E NATVRE, are wholly and
directly contrary to the fall laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

Therefore Sin, if you have any cat^ of your own heads and lives, (though you
have none of the Liberties and Freedoms of England.) I again as a friend
advise you, to take heed what you do unto me any further in your illegal,
arbitrary, and tyrannical way that hitherto you have proceeded with me^ for I
largely understand that Canterbury and Strafford were this Parliament
questioned for their arbitrary and tyrannical actions that they did and acted
many years before, and the Lord Keepers Finch was by this Parliament questioned
for actions that he did when he was Speaker of the House of Commons in the
third of the present King, An. 1628. and forced to fly to save his head.

In the second place I answer, that if since the wars ended, it was or could
be judged lawful for your Excellency and your Council of War, to execute
Marshall Law: yet you have divested your self of that power upon the 4. and 5.
of June last, at New market Heath, you owned the Soldiers and joined with
them, when they were put out of the States protection, and declared enemies,
and further associated with them by a mutual solemn engagement, as they were a
Company of free Commoners of England to stand with them according to the Law of
Nature and Nations See the late Plea for the Agents, printed before. page 42,
43, 44.
, to recover your own and all the peoples Rights and Liberties, the words are
these; We the Officers and Soldiers of the Army subscribing hereunto, do
hereby declare, agree and promise to and with each other, that we shall not
willingly disband nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbandad nor divided
until we have security; that we as private men, or other the free borne people
of England, shall not remain subject to the like oppression, injury, or abuse
as have been attempted. See the engagement in the Armies book of Decl. page 24,
25. 26, 27.


Hereby it appears, that from this time you and the Soldiery kept in a body,
and so were an Army, not by the States or Parliaments will, but by a mutual
Agreement amongst all the Soldiers, and consequently not being an Army by the
Parliaments wills, they were not under those rules of Martial Government which
were given by the will of the Parliament: and your Excellency could no longer
exercise any such power over them, as was allowed you by those Martial laws;
nay, the Soldiers keeping in a body, and continuing an Army, only by mutual
consent, did by their mutual Agreement or Engagement, constitute a new kind of
Council, whereby they would be governed in their prosecution of those ends for
which they associated, and made every Officer incapable of being in that
Council, which did not associate with them in that Engagement. The words of
the Agreement or Engagement are these: we do hereby declare, agree, and
promise, to and with each other, that we shall not willingly disband, nor
divide, nor suffer ourselves to be disbanded or divided without satisfaction in
relation to our grievances and desires heretofore presented, and security that
we as private men or other the freeborn people of England, shall not remain
subject to the like oppression and injury as has been attempted, and this
satisfaction and security to be such as shall be agreed unto by a council to
consist of those general Officers of the Army, who have concurred with the
Army in the premises, with two Commission Officers, and TWO SOVLDIERS to be
chosen for each Regiment, who have concurred, and shall concur with us in the
premises and in this Agreement.

So that your Excellency is so far from having a power to exercise the old
Martial Discipline, that you would have been no Officer or Member of the
Council appointed to govern them, unless you had associated with them, and
by that Association or mutual Engagement, the Soldiers were so far from
allowing to their General, who ever it should have been (for at that time it
was uncertain) the power of exercising the old Martial D^scipline, that
according to the Engagement no Officer or Soldier can be rightly cashiered
unless it be by the Council constituted by that Engagement: so that your
Excellency by your own Engagement have put a period to your power of
exercising your old Martial Discipline, and whatsoever D^scipline shall
appear to the Army to be necessary, must be constituted by the mutual consent
of the Army, or their representatives, unless you and they will disclaim the
Engagement at New market, and those principles upon which you then stood, And
if you do what are you better then a company of Rebels and Traitors to the
Parliament, for your then opposing their power, authority, orders, and
ordinances.
and yield up your selves to the Parliaments pleasure as their hirelings to
serve their arbitrary power, like Turkish Janisaries.

In the rhird place I answer, that it is against reason, law, conscience,
justice and equity, to subject me at one and the same time, or any other free
Commoner of England, under the sting and power of two distinct Laws, and such
a bondage as is insupportable, and such a snare of intanglement, that no man's
life whatsoever can be safe or secure under it, that I shall be liable to be
questioned and destroyed by the common Law of the Kingdom, and then be at the
wills of mercenarie Turkish Ianisaries (in case the common Law will not reach
me) to be questioned and destroyed by an unjust arbitrary Martial law; and if
it can be justly proved against me that I have made any tumults, the Law and
the ordinary Courts of justice are open, by which and by no other rules and
proceedings J ought to be tried, and if it be said or can be proved, that J
have belied or scandalized the General, to the taking away of his good name,
etc. yet scandalum Magnatum is not to be tried by Martial Law, nor yet either
by the House of Commons, or the House of Lords, but only and alone (now the
Star Chamber is down) by an Action at common Law As is clear by the Statutes
of 3. Ed. 1. 33. and 37. Ed. 3. 18. and 38. Ed. 3. 9. and 42. Ed. 3. 3. and 2.
R. 2. 5. and 12 R. 2. 11. 5. part Cooks reports. page 125. and 13. H. 7.
Kelway and 11. Eliz. Dier. 285. and 30. Affiz. pla. 19. and Liev. Col. John
Lilburnes Grand Plea of 20. October 1647. page 7. 8.
by a Jurie of my equals, and no where else, it being a Maxim in Law, That
where remedy may be had by an ordinary course in law, the party grieved shall
never have his recourse to extraordinaries See Vox Plebis page 38. and Lievt.
Col. Jo. Lilburnes Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny, page 10.
: And besides for you to proceed with me, and to be both Parties, Jury and
Judges, is a thing that the Law abhorres See 8. H. 6. fol. 21. and Eliz. Dier
220. and Dr. Bonhams case, 8. part of Cooks Repots and Lievt. Col. Jo.
Lilburnes grand Plea, page 10.
.

In the fourth and last place J answer, that the Parliament it self, neither
by Act nor Ordinance can justly or warrantably destroy the fundamental
liberties and principles of the common Law of England, See Mr. Henry Martins
answer to the Scotchpapers, called the Independency of England at the last end.
it being a maxim in law and reason both, That all such Acts and Ordinances
are ipso facto null and void in law, and bind not at all, but ought to be
resisted and stood against to the death.

But for them to give you a power by Marshal Law, or under any other name or
title whatever, by your arbitrary tyrannical wills without due course and
process of Law, to take away the Life or Liberty of me, or any free Commoner
of England whatsoever, yea, or any of your own Soldiers in time of peace, when
the Courts of Justice are all open, and no visible declared enemy in Arms in
the Kingdom ready to destroy it, is an absolute destroying of our fundamental
Liberties, and a rasing of the foundation of the Common Law of England. But
besides all this I do confidently believe, that the Parliament never gave
power unto the General since the wars ended to execute Martial Law, neither
do I believe that some chief Executors of Martial Law, have any Legal
Commission from the Parliament, who never that I could hear of, ever gave
power unto the General of himself to make general Officers: and besides, all
the Parliament men that are Officers in the Army were, (as I have been
groundedly told formerly) taken off by an Ordinance of both Houses, which was
never repealed since.


And therefore such a power of Arbitrary Marshall Law, cannot justly by the
Parliament in time of peace, etc. be given unto you, (nor if it were) be justly
or warantably executed by you.

And besides, both houses themselves by an Ordinance (unless they alter the
whole constitution of this Kingdom) can take away the life of no free Commoner
of England whatsoever, especially in time of peace.

And therefore that which is not within their own power to do, they cannot by
an Order or Ordinance grant power to Sir Thomas Fairfax etc. to do, it being a
Maxim in nature, That beyond the power of being there is nor can be no being.

But it is in the power of the Parliament, or the two Houses, or the House of
Commons themselves, as the present constitutions of this Kingdom stands,
either by Order or Ordinance to take away the life of any free commoner of
England. See Sir E Cooks 2 part institut. fo. 47, 48. and 3. part, fol. 22. and
4. part, fol. 23. 25. 48. 291. all of which books are published for good law
to the Kingdom by 2. special Orders of the present House of Commons, as you
may read in the last pa. of the second part institut. see also the Petition of
Right.


And therefore they cannot by an Ordinance or Order, especially in times of
peace, give power to Sir Thomas Fairfax by Marshall Law, (unless they totally
alter the Constitutions of the Kingdom) to take away the life or lives of any
free Commoners of England, (which all Soldiers are as well as others, See the
Armies Declaration of the 14. June, 1647. Book of their Declarations, page 39.
and their Letter from Royston to the Lord Mayor of London, of the 10. June.
1647. which the Printer has neglected to print in their book of Declarations.
*) and therefore it is absolute murder in the General and the Council of
War, now to shoot to death, hang or destroy any Soldier or other Commoner
what ever by Marshall Law, for which they may be indicted at the Kings Bench
bar.

And therefore J do the third time as a friend advise you, to cease your
illegal, arbitrary, tyrannical Marshall Law proceedings with me that am no
Soldier, and so not under the least pretense of your Marshall Jurisdiction,
least in time to come you pay as dear for your arbitrarie illegal proceedings
with me as Sir Richard Empson and Mr. Edward Dudley Justices did, who as Sir
Edward Cook declares in his 2. and 4. part of his Institutes, where very
officious and ready to execute that illegal Act of Parliament made in the 11.
H. 7. cap. 3. which gave power unto Justices of Assize, as well as Justices of
the Peace (without any finding or presentment by the verdict of twelve men,
being the ancient birthright of the Subject) upon a bare information for the
King before them made, to have full power and authority by their discretions to
hear and determine all Offenses or contempts committed or done by any person,
or persons against the form, ordinance, effect of any Statute made and not
repealed, etc. by color of which Act of Parliament, shalling (says he) this
fundamental law ( viz. the 29. Chapter of Magna Charta) it is not credible
what horrible oppressions and exactions, to the undoing of infinite numbers of
people, were committed by them, for which (though I cannot read they shot any
man to death, and though they had an express Act of Parliament to bear them
out, abundantly less questionable then an Ordinance for exercising Marshal
Law) they were both indicted of high treason both by the Common Law and Act of
Parliament, See 2. part Instit. fol. 51. and 4. part. fol. 41. 196. 197. but
especially read their Jndictment virbatim set down ibid. fo. 198, 199.
and in the 2. year of Henry 8. they both lost their heads

Therefore from all the premises by way of conclusion, I draw up this
protestation against you, that by the laws and constitutions of this Kingdom,
you have not the least Iudicative power in the world over me; therefore I
cannot in the least give you any Honor, Reverence, or Respect, either in word,
action, or gesture: and if you by force and compulsion compel me again to
come before you, I must and will by Gods assistance keep on my hat, and look
upon you as acompany of Murderers, Robbers, and Theives, and do the best I can
to raise the Hue and Cry of the Kingdom against you, as a company of such
lawless persons, and therefore if there be any Honor, Honesty, and Conscience
in you, I require you as a free borne English man, to do me justice and right,
by a formal dismissing of me, and give me just reparation for my months
unjust imprisonment by you, and for that loss of credit I have sustained
thereby, that so things may go no further; or else you will compel and
necessitate me to study all ways and means in the world to procure
satisfaction from you, and if you have any thing to lay to my Charge, J am as
an English man ready to answer you at the common Law of England, and in the
mean time J shall subscribe my self

Your servant in your faithful discharge of your duty to your Masters (the
Commons of England) that pay you your wages, William Thompson,
From my arbitrary and most illegal imprisonment in Windsore, this 14. December.
1647.
The forementioned Letter thus follows.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captaine-Generall of the Forces
in the Nation for Importiall Justice and Liberty, these present.
May it please your Excellency,
I Here present unto you a Declaration and Protestation against the illegal
and unjust proceedings of your Council of War against me, ( I being a free
Commoner of England) as in the presence of the just God, before whose Tribunal
both you and I shall stand to give an account of all ungodly deeds committed
against him. And so I rest,

Your Excellencies servant, if you are a true servant to the most excellent God
for justice and righteousness in the earth, without respect of persons.
William Thompson.
December. 14. 1647.

The Petition thus follows.

To the right Honorable his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain
General of all the forces raised in the Kingdom of England. The humble
Petition of some of your Excellencies Officers and Soldiers being under the
custody of the Marshall General.
Shows,
THat whereas there are misrepresentations of the intentions of the late Agents
of the Army and their adherents, by men of corrupt minds, who would make all
the end of your own and your Armies noble and valiant Achievements (under the
power of God) fruitless, and would destroy justice and righteousness from
amongst men; and in stead of common good, and equal distribution of justice,
would advance a particular selfish interest: and to accomplish their unworthy
selfish ends, amongst many other scandals cast upon the late Agents, they have
blazed abroad that they intended to murder the King, and that one of them
should affirm it was lawful: And whereas this was reported by one Lievt. Col.
Henry Lilburne; it being altogether most abominable in our eyes, and detracts
from the purity and righteousness of our Principles; tending only to make us
odious to the people, for whose good alone we have run not only all former, but
also these late hazzards.

We therefore desire that the said Lievt. Col. Henry Lilburne may be speedily
sent for to testify upon Oath (as in the presence of God) who used those
words, where those words were used, and when: and what in particular the words
were; That so, such a person may come under a public cognizance, and your
Excellencies faithful servants and soldiers may free themselves and others
from such aspertions. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Will. Eyers.
Will. Bray. Will. Prior, John Wood. George Hassell. Will. Everrard John
Crosseman. Tho. Beverly. Will. Thompson Commoner.


The forementioned plea of John Crosseman, which with his own hands he
delivered to the General himself, thus follows.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND ALL his Officers that pretend to be
Executors of Martial Law.
May it please your Excellency.
I Was convened the 16. December last before certain of your Officers, that
pretendedly called themselves a Court Marshall, who attempted to try me by
Marshall Law, for certain pretended crimes, specified in a paper by way of
Articles, exhibited by a namelesse prosecuter, 20. days after I was a
prisoner, only the said Articles were signed by Henry Whaley who calls himself
Judge Advocate. And the same day and time unto the said Officers I delivered in
a paper under my hand entitled, John Crosseman his Plea, against the
proceedings of the General Officers, to punish him by Marshall Law. And after
much debate by the said Officers upon the said Plea, the said Officers seemed
to be unsatisfied with it, and therefore gave me time till this present Monday,
the 20. day December. 1647. to consider with my self, whether J would stand unto
the said plea, or give in any other answer.

Having thereupon largely considered with my self upon the ends of our late
taking up Arms, I can in my own conscience judge them to be no other, but for
the destruction of all arbitrary, tyrannical power in whomsoever, the
preservation of our Laws and Liberties, and the punishment of all those that
have endeavored the destruction of them. And having since the delivery of the
said plea read the Petition of Right, from end, to end; And William Thompsons
plea, delivered to your Excellency, etc. upon the 14. December. 1647. now in
print, entitled Englands Freedom, Soldiers Rights, Which you may read
before, page 1, 2, 3, and 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51.
upon the deep and weighty consideration of all which, J am compelled, out of
the sense of avoiding the being too justly esteemed by all understanding,
rational men, a traitor, and subverter of the Laws and liberties of England,
to stand unto my said Plea, without any further answer then this.

That the government of the Army by Law Marshall, is only necessary when the
Kingdom is invaded by a foreign enemy, or in a general hurly burly in it
self, being ready to march against a declared professed enemy ready to destroy
it with fire and Sword, and thereby shut up the legal administration of
justice upon Transgressors and Offenders in the ordinary course thereof.

But now there is no foreign enemy upon the march against England, nor no
general Hurly Burly in the Kingdom by professed and declared enemies against
the peace thereof ready to destroy it with fire and sword, but all at the
present is visibly in peace and quietness, and the Courts of justice all open
to punish all manner of offenders whatsoever, (yea Soldiers in Arms that have
taken the States pay For whom the Statute law in such a condition, has
appointed punishments to be inflicted upon them in the ordinary Courts of
justice, either for false musters, cheating the Soldiers of their pay, or for
lucer giving them leave to depart, or for the Soldiers going from their
Colors without lawful leave, or for imbeasing Horse or Arms, etc. See the
18. H. 6. 19. and 2, and 3. Ed. 6. 2. and 4. and 5. P. and M. chap. 3. and 5.
Eliz. 5. and 5. James. 25.
) who only in times of peace (as this is) are solely to be punished by the
rules and proceedings of the known and declared law of England, and by no other
rules whatsoever.

And therefore it being now time of peace, there is no need of Marshall Law,
neither can your Excellency, nor any other under you upon any pretense
whatsoever, derived from any power whatever, execute it upon pain of being
esteemed and justly judged to be absolute executers of an Arbitrary and
tyrannical power, and grand destroyers of our Laws and liberties, and so in
time may receive the Earl of Straffords doom, one of whose principal crimes
I understand was, That he in Ireland, in time of peace (when he was General of
an Army on foot) shed the blood of War, by executing a Soldier by Marshall
Law, when the Courts of justice were open.

And therefore I do absolutely protest against the name and power of your
pretended Court Marshall. And do further declare, that I judge my self bound
in conscience with all my might power, and strength, both by words, actions,
and gestures, now I know so much as I do, to oppose, as the case now stands,
all Marshall Courts whatsoever, and to judge my self a Traitor to the laws and
liberties of England, if I should do any action that might but seem to
support, or countenance that law and liberty destroying power of Marshall Law,
and can neither esteem nor judge him an honest, just, and truobred English man,
that now hereafter (so much in print being declared against it) either executes
it, or stoops unto it, So with my humble service rendered to your Excellency, I
commend you to the tuition of the just and powerful God, and rest,

From my unjust captivity and imprisonment in Windsore, which is both against
the Law of England, and our Agreement at New Market, ( the 4. and 5. June last)
this 20. of December. 1647. Your honors faithful servant and Soldier to the
death, so you turn not the mouth of your own Cannons against me to destroy me.
John Crosseman.

The forementioned Letter or Plea of Captain John Ingram, thus follows.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, these present.
May it please your Excellency,
I Was condemned the 20. December. 1647. by diverse Officers assembled together in
the manner of a Court Marshall, for speaking before them my own Conscience and
judgment with soberness, about Mayor Cobits business. Now in justification
of my self, I must declare unto your Excellency, that in all Counsels
whatsoever, the members thereof ought without check, control, molestation, or
fear of ruin and destruction, freely to speak and declare the dictates of
their judgment and consciences. And undoubtedly the denial thereof, would
render all Counsels whatsoever, useless and vain. And its no less then the
hight of tyranny in any prevailing party in a Council to usurp such a power,
as by terrors, censures, or force, to stop the mouths of those who are of
different opinions, and against whose arguments or saying they offer no reasons.

And its no less against law, and justice, yea, the common light of nature,
for the members of that Council (who were the only offended parties, to assume
to themselves to be prosecutors, witnesses, Jury and Judges, as they did in my
case.

And therefore I am resolved in the strength of God, never to betray my
innocence, by acknowledging an offense according as the censures of my
accusers require, when my conscience bears me witness, that as in the fight
of God I did my duty, so I do freely declare, that I am still clearly
satisfied. That since our association by mutual Engagement at New Market to
stand as free Commons of England, for common right and freedom. And since our
constituting a new Council to be our directer in the manner of prosecuting
those public ends of justice, right and freedom, there is no assembly, but
that new constituted Council only which is a competent Judge of the Actions of
any Member in the Army, and in his prosecution of the ends aforesaid. And of
this nature I conceive was Mayor Cobits case. Whom those godly, pious and
righteous Gentlemen of the Council of War tried for his life, for no other
crime, but for his honesty, in prosecuting that just paper called The Agreement
of the People, and his life was saved but by two voices, O malicious and bloody
men!


And I must further declare, that I am not only willing, but I account it my
honor to be under your Excellencies conduct, so long as you shall act
according to the first principles manifested in the Commission (received from
your Excellency, according to the public declaration of the Soldiery upon
Triplo Heath, for Justice, Justice. And according to the Solemn Engagement,
neither shall any man be more obedient to your Excellencies commands, tending
to those ends, then my self.

But I must declare, that I clearly apprehend the highest injustice of
executing Marshal Law in time of peace, those laws are appointed for cases of
necessity and extremity, when the Army is marching against an enemy, and its
then only justifiable, either because other Courts of justice are not open, or
there cannot be a timely prosecution of offenders in those Courts. But when all
other Courts of justice are open, and no enemy in the field to obstruct a free
access to them, and when every Soldier is punishable in those Courts, and by
the known laws of the land for any crime or offense; I conceive common justice
dictates Marshall Laws to be null otherwise two Courts not subordinate each to
other, claiming the jurisdiction over a Soldier supposedly offending, when the
Known Laws shall have acquitted him, he may suffer by the will of a Court
Marshall. And therefore the Petition of Right complained of executing such
Marshall Laws in time of peace. Which Petition being granted, it remains as
a valid Act of Parliament against it. And the Earl of Strafford was impeached
of High Treason for proceeding against and condemning the Lord Mount Norris by
Marshall Law, See the 5. Article in the impeachment of the Earl of Strafford.
Se also the 15. and 19. Article of that Impeachment.
though the sentence was not executed.

Upon all these considerations, I cannot but be confident that the justice and
conscience which dwells in your Excellency, will compel you to restrain the
proceedings of that Assembly of Officers against me, who are my accusers. And I
hope your Excellency is so careful of your honor and reputation in the
peoples eyes, that you will not suffer my place to be taken from me, unless my
declining from the ends for which I associated with the Army can be proved
against me, or else some crime which according to law and justice merits such a
censure. And I am not yet conscious to my self of the least unfaithfullnesse,
but do remain as ever,

Your Excellencies humble servant John Ingram, whom since they have cashiered
because he was too honest and quick sighted for them, and whom I hear has a
larger discourse coming out against their unjust proceedings with him.
December 23. 1647.

The proceedings of the Grandees at Windsore being so furious, unjust, and
illegal as they were, in which they led the General on hoodwink as their
stalking Horse, to the pits brink of his own ruin and destruction, and to the
Apparent hazard of shedding more innocent and precious blood, of extraordinary
choice English men, and sweet Christians, and to the visible rooting up by the
roots of the fundamental laws and liberties of England, and in its place set
up and executed an arbitrary, tyrannical government of Marshall Law: by the
rules and justice of which, they might have as well, as justifiably, and as
warrantably condemned to death all the free men of England, as those Soldiers
they did. The serious meditating upon all which, perplexed my very spirit, and
therefore I drew out my pen to make an assay upon the General, thereby if it
were possible to stop those most desperate and unjust proceedings. The
substance of which Letter thus follows.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, these present.
May it please your Excellency,
HAving hoard that your Excellency should say there was a great deal of reason
in your apprehension in Thompsons plea, And you wished the Offices would well
weight it, and return an answer to It.

And being yesterday at the House of Commons door, I met with diverse of your
Officers, and in particular with Quarter Master General Ireton, who in his
discourse with me, was pleased to say, That the late Plea for the Agents was
full of falsehoods and mistakes, and my self in discourse came close to him
before many people, and proferred him to maintain before any competent Judges
in England, upon the peril of a sufficient disgrace to prove by the genuine
sense of your own Declarations, and the Laws of England, that there was not a
false nor mistaken sentence in it all.

Now may it please your Honor, having many Obligations, upon me to your
particular self, not only as I am an English man, but also as a sufferer. And
being much perplexed in my own spirit at those many late unworthy actions that
are done, pretendedly by virtue of your Authority, by men of a powerful and
corrupt influence in your Army, the disgrace and danger of which lies very
deep upon your self, which I am afraid in conclusion will cost you very dear,
yea, the head upon your shoulders, if you persevere or suffer them to persevere
in their late murdering, arbitrary, tyrannical, illegal ways; and therefore
out of that real and strong affection, that I truly bear unto your
Excellency, J am compeld to propose and offer unto your Honor, that if you
please under your hand to grant safe coming and going to my self and a friend
or two, and in dempnitie for our discourse, upon the debate, we will come and
wait upon your Excellency at Windsore; And against all your Officers in and
belonging to your Army, maintain the legallity and rationality of every line
and sentence of Thompsons Plea, and the Plea for the Agents (the printers
faults excepted) your Excellency in your own person at the dispute, sitting as
Moderator and Judge. So with my heartiest and truest service presented to your
Honor, I humbly take my leave of your Excellency, and rest.

As true and faithful a servant to you, as any you have in your Army, though
an absolute abhorrer and detestor of the late actions of your pretended
Council of War. John Lilburne.
From my most illegal and unjust Captivity, which I am confident is continued
by the powerful influence of some great Officers in your Army, Viz. ^ievt.
Genesis ^rom^ell, and ^is po^tique Son in Law, Com. Genesis Ireton, who are I will
maintain it the principal supporters, uphol^ers, a betters, preservers, and
defenders of the usurping House of Lords, in all their usurpations, ille^all
oppressions, tyranny, and murdering cruelty, for which if there were any
justice to be had, they ^eserved better to be impeached of High Treason, for
subverters of our laws and liberties, then the ^arle of Strafford, did in that
before their eyes, they have seen his severe punishment, and yet walk in ^s
steps.
this 23. December 1647.
Postscript.
Sir, I have assigned the prisoners at Windsore to wait upon your Excellency
for an answer to this my Letter, and I desire further to let you know, that if
your Officers be unwilling to embrace my desires herein, It will be a clear
demonstration to your Excellency, and all the people of the whole Kingdom,
that they have jugled with, deceived and deluded you, and brought you into life
and honor destroying snares.

John Lilburne.


This letter of mine was delivered to the Generals own hands as I have been
informed by some that was by, but I have not received the least answer unto it,
which makes me conclude, that Cromwell and Ireton, and there under Creaturers
are convict in their consciences, that there is not the least shadow or ground
in the world, for them in times of peace to execut Marshall Law, the full
knowledge of which, they would not willingly the General should be possessed
with, as it is probable at such a dispute as before I offer and am ready to
perform, he might be, and so might be sorry, for that murder committed upon
the Soldier, that was shot at Ware, for which I am sure Cromwell, Ireton, Paul
Hobson, yea and my Brother Henry Lilburne (if he were one that had a hand in
the causing of him to be shot) as well as all others that had, may by the Law
of England be apprehended, indicted, and tried as wilful murderers; and I am
sure in the eye of the Law of God or England, no plea can save their lives, in
any one of whose condition, (in the eye of the Law, to be tied to live in
England) that had a hand in that man's willful murder I would not be for all the
gold in England and let me without contempt, give this advice to the two great
forementioned Nimrods of the Army, (whose present power is bent to suppress
our fundamental laws and liberties, and to build up, and establish the highest
of Tyranny and protect Tyrants) to turn over a new leaf and turn honest, if
they have any grains thereof left with in them, and bend not their parts and
power, to plead for and protect the present tyrannical House of Lords in their
unjust usurpations, and to destroy me in my unjust imprisonment (which I know
is only continued by their power and means) for doing my duty to my self,
country, and posterity, to oppose them therein, least they necessitate and
compel me for the preservation of my self, wife and children, to find out a
man that shall dare, in the hight of all there unlimited potency, and unbounded
greatness, to indict them both for murderers, at the Kings bench bar, or
elsewhere, and shall dare to indict the Judges for perjury etc. if they shall
dare to obey any command in England, that shall command them not to do justice
and right in that particular.

And now O unworthy and dishonorable Cromwell, (that I aver and will
justify to thy face) that brought and drew me into my first contest with the
Earl of Manchester, and when thou hadest served thy ends of me, viz. to help
to pull him down from his Major Generall-ship) left me in the Briars to be
worried, and torn in pieces by him; and now keep me in Prison (to the
apparent hazard of my total destruction) by thy power and influence, for being
true to those principles of reason, truth and justice, that I will justify to
thy face, thou wast as high in as my self, when thou engaged me against
Manchester, the Earl of Essex etc. though now thou art visably and desperately
apostatized from them, to thy shame and eternal dishonor be it spoken, but
seeeing (as my own soul tells me) by thy means, I cannot get one dram of
justice, at the hands of the House of Commons, upon my complaint against the
pressed he tyrannical usurping house of Lords, I here proclaim an open defiance
to thee as a professed enemy to the fundamental laws and liberties of my
native country, to do the worst thou came to me, a man in some sense almost
devoured, by the Tyranny of thy fellow grand Tyrants in England, under which I
have transendantly suffered this cleaver years together, and therefore seeing
that thou and the rest of thy Tyrannical confederates in the present house of
Lords, and there (...) Speaker Sr. John, and Not. Fines, etc, in the house of
Commons necessituously compells me to (...) ^^^dent straits and extremities as
you do and (...) all my own subsistence from me, For the Parliament owes me for
my just arreares, the greatest part of a 1000. pound and my Ordinance for 2000.
l. reparations against my unjust Star Chamber Judges, has laid dorment in
their house this two years, although since then, I know several of there own
Members, to whom out of the public money they have given 5000 l. a piece
unto: that I will upon the loss of my life evidently make it good, never
suffered one hundredth part, of that which I did before this Parliament, and yet
I am told some of them have received all there 5000. pounds.
and yet according to Law, and the just custom of the Tower where am Prisoner
will not allow me a subsistence according to my quality, out of the public
treasure, or those that most unjustly and illegally committed me, by means of
which in the eye of reason I am likely shortly to perish, and be destroyed, yet
in these great straits, in the might and strength of God I say to thee O
Cromwell, with an undaunted resolution, as the the three children did to that
grand Tyrant Nebuchad-nezzar, when he was ready to throw them into the hot
fiery furnace, O Cromwell I am not careful for all thy greatness, to tell
thee thy own, and to let thee to know that the God whom I serve, is able to
deliver me, from thy power, and greatness; But if not, be it known unto thee O
Cromwell, that I will not serve thee nor worship or stand in fear of thy
tyrannical power, or that golden or painted Image, the present House of Lords,
which in thy Imaginations and fancy thou have lately set up, that so in time
thou may be one thy self.

Now upon these Pleas and Protestations of the forementioned honest men,
coming so thick upon them, with the gallant and heroical carriage of diverse
of the other prisoners at Windsore, with the late thunders of Mr. Sidgwick and
precious Mr. Saltmarsh, these new Tyrants the Grandees, had such a curb put
into their mouth, that it so stopped the furiousness of their bloody and
murdering Carreare, that they were (as my often Intelligence gives me to
understand) confounded and amazed amongst themselves, and therefore set their
Imps and underhand pentionary Agents at work, to persuade the honest Agent
Prisoners to close in love and union, with some little kind of (though it were
but seeming) reluctance of spirit, And then they and some of there Pencionary
Imps, lyingly get their Diurnall Mercuries to print to the view of the whole
Kingdom, that they all had acknowledged their faults, and cried peccavie, when
as some of them that are named in the Diurnall so to do, have told me that it
is the falsest lie in the world, for they never did any such thing, but ever
did and still do abhor the thoughts of such a base and wicked
acknowledgement.
and then the Generals almightinesse (in whom those ficosantising Grandees,
place as great an omnipotency as ever the Courtiers or Cavialeers did in the
King, the more to serve their wicked and desperate ends, for this I dare
confidently say, if his Excellency would not let his Creator Cromwell rid him,
he should shortly and as fearcely charge him with as impeachment of Treason,
and breach of trust, as ever he did the Earl of Manchester, by means of
which, his Lordship has of lare been very ra^e and gentle to his greatness
Lievt. Genesis Cromwell) should pardon all their iniquities, and pass by all
their transgressions, and forthwith one of Ahabs fosts is called, that so they
may more closely and cowardly smite with the fist of wickedness, that being
too much the apparent end of all their howling lamentations, Which God amount
but mockings unto him, and without amendment of ways, and doing justice and
judgment, reliving the afflicted and oppressed, and breaking all the heavy
yoaks, are odious and abominable in his sight Esaias ^8.4, 5, 6, 7. and Micah 5,
6, 7, 8.

And after the fist (which was by their Diurnall Mercuries sufficiently blown
and sounded over London) to salve up their own reputations and credits, which
than was very much blasted, and to preserve their own lottering greatness, the
tumbling down of which they were afraid of by the great Hatchers the Scoth
struck at their roots with, in their thundering discourse for the King, and his
answering of the lare 4. bills before they were sent him, both of which were
se^^^all demonstrations, to high and mighty Cromwell and Ireton, that the Scots
would on this them and get away their late admired and do^^ upon darling the
King from them, For opposing whose interest till the peoples liberties were
first settled, they sought the ruin and destruction of all those in the Army
that appeared against it.
and then spoil all their expected Court greatness, in wearing a welsh Gue
Gue, the George and a blew ribbin, with the title of (at least) Earl of Essex,
and Lieutenant, or General Field Marshall of Ireland, and so perceiving
thereby that the interest of the Scots was likely to be joined with that of the
Kings and so Royallisme and Presbytery would shortly swallow up forceable and
factious Independency, especially if the interest of the honest
Nown-Substantive Levellers (as the King their Quandum good Lord (in his message
left at Humpton Court when they sent him to the Isse of Whight) lately
christened them, as he had several times done the Parliament, in his several
Declarations published the beginning of these wars) should not be endeavored
to be united to them again, that so now in their necessity and straights, they
might once again make close stools of them to shit in, and when they had
done, to throw them behind the door (as formerly they had) as unfit to remain
in their sight till they needed them again.

And therefore to kill two birds with one stone upon their fast they release
the prisoners as the mind of God, when without doubt they had resolved it
before, as the only expedient to reinbalm their justly lost reputation. And
secondly as the only means to reimpinloante them into the good thoughts of
those men, they and their late royal friends lately christened Levellers, and
to add strength unto the last, the two chief of the Grandees Cromwell and
Ireton, came to the Parliament to heighten them in their votes against the
King, because he had forsaken his first love, and would not be content with
that price that they would give him, to let them reign and rule under him, the
which if he would have taken, no doubt but he might have com'd in to have
jointly with them oppressed and rid the people, but because it may be the Scots
feared, if he came in by the Grandees of the Army, they and he might join
together to chastise them for all their old former provocations given unto
both, and therefore out of mere safety (it may be) to themselves outbid the
Grandees to gain the Kings affection, at which they are mad, and therefore to
preserve their own greatness, and to gain if it be possible, the lost
affections of the honest Nown-Substantive English men, they fly high both
against him and the Scots, that so they may if possible induce them to join
with them in a new war, (which is their interest and trade) without giving or
offering unto the people the least valuable consideration for all the blood
they have already lost, and are more amply like to loose upon the engaging in a
new war, yea, or intending them any, which for my part I do abhor, Which
is clearly evident, by both their pleading and plotting for the supportation
of the Lords usurped Legislative power, which J will maintain it against
Cramwell and Ireton, they have no more right to, instrict justice, then a
thief and robber has to apurse which he takes by force upon the high way,
which pretended Legislative power alone, has brought all the wars upon this
Kingdom, for if they at first had concurred to the Ordinance of the Militia,
the King could never have been able to have raised an Army, and to continue an
arbitrary power for life, and also hereditarily to their heirs, be they fools
or knaves, is the greatest vassalage and bondage that can be, therefore I say
again down with them.
and shall disward, and hinder by all the interest I have in England, not to
undertake, unless the ancient hereditary, just and native right of all
Englishmen indiffinently, be particularly and clearly holden out unto them, and
secured with strong and good security, that so Englishmen as Englishmen may be
united, and then when that is done, my heart blood I will venture against any
interest in the world that shall fight against it. For to fight as hitherto we
have done, to pull down own sort of Tyrants to set up another as bad if not
worse then the former, I think is the greatest madness in the world.

Now having at present done with the Grandees of the Army, there being so much
truly declared of them in that most notable book called Putney Proiects, (the
truth of which, the brazed lacest of their Champions dare not with his pen
deny, no not forsworn Lieutenant Edmond Chillington himself, their choice
darling) that it here saves (...) a labor.

But before I come to touch upon the arbitrary tyrannical proceedings of the
present House of Lords, I shall first insert another piece of injustice (which
should have come in before) of the Judges in Westminster Hall, from whose gross
and habituated injustice arises the principal misery of this Nation, from
age to age, who immediately before this Parliament, gave away all the estates
of all the free men of England at one judgment to the King, for by the same
right he by his will could by his Ship-writs take six pence from us, he may take
all we have, and by the same right he takes our estates, he may take all our
lives. And if for that judgment they had all been hanged that had a hand in
it, as by the practice of this Kingdom, in like or lesser cases, Judges has
been, these that now survive them would have been wary so visibly to forswear
themselves by doing palpable injustice as they do. For the fore mentioned
learned Author Andrew Horn in his merror of justice, page 238. devision 108.
says expressly. That it is an abuse, that Justices and their Officers, who kill
people by their false judgment, be not destroyed as other murderers, which
King Alfred caused to be done, who caused 44. Justices in one year to be hanged
as murderers for their false judgments.

The case that I shall set down, is Mr. Henry Moors, my Quandum fellow
prisoner in the Fleet, and the most lamentable and deplorable unjust dealing of
the Judges with him, you may briefly understand by his Petition which thus
follows.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in both Houses of
Parliament. The Humble Petition of Henry Moore Merchant.
SHOWS, That whereas your Petitioner in Hillary Term Anno 16. Caroli Regis,
after a verdict, obtained a Judgment in his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench of
7000. l. debt and 7. l. 12. d. damages against Thomas Wright who afterward
was charged in execution for the same, in the custody of Sir John Lenthall
Knight, then and yet Marshal of the said Court, and the said Wright being so in
execution for Composition, offered your Petitioner above 2000. l. and security
for the residue of the said debt, all the same appearing to be true by Records
and by proceedings in Chancery under the Great Seal of England, but before any
part thereof satisfied, the said Sir John Lenthall suffered the said Wright to
escape out of Execution.

Your Petitioner therefore in Hillary Term 17. Caroli Regis. Ten days before
the end of that Term, caused an action of debt to be brought for the said
7007. li. 12 d. at your Petitioners suit for the said escape, and then filed a
declaration against the said Sir John Lenthall for the same. But the said Sir
John to deprive your petitioner of the said debt, and all remedy for the same,
10 Trin. 18. Caroli Regis, notwithstanding your Petitioner had several Rules
against Sir John Lenthall for judgment upon his declaration so filed in
Hillary 17. He the said Sir John Lenthall procured an Order to be made by Sir
John Brampston Knight, and Sir Thomas Mallet Knight in open Court, that your
petitioners Declaration filed in Hillary 17. should be filed as of Easter
Term the 18. contrary to justice, the law of this Kingdom, the liberty of
the Subjuct, and the rules of the said Court, as your petitioner is advised.
And for that your petitioners being so advised that the said Order does utterly
bar your petitioner of his said debt. Your Petitioner several times
publicly in Court and otherwise moved the Judges to alter the same, but could
not prevail, as appears by the Order of the said Court, and for that, that
notwithstanding your petitioner earnest solicitation for his judgment due by
the rules of the said Court for the space of above four years together, and
his great expense after 15. Orders made in the said Court, the now Judges of
the said Court, Mr. Justice Bacon, and Mr. Justice Roll has confirmed the
same, as appears by an Order by them made, per Hillar. 22. Caroli Regis now
ready to be showed.

In tender consideration of the premises, that your petitioner according to the
Law filed his declaration in Hillary 17. when the prisoner was escaped and at
liberty, and for that the said Judges Order contrary to Law barreth your
petitioner from prosecuting upon that declaration, and binds your petitioner
to file his declaration as of Easter term 18. Caroli, when the said Marshall
aleadged that he had retaken the said prisoner again and that he was dead, and
that your petitioners debt is destroyed by the said Judges Order, to your
petitioners damage above 10000 l. And for that other debts may be destroyed by
the like. If men be barred from the benefit of their just Records duly filled as
the petitioner is, contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the liberty of
the Subject, which appears to be done (in this Cause) by the Orders
themselves. Your Petitioner humbly craveth releife according to his damages.

And your Petitioner shall pray. Henry Moore.

Which petition the said Moore delivered to Col. Henry Martin, and diverse other
Parliament men, but can not so much as get his petition read in It is worth the
taking notice, the Speaker is Sir John Lenthalls brother, and it is almost
grown to a common proverb in England, that Parliament men's near Allies as well
as themselves are above the reach of all law and justice, which I am sure if
they look not speedily well about them, will destroy them every man.
the House, upon whom he has long attended, and still waits, and most
earnestly, and deplorably cries out to be releived from this intolerable
oppression, by which the said Moore is damnified (as in his printed complaints
to the House he declares) above ten thousand pound, to the hazard of his utter
ruin.

Now I shall here crave the liberty, to insert the epittomy of my own cruel and
barbarous sufferings, with this desire to all that reads it, seriously to
consider that what has befaln me, by the cruel tyrany of by past Tyrants and
oppressors, if not strongly remedied and repaired, may for future be
encouragement for the present Tyrants to inflict (when they dare for fear of
being dismounted) the like if not worse upon the first Nown-Substantive
Englishman, that shall resolutely stand in their way. And it is the clearest
demonstration to me in the world, that the present men in power always
intended to walk in the oppressive and tyranous ways of the Star Chamber, High
commission, and council board, in that they have done no man effective justice
or right that suffered by them, least their own Acts should be binding
presidents to pay their own Acts should be binding Presidents, to pay
themselves by in future times.
The sum of what I have here to insert, I shall lay down in the very words
that J delivered in print to the Members of the House of Commons at the House
door, the 23. November. last, which thus follows.

A new complaint of an old grievance, made by Lievt. Col. John Lilburne,
Prerogative prisoner in the Tower of London. November. 23. 1647. To every
Individual Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
MY exceeding urgent necessities, and my extraordinary sufferings by your
neglect in doing me justice and right, according to your many oaths and
declarations, presses me above measure still to play the part of the poor
importunate widow, mentioned in the Gospel, and to resolve whatever befalls
(...) never to give over till I have attained her end, viz. Justice.

You may please truly to take notice (and the rather because many of you are
new Members that in the year 1637. and 1638. I suffered a most barbarous
sentence by the Star Chamber, occasioned by two false oaths sworn against me
by Edmond Chillington, The substance of which, with my defense against them in
open Star Chamber, and when I stood upon the Pillory at Westminster, you may
largely read in the relation of my first sufferings, called The Christian man's
trial, reprinted by Will. Larner 1641. now dwelling at the black boy within
Bishops-Gate.
now a Lieutenant under Col. Whaly, and by my refusing to answer
interrogatories against my self, in executing of which sentence the 18. of
April 1638. I was tied to a Car^^ tail at Fleet bridge, and whipped through the
streets to Westminster, and had given me above the number of 500. stripes, with
a threefold knotted corded whip, the weeles made in my back thereby being
bigger then Tobacco pipes, etc. And set two hours upon the Pillory bare head
in an extraordinary hot day, and a gag put into my mouth above an hour, to the
almost renting of my jaws in sunder See my printed relation of my business
before the Lords bar the 13. Feb. 1645. where all this with much more is proved
upon Oath.

And upon that very day, 10. Judges of the said Star Chamber made an Order to
murder and starve me, Which Order you may read at the last end of my above
mentioned relation.
the very words of which Order being, that the said John Lilburn shall be laid
alone with irons on his hands and legs, in the wards of the Fleet, where the
basest and meanest sort of prisoners are used to be put: and that the Warden of
the Fleet, take especial care to hinder the resort of any persons whatsoever
unto him, and particularly, that he be not supplied with money from any friend.
And yet they not any for them during all my imprisonment never allowed me the
value of one f^rthing token to live upon, but executed the said Order upon me
with so much barbaritie, that my pining, tormenting condition, was a thousand
times worse, and less to be endured, then any sudden death whatever, under
which without doubt I had perished, had it not been for the timely relief of
this Parliament, by which said sufferings I was robbed of a profitable trade, in
the flower of my days.

And being by you set at liberty the first week of your fitting, J was by the
malice of one Littleton a Cou^tier, by the Kings especial command arrested of
high Treason, and the 4. May 1641. by the Kings own direction, I received a
kind of an Arraignment at the Lords bar, where the said Lietteton most falsely
swore point blanke against one, to the apprant hazard of my life and being if
he had not been contradicted by the oath of his own friend Mr. Andrews a
Counceller, upon which day and at that very time, the House of Commons were so
sencible of my sad and suffering condition, that they were pleased upon the
report of Mr Francis Rouse to make these Votes for me.

Resolved upon the question. That the sentence of the Star Chamber given
against John Lilburne, is illegal and against the liberty of the Subject, and
also bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous, and tyrannical.

Resolved upon the question, that reparations ought to be given to Mr Lilburne,
for his imprisonment, sufferings and losses sustained by that illegal sentence.

And yet I never had to this hour one penny of reparations, although J dare
safely say it, I have spent above a thousand pound one way and another in
following you therefore, above the space of seven years, which is a longer
time, for any thing I can read of in Scripture, then ever the importunate widow
followed the unrighteous Judge (that neither feared God nor reverenced man) and
yet obtained justice at his hands.

That upon my deliverance, by the assistance of one of my friends, I betook my
self to a trade for my livelihood, and of my own and my foresaid friend, stockt
it with almost 1500. l. ready money, and the late wars coming on, at the
desires of many eminent men of this Kingdom my then choice friends, I left my
trade, and in judgment and conscience girded my sword unto my thigh, with an
honest resolution to spend my heart blood for the preservation of the laws and
liberties of my native country, which then the Parliament by their
Declarations, made me and the Kingdom believe was endeavored to be destroyed
by the King and his evil Council. And having like a man of undaunted
resolution adventured my life at Edgehill and Brainford, with good and
advantageous successes to the Parliament, though with ill to my self, being to
a good value plundered at both places, and at the last taken prisoner, where by
the inhumaine barbaritie of several Lords and others, I was diverstimes in
danger after quarter given (before I came at Oxford) to be bu^^ in pieces,
being pinioned with my arms behind me, and tied to another, and forced on foot
through all the dirt and mire to March two days together. And being arrived a
prisoner at Oxford Castle, J was visited by four Lords, ( viz. the Lord
Newarke, now Marquess of Dorchester, the Lord Dunsmore, now Earl of
Chichester, the Lord Mattravers now Earl of Arundell, and the Lord Andiver) as
messengers from the King (at they told me) and in his name proferred whatever
in reason I could desire, in his then prosperous condition, so J would forsake
the Parliament, and my present principles, and desire his pardon which they all
unanimously promised to get for me, but I told their Lordships they were
mistaken in me if they thought I was to be courted out of my principles, and as
for his Majesty's pardon I told them I scorned either the craving or accepting
of it, having in obedience to the Parliaments then commands done nothing but
what I did then believe was just and legal, and for which I would willingly
lay my life down, and the desiring or accepting of a pardon would argue
guiltiness, which I told them I believed I had no need to confess. Whereupon
I was clapped in irons night and day, forcd to lie in my clothes upon the flore,
locked, up close in a Chamber, when I had not a penny of money about me, being
lately plundered of all I had, and a centry set at my door, that I could not
speak with any of my fellow prisoners, to borrow a penny to buy me bread, by
means of which I was exposed to the greatest of straights, and immediately in
irons arraigned as a Traitor, before Sir Robert Heath, and Sir Thomas Gardner,
etc. for levying war against the King, by authority from the Parliament, and I
pleaded to my indictm^nt, telling the Judge, J girded my sword unto my thigh in
judgment and conscience, by virtue of the greatest authority in the land, with
a resolution to speed the last drop of my blood, for the preservation of the
just laws and liberties of my native country, being seduced thereunto by no
flesh alive, acting not by an Imp^cite faith, but upon principles of judgment
and understanding, in the defense whereof I told him I was then as ready to dye
by a halter, as before I had been either by a Bullet or a Sword, and having
escaped that danger of hanging by a letter of the Speakers of this House,
threatening unto them, Lex taliones, As you may read in the first part book
Decl. 802. 803.

I contracted there, by hard usage, a desperate and dangerous sickness, of
which I lay speechless diverse days, the inhumanity of the barbarous Marshall
Smith, being such toward me, that he would neither suffer Physician,
Apothecary, Surgion, nor Nurse to come near me, and though some Gentlemen then
in bonds with me, got a poor half starved Prisoner to look to me, yet he was
clapped up twice close Prisoner for helping me in those great straights, and I
could not freely enjoy his help, till I purchased it for money at the hands of
one of Smith^ cruel tormentors.

By which imprisonment (besides my large expenses there) I lost at London in
debets, etc. (my Debtors taking the advantage of my araignment for treason,
would as they said pay us Traitors debts) about 600. l. every penny of which
lay upon mine own particular shoulders. And coming out with the same
Principles I went in, I betook my self to my sword again, having refused here
at London; diverse places of ease, profit and honor and with much resolution
and integrity, in the midest of many discouragements, I fought under the Earl
of Manchesters command so long, tell (by his and others visible apostatising
from the first declared ends, and by the wjckednesse, treachery basesse, and
perfidiousnesse J found there) I had lost all my principles, and could not for
all the world any longer kill Caveleeres, in whose service I was plundered the
third time at Newarke, to the value almost of 100 l. besides many scores of
pounds of my own money in that ^^vice I spent, Which I did upon this ground, at
the first modalizing of Sir Tho. Fairfaxes Army, the Parliament voted that none
should bear office in that new Model but he that would take the Covenant,
whereupon though I was proffered better employment then before I ever had, yet I
told Liev. General Cromwell whose white Boy then I was, that upon them terms
I scorned to be so base as ever again to draw my sword for the Parliament, for
h^itherto I had served them, faithfully and uprightly out of principles of
Conscience, and not as a Mercenary, for their money, and what ^^^^soever he
was, that should grow jealous of me without a cause. I would never again upon
my terms in the world serve that Master any more. As for the Covenant every
Knave and Rascal that had no more conscience then a dog, would take either it
or any other oath whatsoever for his own advantage, and for his gain and
profit break it as soon as he had taken it, but J told him, I for my part was
compelled to be honest out of a principle of conscience, and not out of the
forc^ of Oaths. And besides I for my particular would never be such a Traitor
to the laws of my God, and to the liberties of my native Country, as to take
such an insnaring, intangling, dishonorable Scotch Oath.
more then ever there I received, there being due unto me at this day, for my
arreare, there, the greatest part of a thousand pounds, as I doubt not upon
just and (...) grounds clearly when you please to make appear.

That at the laying down my command J rigorously, with all the interest J had
in England betook my self to an earnest prosecution to obtain at the hands of
your house, my just and long expected and promised reparations from my cruel
Star Chamber Judges, (one of which viz. old Sir Henry Vain sits in your House
at this day) in the following of which I met with such hard and unreasonable
measure (not only from the hands of your h^^se it self, Who by Mr. Speakers
means Committed me at eight a clock at night, without hearing me, though at
your door, or without seeing those that accused me, and afterward made an
Order to arraign me for my life at Newgate Sessions, and yet releast me without
telling me wherefore I was imprisoned. See my book called Innocence and Truth
justified.
but also from its Committees, in being causlesly tossed and tumbled out of the
hands of one Messenger to another, and from one Goal to an other) that it made
me almost as weary of the Land of my nativity as ever the Jsraelitas were of
A^gipt when the cruel Tyrant Pharaoh made them to make bricks without straw,
especially when I considered that all this was done unto me by those for the
saving alive, and preserving of whom, J had so often, freely, and resolutely,
with my sword in my hand adventured my life, and in the days of their greatest
straights and calamities been as faithful to them, as ever Jonathan was to
David, when he hazzarded ruin and destruction from his father for siding with
him. Yea, and if it had then been in my power, could have done a thousand times
more then I did, verily believing they would have performed their just
Declarations to the Kingdom. But before the storm of your indignation was well
blown over the fearcenesse of which had almost overwhelmed me, behold such a
furious tempest the 10. of July 1646. arises against me by the House of Lords,
as if it would have blown me into an other Horzian, or have Metamorphased me
into the shape and habit of a bruit beast, and have robbed me of all things
that might give me the denomination of a man, LEVELLING thereby the Liberties
and freedoms of all the Commons of England, unto their arbitrary, Lordly
wills. And having about 18. months ago fled unto you (as justly I might) for
shelter, protection, and justice against them, which by my several Pleas
before your Committees I have proved you ought long since to have afforded me;
and having the 11. of this instant in half a sheet of Paper, presented (here
at your door, as now I do to your hands) an abstract of the Lords
tyrannical; illegal dealing with me. And of all by way of Plea, I have for my
self to say; with a desire to stand or fall under your Judgment thereupon,
which yet J cannot obtain from you, and therefore referring you to that
Abstract, and to my Grand Plea before Mr. Maynard upon the 20. October last,
and my Additionall Plea annexed unto it, for all the particulars ^ crave and
challenge at your hands as my right and due. I adjure you before Heaven and
Earth, and before the Lord Jehovah, and his mighty and glorious Angels,
without any more delay, to adjudge my cause betwixt the Lords and me, either to
my justification or condemnation, and to do me Justice and right by helping me
to my own, kept from me by you, and do not by your 7. years delay of
justice, lay more provocations upon me, then my strength and ability is able to
bear, and then go about to distroy me, for my crying out of your oppression;
when in the eye of ^eason I have no other remedy left me in this world but
that, or to distroy my self, wife and Children, which even nature it self
abhor^s, or else to live upon the kindnesses of those, that in future time to
my reproach shall (as some from whom I should little have expected it have
lately done) hit me in the teeth with it, which makes the proffer of their
courtesies a scorn unto me, and the thoughts of not being able to ^epay them
again; a burden to my spirit. And therefore to conclude, let me in the
bitterness of my spirit, say unto you as the unrighteous Judge said unto
himself, although by your actings toward ^^, you declare that you neither
fear God, nor reverence (...), yet for my necessity and pressing
importunities take, now at last to do just and right; for if I must dye by
yours, and the Lords murdering oppression, I am resolved if I can help it, I
will not dye alone, nor in a corner in silence. Therefore help me unto my
own, to leave subsistence unto my Wife and Children, that they may not beg
their bread when I am dead and gone. And if nothing but my blood will serve my
cruel adversaries, if they be men, I challenge the stoutest of them in
England, (...) unto hand, with his sword in his hand like a man, to put a
period to my days, being ready to ^nswer any man in England, Lord or Commoner,
that has any thing to lay to my charge? Either, First as a rational man: Or,
Secondly, as a resolved man; Or, Thirdly, as an English man.


In the last of which I shall desire no more favor then every Traitor, Rogue,
or Murderer, that is arraigned for his life at Newgate Sessions injoyes, viz.
the benefit of the declared known law of England. And so at present I rest.

Your oppressed friend, that loudly cries out to you for justice and right.
John Lilburne.
From my most illegal, starving, and murdering tyrannical, imprisonment in
the Tower of London, this 23. Novem. 1647. going into the eight year of my
fruitless expecting justice from the deaf and hard hearted house of Commons.
Be pleased to take notice, that diverse hundreds of this half sheet of paper
I delivered the day of the date of it to the Parliament men's own hands at their
door, and the Soldiers, and the by Standers, and while I was delivering them
at there door out came Mr John Ash the clothier to me, (a man that has
fingered about ten thousands pounds for his pretended losses of the States
money, besides what he has got as Chair man to the Commit for composition at
Goldsmiths Hall, which if common fame be not a liar, has been largely
profitable to him, as well as other of the like places are said to be to others
of his bespoted brethren) and told me to this effect, that he had formerly
honored me for my great sufferings, but I had of la^^ Joined with David
Ienkins to destroy this Parliament, which he was pleased to say was the bases
and foundation of the peace, and being of this distressed Commonwealth, for
which I very well deserved to be executed, as he said, unto which, with a good
resolution I replied (having my back against their house door.) to this
purpose: Sir, I scorn your word^s, and charge, of joining with Judge Ienkins,
or any other whatsoever, either to destroy this Parliament, or the Common
wealth, for I am the same man in principles, that ever I was, and as true to
mine, as Judge Ienkins is to his, though you, and the most of the Members of
your House, be changed from yours, and Sir I tell you, that before ever I see
Judge Jenkins face, I had law enough to deal with twenty such as you are,
though I confess I have lost nothing in the particular by my acquaintance with
him, but have gained, much by my imprisonment with him, in the knowledge of the
Law, but Sir, I retort your own words, back upon you, and aver that it is
you, and such as (...) are, by that palpable injustice, that so acted by you,
that will not only destroy this House, but hazard the total destruction of
the whole Kingdom, for I my self have waited upon you seven years for
Justice, to my large expense, but yet cannot obtain one dram of right, from
your hands, although you can find time enough to shaire the Commonwealths
money amongst your selves, by thousands and ten thousands, and whereas you say,
that I deserve to be executed, I would have you to know, I scorn your
courtesy or mercy, and desire you from me to tell your house, that I am ready
to answer the whole house or any particular Member in it according to the Law
of the Kingdom, at any bar of Justice in England, when and where they
please, without craving or desiring the least drame of favor or (...) at their
hands, and here upon the Gentleman want away as though he had had a flee in his
Ear.

And by and by came out of the House an ancient man (as I was told, called Mr.
Jenner,) and he rusly demanded where the man was that delivered those books,
one of which he had in his hand, and I having my back fast against their door,
and looking him full in the face, told him after this manner, that I was he,
that not only delivered them, but also made them, and would justify them to
the death; says he can you expect any good at our hands to give as such
language as at the conclusion of it you do? unto which I replied; Sir, I wish
you had not given me too much cause, by your delaying to do me justice, and
right, and tossing and tumbling ^^ as you have done from our Goal to another,
to give you a great deal (...) whereupon he departed and left me, and I went
on giveing away the aforesaid papers.

But now in regard I can neither obtain law nor justice, at the hands of the
House of Commons, either upon my Star Chamber Judges, nor yet upon, nor against
the present House of Lords, most barbarous, tyrannical, arbitrary, and
murdering dealing with me, and seeing it is clearly discovered every day more
then other, and obvious in my apprehesion to every rational man's eye, that the
design of the present seeming sanctified swaying faction; (which who they
principally are, I have named before) is totally to subject the freemen of this
Kingdom to vassaledge and slavery, and subdue there fundamental laws and
liberties, by crushing in pieces (arbitrarily and tyrannically,) every cordial
hearted and Noun-Substantive English man, that dare peep out in the least to
own his freedoms and liberties, or stand for them, thereby demonstrating that
they have learned their lesson well, from that old guided Fox the Lord Say,
whose maxim it is (if he be not wronged) that it is as dangerous to let the
people know their liberties and freedoms, as to let a stomackt Horse know his
strength, and therefore it is, that my Lord and the rest of his new factionated
Independents (who in my Judgment are grown more tyrannical already, then
either the Episcopalls of old, or the late swaying Presbyterians) have so many
Beagles and Cur-dogg, not only to sharlar, but to bite the shins of every man
they can find out, that dare presume to write, print, or publish any light or
information to the people; and if they hold on but a little longer as they have
begun, it is to be feared they will make it death, as the great Turk does, for
any man to keep a printing press. And seeing they have (in my eyes) laid aside
the studying the Gospel of truth and peace, or practicing any thing that is
commended by it, and are totally studying and practicing of Machievell, and are
closing and dabbing with the interest of the public Priests, to make the
public pulpits sound forth their rotten praises, and uphold their new
confu^^d Babell sandy interest, though in this book (by reason of the great
distractions of the kingdom) I thought to have been very tender of the House
of Commons and its committees: yet because slavery and tyranny is already go
over the threshold, I must furnish my friends with some weapons to keep it out
of the kitchine and Hall, least it get possession speedily of the whole house,
and for that end I shall insert my Defiance to Tyrants in a plea, which thus
follows.

A Defiance to Tyrants. Or a Plea made by Lievt. Col. John Lilburne Prerogative
Prisoner in the Tower of London, the 2. of December. 1647. Against the
proceedings, of the close and illegal Committee of Lords and Commons,
appointed to examine those that are called London Agents, with diverse large
additions, unto which is annexed a Plea for the said Citizens of London against
the Committee for plundered Ministers, for their illegal imprisoning them for
refusing to pay Tithes.
ALL Magistracy in England, is bounded by the ^o^wn and declared Law of
England, See the Petition of right, and Sir Edw. Cooks 4. part institutes,
Chap. high Court of Parliament.
and while they Act according to Law, I am bound to obey them, but when they
leave the rules thereof, and walk by the arbitrarie rules of their own Wilt,
they do not act as Magistrates, but as See King James his, speech to the Parl.
at White Hal 1609. and 1. par. book Decl. page 150. and my book called the
Outcryes of oppressed Commons. page 16, 17. 18. and my Epistle to Mr. Martin of
the 31. May 1647. called Rash Oaths, page 56
Tyrants, and cannot in such actings challenge any obedience, neither am I
bound to yield it, but am tied in conscience and duty to my self and my native
Country, therein to resist and withstand them, and if their Officers go about
by force and violence to Compel me to obey and stoop unto their arbitrary and
illegal command; See Cooks 2. part inst. upon the 29. chap. of Magna Charta,
fo. 52. 53. and fo. 590, 591. and regal Tyrany, p. 78. 79. 80, 81. and Vox
Plebis, p. 37. and my plea before Mr. Mart^n of the 6. Novem. 1646. called an
anatomy of the Lords tyrany, page 5. 7. ^.
I may, and ought (if I will be true to my native and legal freedoms) by force
to withstand him or them, in the same manner that I may withstand a man that
comes to rob my house, or as I may withstand a man that upon the high way, by
force and violence, would take my purse or life from me.

And therefore all Warrants coming from any pretended or real Committees of
Lords and Commons to command me before them, that are not formed according to
the Law of England, I ought not to obey but withstand and resist upon pain of
being by all the ambiased understanding men of England esteemed, a betrayer and
destroyer of the Laws and liberties of England, for the preservation of which,
I ought to contest as Naboth did with King Ahab for his vineyard, 1 King. 21.2,
3, 4, 13. And by the Law of England, no warrant or process ought to issue out
to summon up any man to any Court of Justice in England whatsoever, till a
complaint by a certain prosecutor be filed or exhibited, in that Court of
justice, from whence the warrant, process, or Summons comes, which warrant,
process, or Summons ought expressly to contain the nature of the cause to
which I am to answer, and the name of my prosecutor or complainants, or else it
is not legal, and so not binding, but may and ought to be resisted by me, and
the Court must be sure to have legal jurisdiction over the causes,

Secondly, All the Capacities that either the House of Commons or Lords can sit
in, is.

First, Either as a Council, and so are to be close, (and for any man
whatsoever in that Capacity to come, or offer to come in amongst them, that
do not belong unto them, is unwarrantable, and so punishable, Se Cooks 2.
part. inst. fol. 103. 104. and 4. part inst. Chap. High Court of Parlm. and the
book called the manner of holding Parlmts. and Mr. Prinns relation of the
trial of Col. Nath Fines. p. 13. and regal tirany page 82. 83.
or else.

Secondly, As a Court of Justice, to try and examine men in criminal causes,
and in this capacity they or any of their Committees ought always to Sir
open, for all peaceable men freely to behold and see, See 2. part inst. fol.
103, 104. and my book called the resolved man's resolution, p. 56. and regal
tyrany. p. ^^, ^2, 83. and Mr. Prinns relation of Col. Nath. Fines his trial,
p. 11, 12, 13.
or else I am not bound to go to any trial with them, or answer them a word,
and therefore in this sense most illegal is the close Committee of Lords and
Commons, See my grand plea, and my letter 11. Nov. 1647. to every Jndividuall
Member of the House of Commons, See Sir Edw. Cooks exposition of the 14. and
29. Chap of Magna Charta in his 2. part inst. and regal tyranny, p. 43, 44,
72, 73, 74, 85, 86. and Vox Plebis, page 38, 39 40, 41, 42. and my Epistle to
the Lievt. of the Tower the 13. Ian. 1646. called the oppressed man's
oppressions declared, p. 17. 18, 19.
for examining those (they call) London Agents, or any other whatsoever.

And Thirdly, that Close Committee is most illegal, being a mixture of Lords
with Commons, seeing the Lords are none of their or my Peers and Equals by
Law, and so cannot, nor ought not to be there, to be my examiners, tryers or
Judges, and a traitor I am to the laws and liberties of England, if I stoop or
submit to the jurisdiction or power of such a mixed Committee. f

Thirdly, It is contrary to Law, and expressly against the Petition of right,
either for this Committee of Lords and Commons; See Vox Plebis, p. 38. my
anatomy of the Lords tyrany, p. 10. and Thompsons plea against Marshall Law.
or any other Court of justice or Committee whatsoever, to force me or any man
to answer to interrogatories against my self, or my near relations.

Fourthly, Neither can they legally go about to try or punish me, for any crime
that is triable or punishable at Common law. See the proofs in the third
Maginall note at the letter C.


Which Statute you may read before, p. 6. and take notice of this, that all
misdemeanors whatsoever are Baileable.
See the 3. E. 1. c. 26. and 4. E. 3. 10. and 23. H. 6 10. Rast. plea. fo. 31.
7. Vox Plebis. p. 55, 56. 57. and my late Epistle to C. West late Liev. of the
Tower, calle^ the oppressed man's oppressions declared, p. 3, 4. 1. part Cooks
inst. Lib. 3. chap. 13. Sect 71. fol 368. where he positively declares, it was
the native and ancient, rights of all Englishmen, both by the Statute and
Common Law of England, to pay no fees at all to any administrators of justice
whatsoever, or any Clarke or Office^ whatsoever officiating under them, who
were only to receive their Fees, Wages, and Salleries of the King, out of the
public treasure. See also 2 part inst. fol. 74. 209. 210. The Public
treasure of the Kingdom being betrusted with the King for that and such ends:
see also that excellent book in English, called the Mirror of justice, chap. 5.
Sect. 1. page 231. and Judge Huttons argument in Mr. Hamdens case against ship
money, page 41.
See 1. part inst. lib. 3. Chap. 7. Sect. 438. fo. 260. and the 2. part fo. 43,
315, 590. see my book called the oppressed man's oppressions declared, p. 3. Vox
plebis p. 47, 55. 56. and liberty vindicated against slavery, p. 14, 15, 16,
in his 2. part just. fol. 42, 43. which is exceeding well worth your reading,
see fo. 315, 316, 590, 591. see the mirror of justice in English, chap. 5.
Sect. 1. devision 53, 54, 55, 57, 58. page 231.
Fifthly, and if in case there be no Law extant, to punish their Pretended
London Agents for doing their duty in prosecuting those just things, that the
Parliament has often declared is the right and due of all the free men in
England, they ought to go free from punishment, for where there is no Law,
there can (says the Apostle Paul) be no transgression, see Romans 4.15. Englands
Birth right, p. 1. 2, 3, 4, and the resolved man's resolution, p. 24, 25, 26.
but if that Committee or any other power in England shall Commit me, or any
Commoner in England to prison, for disobeying their illegal and Arbitrary
Orders, it is more then by Law they can do, neither ought I to go to prison,
but by force and violence (which I cannot resist) and I ought to see that the
warrant be legal in the form of it, that is to say, that it be under hand and
seal, and that he or they in law have power to commit me, and that the warrant
contain the express cause wherefore I am committed, and also have a lawful
conclusion, viz. and him safely to keep until he be delivered by due course of
Law, and not during the pleasure of this House or Committee, or till this house
or Committee do further order, and I may and ought to read the warrant, and to
have a copy of it, if I demand it, without ^aying any thing for it, and if I
be committed for any crime not mentioned in the statute of 3. Ed. 1 Chap. 15.
Which Statute you may read before, p. 6. and take notice of this, that all
misdemeanore whatsoever are Baileable.
I am Baileable, which I may and ought to tender in person to the parties that
Commit me, either (if I have them by me) before I go to prison, or else as
soon as I am in prison, or as soon as I can conveniently get f^ bail for me,
and in case I be legally committed, both for power, matter and form, and be
kept in prison after I have proffered bail (as before) I may bring my action
of false imprisonment, and recover damages therefore: but besides know this,
that there is not one farthing token due to the Serient at Arms or any other
Officer whatsoever, that carries me to prison, neither is there one penny due to
any Jailer whatsoever for fees from me, but one bare groat at most; I and when
I am in prison, I ought to be used with all civilitie and humanity; for that
great Lawyer, Sir Edw. Cook expressly says, m That imprisonment must only be a
safe custody, not a punishment, and that a prison ought to be for keeping men
safe to be duly tried, according to the Law and custom of the Land, but not in
the least to punish or destroy them, (or to remain in it till the party
committing please) and he further says, in his exposition of the 26. chap. of
Magna Charta, ^n that the Law of the Land favoring the liberty and freedom
of a man from imprisonment, and so highly hating the imprisonment of any man
whatsoever, though committed or accused of heinous and odious crimes, that by
law it self is not baileable, yet in such a case it allows the prisoner the
benefit of the Writ called de odio and aria, anciently called breve, de bono
and Malo to purchase his liberty by, which (he says) he ought to have out
gratis, Only this is to be taken notice of, that if I commit an offense before
the view of a Judge or Justices fitting upon the Bench I ought to go to prison
with, or by his verbal command, with any officer of the Court he shall Command
me to go with, only he ought to enter a Mittiter and send it after me when the
Court rises, and I may if I please proffer him bail to answer the Law when he
Commits me, which he ought not to refuse, and if he do, it is false
imprisonment, if my pretended or real crime were baileable, and my action I
may have against him.
which writ is in force to this day, and therefore (he says ibid.) that the
Justices of assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and of Jail delivery have
not suffered the prisoner to belong detained, but at their next coming have
given the prisoner full and speedy justice, by due trial without detaining him
long in prison. Nay (says he) they have been so far from allowance of his
detaining in prison without due trial, that it was resolved in the case of the
Abot of St. Albon, by the whole Court, that where the King had granted to the
Abott of St. Albon, to have a Jail, and to have a Jail delivery, and diverse
persons were committed to that Jail for felony, and because the Abott would
not be at the cost to make deliverance, In his 2. part inst. fo. 52, 53. in
which pages you may read the very words of an Habeas Corpus, as also in the 79,
80, 81. pages of Regal tyranny, where you may have them in English, as well as
Latin.
he detained them in prison long time without making lawful deliverance, that
the Abott had for that cause forfeited his franchise, and that the same might
be seized into the Kings hand. Upon which Habeas Corpus, if you be brought up
to the bar, you ought if wrongfully imprisoned, clearly to be discharged
without bail, and with bail if justly imprisoned if your crime be baileable,
or else the Judge forsweares himself, for which you may indict him for perjury,
and also have an action at Law for false imprisonment against him that falsely
committed you, or they that forced you hither, yea, and in diverse cases against
the Jailer himself, who ought not by law (upon their perils) to receive or
detain you, but by a legal warrant flowing from a legal power, as before I
have more fully noted. See also 1. p. book decl. p. 201.

And you are to know, that any house keeper that stand not committed of crimes,
but are legal men, paying scot and lot (though they be no subsidy men) are
good bail, and if refused, you have your action of false imprisonment against
him that so does, and you are further to know, that if the prisoner be in a
Country Jail, who is ^o be brought up to the Bar in Westminster Hall upon the
Habeas Corpus, that he is only to bear his own charges, but by law is not
bound to beat the Gaolers, or to pay him any thing for bringing him.




And in case the party be committed to prison unjustly, and no Bail will be
taken for him, he ought to require a Copy of his Mittimus, and to have it
gratis, and if I should demand it and it would not be given me, I would not go
unless I were carried by force, by head and heels, and then I would cry out
Murder, Murder, ^o and do the best I could to preserve my self till I had got
a Copy of it; for many times, when a man comes to prison the dogged Jailer will
refuse to let me have it (which may be a great ^e^riment to me) and if I stir
or busse for it, his will shall be a Law unto me, to du^geon me, b^^t and
fetter me, contrary to Law. It being (as Andrew Horn says in his excellent
book called the Mirror of justice in English, Chap. 5. Sect. 1. devision 54.
page 231.) an abuse of Law, that a prisoner is laden with irons, or put to
pain before he be attainted of felony, etc. And when J am thus in prison
(committed by what authority soever) the first thing that J am to do, is to
send my friend (be he what he will be) a^ well a private understanding resolute
man, as a Lawyer) for either my self, or any one I will appoint, may and ought
to plead my cause before any Judge in England, as well as any Lawyer in the
kingdom, and neither ought by the Judge to be forbidden, snub'd, or brow
beaten) to the Chancery for a Habeas Corpus, if it be out of Term: for as Sir
Edward Cook on the 29. chap. of Magna Charta well p says, the Chancery is a
shop of justice always open, and never adiourned, so as the subject being
wrongfully imprisoned; may have justice for the liberty of his person as well
in the Vacation time, as in the Term, but if it be Term time, it is most
proper to move for the Habeas Corpus at the Kings bench bar, and if the
Judges refuse to grant it unto you (it being your right by Law, as the Petition
of right fully declare, q and the Judges by their oath (before printed page 10,
36) are bound to execute the Law impartially, without giving care in the least,
to the unjust command of the Parliament, or any other against it) then you may
by the Law indict the judge or Judges for Perjury, and if then they shall deny
you the benefit of the Law, I know no reason but you may conclude them absolute
Tyrants, and that the foundation of Government is overturned, and you (as the
Parliament has taught you) are left to the natural remedy to preserve your
selves which self preservation, they have declared no people can be deprived
of; see their declarations, 1. part book decl. p. 207, 690. 728, 150.

John Lilburne, in adversity and prosperity, and in life and death, always one
and the same for the liberties of himself, and his native Country.
From my arbitrary, tyrannical, and Murdering imprisonment, in the Tower of
London this 2. of December. 1647.
Postcript
But while I was concluding this second edition of the London Agents plea, with
the foreexpressed additions, news is brought me that the committee of
plundered Ministers, summons up Londoners, and commits them for non payment of
Tithes; for whom I frame a Plea thus. That the houses of Parliament, have
already made two Ordinances about tithes of the 8. of Novem. 1644. and the 9.
of August 1647. and by those Ordinances referred the London-Parsons, or
ministers in London, to get their tithes according to the statute of the ^7. H.
8. 12. which statute authorized such, and such men to be Commissioners as are
therein named, or any fix of them to make a decree, which decree shall be as
binding to the Londoners as an express act of Parliament, in which they give
the Parsons two shillings nine-pence in the pound, for all house-rents, etc.
which the Londoners, are bound to pay unto their parsons, if the said decree
had (as by the foresaid statute it ought to have been) entered upon record in
the High Court of Chancery, which it never was nor is no^ her to be found a^
Me^arborow the Lawyer, in Roben-hoods court in Bow-lane London, proved by
certificate under the Record keeper^ hand, before Alderman Adams, when he was
Lord Mayor of London; In a case betwixt Parson Glendon of ^arkins by
Tower Hill, and one of his Parishoners, viz. Mr. Robert a Merchant, as I
remember for I was by, and heard all the Plea.

And therefore the Parsons of London, can neither by Law nor those Ordinances,
recover or justly require, one farthing token of Tithes from any Citizen of
London.

And for the Committee of plundered Ministers, by any pretended authority that
yet is visible to take upon them to execute those Ordinances, or to compel the
Citizens of London to pay tithes to their Parsons or Ministers, they have no
more authority or right to do it, then a Three has upon the high way to rob
me of my purse, or life, and for them by the Law of their own will, to take
upon them to send Summons to any Freeman of England, and to force them to come
before them; and without due process of And what due process of Law is, you
may read in the 2. part institutes upon the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, and Vox
Plebis page 11, 12, 14, 15. etc. and my book called The resolved man's
resolution, page 3, 4, 5, 6. etc. and my grand plea against the Lords, and
Thompsons plea against the new Tyrants at Windsore executing Marshall Law.
law; to pay so much money to the Parsons, upon any pretense whatsoever, and
for unwillingnesse to pay, to commit him or them to prison, is a crime in my
Judgment of as high a nature in subverting our fundamental laws and
liberties, and se^ing up an Arbitrary Tyrannical government, as the Earl of
Strafford was accused of; and lost his head for; and as well do the actors in
this arbitrary Committee deserve to dye for these actions, as Traiterous
subverters of all laws, as the Earl of Strafford did for his, against whom in
the fifth Article of his aditionall Impeachment of treason, it is alleged
against him, That h^ did use and exercise a power, above and against; and to
the subversion of the said fundamental Laws, extending such his power, to the
goods, free-holds, inheritances liberties, and lives of the people.

And in the sixth Article of his said impeachment, it is laid unto his charge,
as a transcendent treasonable crime, That the said Thomas Earl of Strafford,
without any legal proceedings, and upon a paper Petition of Richard Rolstone,
did cause the said Lord Mount Norris, to be disseized and put out of possession
of his freehold and inheritance, without due process of Law.

And in the seventh Article, he the said Earl is charged, That in the term of
holy Trinity, in the 13. year of his now Majesty's reign, did cause a case
commonly called the case of Tenures upon defective Titles, to be made and
drawn up without any Jury or Trial, or other legal Process, without the
consent of parties, by color of which lawless proccedings, diverse of his
Majesty's subjects (and particularly the Lord Tho. Dillon) were outed of their
possessions, and disseized of there freehold, by color of the same resolution
without Legal proceedings, whereby many hundreds of his Majesty's Subjects
were undone, and their Families utterly ruinated.

And in the 8. Article, he is impeached, That upon a petition of St. John
Gilford Knight, the first day of Febr. in the said 13. year of his Majesty's
reign, without any legal protesse, made a decree against Adam Viscount Lo^tus
of ^lie, and did cause the said Viscont to be imprisoned and kept close
Prisoner, on pretense of disobedience to the said decree or order; and without
any Legal proceedings, did in the same 13. year imprison. George Earl of
Kildare against law, thereby to enforce him to submit his Title to the Manner
and Lordship of Castle Leigh (being of great yearly value) to the said Earl of
Strafford, will and pleasure, and kept him a year Prisoner for the said cause,
two Months whereof be kept him close Prisoner, All which you may at large
read in the 12^, 124, 125 pages of a book called Speeches and Pallages printed
for Will. Cook, at Furnivalls-Inne gate in Holburn, 1641.
etc.

Now the Parliament it self or the Members thereof, being as Sr. Edward Cook
well declares (In his 4. part institute, published for good Law, by their own
special orders) as subject to the Law, as other men (saving in the freedom of
arrests, that (so their person may not be hindered from the discharge of their
trust in the house, which their Country has inposed in them) and unto whom
till it be repealled, it is a rule, as well as to any other man in England
whatsoever, especially in all actions or differences betwixt party and party;
and that Parliament man that shall say, that any Committee of Parliament, or
the whole houses is the Law, shows and declares himself either ignorant of
the Law, or a voluntary and wilful deceiver: for what is within their breasts
I neither can know, nor am bound to enquire after for to know or take notice
of, See Englands Birthright p. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
neither is any thing therein (till it he legally put in writing, legally
debated, passed, and legally published) binding in the least unto me or or any
man in England: and indeed to speak properly, the Parliaments work is to
repeal old Laws, and to make new ones, to pull down old Courts of Justice,
and erect now ones, to make war and conclude peace, to raise money, and see
it rightly and providently, disposed of (but themselves are not in the least to
finger it For the third Article in the first impeachment of the Earl of
Strafford in the above said book page 118. runs thus; that the better to enrich
and enable himself to go through with his traitorous designs, he has detained
a great part of his Maj revenue, without giving legal account and has taken
great sums out of the Exchequer, converting them to his own use, when his
Majesty was necessitated for his own urgent occasions, and his Army had been a
long time unpaid.
) it being their proper work to punish those that imbezle, and wast it, but if
they should finger it and wast it, may not the Kingdom easily be cheated of its
treasure, and also be left without means to punish them for it? and most
dishonorable it is, and below the greatness of Legslators, to stoop to be
executors of the law, and indeed it is most irrational, and unjust they
should, for if they do me injustice I am robed and deprived of my remedy, and
my Appeal, it being no where to be made but to them, whose work it is to
punish all male or evil administrators of justice: and therefore I wish they
would seriously weigh their own words in their declaration of the 17. of
April, 1646. 2. part book declaration, page 878. where to the whole Kingdom
they declare that they will not* nor any by color of any authority derived
from them, shall interrupt the ordinary course of justice in the several
Courts and Iudicatories of this Kingdom, nor intermeddle in cases of private
interest, otherwhere determinable, unless it be in case of male administration
of Justice, wherein we shall see [say they] and provide, that right be done,
and punishment inflicted, as there he occasion, according to the laws of the
kingdom, and the trust reposed in us.

And therefore seeing that by the law of their own will, without due course or
pocesse of Law, or any visible shadow or color of Law; the Commit of
plundered Ministers will Rob the Citizens of their proper goods, which is not
in the least justifiable, for as Judge Crook in the 6^. page of his Argument in
Mr. Hampdens Cause against Ship money, says, that the Law book called the Dr.
and studient, chap. 5. page 8. setting down, that the Law does vest the
absolute, property of every man's goods in himself; and that they cannot be
taken from him but by his (legal) consent, says, that is the reason if they
he taken from him, the party shall answer the full value thereof in damage, and
so (says Judge Crook) I conceive that the party that does this wrong to
another, shall besides the damages to the party, be imprisoned and pay a fine
to the King, which in the Kings bench is the tenth part of as much as he pays
to the party, so then if the King will punish the wrong of taking of Goods
without consent between party and party, much more will be not by any
prerogative take away any man's goods without his assent particular or general.

But if they will either have your goods or your liberty from you by the Law
of their one wills, be sure you play the Englishman, not foolishly or willingly
to betray your liberty into their hands, but in this case, part with them as
you would part with your purse to a Thief that robs you upon the high way, for
the forementioned Lawyer in the forementioned 8. page says, that by the prime
Laws of reason and nature (which are the Laws of God) it is lawful for a men
to defend himself against an unjust power, so he keep due distance, so that if
they will have your goods, let them distraine for them, and then you may
replivie them, and thereby at law try the title of their right, and if they
will imprison your person, go not but by force, and be sure to stand upon the
legallity of the warrant, which that you may fully and truly understand the
form of it; I shall give you at large the words of Sir Edward Cook in the 2.
part of his institutes, fol. 590, 591, 592. published by the Parliaments own
authority for good law, who being expounding the Statute of breaking prison
made in the first E. 2. upon the words, without cause, etc. fo. 590. expressly
says this act speaking of a cause, is to be intended of a lawful cause; and
therefore false imprisonment is not within this act.

Imprisonment is a restraint of a man's liberty, under the custody of another,
by lawful warrant in deed or in law, lawful warrants, when the offense
appears by matter of record, or when it does not appear by matter of Record.

By matter of Record, as when the party is taken upon an Jndictment at the suit
of the King, or upon an appeal, at the suit of the party: when it does not
appear by matter of Record, as when a felony is done, and the offender by a
lawful Mitrimus is committed to the Jail for the same. But between these two
cases, there is a great diversity: for in the first case, whether any felony
were committed, or no, If the offender be taken by force of a Capias, the
warrant is lawful, and if he break prison, it is felony, albeit no felony were
committed. But in the other case, if no felony be done at all, and yet he is
committed to prison for a supposed Felony, and break prison, this is no felony,
for there is no cause. And the words of this Act See Magna Charta, Chap. 29.
are, unless the cause for which he was taken require such a judgment, so as
the cause must be just, and not feigned, for things feigned require no
judgment.

If A. give B. a mortal wound, for which A. is committed to Prison, and
breaks prison, B. dies of the wound within the year, this death has
relation to the stroke, but because relations are but fictions in Law, and
fictions are not here intended, this escape is no felony, 11. H. 4, 11. Plowd.
com. 408. Coler case.

Seeing the weight of this business, touching this point, to make the escape,
either in the party, or in the Gaolers felony, depends upon the lawfulness
of the Mittimus, it will be necessary to say somewhat hereof; First, it must be
in writing, in the name, and under the seal of him that make, the same,
expressing his office, place and authority, by force whereof he makes the
Mittimus, and is to be directed to the Jailer or keeper of the Jail or prison:
Secondly, it must contain the case (as it expressly appears by this 25. E. 3.
f 42, B. Coron. 134. 32. li. 3. Co^er. 248. 9. E. 4. f. 52.
Act, unless the cause for which he was taken, etc.) but not so certainly as
an Indictment ought, and yet with such convenient certainty, as it may appear
judicially, that the offense require such a judgment; as for high treason, to
wit, against the person of our Lord the King; or for the counterfeiting of the
money of our Lord the King; or for petty treason; namely for the death of such
a one, being his master; or for felony, to wit, for the death of such a one,
etc. or for Burglary or Robbery, etc. or for felony, for stealing of a Horse,
etc. or the like, so as it may in such a generality appear judicially, that
the offense requires such a judgment.

And this is proved both by reason, and authority. By reason; first, for that
it is in case of felony, (which does induce, or draw on the last punishment)
and therefore ought to have convenient certainty, as it is aforesaid. Secondly,
Also it must have convenient certainty, for that a voluntary escape is felony
in the Jailer. Thirdly, If the Mittimus should be good generally, (for felony)
then, as the old rule is, (the ignorance of the Judge, should be the calamity
of the innocent:) for the truth of the case may be that he did steal Char^ers
of Land, or wood growing, or the like, which in law are no felonies, and
therefore in reason, in a case of so high nature, concerning the life of man,
the convenient certainty ought to be showed.

By Authority, the constant form of the Jndictment, in that case forescape,
either by the party, or voluntarily suffered by the Jailer, is, That he was
arrested for suspicion of a certain felony, namely, for the death of a certain
man, M. N. feloniously slain, or the like; for the Indictment must rehearse
the effect of the Mittimus, which directly proves, that the cause in such a
general certainty ought to be showed, vid. 23. E. 3. fo. 48.

And if a man be indicted of treason, or indicted or apealed for felony, the
Capias thereupon, whereby the p^rty is to be arrested, comprehends the cause
(and therefore much more the Mittimus) whereby the party is to be arrested,
having no such ground of Record, as the Capias has; must pursuing the effect
of the Capias, comprehend the case in convenient certainty, 2^. E. 3. fol. 42.
pl. 32. there ought to be a certain cause; and in the same leaf, pl. 35. in
case of breaking of prison, the cause of the imprisonment ought to be showed.

If a man be indicted ( that he break prison felon^ously, etc.) generally, 9.
H. 4. f. 26 41. ass. 5. 22. E. 3. Coron. 242, 243, 248. 43. E. ibid. 424. 3. E.
3. ibid. 312. 328. 333, 345. 346. 2. E. 3. fo. 1. 26. ass. 51. 22. E. 3. 13.
27. ass. 42. 27. ass. page 116. 15. E. 2. Coron. 38. 9. H. 4. 1. 10. H. 4. 7.
11. H. 4. 11. 8. E. 2. Coron. 422. 430. 431. 27. H. 6. 7. 39. H. 6. 33. ^. R.
3. cap. 3. 2. H. 5. cap. 7. 21. H. 7. 17.
it is not good; for the indictment ought to rehearse the specially of the
matter according to the estatute, that he being imprisoned for felony, etc.
brake Prison: We have quoted many other books, which though they be not so
certainly reported, as might have bin wished, yet the judicious Reader will
gather fruit of them. But see before the exposition of Magna Charta, cap. 29.
(by the Law of the Land) and observe wall the Writ of Habeas Corpus, for a
direct proof, that the cause ought to be showed.

Lastly, see, hereafter in the exposition of the Statute of Articuli cleri, the
resolution of all the Judges of England; the answer to the ^^, and 22.
objections, which we will in no sort abridge for the excellency thereof; but
refer you to the fountains themselves.

Hereupon it appears, that the common Warant or Mittimus, to answer to such
things as shall be objected against him, is utterly against Law.

Now as the Mittimus must contain the cause, so the conclusion must be
according to law; viz. The Prisoner safely to be kept, until he be delivered
by due order of Law, and not until be that made it, shall give order or the
like.

John Lilburne.
January 1647.
I had here an intent largely to have insisted upon the Lords tyrannical
exercise of their illegal usurpations, upon diverse of the free Commons of
England, besides my self, whom they have most Arbitrarily and tyrannically
without all shadow of Law (saving the lawless, unlimitted tyranny of their
own mere unbounded wills and pleasures) sent unto several Gaole^ in this
Kingdom, but because my time has been exceedingly prevented, and my intention
frustrated by those late storms, and ungrounded, fluttering, bellowing,
whirlwind tempests, that has lately been (most falsely uniustly and
maliciously) raised against me by an English Tertullus Orator, called Mr.
Marsterson, the false and lying Sepheard of Shoreditch near London; whose
impeachment of me at the Lords and Commons Bar (of designing the destruction
and overthrow of the present Parliament, although it has made a great ecchoing
and note in the Kingdom) I no more value then a blast of wind, but let malice
it self in all its hight do the worst it can.

Yet I say by these new storms, I have been a little diverted from my purpose,
in fully painting the Lords at present, and therefore because I judge it more
then time to have this discourse abroad, I shall suspend the full execution of
my intentions till my late speeches at the House of Commons bar come to the
public view, where I have drawn their Pictures as lively (I believe) as any
picture drawer in England ever did.

And therefore I shall only at present confusedly fill up this spare paper, and
I shall begin with my proposition which I sent to the Speaker of the House of
Commons, which he caused to be read in their House, and which verbatum thus
follows.

The Proposition of Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, prerogative prisoner in the
Tower of London, made unto the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, and
to the whole Kingdom of England, October. 2. 1647.
I Grant the House of Lords according to the Statute of the 14. Ed. 3. chap 5.
to have in law a jurisdiction for redressing of grivances, either upon illegal
delays, or illegal judgment given in any of the Courts at Westminster Hall,
provided, they have the Kings particular Commission therefore, and all other
the legal Punctilloes contained in that Statute, which jurisdiction and no
other, seems to me to be confirmed by the Statutes of the 27. Eliz. chap 8. and
31. Eliz. chap. 1.

But I positively deny, that the House of Lords, by the known and declared Law
of England, have any original Jurisdiction over any Commoner of England
whatsoever, either for life, (...), liberty, or estate, which is the only and
alone thing in controversy betwixt them and me. And this position I will in a
public assembly, or before both Houses, in law debate, with any 40. Lawyers
in England that are practisers of the Law, and I will be content the Lords
shall choose them every man, and i^ after I have said for my self what I can,
that any three of these forty Lawyers sworn to deliver their judgments
according to the known law of England, give it under their hands against me, I
will give over my present contest with the Lords, and surrender my self up to
the punishment and sentence of the present Lords and Commons.

Provided at this debate, I may have 6. or 10. of my own friends present to
take in writing all that passes thereupon. Witness my hand and seal in the
presence of diverse witnesses in the Tower of London, this 2. of October, 1647.

John Lilburne.

And to conclude this book, I shall only add a breviate of my grand Plea
against the Lords, as I delivered it to the House of Commons, in half a sheet
of paper the 11 Nov. which thus follows.

(...)
