THE RECANTATION Of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, Prisoner in the Tower.
OPENING, All the MACHINATIONS of the Independent Party: THEIR Various
Practices and Judgments.

With the Reasons or Grounds of his unexpected Revolt from that Party: Also
certain Rules to know them, with Cautions to shun most of their pernicious
Heresies.

Printed in the Year. 1647.

THE RECANTATION of LIEV. COL. JOHN LILBVRNE.
Fellow-Commoners:
I Know it cannot otherwise choose but strike a wonder into you, to see me now
revoke that Cause that formerly I have so unanimously maintained, both with my
sword and pen; besides, many cruel sufferings, as whipping, imprisonments, and
the like; in defense of you, your Privileges, Freedoms, and Birth rights,
even with the hazard of my life against all Opposers whatsoever; whether
Bishops, Kings, Parliaments, or any other Principalities or Powers in high
places.

1. Being imprisoned (by the Bishops) in the Fleet for a long time; denied ever
what nature it self so plentifully gives to all sorts of Creatures, water
being near famished, shamefully betrayed by my Ed. Childingden.
friends, abused by Jaylors, censured by Star Chamber, whipped from the Fleet
to Westminster, afterward enduring long Captivity by the Bishops; then having
obtained liberty by the means of my much honored friend, Liev. Genesis Cromwell,
no sooner released but again arraigned for my life, before the whole House of
Peers, about the Earl of Strafford, the King himself sending my Accusation
against May 24. 1641.
me.

The House of Commons then vouchsafed me so much justice, as to vote for me.

1. That the Sentence of the Star Chamber given against me was illegal, and
against the Liberty of the Subject as also wicked, bloody, cruel, barbarous,
and tyrannis all. 2. That reparations ought to be given me for my
imprisonment, sufferings, and losses sustained by that illegal sentence.
But since what justice I have received from them, let the world judge;
considering the high esteem I have had both of them and their Cause, that had
I had at the beginning of these wars ten thousand my hot Zeal.
lives, I should have ventured them all for the Parliament, though I had stripped
my self to my very shirt, and though I had not left my Wife and Family any
thing wherewith to have subsisted: In their service I freely adventured my life
with an undaunted courage and resolution, till being taken prisoner at
Brainford, I was carried to Oxford, where for almost a year I continued a
prisoner, arraigned again for my life; but when they could not work upon me
by any threats or menaces, they resolved to try to do that by polycy, they
could not effect by force, and made me many proffers of worldly honors and
preferments, which came even from the King himself, by the hands of 4 several
Lords, yet I remained unmovable as a My strong faith.
^ock, stopping my ears against all those juncto Sirens, and not so much as
listening to any their conjurations or imprecations, charmed they never so
wisely, though I endured at that present as much misery as it was possible for
any one man to do by sickness, and otherwise, to the utter ruin of my
estate, to the value of 6 or 700 l. as I can make it appear. After this, being
exchanged, I served under the Lord of Manchester, and being before Newarke, was
stripped to the bare Yet fervent for their Cause.
skin, hardly escaping with my life, and although I took in Tickell Castle
from the Cavaliers, with much hazard, and danger; Yet the great Parliamentary
Reward for all my good service, was but an earnest desire to hang me, an
unwelcome payment for so deserving a service, and an excellent new reformed way
to pay old debts, having due unto me under the command of the said Earl about
700 l. a sum that would have reared a gallows as high as Hamans for Mordecai;
but etc.

I forbear to speak of Col. King. But they having served their own turns of
me, I could never have justice from them since, though I have been as faithful
a servant to them, and the Commonwealth, as any they ever employed, and have
bid defiance to all men in the world, to brand or tax me with
unfaithfullnesse: And whereas Magna Carta says, Justice and Right we will
deny to none, nor we will defer to none; Yet did I wait at least four years
upon them, and in all that time, could not get them so much as to put their
Votes in execution; since have I followed them 6 months, to the expense of
above a hundred pounds to get a Petition read, that I might have Justice and
Right, yet denied both, and have been since the 1 of May, 1641. imprisoned
three times by authority of the House of Commons before ever I knew mine
accuser, or ever was suffered to speak one word in mine own defense, directly
against my Freedom, (having been in the field with my sword in my hand for
the preservation thereof:) But if you please to read Magna Carta, 9 of Hen. 3.
cap. 1. you shall find there.

That no Freeman may be taken and imprisoned, and disseazed of his Freehold or
his Liberty or his free Customs, or outlawed, or banished, or any way
destroyed; neither will we go upon him, neither pass upon him but by the
lawful trial of his equals, or by the law of the Land; Justice and Right we
will sell to none, we will deny to none, nor will defer to none; all which
is my proper Birthright and Inheritance, confirmed by this present Parliament
in many Declarations, taxing the King for the violation thereof; yet acting
contrary thereunto themselves.

Dear fellow Commons,

I Desire you to judge impartially, and tell me, if they deserved so faithful
a Champion as my self: That with undaunted courage, and unparrallelled valor
have disarmed their enemies even at their very doors, (as namely Captain Hide
and others) and yet from that very house unto which those doors do lead, have
received so many Votes in Commitments, and otherwise, as any Freeman under the
Cope of Heaven: the Copy of one follows.

Die Sabbati, 19 July,
REsolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that
Lieutenant Collonell Lilburne be forth with taken into Custody by the Sergeant
at Arms attending this House, and so kept till the House take further Order.

To the Sergeant at Arms attending at this House, or to his Deputy, etc.
H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Could instance you many more Tyrannies and Outrages committed upon me since
my commitment to the Tower, where I remain yet a Prisoner, but it is
needless, therefore enough shall suffice for this time.

Let me in the next place give you notice concerning your Collections in your
several Congregations; I have found lately your Zeal very cold, and your
Talent of Charity not to abound; the stream of your bounty still ebbing, or
flowing some other way; I speak this to put you in mind of your forwardness
to minister freely to my wants, for I may speak it to your shames, that many
of you mistaking the way to the Tower, are hurried with too forward zeal to
Newgate, Bridewell, or the Fleet; I must tell you Brethren, Martin Marpri^st
alias H. Overton, his Wise in Bridewell.
MARTIN, though a little bird, has a villainous stomach, Mr. Musgrave, Jane
Hules and John Larner, in the Fleet, and Cupid Overton in the Gatehouse.
even like any Cormorant, can digest your silver as easily as an Estriche Iron;
Martin is a He writ the Bo^ke of souls morta^lity, and maintains the same.
Mortal Creature and of a retrograde judgment to the truth of our profession;
besides he studies Chemistry, and by his fained art of Eloquence, can easily
extract the silver from his fellow sufferers: O divine Martine, if your
superlative holiness have no more fellow-feeling of the necessities of your
Brethren, I shall hardly endure you to build your Nest (this Summer) on the
charities of your abused Brethren, but will cause you take your flight (at
Midsommer) with Cockoes and Jackdaus more Westerly, where you shall perch
according to your Dignity. It cannot much impair your holiness function,
considering your grave Labors, and most Elaborate Pieces that A scurrillous
Pamphlet entitu^ed Martins Echo.
Echo forth your * sacred endowments. I shall go near to tell the people,
that your holiness battens (like an Abby-lubber) in your Cloister of Newgate,
far more abundantly then in your Sacred decretall, or a Hue and Cry of (...)
his holiness, Martin Marpriest.
hole in Toolies: Martin went upon Where his holiness kept his S^ru^pet called
Margery Marpriest, alius his Printing-presse
Crutches then, though now his holiness has taken upon him the garb of a
complete Gallant, smells like a perfumer, God save his holiness: Courts the
Sisters, and finds them excellent well edified, and very compliable in their
uses; Mortal Creatures, grass and hey, all Mortal, all Mortal. Both his
Servants names.


But dear Brethren, enough of this foul bird Martin, next I shall desire you
to lay to heart all my suffering; for your Privileges, Liberties, But he may
thank^ sister Daw the Perfumers w^fe.
and Native Birth rights: And that you would exhort all, and every Member in
your respective Congregations, to contribute freely to my necessities, and the
necessities of my fellow sufferers in the Fleet; and to hold your hand from
contributing to profane Martin any more, till his Brethren that are more worthy
sufferers then himself be first supplied, or he himself reclaimed from his
pernicious Errors.

Therefore to conclude, I give my judgment for the present, which I desire to
hold and maintain until I be convinced by you of the same, and convinced,
shall be soon reclaimed.

1 I believe the King to be supreme head and governor, in all causes, over
all persons, Ecclesiastical or Civil.

2. I am of the judgment, that no Subject ought to take up Arms against his
lawful King, and that all such taking up Arms against lawful Authority, is
fighting against God, and his Ordinances.

3. I querie whether the King, being despencer of Law, or Chief Minister
thereof, offending, or breaking the Law, be under a capacity of being punished
by any inferior power, my judgment therein is, that no power under the King
can do it, but he is to expect his punishment from God only, and none else.

4. I am of that judgment, that if the King shall command me any thing
contrary to the word of God, I ought not to do it, neither to resist, but
patiently suffer what punishment soever he shall inflict upon me, for Christ's
sake.

5. I am of that judgment, that there cannot be fighting for Religion, but
suffering for Religion in England, Ireland, or else where.

6 I am of that judgment, that the Church founded upon the 12 Pillars or
Articles of Christian Faith in the three Creedes, called the Apostles,
Athan^sius, and Nicene Creed, is the true Church of God, and that we ought not
to separate from that Church but from any known Error in that Church: And any
new Faith coined by the Assembly to the contrary of none effect.

Thus dear Country men have I laid down my judgment for the present, which
shall no longer be evidenced by me, then prooved by the Word. Therefore I
desire thee to search the Scriptures, by which Rule all sure foundations are
laid, for lasting structures, Common wealths, and Churches have not a
Philosophical Generation, the new out of the perversion, the corruption of the
ancient Government; the new out of the extirpation, the annihilating the
established old Religion; And if so great tempests and Earthquakes of Drums and
Attillery, subvertions and immersions, of persons and estates: Such
unreckonable expense of a Kingdom, coined (to effect) for supplies, and such
inundations and overwhelming of blood, beget but a bare promise of such an
issue, what remains for the Nation to undergo before its productions?
Doubtless this birth can at these rates be attended with no less then a
desolation, when there shall be too few left, and those too much enfeebled to
fall out about the enjoyment of so great a happiness.

Reason was given to man for a direction, as well as a distinction; and
generally we believe our eyes above any assertions: Poor selfe-deceiving
Englishman, who can not be sensible how fantastic thy opinionate Reformation
is; how real the devastation of thy substance, and can find a hope that the
one will improove, and not a fear that the other may impair; As thou art
only miserable in a proportion at present from thy self; So the Remaining
degrees that thou art to take in misery, are not to be proceeded in without thy
consent to a continued Vassallage.

It is just with God, and abates the Condemnation of imposing man to lay
burdens, and use Goades on those who will be beasts by disavowing their reason,
or pinning it upon opinion of another infabilities. and as just to strike him
blind, who will not see an object of his mark in other colors or demensions
then what are rendered by another spectacles.

FINIS.

