The Prisoners mournful cry, against the Judges of the Kings Bench. OR An
Epistle writ by Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, Prisoner in the Tower of London,
unto Mr. Justice Roll: Declaring the illegal dealing of himself, and Mr.
Justice Bacon with him, in reference to his Habeas Corpus.
Unto which is annexed his two Petitions to the said Judges, and the Petitions
of Mr. William Thompson, and Mr. Woodward etc. in which are contained a Lash
for Mr. Oliver Cromwell and other his spaniolised Creatures. With diverse other
remarkable things worth public view.
John. 19, 20, 21. For this is condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. For
every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth comes to the light, that
his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.
Honored Sir,
BEing a sensible English man, I am compelled to struggle for my portion in the
Laws and liberties of my native Country, and according to my previledge and
right, after all the Council in England, that I could rationally pretend to
have any interest in, had given over (through fear) the doing of that for me,
which by the duty of their places they are bound to do for me, or any English
man else, for his fee; I was necessitated to set my own brains at work to help
my self, and reading in that Act that abolished the Star Chamber, I there
found, that if any be committed, or restrained by the Warrant or Order of the
King, his Heirs or Successors in their own person, or any of his privy
Counselors, etc. that in every such case the party committed, upon demand or
motion made by his Council, OR OTHER JMPLOYED BY HIM for that purpose, ^n to
the Judges of the Court of Kings Bench, or Common pleas in open Court, shall
without any delay upon an^ pretense whatsoever, have forthwith granted unto
him, a Writ of Habeas Corpus, etc. And pausing upon that clause, viz. Other
employed by him, my own reason told me, it must be by some man distinct from a
professed Lawyer. So that thereby seeing Council had refused to move for me
the Term before, I was a casting about upon which of my private friends to
pitch upon to do it for me, Judging it to be my naturally legal right to
appoint whom I please, and therefore reasoning the case with others thar knew
some thing of the Law, I was put upon a Petition, Councillors at Law telling
me, as the case stood with me, a Petition presented in open Court by a friend,
is as legal as a motion by a Counselor at the Bar, notwithstanding any
rules or orders made by the Court, for the monopolizing profit of the Lawyers
to the contrary. Now if this be true in law; you have done me injustice in
denying me a Habeas Corpus upon my Petition, and forceing my Solicitor to name
Council to move for it against their wills and minds, who it may be, are
afraid of an arbitrary destruction from my potent adversaries, who de facto
have already done, it upon diverse others. Yet they moved, and you granted me a
Habeas Corpus to bring my body and cause before you, which by my Petition upon
the 25. April last, I certify unto you the Lieutenant, will not obey, and sent
it to you in open Court by my Solicitor, who before you was ready to make oath
of the delivery of the Habeas Corpus, in which Petition I earnestly press for
an Alias, and yet notwithstanding you will not grant it to me though it be my
right by Law, whereupon I was delayed (as J conceive by your and my Cuuncells
fearfullnes) for 4. or 5. days before J could get it moved, and when upon
Saturday lost my Council did move, J am delayed by you (which Sir Edward Cook
often says, is worse then to deny me justice) and can not obtain an Alias
from you as by Law I ought, and although I understand a return (whether true
or false I know not) is made of my commitments, yet it is neither read in open
Court, nor filed in Court, so that I cannot judicially get a Copy of it, to see
whether it be true or false, which is a wrong in Law unto me. And that mock
return is no Obedience to the Habeas Corpus which commands my body as well as
my cause to be returned.

Sir, I also understand that before you will grant me an Alias, you have
ordered to hear my Council upon Tuesday next, upon the return, when as alas
they have many days since sent me word, they are altogether unwilling to plead
to the illegallity of my Commitment, or any further saving to the point of a
Habeas Corpus. And truly Sir, I cannot much blame them, considering they now
see Mr. William Thompson a free man of England, and no Soldier, taken away by
Cromwell and Ireton from the House of Commons Door; and violently carried to
White Hall, and there by Marshall Law by them, etc. condemned to dye, to the
subvertion of the laws of the land, for whith they deserve the Earl of
Straffords punishment, and you will not do your duty speedily to relieve him,
which it may be they may think may shortly be their own case, if they should
be bold, and effectually plead the Law for me, and therefore they leave that
part of my plea to my self, when I come to the Bar, which I am ready and
willing at my peril to undertake, and therefore do earnestly entreat you, as
either justice or honor dwells within your breast, without any further delay,
to grant me another Habeas Corpus, (with a large penalty in it) which is my
right by Law, for the denial of obedience to the first by my Jailer, is
against Law, or which offense he is subject by law to be fined as the pleasure
and discretion of the Court which he has disobeyed. And J wish my Council
may have oritory enough to agrivate the offense, and press for a large fine
upon him.

2. To an action upon the case for false imprisonment, upon which action the
party grieved shall recover great damages. 3^. Ed. ^. Rot 71. and 79. Little
rege Hilli. and ^^. part inst. fol 53. and 13. Ed. 2. c. 39. see the exposition
of it, in 1. part in f. 451. 452. and Rastalls book of entrys folio 501. 6^6.


3 He may be indicted for his offense and contempt of the Law, and upon his
conviction, he is to be fined, imprisoned, and to be at the mercy of the King.
West. 1. being 3. Ed. 1. chapter 15. at the end see also the exposition upon it, 2.
part inst. fo. 191. and 28. Ed. 1. chapter 16.


But alas Sir to what purpose is all this, if J cannot enjoy the benefit of
the Law from your hands, and therefore Sir, I humbly entreat you to be an
effectual instrument to command my body before you according to your duty, to
plead for my life and the lives of my distressed wife and little children, that
are all wrapped up in mine now dying a lingering death, worse then the sword to
any heroical mind, and either effectually according to your oath, do me
speedy justice, without any more fearful delays, or else cease to be a
Judge. And therefore let nothing before you be done in my absence about the
merit of my cause, for my Council dare not press my business home, neither
can I well press it upon them, because I have nothing considerable to requite
them if they should suffer therefore.

But if you will go on with your intentions to morrow, then I entreat you that
if J cannot speak in person before you, that I may speak unto you by my pen,
what my Council dare not say for me. And that my Plea which J have fitted to
plead my self when I shall be brought before you, may be read in open Court
with my Council at the Bar, and J shall so far willingly lay aside at
present my priveledges, as to abide your judgment upon reading my Plea, and
hearing my Council upon it, for all that I desire is but to be laid to the
true touchstone of the Law, and my guilty conscienced adversaries shunning that
clearly thereby declare, they are workers of iniquity, and dare not abide the
light, John 3, 19.20.21.

Sir my extremities and sufferings are transcendent, and if you will not do me
Justice for Justice sake, know that I have writ these lines on purpose to leave
you without excuse, knowing there is a righteous God in heaven that judges
righteously, and hears the sighs and groans of his poor oppressed and
distressed Prisoners, and many times even on earth punishes Judges with the
law of like for like, unto whom J mournfully commit my cause, and now as my
last legal hopes, if from your hands I can get no justice, but must be exposed
by your hard heartedness to ruin and destruction, then a desperate disease
must have a desperate cure, and the will of God be done, for like a man of
mettell and resolution that neither fears Legions of Devils nor men, death
nor hell, (assuredly knowing my portion is in heaven with the Lord of glory, in
whose bosom I shall one day rest,) I am resolved to perish, but shall take my
leave, yet, to subscribe my self

Your affectionate friend and servant John Lilburne.
From the Tower of London 1. May, 1648. Jf you please, I entreat you to show
this to your Brother, Mr. Justice Bacon.



My forementioned first Petition the 19. April, 1648. verbatim thus follows.
To the honorable the Judges of the Kings bench. The humble Petition of Lievt.
Col. John Lilburne Prisoner in the Tower of London,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner is an Englishman, and thereby intailed and entitled to
the benefit of all the laws of England which by your Oaths Which is printed in
Pultons collect. of Statutes fol. 144. and the peoples prerogative. p. 10.
you are sworn indifferently and equally without fear or partiallity to
administer grat^s to all persons rich and poor, without having regard to any
person notwithstanding any command whatsoever to the contrary, though signified
under the great See the 9. H. 3. chapter ^9. and 2. Ed. 3. chapter and 14. Ed. 3. chapter
14. and 11. R. 2. chapter 10. and the Petition of R^ght, the 3d. C. R and 2. part
inst. fo. 56. and 4. part inst. fo. 68.
Seal or the little Seal, or any otherwise, yet it shall not delay, or
disturb common right, nor you cease to do it in any point according to the law
of the Land.

Now forasmuch as a Habeas Corpus is part of the law of England, and ought not
by law to be denied to any man See 2. H, 5. chapter 2. Petition of right, 3. C. R,
and the act that abolished the Star Chamber 17. C.R. and 2. part inst. 53. 55.
189. 615, 616. and 4. part f. 71.
whatsoever that demand it, which though your petitioner earnestly endeavored
the last Term to obtain, yet could not prevail with his Counsel to move
for it, although ^e has almost this two years been detained in prison in the
Tower of London, without all shadow of Law or justice, and by the Lieutenant
thereof, has been divorced from the society of his wife, debarred from the
free access of his friends, deprived of the use of pen; ink and paper: all
which usages are against the express Laws and Statutes of this Land, your
Petitioners Birthright and inheritance. 2. pa^ inst. f. 56. 63, 97. 5 26. and
4. part folio. 41.


Therefore your Petitioner humbly prays, according to his Right, and your
Oaths, the benefit of a Habeas Corpus, (and that he may have it Gratis, See the
26. of Magna Charta. and the exposition upon it in the 2. part inst fol. 42.
and 3. Ed. 1. chapter 26. and the exposition upon it in the 2. par. in. f. 210. see
also f. 74. 533, 535. and the stat. of the 11. H. 4. No. 28. not printed in the
Stat. book, but is printed in the 3. pa^. inst. fol. ^ 46, 224, 225.
according to the law of the Land, and your oaths) to bring his body and cause
before you in open Court, there to receive your award and Judgment, according
to the declared law of England.

And your Petitioner shall pray, John Lilburne.
Tower the 19. April, 1648.
My forementioned second Petition of the 25. April 1648. thus follows.
To the Honorable the Judges of the KINGS BENCH, The humble Petition of Lievt.
Col. John Lilburne, Prisoner in the TOWER of LONDON.
SHOWS,
THat upon a Petition delivered to your Honors upon Tuesday last, being the 19
present you were pleased to assign council to move for a Habeas Corpus to
bring your Petitioners body and cause before you, which accordingly you were
pleased to grant upon their motion, and to make the writ retournable this
present Tuesday, at which time, after a long causlesse and unjust imprisonment,
your Petitioner hoped to have bin brought before you to have pleaded for his
life, which has bin strongly endeavored by his potent adversaries, in his
unjust imprisonment, to be taken away from him, having kept him most illegally
in a chargeable imprisonment, almost two years together, without ever laying
any crim legally to his charge, or bringing him legally to any Bar of justice
to a legal Trial, keeping almost 3000l, of his own proper right from him, and
in his hard and extraordinary chargeable imprisonment have not yet allowed your
petitioner a penny to live upon although an allowance according to his quality,
be his right by the custom of the place where he is a Prisoner, diverse rich
Members of the present house of Commons having from the present King enjoyed
the same, Mr. Walter Long confessed about a year ago, he spent the King
whilst he was Prisoner in the Tower 1500. l. in Wine and good Cheer, and yet
by this Parliament he had 5000, l. voted him for his said sufferings, and so
had Mr* Seldon and all the rest of his fellow sufferers, and some of them it is
said have already received all their money.
not withstanding the peaceable possession of their great estates in the
beginning of his reign.

Yet notwithstanding this, and all other earnest endeavors, your Petitioner
has with unwearied industry used to bring himself to the Bar of Justice, there
to receive but so much favor as every Traitor, Murderer, or Rogue ought to
enjoy, viz, the benefit of the Law, professing unto you that is all the Favor,
Mercy, Pity, and Compassion he craves at the hands of all the Adversaries he
has in the World, choosing rather to expose himself to any death in the World,
then to a languishing tormenting death in a murdering Goal, which your
Petitioner cannot but fear is the determined resolution of his bloody and
cruel adversaries, in that Col. Robert Tichburne, the present Jailer of the
Tower, refuses to return the Body and cause of your Petitioner before your
Honors according to the legal command of the said Writ of Habeas Corpus.

Now forasmuch as your Petitioner does aver, and offers upon his life to make it
good by Law, that although your Petitioner be committed by two pretended
Warrants, yet the Courts that made them, have not the least shadow or color in
law to commit your Petitioner, being they are not, nor never were entrusted by
law either divided or conjoined to by the executors of it; See the 29. chapter of
Magna Charta, and the exp^sition upon it, in the 2. part. ininstituts fol, 46.
etc. and the Petition of Right 3. C.R. and the act that abolished the
Star Chamber the 17. C, R. and the 5. R. 2, Rot. Parl. number. 45. and 1. H. 4.
number 79, and 5. H. 4. chap. 6. and 8. H. 6 chapter 7. and 11. H. 6. chap. 11. 23. H.
6. chapter 11. 15. and 4. H. 8. chapter 8. and 1 and 2, P. and M. chapter 10. and 4. part
insti. fol. 25. 1. par, decl. p. 48. 2. 278.
and though they had a legal jurisdiction in Law to commit your Petitioner
(which they have not) yet by both their warrants there is no legal crime at all
expressed wherefore they commit your Petitioner (general charges in Law being
no charges nor crimes 2, par. insti. fo. 52. 53, 315. 318, 591. 615. 616. and 4
pert fo. 39. 1. part book dec. page 38. 77. ^01. 845. and the votes upon the
impeachment of the 11 memb. the petition of Right the 3. C. R and the act that
abolished the Star Chamber 17. C. R. printed in my book called the peoples
prerogative page 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
) and therefore there is no color in Law for his imprisonment or detention.

Wherefore your Petitioner most humbly prays a second Writ, with a strict and
severe penalty in it, according to Law, to command his body and cause before
you, and that according to the duty of your places, you forthwith grant it to
your Petitioner without any further motion of Counsel, it being as legal for
your Petitioner to move for it by his Petition, or by any friend he shall
depute and appoint, as by a Councellor.

And he shall pray, etc. John Lilburne.
April 25. 1648.
The forementioned Petitions of Mr. Woodward, and Mr. Thompson, etc. thus
follows.
To the Honorable the Judges of the Kings Bench. The Humble Petition of
Richard Woodward, and Mary Collens, prisoner in the White Lion Southwarke.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners are freeborne people of the English Nation, and are
thereby intailed, and entitled to the benefit of all the Laws of England,
which by your oaths (a) you are sworn indifferently and equally without fear
or partiallity to administer Gratis, to all persons rich and poor, without
having regard to any person, notwithstanding any command whatsoever to the
contrary, though signified under the great Seal, or the little Seal, or any
otherwise, yet it shall not delay nor disturb common right, nor you cease to
do it in any point (b) according to the Law of the Land.

Now for as much as a Habeas Corpus is part of the Law of England, and ought
not by Law to be denied to any man whatsoever that demands it, (c) it being
your Petitioners Birthright and inheritance, who are now detained in hard
durance contrary to Law and Justice without bail or Mainprise 1. part inst.
lib. 3. chapter 7. Sect. 439 fo. 260. and 2. part inst. fo. 42, 43. 53. 54. 115.
and 3. Ed. 1. chapter 25. See Sir Ed. Cooks exposition upon it, 2. part inst. fo.
186, 189, 190, 315. see also 1, and 2. P. and M. chap. 13.
though it has often been proferred to those, etc. that causlesly committed
your petitioners to prison, where they violently and illegally keep them
without bringing of them the last Assizes to a trial at Law, as by Law they
ought to have done.

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray, according to their right, and your
Oaths, the benefit of a Habeas Corpus (and that they may have it Gratis
according to the Law of England, and your Oaths) to bring their bodies and
causes before you in open Court, there to receive your award and judgment
according to the declared Laws of England.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Richard Woodward. Mary Collens.

18. April, 1648.
To the Honorable the Judges of the Kings Bench. The humble Petition of
William Thompson a free Commoner of England, and no Soldier.
SHOWS,
THat the laws of England are your petitioners inheritance 2. part institutes
fol. 56. 63. 97, 526. and 4. part insti. fo. 41.
and birthright, by virtue of his being an Englishman, by which inheritance he
has this privilege, that he shall not be restrained of his liberty,
imprisoned, past upon, or condemned, but by the declared laws of England see
the Petition of Right made in the 3. C. R. confirmed this Parliament in every
particular by the act that abolisheth ship money, see also the act that
abolished the Star Chamber, 17. C. R. and 2. part insti. fo. 46. 47. 50.
viz, by a sworn Judge of the law, in the ordinary Courts of justice, and by a
grand jury and a petty jury of 24, legell men of his equals, and of the
neighborhood, where the crime is pretended to be committed who are Judges of
matter of See 1. part insti. lib. 2. chap. 11. sect. 193. fol. 135, and chap.
12. sect. 134. fo. 155. 157. and 13. Ed. 1. chapter 38. and 28. Ed. 1. chapter 9. and
34. Ed. 3. chapter 4. and 42. Ed. 3. chapter 11.
fact) they are the very words of the Petition of Right, yet notwithstanding
may it please you honors, so it is that in Feb. last, your Petitioner was
without any the least shadow or color in law, taken without any warrant in
writing by the power of armed Soldiers, and carried by force of Arms prisoner
to the Marshall general of the Army, by virtue of the verbal commands of some
pretended officers of the Army, and has ever since been by force of arms
against all law and justice kept prisoner in White Hall, where he has been
most barbarously and inhumanly used, and his life endeavored to be taken away
from him by the pretended power of Marshal law, to the high and transcendent
violation of Magna Charta the Petition of Right, and all the fundamental laws
of England, it being declared by that learned Lawyer Sir Edward Cook in the 3.
part of his institutes chapter of murder fo. 52. (which book is published by
this present House of Commons for good Law) that for a general of an Army or
any other that has Commission of Marshall authority in time of peace (as now
it is, and is so declared by the Parliament in their last Declaration against
the Scotch Commissioners) to hang, or execute any man whatsoever (Soldier or
other) by culler of Marshall Law, it is absolute Murder, and has been in Law
often so adjudged, as he there declares*

Now forasmuch as your honors are Judges of the Law, and sworn impartially to
do equal execution there of, your Petitioner therefore craveth the benefit of
a Habeas Corpus gratis, his undoubted right by law, to command his body and
cause before you in open Court, thereto receive your award and judgment,
according to the declared Law of England.

And your petitioner shall pray, etc. William Thompson.
White Hall this 18. April 1648.
To fill up this wast paper, I shall desire the Reader to cast his eyes upon my
Instructions about my Habeas Corpus, which I gave unto my Soliciter, which thus
follows.
Sir,
I am in some sense sorry you named my Council at all, for I could have wished
I had laid a month in prison longer, so it had been put upon this issue, to
have demanded the Judges answer possitively, whether upon the bare Petition
they would have granted me the Habeas Corpus or no-

For First, I am suit it is as much my right by a Petition, as a thousand
motions, and as they would have done me an inconvenience in denying it, so I am
sure I should have done them a greater in conclusion, which in my own thoughts
would have been equivalent to my loss.

Secondly, This way in not granting it without the motion of a Lawyer,
destroys out native and legal rights, for if I authorize you to do it for me
in the case I am in, the Judge by Law ought to hear you for me as well as any
Lawyer in England, as appears by the Act that abolisheth the Star Chamber. 17.
C. R.

Thirdly, This destroys all poor oppressed men, that have not a Fee to see a
Lawyer, who commonly will but move his lips very faintly without it, whereas if
the right of Petitioning were kept up, diverse that perish and are destroyed in
prison would be relieved thereby.

Fourthly, This is destructive to the lives and being of all oppressed men,
that are committed by potent adversaries, as I am, having both houses and the
Grandees of the Army to deal with, the single Grandees of the Army, having
already crushen and banished by power and force, tall Cedars in comparison of
such little shrubs as Mr. Narborow, and Mr. Cook, unto whom I am so much
obliged, that I am not free to press them to do that for me, that that
Lawyer must do that will do my business as it ought to be done, their
professions being their livelihood, for any thing I know, and if for their
honest, resolved resolution in my business they should suffer, I am not able
to require them, and truly I am afraid they cannot effectually do me service
in the present case, but they must run the hazard of their own unavoidable
ruin, and therefore when you give them their fees, press them to this or
nothing, viz.

To keep the Judges close to the right of a Habeas Corpus, to be granted to
whoever craves it, by whomsoever committed, and that he is not, nor ought not,
nor cannot judicially take cognizance by whom, or for what I am committed, till
it appear legally and judicially in open Court before him, and it is my
positive instructions, they shall not tell the Judge by whom I am committed,
and if the Judge himself shall tell them by whom I am committed, and so think
to bull me and them, I desire them with all their skill to wave that, and
press for a Habeas Corpus, and then upon the return it will appear, and I am
sure judicially, they or he cannot fix their judgments upon reports, all that
I desire is but a Habeas Corpus, to come to the Bar to plead my cause my
self, and I shall easily my self make it appear by law, that these that
committed me, have not the least shadow or color in Law to do it, all that I
desire without further dispute, is but to have the Judges Negative or
Affirmative, by virtue of my right in demanding of it, for the Judge ought not
to inquire by whom J am committed, neither ought they to tell him, but it is
enough I am in prison, which you may make Oath of, and it is his duty upon my
demand to grant me a writ to bring my body and cause before them, and let them
deny it at their peril, for if they do J weigh it not at all, for yet I am
not totally prison sick, and I desire no more advantage to trouble them in due
time, as bad as a nest of Hornets or Wasps, but their positive deny all.
Present my hearty service to Mr Summers my Attorney, and desire a bill from
him, and Make his last Terms business even, only take notice I sent him 20.
s. and bid him expect and look for the Gaolers answer, and speedily send it to
me, but in treat him hereby to go no further without my further instructions,
and I shall rest.

Yours to serve you, John Lilburne.
19 April 1648. Now O all true hearted English men that love justice and real
actions, more then persons and sactions, seriously consider and way my
unparaleld condition who was brought into my contest with the House of Lord by
Mr. Oliver Cromwell (that usurper tyrant thief and murderer as in the 9. to
11. p. of my late plea for a Habeas Corpus I fully prove him to be, and am
still ready at the Kings Bench-bar to make it good with my life) and when he
had brought me into the briars, there like a base and perfidious man leaves me
to be scratched in pieces, and not only so: But in the third place, joins with
the Earl. of Manchester, etc. (whom he had imeached of Treason, (and against
whom he had engaged me) to destroy me, because I will not stope to the
jurisdiction of the House of Lords over Commoners, although by law they have no
more then so many Tinkers and Chimny sweepers have, as is fuller proved in my
books called the fice man's freedom vindicated, the Anotamy of the present House
of Lords, The oppressed man's oppression declared, The Outcries of oppressed
Commoners, my Grand Plea before Mr. Maynara of the house of Commons 20. October
1647. The People prerogative, and my Whip for the house of Lords, and in the
books called Sir John Maynards case truly stated, The Royal Quarrel The Plea
and Protest of A. B. a Citizen of London, and the late printed Petitions of the
imprisoned Aldermen of London, and yet though by all these books the Lords
jurisdiction over Commoners in any case by law is levelled with the earth, yet
nothing will serve Cromwells t^ane for my opposition to the Lords in maintaing
my own liberties, but my blood, although if he would have helped me to my
liberty, and that which the Parliament justly owes me, I have offered him to
leave the Kingdom, and totally to refer all differences betwixt us to the
final determination of his own General, and for my contest with the Lords
wholly to the house of Commons, or the Judges of the Common law, none of which
he will embrace, and therefore judge righteously betwixt us.



FINIS.

