THE STARRY MESSENGER; OR, An Interpretation of that strange Apparition of
three Suns seen in London, 19. November. 1644. being the Birth Day of King
CHARLES.

The effects of the Eclips of the Sun, which will be visible in ENGLAND, 11.
August. 1645. whose influence continues in force, from January, 1646 to December.
1647. almost two whole years; and cannot but be the forerunner of some
extraordinary mutation in most Commonwealths of Europe, but principally in
ENGLAND. With an Answer to an Astrologicall Judgment. Printed at Oxford, upon
his Majesty's present Martch. By WILLIAM LILLY Student in Astrology.

LONDON, Printed for John Partridge and Humphry Blunden, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Cock in Ludgate Street, and the Castle in Cornehill, 1645.

To his truly Honored Friend, Master JOHN THOMPSON, of the City of LONDON
Merchant.
SIR,
AS in those more painful employments you formerly underwent in Transmarine
parts you did with great fidelity, courage, and industry for sundry years,
manage the affairs of our English Merchants entrusted to your care and
discretion: So now in this your present retirement, your continual Study makes
it manifest, you act not the part of a young man (though your years speak you
not aged) but like a wise man (that ever husbands Time with advantage) You
enrich your mind with Knowledge, Converse amongst Studies, and with Authors of
wisdom, that hereafter you may be more serviceable to your Country as
opportunity shall present you with a fit occasion: I shall not need acquaint
the World, that you have (as we say changed heaven) and lived not further then
five degrees from the Aequinoctiall; yet have you still remained your self,
and twice returned Statu quo, bettered by your travells.

This little Treatise (of less worth then I wish it) I present unto you, and
desire your perusal by way of Recreation, (I am not singular in Dedicating a
small thing to a worthy Friend: John Dee a most Learned man Dedicated his
Aphorisms to Gerard Mercator a man famous, and they consisted of less then
six sheets.)

Wearied I say with more weighty Studies, run over this, and the rather,
because its the first in this kind ever wrote by any: and you can judge
whether it is well or ill done, and few else: Your self have seen it in loose
papers, from the beginning, middle, and to the end of it, are able to testify
its my own, I borrowed it from no man, (that impertinent Traveller spoake by
Authority, who hoodwinked in judgment, bleated openly that others performed my
Work, yet he never saw me.)

Sir, Favor me with as much love in Receiving it humanely, as I in Affection
tender it unto You, and You engage me to rest,

Your Real Friend, WILLIAM LILLY.

To the Reader.
BEfore I speak any thing of that prodigious Apparition of the three Suns in
the Elements, I will acquaint thee with as rare a Progedy which happened in
Cheshire.

When first our unnatural Wars began, and that it was apparent, War would be
betwixt King and Parliament, Sir George Booth Knight and Barronet of a Noble
Family in Cheshire, and one excellently deserving of the whole Kingdom for his
fidelity to the Parliament, and without whose countenance our affairs in those
parts could not so happily have succeeded: this gallant old Knight perceiving,
that many of his Tennants were necessarily to engage their persons, for better
encouragement of them, he seriously professed unto them, that if any Tennant or
Tennants son of his, servant or any other that was any of the lives in any
the Leases made by him or any of his Family, should casually be slain in this
unnatural war in defense of the Parliament, Religion and Subjects Liberties,
that then he would make a new Lease Gratis, and insert any younger life in Liew
thereof, which thing he has constantly and freely performed ever since to his
eternal fame and honor, and if this be not worthy of especial taking notice
of, I know nothing; Nor let us forget the singular valor of his Noble
Grandchilde Collonell Booth during the siege of Nantwich against the English
Irish.

But to our own Discourse.

If there be any of so preuaricate a judgment, as to think that the
apparition of these three Suns does intimate no Novell thing to happen in our
own Climate, where they were manifestly visible, I shall lament their
indisposition and conceive their brains to be shallow, and void of
understanding, humanity, or notice of common History: For full satisfaction of
such unbeleeuing Saints, I have produced presidents, not one or two, but many,
and those recorded by men of unquestionable Credit. When was it known, that
such like unusual sights appeared, and were not the forerunners of things to
come, yet seldom regarded before the things they signified came to pass.

I am of this opinion, the Heavens never send forth any great signs, which
have not a particular relation to some great personages: for doubtless they
are the Universal cause (God permitting) of all things; and whilst they
produce effects; which seem to have relation to one only: if he be a Prince,
it has an Universal operation, for people are partakers with their Princes,
in their gains, losses, virtues and vices, and this is the reason why many
times our predictions do not jumpe in that measure of time by us limited; for
actions are not done by their Agents in an instant, dispositions precede them,
etc. Besides, great alterations require great influences, which when they cause
great diversity in their working, happen nor because the influences are diverse,
but because they are diverse that receive them.

Read me with indifferency, and poyse me with an equal judgment, I write with
no prepared gall, no not against Master Noworth of Oxford, who borrowes the
gross of his judgment in his last Almanac from my Prophetic Merlin, nor am
I angry, but pity that wooden Doctor whether Atheist or Papist I know not,
that swells with his own ignorant fancy, and says, he can make it appear,
what I speak in behalf of the Parliament, in point of Art ought to happen to
their enemies; this is one of those purblind Prophets, that in corners villifie
the Parliaments Friends, and yet they uncontrolled harbor amidst us, etc. but
this thing called a Galenist I let pass, until his capacity can erect a
figure, etc. Many and great are the judgments ready to fall down upon some
great Families of England and Europe, but unless an Angel, nay if an Angel
from Heaven should report it, nothing will be believed: an Achan and an
Achitophell, or faction equivalent, both covetous and irreligious, and
countenancing for byerespects, unworthy men have wearied my Pen, disheartened
the Gentry to our inevitable loss, and impoverishment of the poor
Commonallty, and destruction of those towns so unluckely committed to their
charge: Let the town of Leicester be hereof an unlucky president, which has
been these three years fortifying, and now on the sudden transmitted to his
Majesty's forces. What became of the vast sums of money there raised? why the
valiant Gentlemen displaced? and men of inferior rank exalted? who gives any
reason? unless it was purposely done to betray the Town to our enemies, or by
loss of that to prolong the wars another year. You shall see if his
Majesty's Providence fortify not that town in less months then we in years;
It must be discovered who, or whom have played the plain knaves with us, or
else we shall never be at quiet. Many complain the taxes of that County have
exceeded the Incombes of Rent. Thus Division, wilful Faction, a scabbie Sect
of covetous Sectaries undo us, and disparage our Parliaments proceedings; but
let it be remembered, his Majesty's Pressures first begot courage in us to
resist him: I hope those Devils that undo us will shortly be found out, till
then, if we thrive its miraculous. God grant our Parliament in time may purge
the Counties of all Schismatic, who alone do them more mischief then his
Majesty's Army: Discontented that the Gentry are no more respected, I will
engage no further at this time.

Its true, we gained Shrewesbury, and when the eyes of all Well-wishers looked
upon Colonel Mitton; a most beloved, active, and deserving Gentleman to be
Governor thereof, En and Ecce, no such thing; Sic vos non vobis.
Sic vos non vobis.


Time will make us see how we abuse and are abused, many can preach that connot
fight;

WILLIAM LILLY.
Without Temple Bar London, at the Corner House over against Stranbridge.
An Interpretation, or Declaration, what manner of Accidents may ensue upon the
three Suns which appeared in England the 19 of November, 1644, (it being his
Majesty's Birthday) by William Lilly.
It Is far from my intention, to make the signification of this extraordinary
Prodigy more ominous, because it had its appearance with us on the same day 44
year that his Majesty was born, and ushers in, as it were, the actions of his
45 year. I humbly desire his Majesty would be pleased to take some notice
hereof; for I conceive he may be hereby much concerned; and the rather, as he
is one of the prime Monarchs of Europe, and also in regard it was visible in
England, a Kingdom of his own, and of which he is rightful Inheritor: For
doubtless, over what City or Country these unusual Apparitions are
vertical, or where they do more manifestly show themselves, those Countries,
in a more sensible and perceptible manner, shall be capable of the effects
attending those Apparitions. Nor am I clearly of that opinion many very
judicious men, both of forepast and present times, are, That such like
Prodigies, Comets, etc. do never show themselves, but as precursors of
mischief. What greater benefit did ever happen to mankind, then the birth of
our Savior Jesus Christ? and yet was his coming manifested to us by a Star or
Comet, etc. the like whereof we have never read or heard of. And besides, we
have seen in our Age, that if that Comet in 1618 did design out ill to the
Austrian Family, as indeed it did; yet the Swedes did thereupon thrive; and,
before them, Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, attained to great esteem in
the world, and enlarged his Patrimony. I do willingly consent to those words of
that learned Physician of our times, Dr Brown, in the small, but unparalled
Piece of his, Relig. Med. fol. 70. That those noble essences in heaven, bear a
friendly regard to their fellow-natures on earth; and that such like Prodigies
as these, are the charitable Premonitions of good Angels, which more careless
Enquiries term but the effects of Chance and Nature.

There be many now living, can hardly believe there was any such thing as three
Suns appeared: and why? Because themselves had not the sight of them. Others
will consent such like things might be seen; but what should be thereby
signified, they conceive is beyond Humane Capacity.

To the first sort of men, I say, That, as Christians, we ought to believe the
report of one another, especially in a matter wherein there is no danger or
prejudice can come either by crediting or not crediting the report, or wherein
neither Religion or our neighbor suffer scandal or harm, etc. But I say, Many
hundreds, of uncontradictible credit, did behold this: We have it also
mentioned in many men's printed Pamphlets; amongst the rest, I hear the witty
Aulicus has glossed thereon. Sure I am, Britannicus promised some Conceptions,
which yet are not come to public view, upon that very subject.

I here represent the form of it, as it appeared in the Element, and was
carefully taken and observed by one Master Heylet, who courteously communicated
it unto me. The form of ^^e three Suns ^^en in England ^9. November 1644.



I will endeavor to give a general satisfaction, and first will produce the
years wherein formerly, long before our time, such Prodigies have been seen and
recorded, and also what material Occurrences did immediately, or within one or
two years, succeed: Which being performed, I shall, God willing, fall upon what
effects I conceive shall be instantly subsequent to these three Suns, the
now-subject of my Discourse.

IT is recorded, that in the One and fiftieth year after Christ, there appeared
three Suns at once, and forthwith they joined in one, etc. In that year,
Clodomire King of France began to recover what his predecessors had lost. Saint
Paul was converted. Luke writes the Gospel. Caractacus the valiant was led in
triumph to Rome, where a great Famine was the same year.

Anno 66. A Comet was seen, and also three Suns: In which year, Florus
President of the Jews was by them slain. Paul writes to Timothy. The Christians
are warned by a divine Oracle, and depart out of Jerusalem. Boadice a British
Queen, kills Seventy thousand Romans. The Nazareni, a scurvie Sect, begun,
that boasted much of Revelations and Visions. About a year after, Nero was
proclaimed enemy to the State of Rome.

Anno 69. In the East and in the West two sons were seen, of the which one
seemed weak and pale, the other strong and clear. In this year Jerusalem was
taken by Titus, and Eleven hundred thousand Jews slain and made away in the
Siege. Linus was this year first Bishop of Rome; where we may carefully note, a
Prodigy was the forerunner of Episcopacie at Rome. This year Galba is slain by
Otho, having reigned but three months. And men suppose, that in this year the
Gospel of Saint John was written at Ephesus.

From hence I pass until some later Genturies of years: for from the year 69,
to 1103, I find none recorded in those Authors I have read.

In the year 1103, a Comet appeared in Normandy; and not long after, two full
Moons, one in the East, the other in the West. The Effects that followed
instantly, were these: The son of Henry the Emperor rebelleth against his
father: A Council was held in London for reformation of the Clergy. (I think
that Tribe is out of order in all Ages.) All married Priests were
excommunicated by Anselme: (this was a strict Priest, certainly.) Lewis of
France forces a Restitution of Church-goods sacrilegiously taken. This year
began the long and cruel War betwixt the Polonian and Russian. The Venetians
obtain large Privileges of the Emperor.

Anno 1156, the first of October, for three hours, there was seen three Circles
about the Sun; which at length vanishing, there was seen two Suns. The Pope,
being an Englishman, is taken Prisoner. The Kingdom of Denmark is divided: And
in the next year, the Pope and Emperor fall at variance.

Anno 1157, in September, there were seen three Suns together, in as clear
weather as could be: And a few days after, in the same month, three Moons,
and, in the Moon that stood in the middle, a white Cross. Sueno King of
Denmark, at a great Feast, kills Canutus: Sueno is himself slain, in pursuit
of Waldemar. The Order of Eremites, according to the rule of Saint Augustine,
begun this year; and in the next, the Pope submits to the Emperor: (was not
this miraculous?) Lumbardy was also adjudged to the Emperor.

Anno 1168, the first of September, there was seen at once in the West, three
Suns: Two hours after, when two were gone, he in the middle went down alone. By
mediation of the French King, Becket is restored to his Archbishopric.
Almaricus King of Jerusalem, calls in the Turks to his aid, which was the
ruin of that Kingdom; and, contrary to his Faith given, aids the Greeks
against the Egyptians. A Conspiracy arose in Bohemia against the King.

Anno 1169, three Moons appeared. The year succeeding, Becket the stiff Priest
was slain in a Church in England, Catana a City in Sicily, is destroyed, with
fifteen thousand people, as also the Bishop and Clergy, by an Earthquake. A
Smiths son raised great troubles in Norway, pretending himself to be Harolds
Grandchilde. The Romans raze the City of Alba: And in the next year, a great
Inundation was in Freezland.

Anno 1314, three Moons appeared. Lewis was Crowned Emperor by some Electors,
Frederick by the rest. A Council was at Ravenna for Reformation, etc. Note the
instability of the Clergy. The Pope dies, and the Sea is void two years and
four months. The English, under a simple and wilful King, Edward the second,
are overthrown by the Scots, and to purpose. Lewis Hutine comes to the Crown of
France, hangs his Treasurer, etc. The Queen of Castile dies. The Genowayes rob
the Venetian Merchants, and invade their Territories.

Anno 1372, the first of July, and some days after, a strange Circle was seen
about the Sun, over which appeared two Crosses of a red color, near Basil.
The French besiege Rochell, and the English defend it. The year after, the
Order of Nuns of Saint Katharine was founded. Robert Stuart King of Scotland
marries his Concubine; and John Duke of Lancaster the King of Castiles
daughter. The King of Portingall refuses a Match in Castile, and takes a
Noble-mans wife from him, having banished her husband; at which his people are
discontented. Shortly after, the Venetians restore Paleologus, being expelled
by his son Andronicus.

Anno 1460, the second of February, three Suns appeared, every one showing a
several light, which again closed all together in one. The Duke of York is
attainted of Treason. Henry the sixth is taken Prisoner at Northampton. Civil
War in France, called, The Weal-publike, caused by the Kings Covetousness. The
King of France dies, having, upon a foolish Conceit, forborne his meat so long,
that when after he would eat, he could not. A Rebellion in Spain against the
Queen, for death of the Prince. James the third came to the Crown of Scotland.
The Duke of York is slain in Yorkshire. David Emperor of Trapezond, and his
two sons, taken and slain by Mahomet the Turk, In the next year after, Edward
the fourth came to the Crown of England, and poor innocent Henry the sixth sent
to the Tower, etc.

Anno 1466, three Suns were seen at Rome; in which year Erasmus was born. The
King of Denmark is excommunicated by the Pope. Warwick and Edward the fourth
fall out. John King of Spain is deposed, and Alfonsus crowned. The King of
Hungaria's brother is taken by the Turks, and beheaded at Constantinople.
Gerard the King of Denmark's brother, is imprisoned for aspiring. Matthias of
Hungaria is set up against the lawful King thereof. Scanderbeg a most valiant
Captain against the Turk, dies. The French King takes from his brother the
Duchy of Normandy.

Anno 1492, the fifteenth of December, three Suns were seen in Poland at noon.
The Jews are expelled Spain. Alexander the sixth plays the ungrateful fellow
with his Gardinalls. Toward the later end of the year, the Emperor of Germany
dies; and John Albert succeeds Casimire in the Kingdom of Polonia. The Ganthois
in Flanders rebel.

Anno 1514, in January, three Suns were seen in the Duchy of Wittenberge, the
middlemost surpassed the rest in greatness: In every of these, there appeared
the form of a bloody and fiery sword. The same year, in March, three Moons were
seen. It was in that year some parts of Sussex were burned and spoiled by the
Rhodians, in behalf of the French. An Interview follows, betwixt the Emperor,
King of Polonia, and Bohemia. The French King and Pope meet. The Queen of
Scotland flees into England. The French King dies, and Francis the first
succeeds, and recovers Millan.

Anno 1515, Queen Mary, the scourge of Protestants, is born in England. Wolsey
a proud Priest begins to rise at Court. The Pope falls out with the Venetians.

Anno 1520, the fifth of January, about Sunrising, three Suns appeared, with a
Rainbowe of diverse colors, at Vienna. The seventh of January, there were three
Suns also seen. After Charles the fifth was Crowned, there was seen a circle
about the Sun, with a Rainbowe. The Pope, he spues out his Excommunications
against Luther, who as stoutly burns his foolish Bulls. The Pope executes the
Tyrant of Perugia. The Duke of Buckingham is in England beheaded for Treason.
The French detain our Merchants goods: we imprison the French. Solomon the
Magnificent comes to be Emperor of Turkey. The Geldrois rebel. The next year
after the French War began, which continued thirty and eight years, troubles
arise in Scotland. Many rich Cities taken by the Turk in Hungary.

Anno 1523, in Switzerland, there was seen three Suns at once, and also diverse
Circles in the Element. At Norimberge, in a Diet there held, grievances are
exhibited against the Pope. The Peasants rebel against the Nobles in Germany.
Both the French and Swedes are defeated by the Imperialls. The Earl of Surrey
burns thirty seven Towns in Scotland. The Duke of Holsten is chosen King of
Denmark, and the former King expelled for his Cruelty. The Janissaries mutiny at
Constantinople.

Anno 1525, there was seen in Hungaria five Suns, two on either side the right
Sun. The Duke of Luneburg becomes Lutherane. The Order of Capuchines is
erected. The French King is released out of prison. Fifty thousand Clowns are
slain. Henry the eighth falls off from the Emperor. The women of Hague rise
against their Customers, upon their exactions: and the Swedes become Lutheranes.

Anno 1526, in Sweden three Suns were seen, with diverse circles in the
Elements. The Emperor abolisheth the Popes Authority in Spain. The Tartarian
invades the Polonian, and is defeated and taken. Rome is wasted by the
Columnenses, and besiege the Pope in S. Angelo. A Sedition arose in Suffolk.
The holy League made by the French King, Pope, Duke of Millan, and Venetian,
against the Emperor. Now was the Battle of Mohatz, where the whole Nobility of
Hungary was slain, and the King in flight drowned in a ditch. Bud^ a chief
City of Hungary, is yielded to Solomon. The next year, the Duke of Burbon
takes Rome, sacks it ten months. Sweating sickness in London, continuing two
years.

Anno 1528, in Switzerland, and month of June, many Suns were seen at once,
and about them three circles. A Council was then held at Sena for Reformation.
Images and Popish trumperies abolished at Perne and Strasburg. A Rebellion at
Dansk. Some mutinous Vtrechters executed by the Bishop. Sharp Differences
betwixt Henry the eighth and Queen Katharine. The next year, Solomon invades
Hungary with One hundred and fifty thousand men. Vienna is besieged, but not
taken. The Ransom of the French King is paid.

Anno 1532, the eleventh of April, at Venice, Cardanus saw three fair and
bright Suns, with two Rainbowes, not with points descending, but opposite to
the Sun. Vienna is relieved by the Emperor. Henry the eighth is divorced from
Queen Katherine. 1533, Qveen Elizabeth was born. Sedition raised by the
Anabaptists and strange Factions in Hungary.

Anno 1541, there appeared three Suns; the usual Sun stood in the Center, and
two bright Circles did environ it. Katherine Queen of England is beheaded. The
Rochellers rebel. Charles the fifth makes an unfortunate Voyage to Algiers.
The Germane Forces are foiled by the Turks, only by the cowardice of the
Leaders. The year after, the Scots were beat at Solwy Moss: and their King dies
of Melancholy. Transylvania is subdued by Solomon, and given to John. Popery
rejected in the Palatinate.

Anno 1550, near Brunswick, three Suns appeared. Now great troubles arise at
Antwerp, and the Inquisition opposed in the Netherlands. Difference betwixt the
Emperor and Ferdinand, about succession in the Empire: Some of the Electors
arm against the Emperor. The Thames ebbed and flowed three times in nine
hours. Peace with Scotland.

Anno 1551, in March, at Magdeburg, about seven in the morning, seven Rainbowes
were seen; and in the evening, three Moons. In April, at Wittenberg, three Suns
were seen, with various Circles in the Element. There was seen the same year at
Antwerp, three Suns, with diverse Circles. The same year there was seen two
mock-Moons twice. In England, the Duke of Somerset is beheaded. A world of
Disputes in Germany, about Religion. The French make War with the Emperor.

Anno 1553, three Suns appeared; the middle of a bright color, but the Parclii
or mock-Suns red and bloody. The same day, after Sunset, three Moons appeared.
The Papist and Protestant in England dispute. The King of England dies. A
tumult in Brussels, between the insolent Spaniard and the townsmen. Now
Persecution in England for being Protestants. Queen Mary comes to the Crown;
ushered into the world by a Prodigy, and to the Crown with the like ominous
Portent.

Anno 1554, in Bavaria diverse kinds of Suns were seen; but especially the
sixth of March, two Suns were seen, with a Rainbowe. In May the same year, two
more Suns were seen, the Sun as it were environed all about with a Rainbowe.
Wyat rises in Kent. Philip and Mary married. Sena betrayed to the Emperor by
the Pope. Henalt in Arthoys wasted by the French.

Anno 1556, in Saxony two mock-Suns appeared. Charles the Emperor enters the
Monastery of S. Justus, in the confines of Castile. The Lord Sturton is hanged
in England for a Murder. Transylvania revolts. Nineteen thousand people at
Brussels, die of Cold and Famine. The next year, the War is begun betwixt the
King of Spain and the Pope. A general Pestilence happens in England. Calais is
lost to the French: and the Scots invade the English. Treasons and Uproars are
frequent in Turkey.

Anno 1622, three Suns appeared at Heidelberg. The woeful Calamities that have
ever since fallen upon the Palatinate, we are all sensible of, and of the loss
of it, for any thing I see, for ever, from the right Heir. Osman the great Turk
is strangled that year: and Spinola besieges Bergen up Zoom, etc.

I have heard it credibly reported, that there were seen, about twelve years
since, many Suns at one time in Cornwall: and in March 1639, toward Sunset,
three Suns were seen in the West, not far from Oxford.

I have not seen any of these Suns I mention, my self; only in those six years
in which I lived in the Country, viz. 1636, 1637, 1638, 1639, 1640, etc. many
evenings I observed a strange fiery sky, and unusual forms in the Elements,
toward that part of the heaven where Oxford stands, and toward Bark-shire,
Hamp-shire, and so also toward Buckingham-shire, etc.

I have the rather repeated these things, that the incredulous of the times
might not be wavering, or a party now upon earth too confident that these
prodigious Sights have no signification upon Mundane affairs. The Historical
part is now ended, and my own Judgment upon those three Suns apparent the
nineteenth of November, 1644, follows: Wherein, if often repetitions of the
same thing trouble thee, with modesty or courtesy pass them by; for in
Astrology it cannot be avoided: Nor do thou expect an exact Method from me,
since it was no part of my meaning, or could I conveniently do it: Only this I
must tell thee, that the Interpretation I write, is, I conceive, grounded upon
probable foundations; and who lives to see a few years over his head, will
easily perceive I have unfolded as much as was fit to discover, and that my
Judgment is not a mile and a half from truth.

A Figure of the 3 Sonns appearan^. 19 November 1644. 9:45. A.M. ab in ad.
21 28 2.38 4 2.56 R 26.5 5.34 24:47 R 2.0 1.0 14.32 R 28 2.38 4 26.5. 7.51
^.34 20 18 1.0


A Figure erected for the middle time of the three Suns appearance the 19 of
November, 1644. 9 hor. 45 min. A. M.

Londinum Angliae.

MAny Philosophers are of opinion, that these false Suns, amongst the learned
called Parelii, do especially appear, when many subtle moist clouds are
betwixt us and the Sun. Others, that they are round clouds shining like the
Sun; or that they are images of the Sun in a thick and neighboring cloud in
the form of a Mirror. But if that collected clouds, or multitude of vapors, or
any Natural cause, produced such rare and unusual Apparitions; Why have we
not such Sights often? Its well known, such are not usually seen, although once
in a month we do not want plenty of Vapors, which, if they were so produced,
might cause monthly, or oftener, such like Apparitions. And besides, when these
three Suns were seen, it was a very fair Sunshine-day, a very clear day, no
Clouds, Vapors, Foggs or Mists appearing. Indeed for seven or eight days
before, we at London had extreme stormy Weather, cloudy, windy, rainy, and what
not? I did not observe, for a long time, such variety of blustering and
unnatural Weather, which I conceive was occasioned by the late Opposition of
Saturn and Venus, and the matutine setting of the Virgiliae, and other most
violent fixed Stars, which, according to Stadius, Hiemem pluviosam denuntiant.
It is also the opinion of Pliny, Succularum and Pleiadum, occasus Terra
Marique turbidum esse. Nor may we forget the access of the Sun to Cor Scorpii,
to lessen any ill Weather the days precedent, etc.

Here Is Natural causes for the ill Weather preceding, so many days together;
but no cause in Natvre to induce a belief that the three Suns were occasioned
from Nature.

I am clearly of opinion, These Sights, as well as many others, were caused by
those tutelary Angels, who, by Gods permission, and under him, have the
Government of the English Commonwealth. They are sensible of those many
impending Miseries now too plentifully amongst us. Their conference with man
now, as in the days of old, very few attain unto, it being a blessing sought
after by many, attained unto by few: And yet there are some of opinion, There
lives in the world some, and of those some, a small Party in England, that know
more then they utter, and, either by Vision, or verbal Colloquie, have the
knowledge of future events, yea, even from the blessed Angels.

But alas, these are Riddles; I must adhere unto my Astrology; and yet wish
all happiness to those good souls that either confer with their own Genius,
whom some call, A good Angel; or with such other of those heavenly Ministers
whom God in mercy affords them. And herein let no Reader mistake me; for I
abhor Witches, or those Necromancers that raise the deceased out of their
graves, or those Circular Priests now almost worn out of the world: My meaning
is this, That I do believe there are many now living, to whom God, by his
Angels, gives Revelation of things to come: And where and to whom God gives
such a blessing, I believe that Saint may lawfully use the Talent God has
enabled him with.

But I leave this obsolete, though excellent Learning, to another Discourse,
and come to the Text it self.

I do somewhat adhere to Cardan, Seg. 4. Apho. 94. Signa circa Solemn, in Luna
vel Stellis, aut circa eas, tum in Coelo valde aliena a naturali cursu; si
locum ubi apparent, and figuram Coeli cum hoc, ea hora ab initio in finem
observabis, intellegere possis quid significent: Viz. If you observe any
strange forms or signs about the Sun, or in the Moon or Stars, or near unto
them, and those unusual signs are strange, or contrary to a natural course;
consider the place where they appear, and compare the Figure of heaven with it,
set to the beginning of their appearance, and considered until its end, and
then you may understand the signification thereof.

The better to direct me in my Judgment, I have erected three Scheams of
heaven, and, according to my mean Capacity, judged thereupon of the effects of
these three Suns.

Neither indeed is Cardanus single in his Judgment; for Ludovicus de Rigiis,
Apho. 88. lib. 2. says, Monstruosa corpora and portenta, quando ultra modum
acciderint, hora ipsorum consideranda est, nihil accidit, quin a corporibus
supercoelestibus designetur effectus. Monstrous bodies, and seldom seen, when
beyond nature they chance to show themselves; the hour of their first being is
to be considered: there is no such things happen; but the effects thereof are
designed from the supercelestiall bodies.

And though this may seem strange to most men that shall read this Discourse;
yet I hope the Judgment following shall, in some measure, better satisfy
them, if they will have patience first to read it warily, and then to observe
the general Affairs of England, and all or the most part of Christendom,
presently, or within a little compass of time subsequent. Nor let any humorist
press me too hard for reason in every thing falls from my Pen: Multa res sunt
quae non videntur ratione naturali esse, effectus quidem earum per formas
superiorum corporum considerare possumus habereque eas, si in tempore proprio
investigatae quaesitaeque sunt. Rigel. Lib. 2. Apho. 77. Many things do come to
pass, for which we can give no natural reason: we may attain to discern the
effects by the forms of superior Bodies, and exactly* to know them, if we
search and look after them in their proper times. By which this learned Grecian
intends, that the true notion of what may be signified by these late disastrous
three Suns, or any other unnatural Apparition, is most easily attained, by
taking the exact time of their first appearance, and then the erection of a
Scheam of heaven.

And this I find further confirmed by Cardanus, Apho. 95. Seg. 40. Monstra
vero and portenta clades and mortes hominum, sed non eodem modo neque statim
significant, oportet autem and exortus eorum considerare, sed illorum casus*
and vis non est praesentis contemplationis. The meaning whereof is to inform
you, that upon any general Misfortune happening, or any sudden Calamity
chancing amongst men, you are to observe the first time of its motion, and
thereby frame your Astrologicall Judgment upon the Accidents subsequent.

Its first considerable, in what nature, kind, or thing, this prodigious
Appearance shall manifest it self in, and upon what kinds of* Men, People,
Kingdoms, or Countries; and lastly, its Determination, etc.

Of all which I will treat, but not methodically, for some reasons best known
to my self, etc. For let it be considered, how dangerous it is to speak truth
in significant Language, in this Age, and at this time, when Opinion is more
prevalent then sober Judgment, and when a word modestly misplaced, may more
puzzle me by information of some seeming-Saint Coxcomb, then either real
Treason against my Prince, or Blasphemy in Religion, etc. But I slight these
pedantick Informers.

BE it known then unto all men by these Presents, That Hujusmodi imagines and
figurae multa minantur, frequenter enim aut Civitati ali^ui, aut Regioni, aut
Regno, vel Principi, Regi, Caesarive, quae expressis alias verbis sibi dici non
tolerarent. Such Sights as these three Suns, or other Images or terrible
Figures appearing in the heavens, do threaten many things frequently either to
some City, Region, Kingdom, Prince, or Emperor: and further, these are
manifested in such extraordinary manner in the heaven by Signs, because such
persons as above named, will never suffer any man in plain words to acquaint
them with so much.

The Apparition being visible in England, the whole Kingdom is concerned more
or less.

The Lord of the tenth in the seventh House, Retrograde: our prime men, of all
Qualities, are intended to share in the Mischief hereby portended.

Kings, Princes, Nobility, etc. of which anon.

I particular out no one; Quis enim prudens id periculi subiret? What man would
run such a hazard of danger? Licet Astronomiae and Magiae pertissimus, ut
Principi alicui aut Regi Caesarive in os diceret* tibi hoc accidet, tu
occideris, glande trajicieris, subditi tui te Regno exuunt, and ejicient, in
exilium agent, subditi tui dat^ fide violata and rebellione facta te
repudiabunt, and Domino alio jurabunt? What an Ass were the Astrologian, or
skillful Magician, says Paracelsus, if upon the appearance of a Prodigious
Sight in the Elements, he should say, to the face of a Prince, King, or
Emperor* Such a thing shall happen unto thee, Thou shall be slain, knocked in
the head with a Bullet, Thy Subjects shall spoil thee, and cast thee out of thy
Kingdom, Thou shall live a banished man in another Country, Thy own Subjects
or People, notwithstanding their Fealty or Homage done, shall violate their
Faith given, raise Rebellion, repudiate and scorn thy Acts and Person, and
perform Service to some other Lord. This is a pretty piece of Stuff.

If we believe the sayings of the wise, that were curious in search after such
like Prodigies; you that are Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, or the
principal Rulers of all Commonwealths in Europe, have reason to be careful
of your selves, and to thank me for putting you in mind of such things as
these: Be angry, and you please, I care not; I must discharge my Conscience.

Its not unknown to the Learned, that Europe is now at this time under the last
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the Watery Trygon, and sign of Pisces.
Its not unknown, as I may say, how preposterously and irregularly that
Conjunction slips in betwixt two Conjunctions of the Fiery Triplicity, the
first entrance whereof was in 1603, and their Conjunction in the eighth degree
of Sagittarius, the very self-same sign, degree, and quarter of heaven the Sun
and Moon are in upon this present Apparition.

King James came to be our English King that year.

In the full-Moon postventionall to the Comet, 1618, the Sun was in the tenth
degree of Sagittarius. In the second Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1623,
the almost degree of this present Lunation did mediate heaven. King Charles
went into Spain that year.

In the year 1642/3, when Saturn and Jupiter made their last Conjunction, the
place of the Luminaries at this time was then the Cusp of the tenth house: and
the Sun now in Partill square to his then-place, the Moon at this present, her
Latitude considered, is in almost Partill Opposition to the place of Mars then:
The Scheam of heaven then and now, differ very little or nothing at all. This
is written, to satisfy Artists: He that would know more, let him repair to the
Tract I wrote, called Englands prophetical Merlin.

These are all Arguments, and not mean ones, of premonition to a Family, and
that no mean one, That a storm, and that also a furious one, is ready to rush
down upon their heads. Doubtless this Prodigy is a more near and significant
Interpreter then any has been this half Century of years, of that fatal Doom
hanging at this time as it were in the Air by a twine thread, over some
obstinate and sinking Progenies in Europe. These three Suns show acceleration
of what has mercifully a long time been forborne, and that now, after so many
Warnings, divine Providence will not be deluded by the struggling or frail and
brittle policy of man.

Cardan has such words as these, Seg. 5. Apho. 67. Cumque tres Soles eodem
modo, and in ambitu medii Circulus completus ac permanens ad modum Iridis, eo
anno in Civitate libera nascetur ex Civibus Rex, quod si cum hoc, Stella
apparuerit in die lucida, erit in eadem hora. When three Suns appear, and in
the compassing round of the middle one a complete Circle is permanent, in
manner of a Rainbowe; in that year, in a free City (or Commonwealth) there is
born of some Citizen one that shall be a King: But if upon the time of such an
appearance, some glorious Star show it self in the daytime, the Infant is born
the same hour, mutatis mutandis. The words of this learned Philosopher stretch
to this sense, That when such a Prodigy as he speaks of appears, it shows, or
is the antecedent of some new Principality, or some notable Privileges to be
obtained, or the birth or rise of some man or Commonwealth to Sovereignty, and
to that supreme Command which was not before. Believe me, O all you great ones,
there is some such Monster in hatching, as the depriving of many of you of that
Freedom your Ancestors left you, etc.

If we take signification from the predominant Planet, we shall acquaint you in
plain English, That Religion shall be a strong Pretender, and a painful
Stickler in most Commonwealths, for some years. Venus, as now posited, tells
you how much some sober and modest Judgments endeavor to settle things
purely, soberly, and legally: But if you look into the third house, you shall
find Saturn Retrograde, and in opposition to her. Master Booker says, Saturn
signifies Tom Jew and Jack Jesuit: Bona fide, I say, That we are hereby
premonished of men in our Commonwealth that are as superstitious as the Jew,
and malicious as the Jesuit; and that these hodge-podge mixture of
shallow-brains shall disturb all our proceedings. Good God! that so much deceit
and hypocrisy should be veiled, and we continue ignorant of the Plot thereby
intended.

What incongruous and inconsistent Opinions, even to reason it self, do I
foresee by this froward and malicious Aspect of Saturn, shall appear in the
world, vex all or most Nations, undo almost every State and Commonwealth.

Methinks here is to be plenty of Ambassadors severally employed: What
Conclusion they shall make, the Retrogradation of Jupiter in the fifth tells
you, Worse and worse, Tinker-like, mend one hole, and make two; or, if you
will, Salve up a little Breach, and not long after make one five times greater.

Mutual Assistance shall be pretended, and one Nation or Commonwealth leagues
with another; but to what purpose? That Policy which in the conception of the
wisest Statist is held most convenient for his Prince and Country, even in
that very point shall his King or State suffer most detriment. Can we delude
God? or have the Stars no Influence? or can we by Art or Nature make the two
unnecessary invironing Suns, which are no better then Scar-crows or outward
appearances, to be real, proper and material ones? I must deal plainly, that
we in England, (for Saturn is in Aries, the Ascendant of England) under
pretense of a glorious show for Reformation in divine matters, intend
deceitfully; and that mischievous Intentions, under religious Pretensions, are
most viperously cloked.

But upon maturer Consideration, while I see the hand of the Almighty deading
and dulling our understandings, I apprehend the Stars as directory-Messengers
of some such things, but in my solid Judgment conclude it the All-seeing
providence of God. God is angry we will see nothing; but more angry, because,
though some do see and perceive, and know to what Ruin we are hastening; yet,
like mute Statu's, they are silent in this great necessity of the State, and
close up their mouths, lest they should utter Verity.

My Genius, if it be lawful to say so, dictates unto me nothing but Fraud,
Cozenage, Dissimulation, Hypocrisy, will be used amongst some
pretended-Reformers both of Church and Commonwealth.

If I understand any thing, scandalous aspersions shall, without number or just
cause, be fathered upon our Parliament and their Proceedings: heinous and
formidable Informations against the Nobility and Gentry. Seurrilous Reproaches
from all parts shall fall upon our Senior and Orthodox Clergymen, from a
Junior sort of Rabbis, a Serpentine people not heretofore visible or known in
the world, lately elapsed by chance, not from heaven, (where Goodness it self
dwells) but from the Moon, (which Galileus says is habitable) in some terrible
Thunderclap: for I believe they were so terrified and stupefied in their
hearings, by their so violent descent in that storm, that not any sense could
ever since pop into their Noddles.

Reason in Astrology must be given, and so it shall. Mercury generally
signifies in Man, Youth: his Orientality of the Sun, and in the Figure, adds
more Youth: But now in the sense I speak it, it tells the whole World, the
Novelty of what now most afflicts us. Jupiter is generally a Significator of
Nobility, and by position of the Clergy, he is under the earth, and in the
descending part of heaven: we hear of things now, that did not appear before,
etc. From whence I frame this Judgment, That Youth, or young novell Opinions
or Disputations, shall deceitfully prejudice maturer Judgments, with Lies,
Hypocrisy, Calumny, Impudence, etc. And I say again, Because Mars that is Lord
of the tenth House, disposes of Mercury, and he is Retrograde in the seventh
House, and mansion of the Moon, and opposite to the Ascendant; I deliver
ingeniously this freehearted Judgment, That if his Majesty give protection to
such upstart pretended-Saints, he shall run Retrograde, that is, he shall
receive infinite Dishonor by it. And to our Parliament I say, If Connivance be
had, under their Protection, with these superlative assuming Zelotes, (for my
heart will not suffer me to abuse Religion so much, as to call them Religious)
the Parliament shall more suffer in the conclusion, even by them, then either
by the Turk, were he armed against us, or all the Forces of any potent Enemy. I
cannot call them by any certain name, that so they might be distinguished: do
but observe their actions, and it best informs you: they absolutely study
nothing but Division, etc. and suppression of Monarchy.

The very true meaning of these three Suns, is to inform every Commonwealth of
Europe, that they are hastening to either their Confusions, or unavoidable
Dangers: The Counsels of the most aged shall be despicable, the Projections of
the younger men shall cause Insurrections, Slaughters, Murders; the Advice of
the most wise shall be innocently slighted. A great Work is in hand.

Both Sun and Moon are ill placed. Both Kings and People, and all
Commonwealths, are in their Councels now to seek. They have cunningly, as long
as they could, carried their Devices secretly: This Prodigy speaks, as if we
shall discover more then is wished, and yet conceal enough to undo us.

Three Suns have been seen many times, and several Circles, sometimes over,
sometimes under the true and proper Sun: Seditiones inter mortales manifestas
ostendunt, and ab omni concensu concordiaque alienationem: Junct. 312. Here Is a
strange thing, that they do manifest public and eminent Seditions amongst
mortal men, and a general alienation or averseness to any Peace, Agreement,
or Unity. Infinite Divisions these three Suns are the Forerunners of; of
sturdie Disturbances to Emperors, Kings, Princes, and all manner of
Principalities: and they do usually show a general Calamity at hand; they
declare Schisms and Rents in the Church, Disorder amongst the Religious, the
brooding or upstarting of some cragged or rugged Tenants in Divinity, some
admirable, miraculous, and unexpected passages amongst men, a general Delirium
or madness, or Confusion in Opinions reigning and raging, and to domineer in
most parts of those Countries adjacent to the place of appearance. All manner
of inferior people threatening their Superiors and Commanders, grumbling,
repining, whispering out revenge against them: No union in Counsel, or
constancy in Opinion: Nothing is thought on, but how to bring the whole Fabric
of every Commonwealth out of frame: Not a man appears, but he is more
judicious in State Affairs then Ahithophel: Each Cobbler in Divinity assures
himself of more knowledge then Calvin, Luther or Melancton were acquainted
with, poor Idiots: The acts of the most Reverend men preceding such times, are
called in question, the validity of their Judgment undervalued, and a Rabble
of Saturnine people fill the Times with Ignorance, the Church with Sects, the
Commonwealth with Beggary, and their own Coffers, tantum quantum, with as much
Money as they can theevishly cozen the King, Kingdom and State of.

Is there need of more Suns then one in the day? or of more then one Moon in
the night? or of one King in a Kingdom? one entire Government in a
Commonwealth? one uniformity in the Affairs of the Church? Verily I think that
man out of his wits, that would affirm a positive necessity of more: and yet
usually, after the appearing of such Prodigies, such lawless and and
unaccustomed Monsters appear: and even such most irregular Attempts are to be
prosecuted by people of as great antiquity as the two mock-Suns, which appeared
at an instant, but vanished not away in a moment.

When God Almighty had drowned the world, in confirmation he would do so no
more, he produced the Rainbowe, and made it appear at all times and seasons in
a constant and natural form and manner, ever opposite to the Sun; and this was
out of his great love to Mankind: But while in anger he permits his ministering
Angels (as now he did) to manifest to our eyes a Rainbowe (and that such a one
as no Age has absolutely recorded the like) to appear with the Bend of it
downward, just over the natural Sun. The Prognostic part hereof may gravel
an assured Judgment. Reader, pity the weakness of Humane understanding, and
let thy love appear, in charitably passing by my failings.

The Portent of this Prodigy is very great: The Angels are willing we should
discern something, else why was it made visible? There was no necessity of it.

O All you Emperors, Kings, Princes, Rulers and Magistrates of Europe, this
unaccustomed Apparition is like the Handwriting in Daniel to some of you; it
premonisheth you, above all other People, to make your peace with God in time:
You shall every one of you smart, and every one of you taste (none excepted)
the heavy hand of God, who will strengthen your Subjects with invincible
Courage to suppress your Misgovernments and Oppressions in Church or
Commonwealth: Nor shall War cease, or the Sword of God leave persecuting you
and your Offsprings, until this great Work is perfectly done. What will you
say, if the Almighty is ready to let fall from heaven a new Government, quite
contrary to any has hitherto been in the world? Here Is threatened an universal
Insurrection against you by your oppressed People. Here Is either the Deposing,
Flight, or final Extirpation of some of you, at hand: Your Viceroys,
Lieutenant-Generalls, shall quake and tremble, and prove men of no Courage*
shall shrink from you in your greatest necessity: Your Confederates shall fail
in real Performances, and do you more mischief then a professed enemy: Your
Children shall wander as banished People all over the world, die unlamented in
strange Countries, while some of your own Generation, of set purpose, shall
bring you in dislike of your vassails.

Those words are general: A word to my own Country of England. Verily I am
doubtful there is now as great Treason in hatching against England, as either
the Armado in 1588, or furious Gunpowder-Plot in 1605. I am scrupulous, for the
love I bear to my native Soil, whilst I conceive there is a second Massacre in
agitation; and yet I faithfully believe we shall really overcome it, and
maturely, and in good sadness, take lusty Vengeance on the Contrivers, etc.

Are not both the Lights, in our Scheam, with or near Cor Scorpii, a most
violent fixed Star? which usually (if we believe Antiquity or Experience)
threatens sudden and violent death; else why have we this Aphorism? Cor Scorpii
cum Luminaribus cruentam mortem, aut ex veneno repentinam denuntiat. He or she
of any great Family, that has either the Sun or Moon, or both, with this Star,
in the Radix of their Nativities, are threatened hereby, either to die some
violent death by casualty, Sword, Gun, or Poison. Look to your selves; here is
some monstrous death toward you. But to whom? will thou say. Herein we
consider the Sign, Lord thereof, and the House: The Sun signifies in that
Royal Sign, great ones; the House signifies Captivity, Poison, Treachery:
From which is derived thus much, That some very great man, what King, Prince,
Duke, or the like, I really affirm I perfectly know not, shall, I say, come to
some such untimely end.

What Magistrate soever of Europe has the Sun or Moon in the place now
afflicted, his person and estate will be in danger: Where the 6, 7 or 8 of
Sagittarius do culminate, he loses his Sovereignty: where the same degrees
arise in the Horoscope, it threatens his life; witness the King of Sweden, etc.

Great men may, and I know will, despise these favorable Admonitions. Let them
so do, and afterward cry, Had I wist.

Here in our Figure we have all the superior Planets Retrograde, as if all the
Grandees of the world, and every principal man in his kind, should find
vexation enough; or as if every State and Commonwealth, or Society of men,
were declining, and ready to suffer in one kind or other. Significat etiam
morbos populares, and mortalitates and quod ibi morietur Rex: Haly* Popular
Diseases, that is, abundance of the common people shall die by the Sword,
Mortality, etc. And where these afflictions are in most force, there, and in
that Land, shall the King or principal Officer die.

What success shall follow of Treaties, or from or by means of Messengers,
Commissioners, Ambassadors, Nuntio's, General or Provincial Councels, you
may read by the positure of Mercury in Scorpio, hastening to Opposition of
Jupiter. The Significator in fixed Signs, show the tediousness of such like
matters, the length of time shall be spent in Embassages, Treaties, Counsels:
but was there ever (without the immediate finger of God) any good Conclusion,
when the Significators applied by opposition? Long, deceitful and painful
Debates, slender and impertinent Conclusions.

Men are employed by some, to good intents and purposes; but one dash of a Pen,
one simple underhand-missive of or from a guilty Secretary, or male-contented
Statesman, or one scrupulous Tenent of or from an unsettled Separatist, hinders
and makes void all conclusion of difference by Negotiations and Treaties.
Whereas formerly Commissioners from Prince to Prince have determined the
greatest Controversies ever happened; there is now in the Figure of heaven no
appearance of such blessings, the Sword being only intended to decide these
consuming Plagues and inveterate Quarrels that either have or shall, for some
years, rise amongst the European Commonwealths.

Blinded shall be the eyes of the wisest discerning men, curbed and disheartened
shall be the intentions of the cordial, slandered shall be the well-wishes of
innocent and harmless souls, who are not so verbal, to no purpose, as some
airy spirits.

Wars shall be prolonged, beyond either the reason or judgment of the wisest
Statesman now living, nay, until the furious Soldier himself is weary.

The Rainbowe seemed occularly to be amongst the Northern Constellations, above
the Equator, in that space of heaven where the learned place Serpentarius, or
the form of a Serpent, his mouth gaping wide open, and a Crown ready to fall
into the Serpents mouth.

This is the second time, within one years space, that some Princes of Europe
have been threatened with Ruin and Destruction; (if they repent not) for the
last of June, 1644, there were strange Apparitions in the heavens, in this very
Constellation; and now again this unusual Rainbowe extending it self over the
proper Sun, and quite through the body of the Serpent. Let me add to this, The
subsequent Eclipse I shall write of, has no little signification in the
fortune and persons of Kings and great men.

Was not our mother Eve deceived by ill counsel given unto her by the devil in
form of a Serpent? and was not Adam thereby himself mistaken, and so his whole
Posterity made capable of that punishment he for that suffered, and we all by
his act?

It was not Adam, it was not Eve, but the Serpent: Its not Kings or Princes,
its not their Queens or Ladies, that invent those execrable Counsels so totally
destructive; no, it is the Serpent, it is, in plain language, such destructive
Counsel as is put into them by Serpents, that is, ill Counselors. Its Mercury
in Scorpio, its religious men in habit, but devils in conditions; its men of
great Conformity outwardly, that deceitfully hatch these hellish Advices.

I wish, in time, great men to become themselves; for if some good Angel has
hitherto seemed to keep their Crowns, their Dominions, their Authority, from
dropping into the Serpents mouth, that is, from Ruin, Approach of foreign
Power, or Incursion, etc. yet now, as in a little time this Rainbowe vanished,
and so left the true Sun naked, and to recive any impression; so questionless,
in a short time, shall Princes, after an unwonted manner, be deprived of
Friends, Rule and Dominion, by people formerly contemptible, scarce dreamed of,
and which themselves, within less then a few years, aimed at no such thing.

The most Ancient and Noble Families of Europe are declining; but especially
here not far remote, or in England: And this Saturn by Retrogradation does
easily declare.

The Nobility and Gentry who have continued many Generations are now sinking*
and an inferior sort of people, by plain Legerdemain, are ascending; but
whether to heaven, or worldly preferment, sub judice lis est.

The Soldier, whom I most honor, shall tremble, and yet fight for he knows
not whom or what: as Mars in the seventh House does manifestly declare.

Germany that part thereof

Some parts of France, and my own dear Country of England, and therein
especially Kent, Sussex, Surrey, part of Essex, Suffolk and Lincoln, and parts
adjacent.

Oxford shall suffer both with Sword, Sickness, Famine, Plague, if not final
Subversion.

Shall the City of Rome escape? No, nor Pamfilio the now present Pope shall
continue scarce six years, without Poison, or Opposition; I will not say,
Deposition.

I omit some Countries purposely; for Infidelity and Ingratitude is to be
requited with Blood; the sword, and not words. Some shall, notwithstanding
their prudence, be ensnared, without caution.

I wish cordially all happiness to the Kingdom of Scotland: Nor shall some
waspish Antagonists of that Nation against Astrology, cause me to love the
Kingdom the worse. There Is not yet any probability of a constant Settlement in
that Commonwealth.

Let us expect to hear of some mutiny amongst the Turks, and in Constantinople:
and Faction amongst the Nobles in Polonia.

I cannot predicate good to the barbarous Irish.

I am doubtful Denmark is appointed for a Pattern either of Vengeance or Mercy:
it is, it must suffer more and more.

This prodigious Apparition foreshews to all England a general Infelicity,
perhaps to all Europe, I mean, to the North-East part thereof, so situate from
London in England.

A Famine, Scarcity of bread and provision for Man, is like to be subsequent;
the Murrain of Cattle, infectious and pestiferous Diseases, as well in man as
in beast; and full Plague and half a Plague, this year and the next, not in
Villages only, but almost in every great Town of England. Horrible persecution
of the Nobility and Gentry; and indeed the Runaways from our Parliament deserve
no less, and some besides. Some superlative Discord with and concerning
Religion, and Controversies therein.

Incursions of foreign Princes into their Neighbors Territories, Friends and
Allies. No belief upon earth amongst men.

Surely the world is not yet at an end: But whosoever shall see, or have the
unhappiness to survive the two or three years next succeeding, will wonder at
the strange Metamorphosis and Catastrophe of Humane Chances in Christian
Commonwealths, where Jesus Christ is professed with so much pretended-Zeal,
but his Doctrine practiced with so slender Devotion.

Nor shall many, and those not the least Cities and Towns of England, suffer in
their private Commonwealths, less then a new moulding of their present
Government.

Did the wit of man of set purpose study it, he could not find out so many
unnecessary Inventions for present and future destruction, as we our selves,
with premeditated wisdom, find out, with intention to salve up all our sores.

We beggar our selves with Wit, and destroy Mankind with Discretion.

In good truth, the City of London is like to be afflicted (and now simple
George at Oxford holds his mouth wide open) with the Plague, and some other
Pestilentiall or Purse-Diseases, etc. Do not I see both the Sun and Moon in
Opposition to Gemini? Their Ships are like to suffer by Fire and Pyracie, etc.
Is not Gemini the Sign descending on the Cusp of the sixth and seventh? God
bless their Ships from Sea Fights and Shipwracks.

And yet methinks there is one in the world looks high, born, and in being, that
would, but shall not, exalt himself to a Crown. Quicunque fuerit ex stirpe
Regali, si in ejus Radice Nativitatis fuerint duo Soles, erit Regibus
contrarius, etc.

My friend, be quiet, thou art not the man, thy time is short; the Chicken of
the West shall prevail: Return in peace, if thou can, to the Sepulcher of thy
not-Kingly Ancestors, etc.

This is part of the little I am able at present to put forth, concerning the
Signification of the three Suns; whose Effects cooperating with the immediate
subsequent Eclipse in August, shall not determine in less time then three
whole years. Dixi.

An Astrologicall-Judgement concerning the Effects probably like to succeed the
Eclipse of the Sun upon the eleventh day of August, 1645, being Monday.
THe Eclipse is in 28 d. 28 m. Leo.

Its beginning is at 10 ho. 17 min. before noon.

Its Middle is at 11 ho. 14 min.

It Ends, eleven minutes after 12.

The Digits eclipsed are six.

The Duration of the Eclipse is, One hour, fifty four minutes.

To find when it shall begin to operate, and how long the Effects shall
continue, you must consider

The Elevation of the Pole at London, which is 51 degrees. 32 min.

The Semidiurnall time, which is 7 hor. 3 min.

The time of rising of the Sun the day of the Eclipse, 4 h. 57 m.

The length of the day is, 14 hours, 6 minutes.

The Interval of time from Sunrise to the time of the Eclipse, is 6 ho. 17 min.

Now I say, If 14 hours and 6 minutes give 365 days; What will 6 hours and 17
minutes? If you work it by proportion, it will give you 162 days; which added
to the 11 of August, point out the 20 of January, 164 5/6, for a Beginning to
the Effects depending on this Eclipse.

The Dignities and Debilities of the Planets stand thus:

Saturn has one Debility. Jupiter has Fortitudes -- 20 Mars, -- 13 Venus, --
4 Mercury, -- 12 The Duration being 1 hor. 54 min. the Effects shall continue
almost two whole years, viz. until the 16 of December, 1647.
A short Historical Narration of some preceding Eclipses, and the Effects that
thereupon ensued.
TThe first Eclipse we find recorded to Posterity, is by Dion. Hal. and it was
in the year of the world 3180, about 767 years before Christ. Its noted by
Historians, that Romulus was that year conceived, and the Kingdom of Israel
began to decline.

Many were the Eclipses which Antiquity took notice of, and after most of them
some memorable Actions to have succeeded: As, that in anno Mundi 3235, and 26
of May, the Sun suffered a fearful Eclipse; and it was in that year
Sennacherib King of Assyria departed from the Siege of Jerusalem, and had One
hundred and fourscore thousand men slain in his Army. You may read what
succeeded after, 2 Kings cap. 19.

Anno mundi 3470, and 19 of April, the Sun was eclipsed; at what time Xerxes
went with his innumerable Army against the Greeks, and was as valiantly beaten
at Thermopylas and Salamine.

Anno mundi 3621, there was a total Eclipse of the Moon; and it was only
twelve days before the great Fight betwixt Darius and Alexander; and this was
upon Saturday the 20 of September. The Monarchy of Persia, by the overthrow of
this Battle, vanished, after it had ruled Asia 200 years.

Anno mundi 3733, there was an horrible Eclipse of the Sun, the 11 of February.
Who is conversant in History, may find, that not long after Hannibal slew
fifteen thousand Romans, and Ptolomeus Philopater King of Egypt overthrew
Antiochus; after which Victory, the proud King, being insolent, entered the
Sanctum Sanctorum of the Jews, for which he was punished by God, and so
returned into Egypt.

Anno Christi 45, some say, 47, the Sun suffered an Eclipse the first of
August; after which followed that sad Famine universal to all the world,
prophesied of by Agabus, Act. 11. But I hasten.

Anno Christi 807, the Sun was eclipsed once, and the Moon twice: there
succeeded instantly very great Division in the Empire under Charles the Great.

Anno Christi 813, an Eclipse of the Sun preceded the death of Carolus Magnus.

Anno Christi 891, after an Eclipse of the Sun, the Emperor and Princes of
Italy fell at variance, and mutually invaded each other; by which means Italy
was fearfully afflicted for many years.

I find some remarkable Observations in Plutarch after Eclipses; as these: At
what time Pericles armed 150 Ships, and was ready to set sail, an Eclipse of
the Sun happened, which being conceived to be ominous by some, Pericles derided
the Prognostic: But see the words following, But Pericles hoysing Sail
notwithstanding, did no notable or special Service answerable to so great an
Army or Preparation; for which he was deprived of his Charge of General, etc.
and fined at fifteen Talents.

In the Life of Pelopidas you shall read, that upon his second Journey against
the Tyrant Alexander of Pheres, a great Eclipse of the Sun was, causing great
darkness at noonday. You may read, fol. 303 in Plutarch, that Pelopidas
wilfulness, contrary to the advice of some in the Army, cost him his life: for
not only those that were then versed in Soothsaying, but his own Citizens,
told him, That this Eclipse did threaten the death of some great Person like
himself, etc. which his death exactly verified.

You shall also read in the Life of Nicias, That instantly after an Eclipse of
the Moon, the Syracusians overthrew the whole Power of the Athenians by Sea;
and he himself, and Demosthenes, were taken Prisoners, and not long after lost
their lives.

During the Effects of a Lunar Eclipse, and upon some prodigious Sights in the
air, Dyonisius Tyrant of Syracusa was enforced to flee, and that City, after 48
years, restored to liberty. That was no weak Judgment therefore that Mil^as
the Soothsayer resolutely delivered, upon sight thereof: My good friends, be of
good cheer, and assure your selves that we shall prosper; for God does foreshew
us, by this Sight we see, that some one of the chiefest things now in highest
place and dignity shall be eclipsed.

He that shall please but to peruse Leovitius de Conjunctionibus and
Eclipsibus, may be more fully satisfied.

And yet if examples of late years work any thing in us, we cannot forget that
eminent Eclipse in 1639, and in the month of May: I am sure we were never
quiet since: It was fully visible in our Horizon. We may not forget the
overthrow of the Spanish Fleet upon our English Coasts, within four months
after, etc.

In all my reading, I find Solar Eclipses are most ominous to Princes, to
Authority, Magistracy, etc. and that Eclipses of the Moon do both afflict King
and People; but most properly incite and excite the Subjects to Arms, and the
vulgar against his Lord and Master.

For whereas the Solar Eclipse puts difference betwixt one Prince and another,
betwixt one State and another, one Nobleman and another, each Commonwealth
against his next neighbor; a Lunar Eclipse, on the contrary, stirs up people
of more ignoble Condition, to strive against their Ministers that have power
over them, etc.

The Effects of the present Eclipse prosecuted.
IF that Sentence of Ptolomey be admitted for truth, Lib. 2. c. 7. Quaecunque
Stella erratica pluribus dignitatibus utrique loco, id est deliquii ipsius, and
hoc sequentis cardinis associabitur, Sola dominabitur: Which in English runs
thus: That Planet which has most Dignities in the degree or place eclipsed,
and angle succeeding, shall be ruler of the Eclipse: that is, Consider his
nature and position, how he is well or ill affected, and how and by whom
aspected, and accordingly judge of the Events.

By which Doctrine we may be bold to affirm, that Mars shall principally rule
the effects of this Eclipse, as having most dominion in the place of the
defect, and solely ruling the angle subsequent, which is the Ascendant. If I
deviate an hairs breadth from truth, I must expect some dirty fool to throw out
nonsense in Print against me: therefore observe if Cardan confirm not my
words, Lib. 20. fol. 258. Cum enim idem fuerit Dominus loci deliquii, and loci
sequentis anguli, ille prorsus erit Dominus and Principalis: When the same
Planet is Lord of the place eclipsed, and of the sequent angle, he shall be
altogether or especially Lord of the Eclipse. To which Judgment Campanella,
fol. 84* consents, while he delivers, Validior est, qui deliquii loco and
cardinis plus potest. And yet in designing the effects of the Eclipse, we are
to consider the Predominancy and Fortitudes of the rest of the Planets, and
their mutual Aspects each to other, their position in the heaven, sign and
quarter; for they will challenge something in the Effects, as Ptolomey, lib. 2.
cap. 8, says, Hoc sumitur a natura dominantium Stellarum, quae sunt in
praecipuis locis, and earum commixtione inter sese, and cum iis locis in quibus
esse conspiciuntur. We ought (says he) to take signification of the Eclipse,
from those Stars that are most powerful in the chiefest places of heaven, and
their commixtion one with another, together in those places in which they are
posited.

But since Ptolomey delivers us a kind of Method, we shall willingly follow it,
in manifestation of the Effects now subsequent.

Wherein we first consider,

The Kingdoms, Cities, or Commonwealths of Europe likely to suffer; as also,
what manner of men be most probably to smart by the Effects.

In our Figure, because the Eclipse is in a fiery Sign, the fiery Triplicity
is passive, viz. Aries, Leo, Sagittarius.

In defectibus Solis and Lunae maxim insignibus, considerabimus locum Zodiaci,
in quo fuit luminum defectus, and ei loco juxta Trigonorum distributionem
familiares, and quae Vrbes propter Horoscopum in exstructione, aut propter
locum quem eo tempore tenuerunt, aut propter medium-Coeli in Nativitatibus
Principum earum regionum familiaritatem habent cum loco defectus: Ptol. lib. 2.
cap. 5. In Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, we consider the place of the Zodiak,
and those Regions familiar to that place, according to the distribution of
Triplicities, and what Cities at their Foundation had their Horoscope either
the place of the Sign eclipsed, or wherein either of the Lights at that time
were in the degree defective: and we also consider if the medium-Coeli of the
Princes Nativity then governing, be the Sign and Degree of the Eclipse.

Of all which, we shall make good use in its proper time.

We must also consider those Countries which are under, or properly belong to
the second Quadrangle; viz. Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius; so that upon the
matter, any Prince or great person that has his Ascendant, Mid-heaven, or
place of the Sun or Moon in or about the 26, 27, 28, or 29 of Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, or Aquarius, is made capable of receiving good or ill by this present
Eclipse.

Germany, France, England, Denmark, Italy, Turkey, Bohemia, Spain, Hungaria,
Moravia, stand all subject to the frown of this Eclipse.

Part of Swedland, Polonia, Russia, Valachia, Westphalia, Bavaria, to all these
Kingdoms and Countries the Eclipse will be visible, and these Countries
Ascendants having affinity either in Triplicity, or being of the second
Quadrangle, must participate of the actions, more or less, which may be
expected from this Eclipse.

As to men, the fiery Trygon represents men of great Quality, of highest
Command. Remember, you great ones, that in January last, the same Decanate of
Leo, or the ten last degrees of this present Sign of Leo was afflicted, and
now the same face of the Sign again the second time, all in one year. Sed quae
non prosunt singula, multa juvant. Its not true in Eclipses, as in other
things, The more, the merrier: The fewer Eclipses, the least hurt. More fully
of this in the sequel.

The second thing considerable, is, De genere Effectum: viz. Of the kinds of
the Effects.
IN what manner and kind the Effects of the Eclipse shall manifest themselves,
we cannot discern, unless we know what Planet principally rules the place
defective. Nam qui Planeta pluribus modis congruit, ad utrumque locum defectus,
and ad cardinem qui sequitur hic Solus dominabitur; Ptol. cap. 7. lib. 2. What
Planet has most Dignities in the place of both the Lights (this is when
there is an Eclipse of the Moon) and the Angle subsequent, he only shall rule
the Effects, or demonstrate the quality of them; as, whether War, Famine,
Plague, etc.

In our Scheam, Mars rules, without any contradiction, both the defective
place, and the Angle following: he is near some fixed Stars of his own nature,
and is in a semi-Sextill, if that Aspect be considerable to the place
afflicted, by which he is the more fortified, and made more significant in the
Effects.

Although the Sun and Moon are powerful in this Position, yet ( consideratis
considerandis) they are at no time admitted to signify the quality of the
Effects. Nam Sol and Luna aliarum Stellarum sunt and praecipuae causae
eventuum, and Regunt Stellarum dominia and dominantium vires aut confirmant aut
languefaciunt: Ptol. lib. 2. cap. 8. The Sun and Moon are Governors of other
Stars, and are principal causes of the Effects, and sway the rule of the
Stars, and either strengthen or weaken their forces.

I may well say* Mars is in Libra; however, he is in a humane Sign, if he be
in Virgo.

Figurae adspiciantur in quibus sit defectus, and in quibus sunt Stellae
dominantes, unde genus eventuum judicari poterit: Ptol. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Consider the form of the Sign in which the Eclipse is, and wherein especially
the Planets having any predominancy are, and by that you may judge of the
kinds of the effects.

The Sign wherein the Eclipse falls, is Leo, a ferall Sign. Damnum ex
domesticis and mansuetis domesticis, and ad utilitates vitae accommodatis, viz.
ex bobus, equis and aliis. Men shall receive damage by loss of their domestic
tame beasts, viz. Horse, Ox, Sheep: so that I perceive here is like to be great
scarcity of these creatures, after which, expect a direful Famine.

Firma sive fixa signa significant fundamenta and aedificia. Fixed signs
intimate, the Judgment of this Eclipse will in part fall upon things long
since founded, and upon Buildings* Houses, Towers, Castles, Forts; the
subversion of many ancient Seats, erecting many new Fortifications, etc.

As to men, the Defect is in the Mid-heaven, the Effects portend matter to
Kingdoms, Kings, to men of middle-age, to all manner of men in Authority
whatsoever: Ptol. cap. 7. lib. 2.

Indeed the House of heaven is extremely considerable; for it falling in the
tenth, the Effects shall be glorious, famous, eminent, of mighty concernment,
published all over the world.

Mars either in Libra or Virgo, must have judgment in this nature: Quae habent
figuram humanam, significant eventus fore hominibus. The overruling Planets
being in Humane Signs, Man and Makinde are concerned: All which shall be
explicated by and by.

The third thing considerable, is, Whether the Events of this Eclipse shall
intend good or ill.
COnsideratio vero Stellarum quae praecipuum jus in commixtione habent, indicat
eventuum qualitatem: Which in effect tells you what I formerly repeated, viz.
That those Planets which in their mixture one with another have most Dignities,
do show the quality of the Events.

It might be easily judged, that, since Mars rules the Ascendant and place
eclipsed, and is entering Libra his Detriment, and is naturally an enemy to all
good, and to man, that we must expect but sad Times, and, in plain terms, that
we must look for a woeful desolation and destruction of man: for the Ascendant
signifies in general, Mankind, or Commonalty of every Nation. So then,
according to the Ptolomeian Doctrine, without any Comment, evil is to be looked
for from the Effects of this Eclipse.

How to apply all preceding to the present Purpose, is now my Task.

NEc in mixtionibus tantum errantium congressus intelligo, sed aliarum, quoque
similes naturas sive fixarum, sive locorum signiferi, vel familiaritates cum
errantibus supra indicatae sunt.

Nor do I (says Ptolomey) in the mixture of the Planets only consider their
Conjunctions or sole Aspects, of what nature soever they be; but also the
nature as well of the fixed Stars, as places of heaven, if they consent with
the nature and quality of the Planets.

Si Planeta vincens super Eclipsin sit maleficus, significat malum and
detrimentum. An evil Planet ruling the Eclipse, he portends evil, etc. This is
also the Opinion of Junctine.

When I see Aquarius descending in the fourth, and the Dragons tail so near the
Cusp of the House, and Saturn Retrograde in the seventh, a fixed Sign; What
assurance have I that the most stately Buildings of this Kingdom shall escape
ruin, or most ancient Cities and Towns desolation? I cannot shorten those
Miseries I see depending on this Influence, or convert the Signs fixed into
moveable: for the Evils portended, are to be maliciously permanent.

A crooked and perverse Generation of men, has cunningly ensnared all or most
part of Europe, in these preposterous Wars now on foot. Lord God of heaven,
direct the heart of some wise man to salve these grievous Maladies.

We have already handled the Effects which may attend that unusual Apparition
of the three Suns; and now, leaving our former Method, undertook only to
benefit such as are not conversant in Judgment of Eclipses; we come more
nearer to what we first intended.

THe Effects of this Eclipse shall not determine until December, 1647; until
which time, we shall have eight Eclipses, but hardly any, but one, visible in
England or Europe. There does also in this interval of time happen about fifty
Conjunctions of the Planets amongst themselves, which are materially
considerable, and ought to be made use of: And herein I mention no Lunations,
etc.

Scito, quod in Eclipsi Solis non potest fieri, quin significetur magnum
aliquod accidens secundum quantitatem Eclipsis: Junctinus in Speculo, fol. 310.
Whosoever thou art that read these lines, I would have thee know, That no
Eclipse of the Sun can be, but some grand matter is signified thereby,
according to the quantity or greatness of the Eclipse. And if you will know
more particularly, or something more near the matter, Junctine tells us,
Eclipses Luminarium in Triplicitate ignea, denuntiant armentorum, pecudumque
interritus, magni Regis seu Principis exilium, carceres, aut internecionem. An
Eclipse of the Lights in the fiery Triplicity, does signify and declare the
destruction of whole Herds of Cattle, and their death: as also, some famous
King or Prince his Exile or Banishment, his restraint of liberty, or Captivity,
whether you will; as also, his Slaughter.

The Sign wherein this Eclipse is, all men know, is of the forementioned
Triplicity: its warning enough to be thus plainly dealt withal. What Junctine
says of Kings, I say of Nobles, great Peers, Knights, etc. Inter plebeios and
potentiores odia, mutuas simultates, dissidia, magni excercitus motum, Bella
horrida, hominum strages, incendia, furta, rapinas and depopulationes. The
Eclipse denounces rancour and malice betwixt the vulgar person, or Commonalty
and great persons, pretty dissembling with each other, disagreements in
Opinion, the motion of some great Army, horrible Wars, multitudes of men slain,
many curious Buildings burned to the ground, much Theevery, pillaging and
plundering, many Towns, Villages and Countries depopulated, or left naked of
Inhabitants.

Shall our troubles be so great, we shall expect all those forenamed Miseries?
I pray God divert his Judgments, and make us penitent, ere those threatened
Mischiefs light on our heads.

Again, Praegnantium abortivos, acutas febres, epidemiam ob aeris uredinem and
caumata, frugum sterilitatem, and annonae penuriam, in Regionibus praecipue
quae Eclipsis Signo subjiciuntur, excellentem mutationem. Women shall miscarry,
men shall have sharp Fevers, in universal Plague and Pestilence caused by
heats and blastings of the air, great scarcity of fruits, want of Provision for
man, as Victuals, Corn, Provision, etc. These things are more vigorously to
operate to those Kingdoms subject to the Sign of Leo, then to Aries and
Sagittarius. Some famous Alteration.

It may be feared, that of Cardan will prove too true: Eclipsium Solis effectus
potentes sunt, unde si in florentem messem inciderint, sterilitatem afferunt:
Cardanus Seg. 2. Apho. 16. The operations of a Solar Eclipse are powerful;
which if they fall to be in the beginning of a flourishing Harvest, they show a
Barrenness to follow.

Our Eclipse at this time is in August, when we in the South of England, and
generally over all the Kingdom, are busy in getting it in. I pray God make our
Harvest fruitful, and bless the Husbandman with a plentiful Crop, and a
peaceable enjoying what he has taken sore pains for. We may fear some Disaster
amongst us at that time, and my Judgment may prove more real then I wish.

But the decay of Tillage and Husbandry is the least thing (though very
considerable) which is intended by the Eclipse: we must elevate our
Conceptions; men of an higher strain and condition are aimed at. Does the Eagle
catch at Flies? Shall an Eclipse in a Fiery Sign, and a Kingly House,
principally intend the vulgar man, or private Countrey-Gentleman? No: Arma,
Bella horrida, Virumque cano, etc. In truth, there is War, Famine, a grievous
devouring and destructive Vengeance to be poured down upon some unthankful
Families of Europe, of which, without doubt, some live in our own Country of
England, some in Scotland, many in Ireland: Upon what House, Man, or Family in
particular, there I must be silent.

The Star in Cassiopeia, 1572, those many apparitions of Comets since, those
unaccustomed Sights in the Air, greater and lesser Conjunctions of the Planets
in the Fiery Trygon, multitude of Eclipses both Solar and Lunar, are the sad
Messengers of the downfall of one, nay I say of many egregiosu Families of
Europe.

Yet if my search into the most secret Cabinet of Astrology does not delude my
impartial Judgment, my more serious Conceptions tell me, There Is a Man or a
Family in Europe, is not far from attaining an excess in Dominion and
Sovereignty. The time of this Man's growth, or Families^, to such an height,
draws on and near; the time is not mensurable in days, or months, nor in
Centuries of years; the unnatural War of every Country, helps forward and
prepares the matter, whiles the good man (if he be born) sleeps quietly, until
that Angel appointed for his Guardian, excite him in a moment to rouse up his
meditating thoughts, and to convert Consultation into Action.

As the State of France now stands, or Spain, or Italy, How incredible and
improbable a thing do I speak of, or should do, if I should deliver, That a man
not yet in Action, should turn the fate of those Kingdoms in a moment, and,
like the Son of Thunder, in less weeks or months, not many years, in less
then man can imagine, settle those vast Kingdoms as himself best likes, and
then dispose of other Kingdoms then in Distraction by Missives rather then the
Sword, etc.

But I forget my self, I see Saturn Lord of the third and fourth House,
Retrograde in the seventh. Saturnus praeest plebi, sensibus, infirmis, ob hoc
cum vitae inimicus sit facile tales omnes pereunt aggregatim. Saturn has
command, and represents old men, every common Clown or vulgar man, and every
sick man, because he is enemy to Nature. Now such manner of men shall die and
perish in whole companies or swarms.

Woe to the man that digs the ground, and thinks to enrich himself by turning up
fat furrows, or in expectation of thriving Crops.

Woe to that aged man that wants strength to manage his feeble body in a time of
so much sorrow as the Eclipse says is approaching.

When the daring or cruel Enemy comes near us, what shall the infirm man do?
neither able to move or be moved: Perish he must, flee he cannot; there is no
way assigned but death, yea, although he was the son of a father most eminent.

But again to the purpose. Si in Revolvendo anno, Regni Stella in signo
depressionis inventa fuerit, magnus aliquis vir ex stellae ipsius natura
morietur: Ptol. Apho. 31. In handling the Judgment or Revolution of a year, if
a Planet that is usually taken for Lord of that Kingdom be in his depression,
viz. either in his detriment or fall, some great person of the nature of that
Planet will die that year.

This is like to be fatal to the Kingdom of England; for in Figura mundi,
Saturn was in his fall.

In this present Eclipse, Mars, that has sole dominion in the Ascendant and
place eclipsed, is in his detriment.

It cannot be the death of any vulgar or ordinary man, that is hereby intended
to be sent to another world.

Mars represents great persons, principal Commanders in our Armies as well as
in his Majesty's. Truly I fear an eminet Commander.

Cavete viri, qui sunt tanquam Princes.

You that are in esteem like Princes, and domineer like little Kings, beware
every one of you, in every County and City; you are said to be gods, you shall
die like other men, etc. disgraced, odious, etc.

Its not one only man that is intended by the heavens to be the mock of
Fortune, and scorn of Mankind; there is a signification of many, that are to
undergo a very hard and unpleasant Doom, ere the Influence of this Eclipse
shall have period, or the Porrent of the three Suns be fully determined.

Obsecro, mi Domine mitt^, qu^m missurus es.

I may be derided for predicting so much: but I rather laugh at their folly,
that, having been often premonished, amend not their lives, and endeavor
Composition of these unhappie Dissentions now too prevalent all over
Christendom.

What great one soever thou art of England, or of any Nation of Europe, that
have the 28 or 27 of Leo ascending at thy birth, or the same degree of Taurus,
Scorpio or Aquarius, to thee I say, Thou art in great danger of death, or
mighty disturbance in thy health, ere this Revolution of almost two years be
completed. I am not idle, but thou art mad, and out of thy wits, if thou do
not beware in time.

Let us admit thou have the same degree culminating, look to thine Honor,
Crown and Dignity, if thou art a King, thou shall assuredly receive blemish in
thy fame and estimation, nor shall thou escape without hazarding thy Crown, or
most fearful scandals on thy Reputation.

Have thou the same degrees ascending on the Cusp of the seventh? Art thou a
King? thou shall have War unlooked for, enemies without number, domestic and
foreign, shall invade thee; look to be plunged to purpose, and to suffer
discontent without period: those as dear unto thee as thy wife in thy bosom,
shall betray thee by indirect counsels.

Have thou the said degree upon the Cusp of the fourth house? Art thou Emperor
of Constantinople? Thy father left thee more Kingdoms then thou shall leave thy
son: Lose part of thy Dominions, I desire thee; the Fates will have it so. Art
thou of the Noble Austrian Family? or art thou King of England, France, Spain,
or Denmark? Be all or any of you assured to have a share in these Calamities: a
part or parcel, an arm or a branch of your Kingdoms will be lopt off from you.

Is there any man has the Sun or the Moon in the 28 degree of Leo or Aquarius
at the time of his birth? let him ponder these words of Ptolomey, lib. 2. cap.
8. Sed periculosum in primis and inevitabile est, si ipsae Eclipticorum locorum
parts aut oppositae, coinciderint cum gradibus alter utrius Luminum, quos
geniturae tempore possederunt. The sense of which words run thus; That if an
Eclipse happen in that Eclipticall degree in which at the time of birth either
of the Lights, viz. Sun or Moon, were, its an argument (says he) of some
danger at hand hardly to be avoided.

We cannot forget that fearful loss his Majesty of Spain suffered not long
after the Eclipfe of the Sun in Geminis, 1639. Truly I fear that same potent
Prince must have another such like Brush; for the three Suns does in a manner
deliver so much: and look carefully what Nation or Prince suffered upon the
Influence of that Eclipse, shall again by these three Suns apparition, in a
more then miraculous way, if it be possible, be loaded with misfortune.

Prodigies in heaven, of heaven, and from heaven, appear not in vain: Eclipses
do ever foreshew some notorious and eminent matter near hand, yea, in a most
peaceable season.

The Courts of all Princes shall be stricken dead with fear, horror and
amazement; Privy Counselors shall be trampled down like dirt under our feet.

In the East, from the East, or somewhat South-east, shall the beginnings of
some miraculous Accidents have some first life, motion and beginning. But this
is quite out of the Text.

If, as the wisest men conceive, the Sun and Moon do govern our body and
spirit, and so moderate the Elements, that all men, even every vulgar person
understands it; what shall we then think to be more admired or formidable, then
when we, upon a sudden, see these most glorious Bodies obscured, and their
light taken from our present sight? We may from thence imagine, Somewhat more
then ordinary is drawing on.

It was therefore well and rightly said of Ptolomey: Cardinales Eclipses sunt
pollentiores, ac vehementius afficiunt, quipp^ quum cardines sint mundi prima
loca in quibus cum Planetae collocati, cum Majestate praesideant. Eclipses that
are in Angles are more prevalent, and more fiercely afflict; for Angles are the
chiefest places of the Figure, wherein when Planets are posited, they rule as
it were with Majesty.

Our Eclipse begins in the tenth, its middle and end is there also. How
wonderful and eminent Designs, Changes of Fortunes in the states of great
persons is hereby to be expected, and these all over Europe, doubtless such
things shall hereby come to pass, as this Generation now living has scarce
been acquainted with the like.

Here Is mad work in hand: Kings and Lords clouded; Clowns and silly fellows
climbing aloft: The world is almost turning Topsie-turvey.

What is the matter, that a sudden Affright shall amaze the Italian Princes?
They that er^-w^ile thought of no such thing, shall now tremble for fear: So
shall Pamphilio the Pope fume to no purpose, and be in as much danger by a
Conspiracy at home, as if he were a road, and amidst a rude sort of enemies.
But whether this Eclipse shall point out his death within the compass of two
years, it little concerns me; nor if he be presented with a Spanish Fig, and
die thereof, shall my conscience be any thing troubled.

I find, upon the last Restoration of Rome, 1506, that both Mars, Saturn, and
the Dragons tail, were in Leone, in the second House. We have, in the month of
August, a total Eclipse of the Moon, though not visible in Europe, in the 15
of Aquarius. I admonish the Prelaticall Tribe of Cardinals to provide good
store of Money, and the Citizens of Rome to be no niggards of their purses: A
Famine is threatened to them, and some parts of It^ly; and a sudden fire is like
to descend, to the consuming of many stately houses: Neither do I positively
affirm, that a strong Intruder shall waste part of Italy, or supplant some very
good Families therein. I see plenty of Consults amongst the Princes, fruitless
Embassages, variance upon Niceties, even to weariness, a giddiness amongst
wise people. Worthy men, you have most admirable men amongst you, that yet keep
a Traditionall learning amongst you, as ancient as Hermes, whereby you may be
better provided, Quid agendum. I love Italy, and am no Mohammedan.

But I pass by Italy, since her Princes in a moment may confer with men as
deserving as any in Europe.

Constantinople is like to groan under the Pressures of some merciless fires,
and extravagant commanding Soldiers: A Plague will wander through that spacious
City, to the consumption of some scores of thousands.

Nor is any great success to attend the Emperors of Greece, whom we call The
great Turk: An inferior People shall give him a Baffle, and he contented with
a Flea in his ear.

If thou art English, and disaffected to our present Parliament and City of
London, thou expectest I should speak somewhat of this famous City, so
terrible to our now-mischievous enemies. The exact Scheam thereof thou gettest
not from me, no not with large promise of money or reward: for, have not I read
some Treatises called T and Z?

Contrymen, I tell you, Gemini is in the eighth House of this Eclipticall
Figure; but Mercury, that is Lord thereof, is in Virgo, his own house, angular,
and departing from the Sunbeams. Will thou have me speak plain English? This
very City must suffer a share in the effects of this Eclipse, it were a wonder
else, the times considered: I fear not the Plague very much; I rather fear hurt
unto us by Pyracy, loss of Ships, and the death of many poor Creditors abroad,
and from thence a general Damage to the Citizens.

Indeed, courteous George Naworth, I would not reside in London, were I as
doubtful of its safety, as I am confident of some Calamity to Oxford. Our
City must stand yet, to day, and to morrow, this month and one more, this
year and the next, and 52 besides. He that understands this Riddle, shall know
more then a little: he that takes it to the letter, mistakes my meaning: he
that would know the truth, viz. when, and how long, he must first know the
Astrologicall way of numbers, and what does mean 1732, then he may give a
moderate sense, and yet come short of the Authors meaning, and of truth it
self; yet shall he come to a knowledge not despicable, nor repent that he spent
some time in the disquisition hereof.

Magnorum facias Principum significatorem Solemn, vel aliquem de superioribus:
Herm. Apho. 7. Make the Sun, or some of the Superiors, significator of great
Princes. It is so; the heavens doubly and trebly give that warning which I have
set down unto Kings, Princes, etc.

But why, or wherefore, will some busie-body say? I answer with Hermes, In
Revolutione annorum mundi multae difficultates erunt and praelia, cum in
exaltationibus fuerint Jupiter and Saturnus. In the Revolution of one of the
years of the world, you shall judge many difficulties and Battles, when Saturn
or Jupiter are in their Exaltations. If this hold true in a Figure of the Suns
entrance into Aries, much more in an eminent Eclipse. We have only Jupiter of
those two Planets exalted in our Scheam, he does by his now-position signify
unto us things concerning Religion, Laws, Leagues, Covenants, all manner of
Association, either of one Prince with another, or man with man generally: as
here posited, now he prenotes high points to be in handling, in things Divine.
Jove is but entering his exaltation: Shall a people begin, with great ardour and
vigor, to contrive new Tenants in Religion, and not live to see them confirmed?

Is there no stability in this world? One Sect to day, another to morrow. Shall
less then a Sabbath of years blot almost out of remembrance many fruitless
Niceties in Doctrine? Why the Clergy of Europe, in a time so troublesome,
should invent so many new Opinions, to be permanent so little a while, I know
not.

What shall we do? or whither do we arrive with these general Disputes? I see
Jupiter direct at the time of the Eclipse, but Retrograde two months after. We
have a Proverb in English does well express that sense, viz. He was turned out
of his place, before he was warm in his Gears: The assured sense hereof is
this, That when the world thinks Religion settled, its then furthest off from a
sollid confirmation. One Generation comes, and another passes away; the later
usually corrects and refines the former: So will it be, even till man, as well
as Religion, in this world have no more being.

In person I am not more remote from Vtopia, then my judgment from finding the
year of the world when unity in Doctrinall or Ceremonial points shall be.

Conjunctiones totius anni Oppositionesque and Quadraturas necesse est ut
consideres, per has causantur diversaetransmutationes temporum. Consider the
several Conjunctions, Oppositions, Quadratures of the whole year, for diverse
and sundry transmutations of the year are caused from thence, etc. Wherefore,
finding a dangerous Opposition of Saturn and Mars, Saturn in 2 degrees. 19 min.
Taurus, and Mars in 2 degrees. 19 min. Scorpio, the later end of September; I was
doubtful what it might in general signify, since the Aspect happens so near
the Cusps of the East angle and seventh house, in the Figure of the Eclipse:
For, Oppositiones infortunarum in diversis latitudinibus terribilem habebunt
effectum, demonstrabunt, inducentque effectus velociter interficientes and
auferentes vitam. An Opposition of the two Infortunes, having diverse Latitudes,
(as now they have) has most terrible effects, they will demonstrate and induce
their effects furiously, and such as shall kill and take away the life of man:
But upon which side, or on what party these foreseen slaughters shall fall, you
must give me leave to expatiate my self, and so I will.

Nor let that vain and enforced Opinion, without sense, honesty, or art, in
that purblinde-Prognostication (printed at Oxford by his Majesty's Command) any
thing move those that stand well-affected to the Parliament, upon this direful
forenamed Opposition. The words of that wrangling fellow called Naworth, or
Wharton, or a man of a double name, in the Prognostication of September, are
these: At Michaelmas there is an hateful Opposition of Saturn and Mars:
something of great consequence will be done about that time, prejudicious to
the Rebels. The Parliament, Citizens of London, and all those natural English
that adhere unto them, are called Rebels by that ungodly Tribe of scornful
Monsters at Oxford, and this scurrilous Language printed by command. Vix credo.

But why this Opposition should prejudice the Parliament, I see not: It
promises them such a Victory over their enemies, as they yet never had. And I
will refer the reason of the Judgment to any moderate Artist. In this Eclipse,
Mars is Lord of the Ascendant, and so has signification of our Parliaments
affairs; Saturn therein is their enemy, because placed in the seventh house:
Now when Mars in his own house comes to Opposition of Saturn, having no
Fortitudes, if we knock not our our enemies soundly, I say then God is angry
with us. It points out something else, etc.

But let this man of error consider the Figure of the Suns entrance into
Libra, the 12 of September next, and he shall find, to his grief, the Dragons
tail in the tenth house, and Saturn Lord of the tenth, in the twelfth,
Retrograde: let him boast, if he can, of that position, and see if such a
glorious Conquest be thereby signified to chance to the Kingdoms Vipers, as he
Traitorously prophesies. Nothing troubles me more, then in unfolding the truth
I must instruct this Changling, that pretends himself a Regal Prog-man (for
Astrologer he is none.) But to save me a labor, I find in the Judgment of my
loving friend Master Booker upon the Autumnall Quarter, these words, which
clearly end the Controversy, out of such Authors as the Highway-finder G. W.
sometimes to little purpose does mention.

There can be nothing worse ( says Master Booker) then the Dragons tail in the
tenth: for Guido, fol. 595, says, Significat impedimentum Regum atque
Nobilium, and Magnatum, and diminutionem honoris eorum seu dignitatum. Kings,
Nobles, and great persons, shall have many impediments, and their honor and
dignity blasted. The loss of Honor is a signal of Victory, in Naworths
opinion. Albumazar dixit, significat depositionem, and pericula, and
peregrinationem seu casum. Albumazar says, When the Dragons tail is in the
tenth, it signifies the deposing, danger, or often running up and down, or some
Fall, to chance to Kings, Princes, great Nobles, etc. Some might have Englished
the Latin, and it would bear the sense well, as if such persons-should be
enforced to flee away, etc.

O what cause of insulting here is on Naworths side! when its almost
conspicuous, in that Natural way we both judge by, George his best friends
must be utterly routed, trudge and run away with such trinkets as they can get;
and amongst the rest, I know George himself, Budget, Almanac, some say a Gown,
I hear of no Cloak, will not be the last man that runs, for fear of being taken
prisoner, and delivered over to Master Booker, with whom I promise to intercede
for good Quarter, because George pretends to the Mathematics.

But letting this Quibling Novice alone till he is better literated, I shall do
well to inform the world what the greatest Actions of this Eclipse may be.

In a word, they are like to be of diverse kinds; but those of most eminency
signified by Mars, who tells you of most unnatural Wars, of unusual Treachery
in the Courts of Princes; he tells you a Famine shall follow the effects of the
Eclipse; he tells you of the loss and drowning of men in Ships, Pyracies,
Shipwracks, whole Cities, Countries, Towns, wasted, consumed, depopulated,
burned down to ashes, shot down to the ground, and made Rubbish of; fearful
and horrible Insurrections, Discontents, of Rapine, Murder, Thefts, Plunder,
Pillaging, death of several young Nobles and Princes, or men of Princely
Progeny: he threatens Poison to great ones, unusual Fevers, multiplicity of
Sea Fights, infinite Losses at Sea, multitudes of Pirates, a Plague amongst men,
Murrain amongst Cattle, Mutinies of servants against Masters, destruction of
Sheep and little Cattle, etc.

Kings shall hazard their Scepters by Wars, Subjects their Liberties, Cities
and Towns their Privileges: He threatens a general confusion and madness
upon the face of the earth; and that Europe is totally out of the right way;
that the Emperor of Germany, the later end of this year, will run a great
hazard with the Swedes; that France is not many years to continue in that Peace
the Cardinal left it; and that the Spaniard shall have one lusty day over the
French.

If we credit the principal Signification of the Eclipse, with its
Appurtenances, Consequences, Configuration by it self, and compared with
preceding Conjunctions of the superior Planets, and with subsequent Aspects
for some years succeding, it does whisper as if some Design were in hand, or
minting, to make 0000 Master of Europe, and possessed of more ground then his
Ancestors left him or them.

We see Jupiter in Cancer: Here Is like to be tugging to settle some scrupulous
Tenants, be they right or wrong, its no matter, say some. Zizania cum tritico
usque ad diem messis crescunt. Tares grow up with the wheat till Harvest, but
then, etc. I will pray for Peace, though, being a great sinner, I despair of
obtaining it.

This Eclipse is the Forerunner or Messenger of the death of some of the most
eminent persons of Europe: As the Eclipse falls out in the later degrees of a
Sign, it prenotes the death of some aged person, and he a King, or not much
less.

Eastward ho!

Ego duorum Principum vel magnatum genituras novi, quibus haec Eclipsis exitium
aut graves aliquas calamitates aut difficultates denuntiat, nomina eorum tuto
nominari non possunt. I know the Nativities of two Princes or great persons, to
whom this Eclipse portends either Destruction, or many fearful Calamities:
Their names I hold fit to be concealed, etc. O it is like to be a sickly time
with some, a bloody and treacherous one with others.

The Eclipse in a Kingly Sign and house, and accompanied with a Kingly fixed
Star: It must, according to the course of Nature, be the Forerunner of some
more then usual accident to Emperors, Kings, Queens, Princes, and the
chiefest Potentates of Europe. Non enim Sol in Leone aliis rebus prae est nisi
sublimibus and altis, item Regibus, Princibus, Generosis viris, and qui ad
Gubernacula Reipublicae sedent. The Sun in Leo, signifies nothing but what is
of an high nature, and Kings, Princes, Gentlemen, and such as sit and govern
the Commonwealth.

Here Is many old Laws and Customs to be abrogated; here is many ancient Families
to be deprived of their Inheritances; here is erection of new Customs, Laws,
perhaps a new Government: here is Nation against Nation, as much Plundering at
Sea as at Land: here is one would rise to be greater then his forefathers;
Ambition deludes him, and Death deprives him of all Monarchical intents: Exit.

Here Is a woman as like a Queen as can be, or of the Stock of Princes, probably
like to suffer either death, or disgrace as terrible as death, ere the
determination of the Effects of this Eclipse, and 1647: during which time, Vbi
res ad Pacem inclinare videbitur, illico novis occasionibus, intollerantia
puta, cupiditate vindictae, ambitione, avaritia, callidis consiliis, Bella and
odia recrudescent, quae multis exitio erunt, multos etiam fortunis omnibus
spoliatos extorres agent. When the difference is like to come to a Peace, by
and by, what with new occasions, impatience, covetousness, desire of revenge,
ambition, crafty Counsels, War and malice, shall wax worse and worse, even to
the destruction of many people: many also shall live like banished men deprived
of all Fortune and Means to relieve themselves.

The God of all Glory and Power, who has created us, and given us now more War
then we expected, He of his goodness send us Peace. ( I hope this is no ill
Wish) Amen.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT. Since the Impression of the Starry Messenger, and before its
Publishing, I received an Oxford Pamphlet, to which I return this Answer, and
so send them both into the world together.
An Examination of an Astrologicall Judgment upon His Majesty's present
Martch, begun from Oxford, 7. May. 1645. Set forth purposely by G. WHARTON to
advance their declining condition, to impedite the Parliaments, and dishearten
the City and Citizens of LONDON.
WHile we divide, the enemy unites; our factions prove their victories,
Wharton in behalf of our Enemies appears publicly, nay requested by
personages of Honor ( per fas aut nefas) whether he lie or not, so it advance,
its no matter: are any so indulgent on our side? etc.

I must begin with his Epistle, wherein the Author prosesses to deliver his
Judgment in general terms, and yet, forgetful, being not ( Mendax memor) a
liar of a good memory, he goes on in the whole discourse, assigning and
determining the success of His Majesty's martch and his Army in particular
words and terms, as appears, Fol. 4. line 20. 21 Fol. 5. line 10. Fol. 6. line
10. In all which places he proclaims victory, upon victory to His Majesty,
and not so much as the loss of one lowse on their own party.

In the next place he soberly dehorts Master Booker and my self from adhearing
to the Parliament, and tells a tale of a tubb, as of Gauricus, a certain
Priest, etc. That meddled with the particular destiny of Princes, and were
therefore well rewarded, and so would he have Master Booker and me, for
publishing pernicious Pamphlets, as this man calls them.

Were I commanded, I would make it apparent, the Parliaments cause shall not
want a Champion in Astrology to confute any thing in point of Art that can be
alleged from the greatest Clerks in Oxford.

God is on our side; the Constellations of Heaven after a while will totally
appear for the Parliament, and cast terror, horror, amazement, and frights
on all those Dammee-Blades now in Arms against us, etc. But our Author in his
Epistle goes on, and makes it evident, he has read part of the last leaf in
Cardan: whose words he recites, viz. Never tell 2 King of any danger near unto
him: then, its probable, we must say as Ahabs Prophets: Go to Ramoth Gilead and
prosper: yes; so he did; for there the poor misled King was slain: I am Master
Wharton so far from your mind, that did I know any sudden danger near to His
Majesty. I would adventure to the hazard of my life through both Armies to
give him warning, and so would master Booker.

Do you Master Wharton read Cardan on the same side, and thereby rectify your
partial Judgment. In praedicendo, amoveas timorem, odium and amorem: when you
take upon you to praedict to a Prince (as you now in particular do) neither
speak or write out of fear, hatred or love: and you might know what Ptolomey
commands, viz: that in every Judgment we beware of flattery and hatred, for
that renders the Art fallible and the Artist scandalous.

You are guilty in the breach of these Aphorisms, while you call our
Parliament Rebels, and convert every Judgment to signify victory to his
Majesty: and leave the end of His martch untoucht because you love to speak
Placentia: for in truth the scheame it self promises an unluckie end to your so
fortunate and so much applauded martch. Do but read Goclenius in discursu pro
Astrolo. Fol. 11^* Scotie reges fere omnes: and a little further; Anglorum fere
reges omnes; having perused those words, deal plainly with the world, and those
Honorable personages at Oxford, which employ you.

For his Majesty's Nativity, I think Master Booker and I have some other
better employments, we love not to take pains for so slight a reward as
follows the handling the Genesis of a Prince without His consent: but get me
public license, under His Majesty hand, and then George, have at any thing,
else not.

His Majesty's Martch (as is suggested) began Wednesday 7. May. 1645. 10. 32.
A. M.
THe body of the discourse intends two things principally; threatenings against
the City of London, victories to His Majesty, or confusion to His Enemies, etc.

Not to play the Critic with this University Freshman, or Cavil at his
ignorance in collecting the debilities of Venus which he makes more then they
are by placing her, in Conjunction with Caput Algol, whose Longitude is 20. 54.
Of Taurus, vide Orig. 175. Nor is Mercury debilitated by occidentallity: Orig.
540. Nor is Venus fortified by Orienlity, but debilitated: Honest George cannot
yet get out of his Horn-book. I begin with his Astrologicall Judgment spued
out against London, out of His* Majesty's Martching figure: Fol. 4. line 3.
London is hereby forewarned of her misery, and deservedly hereby threatened.

Lilly. Well may George have a great Whetston, he well deserves it; out of his
own words its lawful to beat him, and so I will.

That Gemini is the ascendant of the City of London all Authors agree, and
George acknowledged in his first Progg.

That Mercury is Lord of that sign, and simply most strong in this present
figure, its his own words at this time.

Neither is the sign, or Lord thereof afflicted, but on the contrary the most
Potent Planet in the figure, yea more dignifyed then Sol or Venus, he is in
Conjunction with Jupiter, and in Trine with the Moon who translats the Light
and Virtue of Venus to Mercury: now according to George his own words, Fol. 3.
These are undeniable testimonies both of the safety and honor of this famous
City and Citizens thereof, nor does it in the least particle point out by this
his Majestyes martch any danger, loss, misery, or accidents unto them; this
Constellation foretells what fame and esteem the Citizens hereof shall
attain, by being the Kingdoms Bulwark against Tyranny and Oppression, by
releeving the many thousands plundered and pillaged by his Majestyes forces: and
that this city shall get into their power one time or other all their enemies,
perhaps in a very short time, for we see Mercury disposes of Jupiter: I
seriously avow upon my reputation to the whole Kingdom, this Judgment I give,
is, and will prove true according to the Scheame of heaven Wharton has set,
etc. Who prosecutes his story with many invectives alleged without Art or
Judgment, and last of all, invites me to the Combat, with these words, The
Moon is in the 6, very sick (Master Lilly) and near the Dragons taylae, this
will teach the Citizens their Allegiance.

An Vtopian judgment Master Wharton, that the afflicted moon in the sixth
should teach us slavery: Our obedience we well know, we have performed our
Allegiance, until necessity enforced us for the Defense of the Parliament and
our own greivances to stand in Arms, and engage our persons for the Public
Good: but what is this to the thing in question. Master Wharton see to it,
there has been one Eclips in Leo, there will be another the eleventh of
August, Remember George. The last Vomit against the city is an imprecation,
that unless they submit to their Princes mercy, he like one of Baalls Priests
falsely prophesies such things unto them as cannot be diverted. But in what
Apocripha he learned this Astrology, it appears not to me; no not out of
quarterly Ingresses, which are signifycantly all averse to his Majesty and that
party.

Master Wharton, having left the City with a curse, begins with full Sails to
tell us: All the good our hearts can wish for is promised by this Scheame; Stay
false prophet, your hearts wish every day for the City of London, and can never
have it; he goes on, and tells how his Majesty shall pursue his enemies,
besiege Towns, Castles, Forts, Ruin us, have great success in all his
Designs: Cum multis aljis, etc.

Lilly. This must needs be a happy election of time, or else George a
stickling Prophet, for he pipes out nothing but victory for his Majesty: Be it
granted, that the storming of Leiceister has in part verefied some part of
this prediction, (and a little treason besides) yet I deny it was signified by
this positure, or that the rest of this man's words shall have like success:
Nay, by position of Mars Lord of the fourth, in the twelfe, his Majesty shall
not keep that Town very long, or any else that he may take in this Prophetiek
martch, without infinite loss on his party: Venus in her house, does assuredly
tell us we shall keep Evesham taken by plain valor, and were it not for that
accursed Cauda in Aquarius we should seldom be loosers, but be gayners, but
Division and Treason have got an habit and live with us, and are your friends,
yea your only friends.

The figure does at the beginning promise success, but the end of this martch
will be unlucky, and foreshew some wilful obstinate Commanders on his
Maiestyes side, will afford us an absolute victory over you. George for pure
love, I tell you, there is in the Army such as the traiterous Butcher in
Leicester. But upon examination, I find that the Sun whom George magnifyes
so much is in square to the Ascendant, in Conjunction with the Virgilliae, it was
no such prime time, observe the end, wait a few months, and consider if the
Astrologer that elected this time for his Majesty deserves not more punishment
then Master Booker or Lilly: Herein George I will make you Judge, an honor you
were never troubled with, nor are capable now, but that the thing is easy. See
Guido Fol. 480. Whose words are: When you will elect a fit time for a King,
etc. Let not the Sun or Moon be unfortunate or the Sun in a feminine sign*
let him have dignity where he is, the Sun in this scheame is totally
unfortunate, so is the Moon an ill Omen ( George) to his Majesty that he will
hardly keep any thing he gets; Oxford, being ( Locus a quo) is like to be safe
awhile and the Judgment therein good, but you expose his Majesty to infinite
danger. Again, see in the same Folio these words; Consider says Guido, if in
the same year there had been or will be an Eclips, and in all elections
avoid that sign, and let the two Lights be in Trine or Sextill, the more
fortunate the Lights are, so much the better, and so the Contrary.

It is known there was a Lunar Eclips in January in Leone, the effects thereof
began in April, Continue till the end of June, etc. That very Degree wherein
the Eclips was, have you elected to be the Ascendant of his Majesty and his
Armies martch: In August there is a Solar Eclips, etc. In this figure the Moon
applies to a square of the Sun in fixed signs: Believe me, hear is no
continuance of your successes, not the taking of so many Towns, Forts, or
Castles, or such routing of our Armies, as you Master VVhirton delude the world
with. He was none of his Maiestyes Friends, that gave Direction for this
martch; the sequel will tell you so, ere you return to your winter quarters
if any be left for you, Keep Leicester if you can, July may give it us again.

After some evacuated Chollar, Wharton bursts out for very joy into these
words, Oh what snuffling there will be amongst the Zelots, before the middle
of November. He goes on and derides our humiliation, etc. Do so still and
prosper; God will not be mocked, whose Cause we do maintain, though I
confess not as it ought to be.

But let me tell you, such shall be our victories before the time limited by
you be half come, that me thinks I hear the many accursed oaths the dam-boyes
spue out both against God and man. Oh what sculking, sneaking, running into
Corners, mouse-holes, sawpits, Cunny berries, tossing and tumbling the ungodly
out of one County into another, do I foresee: face about Gentlemen says one
for our honor, as you did at Newberry, that is with a good pair of heels, or
alls lost say I; Oh the way to Bristoll, from thence to Exceter, then into
Cornwall, thence into a safe harbor, if any can be found for Malignants, Now
Master Wharton I leave you, till again provoked by a more able Astrologer, and
I desire you to get into your Accidence against the publishing of the next
Journall or else you will be stripped out of the remainder of the Prerogative
Astrology by Master Booker in his next Almanac, to the total confusion, and
dishonor of the University that suffer so weak an Artist to be their
Standard Bearer; but money and Learning are equally plentiful in Oxford.

WILLIAM LILLY.


