OBSERVATIONS For this present Year, 1667.

By WILLIAM LILLY, Student in Astrology.

compass rose and planet

Printed in the Year, 1667.

Observations for this present Year, 1667.
JANUARIES Observations. 1667.
IN December, though two Eclipses, one of the Sun and another of the Moon
happened, yet little of their effects will appear in Europe, except in Portugal
and Spain; and those effects rather concern animosities betwixt or among the
Grandees, then particularly to either Nation: however, various reports will
come from the West Indies of both Nations, intimating damages received by
either party in those parts. January begins strangely as to the Weather;
abundance of snow, sleet, or moist weather, cloudy, obscure, and dark; and if
the influence of the late Comets impede not the weather, we might expect very
strange floods; but usually Comets are percussors of drought in every Season of
the Year. The North-west part of Europe, and those Countries North which border
upon Muscovia and Tartaria, highly concerned in their consultations in this
month; near this time also the City of Breme is threatened with great
unhappiness, if Peace be not ere this concluded betwixt the Swedish Nation and
it. High honor is done to some Ecclesiastical person in Foreign parts; and
the like advancement to some of our own Nation, either Civil or Temporal.

Many reports fly abrod as if some Treaty for Peace were in hand; people
willingly embrace that Intelligence, but time makes it appear a vapor: Our
Enemies have not yet had a sufficient share of the second Comets influence; let
them expect it with a sad Interest in this Summer.

FEBRUARIES Observations. 1667.
THe King of Poland his Affairs seem to proceed but untowardly, rather they
backslide then go forward: So near this time some unruly irruption, disturbs
his imperial Majesty's Subjects near the Turkish Garrisons. Still men hearken
after Peace, the generality of Holland above all people desiring it; no
probability as yet of any right understanding to that purpose. Now is Jupiter
entered Aries the Ascendant of England; from thence we may expect an happy unity
amongst our selves, and perceive Gods Mercies generally to smile upon the
Actions of his Majesty, and grand Affairs of the whole Nation, infinitely to
the satisfaction of all sober persons. If the Season of the year permit, there
may happen about this Month some warlike action betwixt the Spanish and
Portugal Forces. An appearance of drawing Forces into Normandy, the French King
being active near this month; but Providence seems to contradict his
intentions, and the prudence of his Majesty of England prevents all fear of
French Invasion. Mars is entered Aries, associates with Jupiter in all his
Majesty of Great Britains Conducts: whether the French King resolve upon War or
Peace, it is no matter; if his Navies will peep out of their Harbors, they must
return home again if they can; but assuredly destruction, or captivity, or
sinking, will be the final end of most of those who shall encounter His Majesty
of Great Britains Sea-Forces in this year.

MARCHES Observations. 1667.
THree Superior Planets angular in the vernal Scheam; the two Infortunes
essentially dignified; the benevolent Jupiter oppressed: these argue the
vivacity of mankind prone wholly unto War, and the superlative transactions now
in consultation, how, where, and when to offend their enemies, how to fortify
themselves, or to do most mischief: And though some moderate Spirits or grave
Counselors in many Nations study wholly for Peace or Reconcilment, yet it is
more than probable their designs are frustrate, and the whole inclination of
man tends for warlike concernments. The Monarch of Great Britain seems in
greatest readiness for action, and best provided: The Dutch fearful of a plague
and consumption of their Seamen, nor in a present capacity of undertaking any
great design: The French seem at a stand, some emergent misfortune having
happened unto them, or feared to happen amongst themselves suddenly: Ne verbum
quidem de Dano: The Dane cannot get out of his Harbors; No penny, no
Pater-nosters: The Polonian King in great fear of his Subjects, matters seeming
to tend again to Rebellion, or taking up Arms. The Swedish Nation, the Season
of the year considered, seem the most active of all Europe; and reason there
is; for some violent storm is like to breakforth upon them from a barbarous
people, if not prevented.

Much good intelligence comes into England from the North-east, and many of her
Ships or much Goods arrive at London, or most certain News of their Ships being
well conditioned, and suddenly like to arrive.

APRILS Observations. 1667.
THe Month begins with various Reports, malicious and vain, intimating losses
at Sea, some Westward, some Southward; others disaffected to the honor of
England make Mountains of Molehills, dispersing scandalous Libels against
Authority; a people neither satisfied in their own judgments, or willing to be
instructed from the more learned Doctrine of the Church of England. Here seems
breach of Leagues, or misunderstandings amongst many Confederated Princes;
great failings in their mutual Aids one unto another. The Amsterdam-merchants,
as also the generality of Holland, find great opposition in their Vocations and
Callings; they seem now more sensible of their present sad condition than for
some years before. New broils begin to arise in Polland; the Princes of Germany
at variance one with another; the North parts of Sweden like to be invaded; and
there are not wanting evil spirits to stir up a Commotion in Ireland. The
Lorrainer where ever he is, is much spoken of for his plundring, and probably
like to suffer for his insolences. Some pyratical people threaten the English
Ships coming from Barbados, and those more remote Plantations. If the Navies
of France and Holland were fitted at Sea, it were more than probable His
Majesty might be blessed with a glorious and successful Victory; but we cannot
find either Dane, Dutch or French, sufficiently provided for so sad an
encounter; or is there any probability of their meeting or joining together in
many weeks after; yet toward the latter end of this Month reports will be as
if all would suddenly be ready: be it so; or if were so, nothing but our great
and manifold sins can hinder us of an entire Victory.

MAYS Observations 1667.
WHere and in what Countries Armies are near one another there will be great
slaughter of mankind suddenly. Where Fleets at Sea are out, a dubious and
tedious Fight there will be, wherein the Hollanders are sure to be worsted, by
firing, burning, or taking their best and most serviceable Ships, killing and
destroying their most able and serviceable Commanders and men; neither will the
Dane or French speed better; the Dane seems to lose his honor by not fighting,
and much aspersed therefore: providence seems to bless the French King with
answerable success, viz. with the captivity of many of his Ships and Men.
Perhaps these actions may be retarded something longer. Destruction in pluribus
Climatibus: Great destruction in many Countries, Sad weather, the season
considered; high tempestuous Winds, strange Thunder and Lightning, sudden and
violent Showrs; some begin to fear the Plague or Pestilence, we hope no such
thing will be. Many violent actions committed this Month; many Murders,
unhappy Duels; many Pyracies at Sea, much Thievery at Land; and yet if our
judgment deceive us not, this Nation seems blessed with some remarkable
testimony of Gods favor, even in or near this Month, highly to the honor of
His Majesty, and satisfaction and content of the whole Kingdom; for here is
probability of much Honor conferred on deserving Persons, as well Swordmen as
Gown-men; and we have cause to believe His Majesty to be much honored near
this time by several Ambassadors from Foreign Parts to congratulate His
Successes.

JUNES Observations. 1667.
THis Month seems to be ushered in with great expectation of Peace, and His
Majesty courted thereunto by Agents from several Parts; but Heaven we fear has
no such blessing for the Hollander, divine Vengeance having as yet not scourged
them, sufficiently for their former insolences. The King of Denmark threatened
with War and many sad mischances near his own Confines, a sturdy Enemy and
powerful, watching all opportunities against him. The French King seems to
expend much money, and to make great preparations to little purpose; he will in
a short time be sensible of the first Comets influence, for evil and not for
good. In this Month there is a Quadrat aspect betwixt and, whereby we judge
great difficulty, much fraud deceit, and tergiversation in such things and
matters as might otherwise tend to a reconciliation of differences. The Ingress
of into, and the several Lunations of this month do rather portend-Seafights,
Wars, etc. then give hopes of Peace; particularly, the several Configurations
do very much threaten Holland wirh a most strange and unusual loss at Sea, if
they shall dare to fight His Majesty's Forces. Still poor Polland is threatened
either by the Muscovite or wandering Cossacks. Strange rumors dispersed in
London, some vain people abuse His Majesty's Subjects with untruths and
ill-grounded suggestions. Much division in London about Building, perhaps that
may occasion those vain and idle reports beforementioned. Strange news out of
Holland, as if all were in an uproar; we believe they are now in a sad and
fearful condition. Discite justitiam.

JULIES Observations. 1667.
THe Sun draws near to the opposition of Saturn, and he-retrograde, now in this
Month near his place in the Vernal Scheam, the Sun and he both with a quadrate
aspect beholding the Ascendant of the Solstitial Ingresse, as also near to the
Quadrate of Jupiter in that Figure.

Quis talia fando temperat a lachrymis?
The Aspects are in cardinal Signs; besides, Mars is entered Cancer; A great
slaughter of Mankind is at hand, and it may be feared both at Sea and Land,
where there is fit matter to work upon. These Aspects seem formidable unto the
French King both at Sea and Land, especially at Sea: The Hollander from the ill
success he shall find in this Month, if he submit not before unto a Peace,
shall perceive its in vain to strive against the King of England, whose Forces
(though not without much blood) shall obtain so remarkable a Victory over both
French, Dutch and Danes, as the like has not been heard of in any age. If
Providence have assigned this Month for a Sea Fight, it is the ultimum vale of
the Hogens. The active Scottish Privatiers seem to grow rich with their many
and rich Prizes, taken as well from the Dane as the Hollander and French. The
Venetians very hardly put unto it near this Month, yet in a Naval Fight with
the Turks they seem to prosper. About the second week of this Month strange and
unusal weather in many Countries, and it seems to continue for many days. Many
divisions are like to be amongst the Religious in Italy. Blessed News should
arrive of some noble Achievement of His Majesty's Forces.

AUGUSTS Observations. 1667.
IF Providence retard the Actions intended in the former Month until this
present August, they then seem more ponderous and weighty in this Month, all
parties being better prepared then in the former. The grand Configurations of
this month signify, Fugas in exercitu, stupores, anxietates, tristitias, and
timores, and mortalitates, bella, and guerras, and interfectiones; erunt
fulmina, tonitrua and coruscationes; erunt ventorum flatus inconvenientes,
submersiones navium and pericula navigandi: Here are signified to happen in
this Month (if no Peace be ere this concluded) the flight of running away of
many engaged in Land or Sea-service; great fears, troubles, sorrows,
amazements, mortality, wars, slaughters of men; much lightning, thunders,
strange sights in the Air, very inconvenient or cross winds, the drowning or
sinking of many Ships, great danger to all that Navigate the Seas; these
actions are generally signified to happen in all or most places of Europe, but
more particularly nearer England, toward the Northeast thereof; High
engagements assuredly are near at hand, wherein the English fight against a
Saturnine people, viz. a people who upon equal terms seldom dare encounter
their enemy: Now in those Configurations of this Month portending Sea Fights,
it is thus said of the Ancients; Illi de terra Martis superabunt, eo quod irae
and audacia erunt in eis; Those Navies, those Soldiers who are under the
Dominion or dwell in the land of Mars (as the English do) shall overcome their
Enemies, because there is much of choler, anger, and boldness in them; whereas
in Saturnine people there is much fear, cowardice, by reason of their want of
heat. Still nothing but our sins can prevent us of a glorious Victory.

SEPTEMBERS Observations. 1667.
NEws from Ireland; Intelligence from Italy, from the English Plantations in
the West Indies, from the Streights and Spanish Coasts; all should be pleasing
and comfortable to England. Addresses made to His Majesty of Great Britain from
several parts; men's minds begin to hearken after Peace, and many general
rumors dispersed and spoken of to that purpose: Yet some of the
maleconfigurations mentioned in August, may manifest their sad influences in
this September, unto the greater glory of England, but exceeding misfortune of
her enemies, whether Dutch, Dane, or French, whose imperious King finds great
obstructions in his civil affairs at home, and lesser satisfaction in his
military proceedings abroad; so that we may truly say of him, the present
positions of Heaven do signify, Paucitatem lucri, seu profectus in rebus, de
quibus speratur utilitas; and quod cadet in inimicitias amicorum; he may expect
little gain, no gainful returns in such things and actions from which he
thought to have reaped great gain; and quod cadet in inimicitias amicorum, his
Confederates will receive no benefit from his assistance, and therefore there
will follow controversies and disgusts between them, viz. there is much
probability of an absolute breach of the League betwixt him and the Dutch, and
others, etc. The Imperial affairs seem carried on with happy success, much to
the honor of the house of Austria, saving some small fears in the Western
parts of his Dominions, wherein there seems more danger to be threatened then
really will be executed.

Pax est dulcissima rerum.
OCTOBERS Observations. 1667.
MAny scandalous reports cast upon persons of honor; the common people
male-contented, much dejected in their spirits; in several Countries the
Configurations signify, dejectionem nobilium and magnatum, atque ipsorum malum
esse, and exaltationem vilium and ignobilium, and contristabuntur Scribae,
atque Legum Doctores, and Consules, and Consiliarii, aut evenient eis
impedimenta occulta, quorum causa tristabuntur: In many Countries here is
denoted the downfall of Nobles and great Persons, and their present sad
condition; Scribes, viz. the Legal persons, or Lawyers, and Doctors of the Laws
both Civil and Canon, State-holders, Senators, and Counselors of State shall
have great cause to be sorrowful, for there will be many accusations against
them, many of their secret failings will be brought to light, and they suffer
for their faults. A sad fate seems to attend some high-spirited Grandee in this
Month; and another eminent Gown-man either ends his days or loses his Office;
A reverend Father of the Church is manifested to have his interment or death
near or in this Month, which seems to be fatal unto many of great years and in
great dignity. Unruly weather, much rain, several floods, strange and
uncomfortable weather; no pleasing Seed-time, the Farmer repining, and a
dissatisfied Gentry conclude the Month.

Sudden but vain news comes from the North parts.

NOVEMBERS Observations. 1667.
A Person of great counsel and conduct seems now to yield unto Death, greatly
to the affliction of his Prince or Country; so also one of Royal Extraction is
threatened with a lingering consumptive Disease, much lamented the party will be,
whecher male or female. Saturn and Jupiter are near a second Quadrature; the
Courts of Princes troubled with their unruly Servants and Courtiers: The Clergy
of Nations in some contempt: Those of different judgments in things Divine
complain of hard measure generally in all places of Europe: Those who do now
mediate to reconcile the Quarrels of Nations in several parts of Europe, seem
to complain of much fraud in the transactions thereof; however, if Providence
for our sins contradict in not, matters appear in a fair way toward a
settlement; and the Monarch of Great Britain again visited from parts beyond
Seas by several Agents for settlement of all Differences and Contraversies. An
invisible Eclipse as to England harms not the progress of a Treaty, only
manifests some unruly spirits in England, who asperse both Church and State.
Several good Letters, bringing good news both to the Merchant and others, do
near this time arrive. Some strange robbings and steelings, or robberies
committed toward the latter part of the Month.

DECEMBERS Observations. 1667.
FRom most parts of Europe, England has comfortable Intelligence, and stronger
hopes then formerly of Peace and Tranquillity at home, if not with other
Nations; which God of his mercy grant. Some honorable Persons of several
Nations again interceding with His Majesty for full reconcilement; so that if
the Dutch be not ordained for a full destruction, a Peace in probability is
near at hand; but if they shall still wilfully neglect his Majesty's Civility
and Clemency, let them English this Prediction, which is operating and in full
force against them all 1667. viz. according unto Gauricus, p. 1329. M. Coeli
ad. This is to their Magistrates. Multa mala decernuntur ex inopinato, and unde
non speraverant, lites, jurgia and mutuas simultates cum martialibus, quorum
odiis multa mala portenduntur: inoplnata cum fortunarum jactura atque dedecore,
multi a Magistratu deponentur; eruntque hoc anno 1667 tantis calamitatibus
conquassati, ut quo se vertant, penitus ignorent, praevideant ne ab hostium
insidiis infligantur: Unexpectedly they shall receive much damage from whence
they least expected it, constantly troubled with quarrelling and controversies
amongst their Martial Commanders, by whose malice much detriment happens unto
them; a sudden wreck or subversion of their Estates (which is most part in
Ships;) with shame and scorn many will be desposed from their Authority; they
will in 1667. be so shaken with all manner of misfortunes, they will not know
what to do; and let them beware pretended Friends prove not their worst
Enemies. Vivat and floreat Rex Magnae Britanniae.

FINIS.

