THE JUST MAN'S JUSTIFICATION* OR A Letter by way of Plea in Bar;
Written by L. Col. JOHN LILBURNE, to the Honorable Justice Reeves, one of the
Justices of the Commonwealths Courts, commonly called Common Pleas.
Wherein the sinister and indirect practices of Col. Edward King against L.
Col. Lilburne, are discovered.

1. In getting him cast into prison for many weeks together, without
prosecuting any charge against him.

2. In arresting him upon a groundless action of two thousands pound in the
Court of Common Pleas; thereby to evade and take off L. Col. Lilburns testimony
to the charge of high Treason given in against Col. King, and now depending
before the Honorable House of Commons.

In which Letter is fully asserted and proved that this cause is only tryable
in Parliament, and not in any subordinate Court of Justice whatsoever.

Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, thou shall not
respest the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor.
SIR,
HAving lately taken upon my self that boldness to speak with you, as you are
one of the public Judges of the Kingdom, about an honest poor man that was
unjustly and without any legal authority cast into prison, and finding a very
courteous, fair and rational carriage from your Honor toward me at that
time, imboldeneth me the more at this time (being extraordinarily necessitated
thereunto) to write a Letter to you in my own behalf. I being upon the
fourteenth of April last arrested at Westminster, upon an action of Trespass,
by the Bayliffes thereof, at the suit of an unjust and troublesome man,
commonly called Colonel Edward King; and the Bayliffes pretended it was for so
many thousand pounds (although I am confident that I never was six pence in his
debt in my life) that they must have extraordinary Bail for my appearance.

So that I was forced to give them two housekeepers in Westminster, and one
stranger, or else in their merciless hands I must remain, although I was very
hard following of my business to perfection with the Parliament, which has
stuck there almost six years, to my extraordinary cost, charge, and loss of
time, and although I am confident that it is as just a cause as any is in the
world, and has so been adjudged by both Houses of Parliament, as in this
enclosed printed relation you may read.

I must ingenuously confess that it did somewhat trouble me to be arrested in
that manner, having never before in my life bin arested to my remembrance, and
I was the more troubled in regard that my Ordnance for my reparation, which
lastly passed in the Lords House, was depending in the House of Commons, I was
afraid that it might there stick, if I were diverted from following it, and I
did not know but this arest might do it.

And being in a longing expectation for the Term, to see my Antagon^sts
Declaration, I found in it that it is an Action of Trespass for 2000l
pretending that I said in October last, that Col. King was a Traitor, and I
would prove him one, and for taking away his good name which I scarce believe
he ever had in his life, and considering with my self what to do, I was
resolved to make a Plea at the Bar of the Common Pleas (where you are the
eldest, and chiefest Judge, that Col. King and I, being both Soldiers, were in
that condition to be governed by the Laws Martial which were published with
the Stamp of Parliamentary Authority by the Generals thereof: And he having
committed many grievous crimes against the Letter and true meaning of them, I
complained to the Earl of Manchester thereof, being both his General and
mine; and at the same time, diverse Gentlemen of the Committee of Lincoln, as
Mr. Archer etc. having Artickles of a very high nature against him, pressed my
Lord to a trial of him at a Council of War, and at the very same time, the
Major, Aldermen and Town Cleark of Boston, came to Lincoln to my Lord, with
Artickles of a superlative nature against King their Governor, but could not
get my Lord to let us enjoy Justice at a Council of War, according to all
our expectations, and as of right we ought to have had, which at present saved
his head upon his shoulders.

Yet notwithstanding others endeavored to try whether justice could be had
against him in the Parliament, and for that end, in August 1644 Mr. Mussenden,
Mr. Wolley and diverse others of the Committee of Lincoln did exhibit Artickle
of a very high nature to the House of Commons against him, and to speak their
own words in their 4th Artickle, they say.

That when he was last before Newarke, h^ sent for a Captain who kept
Crowland, who obeyed his command, yet sent word to him of the danger that that
Town was in, and therefore desired his second pleasure, which was that he
should march, who accordingly did, the Gentlemen of the Country, scaring the
enemy, procured Major Ireton to send 100. Musketeers to keep Crowland, which
he hearing of, took ill, That any without order from him should come into his*
liberties, and commanded them to be gone, who accordingly departed, the Enemy
presently surprised the Town, and those few that he had left in it, by which
means he betrayed the Town unto the Enemy, which was not regained without much
charge hazard, and loss of many men's lives.

And in the 12th. Artickle, they plainly accuse him for betraying the
Parliaments Garrison of Grantham, these Artickles with the rest, having there
hung ever since without a final determination, King knowing that I was a main
witness against him, in diverse of the things laid to his charge, and bearing a
malignant and inveterate malice against me, for opposing him in his unjust and
unwarrantable actions, (while I was his Major, and for discovering of them, and
often complaining of him to the Earl of Manchester and Lievt. Genesis Crumwell
etc.) to be revenged of me, did upon the 19th. day of July 1645, plot,
contrive, and by lying and falce suggestions to some members of the House of
Commons, caused me to be committed as a prisoner, and as a prisoner, by virtue
of that his unjust procurement, I lay till the 14th. of October 1645. to my
extraordinary charge and damage, yea, and to the hazard of my life, as I could
easily, truly, and undenyably demonstrate.

And yet neither he nor any man for him ever prosecuted any charge against me,
for although I lay so long, yet was I delivered before ever I knew truly and
legally wherefore I was imprisoned, as appears by the following Copy of my
releasement.

Die Martis 14. October, 1645.
MR. Recorder acquainted the House, that two Sessions were now passed, since
Lieutenant Colonel Lilbourn was removed to Newgate, and had continued a
prisoner there, and that no information or other charge had been yet brought
against him, and at this last Sessions, he humbly desired either to be tried or
to be discharged, and it is thereupon resolved upon the question, that
Lieutenant Colonel Lilbourn be forthwith discharged from his imprisonment.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

To the Keeper of Newgate or his Deputy.
And that King was the isntrumental cause of my imprisonment, appears clearly
to me, by what I find recorded by his good friend and my grand enemy Mr.
Prinne, in the latter end of the 6th. Page of his book entitled the Liar
confounded, and by what J find recorded under Kings hand in the 8th. page of
his co-partner, Doctor Bustwicke Book, written against self, for although
Doctor Bastwick be now my bitter Enemy, and his hand be with Kings to the
Information which Doctor Bastwick here says was put into the House of Commons
against me: yet I am apt to think that King was the Ringleader in it, because
at that time there was no visible nor professed breach of friendship betwixt
Doctor Bastwick and my self.

Upon which provocation by King, it might be, and I do believe it to be true,
that J might be free in my discourse at several times of King, and the
forementioned charge ^f Treason given into the House of Commons against him,
and J am very confident it will be made good by sufficient proofs and
witnesses, according to the rules of War, when it there comes to a trial,
but do not own the words specified by him in every particular.

Therefore J conceive it unjust, irrational, and Anti-Parliamentary, for an
inferior and subordinate Court, as the Court of Common Pleas is, to meddle with
this business, it being now dependent in Parliament, the supreme Court, and
unjudged there as yet, although the prosecutors aree rady at their utmost
peril to prove their charge against him.

Therefore my Lord, in my apprehension, Kings former malice manifested about
my commitment, and his present bringing me before you, are mere evasions and
tricks to terrify me and all others from prosecuting him in Parliament, and
also (under favor) your meddling with it in your Court, it being still
depending in Parliament, and not by them referred to you, is an incroachment
upon their Privileges, and J am the rather confirmed in this opinion, when I
seriously read over Mr. Prinnes Book, called the doom of cowardice and
trenchery, he being Colonel Kings very good friend and councellor, and
therefore his words in this case are of the more weight and authority Titus
1.12. being a professed adversary to me, who citing the Rolls of Parliament of
the 1. R. 2. number. 38, 39, 40. which contains the case of Gomery and Weston,
has these observations and inferences from them, in the 7th. page thereof.

That it is to be remembered, that Ieffery Martin Clearke of the Crown made this
very Record, and delivered it thus written in this present Roll, with his own
hand, therefore says he, from this memorable Record, I shall only observe
these few particulars.

1. That the Surrender of Towns, or Castles to the Enemy, through Cowardice or
Treachery, is properly examinable and tryable only in Parliament.

It being a detryment to the whole Kingdom, and so fit to be determined by the
representative Body of the Kingdom.

2. That the Cowardly delivering up of any Town or Castle by the Governor
thereof, to the Enemy, is a Capital Offense, deserves death, and likewise the
loss of it through his negligence or default.

3. That every Governor, who takes upon him the custody of any Fort or Town,
is obliged in point of Trust, and duty, under Pain of DEATH to defend it to the
utmost extremity.

4. That the concurrent consent of a Council of War or Soldiers, to render
up a Town to the Enemy before utmost extremity, for the saving of the Houses,
Lives and Goods of the Soldiers or Inhabitants, is no excuse at all to justify
or extenuate such a Governors dishonorable Surrender and offense.

5. That those who are accused of such an unworthy Surrender of any Town or
Castle ought to be apprehended and kept in safe custody, till their Trials be
past, and not suffered to go at large.

6. That a Governor giving timely notice of the Enemies apporach, of the
weakness of the Garrison, his s^ing for timely aid, and repulsing of the
Enemy for a season, will no ways excuse his surrender of a Town or Castle,
unless he hold it out to the utmost extremity, or Surrender it by the consent
of those, who entrusted him with the Custody thereof.

7. That the violent Battery of the Walls, or drayning of the Dykes of any
Castle or City, or any breach made in them by the Enemy (though extraordinary
powerful) are no sufficient causes or excuses for any Governor to Surrender
them upon composition to the Enemy, while there is sufficient victuals, men, or
ammunition to defend them; And that they must in no wise be surrendered, without
consent of those who put in the Govirnour till the greatest part of the
Soldiers be slain, the victuals or ammutioun quite spent, and all hopes of
relief dispayred of utterly upon good grounds.

Which is clear by the Case of Weston, who made a better defense of the Castle
of Outbrewick with 38. men only, against more then 8000. Enemies, (who
besieged, assaulted, battered it for 6. days together, with nine great Cannons
and other Engines, and pleaded far more in his defense of his surrender of
it, then many now can do, for surrendering of Towns and Castles of far greater
importance, then this Castle was, and yet for all this Weston in full
Parliament, was adjudged to death for it.

Thus far the words of an adversary to me, and Kings especial friend and
councellor, and therefore of the more weight and authority. Titus 1.12, 13.

Therefore my Lord, laying all these things together, as 1. Col. King and J
being both Soldiers under one General, namely the Earl of Manchester, who was
authorized by Parliament to govern his Army by Martial Law, which Law was
plainly printed by the same authority, and openly published to the view of
every Commander, Officer and Soldier; for transgressing against which
Artickles, many in a martial way have lost their lives, and no other visible
Rule that J knew off, was to be the Rule and Judge of our actions, or offenses,
but that Law, unto the power and authority of which, both Col. King and my
self did voluntarily stoop, and therefore (as I humbly conceive) we are not
to be tried by the Rules of the Common Law, (which I think no man in the world
fully and truly knows) for our actions committed in our soldier condition,
which is the true cause betwixt him and me. 2. I did my duty according to the
trust reposed in me, By the State Legal and representative, and by my General
from whom I had my Commission, and according to the private commands of
Lieutenant General Crumwel, which was to be faithful in my place, and to
complain, either of Col. King, or whomsoever I groundedly knew, did any actions
that tended to the ruin of Salus Poppuli, The safety of the People, or the
State universal, and he promised me upon his Honor and Reputation, that he
would do the best he could to have justice done, which is the very life of all
societies or Common Wealths, and that without which, the People cannot be happy
or safe; yea, and he gave me the reason, wherefore he so earnestly tied me to
it, which was because our General with his Army was to march out of Lincoln
Shire, and that Country being lately won out of the hands of the Cavaliers,
there being very few of that Country at that time that desired Command under
the General, (says he) we are necessitated to make use of Col. King, and to
make him governor of Boston and Holland, upon whom he looked then as an active
popular man, who promised to do mighty things for the good of that Country, and
the Public.

But in regard diverse of the chief men of Boston do mislike him, I have
therefore (says be) in his behalf engaged my self to them for him, that he
shall be faithful, just and honest toward them, and therefore in regard I
have no large experience of the man, and of his temper, I principally look
upon thee Lilbourne, and thy Lieutenant Colonel, whose faithfulness. I can
rest upon, and for both of whom I have used my interest, to place on purpose
with him, that so if he should break out to the dishonor of my engagement,
and the detriment of the public, I may from time to time be sure to know of
it, that so it may be prevented before it be past remedy.

But King being puffed up with his Command, took upon him an absolute regal
tyranicall authority over all his Officers, but especially those that were
betrusted in Commission as well as himself, and to do his chief actions by the
rule of his own will, without their privity or advice, which tended to the
ruin of all that were under him, and consequently of that whole country, he
having treacherously lost Crowland, and Boston put in extreme danger, by his
absolute wilfulness, if not treachery, the making known whereof, with his
cariages at Newarke Siedge etc. cost me in sending posts to the Earl of
Manchester, and Lieutenant General Crumwell, then, in or about Cam^bridge, I
am very confident 20. or 30. l. which so madded him, that he imprisoned Major
Rogers for daring to go and complain against him, I being in those straights in
regard of the charge I had taken upon me, that I durst not stir my self, till
all was clear, without fear or danger of an enemy, he having already by the
Law of his own will, cashiered his Lieutenant Colonel, without ground or
cause, and endeavored the apparent destruction of Capt Camebridge, and all the
honest, zealous, and conscientious men, under his command, which to me was an
ill Omen of his intentions.

Therefore I say, so soon as I durst leave my charge, I posted away to Bedford,
where I found my General, and Lieutenant General Crumwell, and told them
both fully of Kings carriage, and that he commanded his forces to march forward
and backward, where, and when he pleased, without the advice, aprobation and
consent of his Field Officers etc. who were to engage their lives a thousand
times more then himself, in managing the designs he set them about, and that
the Committee of Lincolnshire had paid him diverse thousands of pounds to pay
his Officers and Soldiers at Newarke Siedge, but J could not hear that he
paid one penny to any Officer there, and for my own part J am sure J could not
get a penny from him, although J am confident J took as much pains both night
and day, and hazarded my person as freely, and as often as any Major at that
Leaguer did

So likewise, although the Country sent in great store of provision for his
Regiment gratis, yet he and his under Sutlers, made both my self and other of
his Officers and Soldiers, pay ready money for a great part of it, to their
extraordinary discontent, provoking them thereby to mutiny. And so full was he
of arrogance pride and contention (contesting with all, or most of the chief
Commanders there) that Sir John Meldrum told me, that he ^indled such a fire of
contention amongst them that he durst scarce call a Council of War to
consult how to manage their business, for fear King should set them all together
by the earres, and so dest^oy the business, being there continually in
contestation with my Lord Willoughby, Col. Ross^ter, Sir Miles Hubbard, Sir
John Pagraffe and diverse of the Lincoln Committee etc. which did so trouble and
distract the old Knight Sir John Meldrum, our commander in chief, that he knew
not well what to do, when Rupert came upon us, by reason of our own
distractions aamong our selves.

And I dare confidently aver it upon my conscience, that he (namely King)
was one of the greatest instruments of our overthrow and ruin, and therefore
if Thomas Earl of Lancaster, (as Mr. Prinne in the 2. page of the foresaid
book records) was proclaimed a Traitor, by the whole Army in the 12. year
of King Edward the second; for departing in discontent from the Army, at the
siege of Barwick, by means whereof it was not taken, and the siege raised;
then I desire to know what Colonel King deserves, that at the siege of Newark
carried himself so, that he did raise discontents, and little better then
mutinies, by means whereof the siege was not only raised, but the whole Army
in a manner destroyed, to the extraordinary danger of the whole Kingdom.

I also told my Lord that after the articles of agreement was concluded,
Colonel King commanded, (and in a manner forced me) contrary to the Agreement,
to march away his Regiment in a hostill manner, with their arms, etc. by
means of which we were set upon by their horse, and forcibly disarmed, which
did also occasion the plundering of us, as violaters of our Covenant and
contract; to the disparagement of the whole army, yea, and the Parliament it
self, and to the extreme hazard and danger of abundance of our lives; yet King
was so honest, and valiant, that as soon as he saw the storm fall upon us, he
fairly left us, and shifted for himself, without being plundered as we were,
at which bout I lost well nigh 100 l, being plundered from the crown of my
head to the sole of my foot.

I further told him, that the Town of Boston had been in extreme danger, for
after Lincoln was discerted, and Ruperts forces possessed of it, and daily
news brought into Boston, that Rupert would assault it on both sides the
river; I moved Colonel King, that seeing the arms of his own Regiment etc.
was lost, and he in no possibiltiy to defend the Town of himself at the
present, that therefore (the Town being of that consequence, that if it should
be lost, the Enemy might presently make it, the absolutest strong Town in
England for themselves) that he would forthwith send to Colonel Walton, then
Governor of Linne, to entreat him to lend him at his great need and strait 4.
or 500 men, to defend the Town, till such time that he could get his own
Regiment again together, which he absolutely refused, and told me plainly that
he would never send for another to command and affront him in his own
Jurisdiction, which the Linne men would do, (he said) if they come, at which, I
being exceedingly troubled, that he should prefer his own domination before
the preservation of so considerable a Town and Garrison, it made me believe
he intended to betray it.

Whereupon I went to Mr. Major, then as I remember, at Alderman Tilsons, and
told them both, with some others, that their Town was in extraordinary danger
to be lost, and they all undone, if they did not look about them presently,
and told them all the discourse I had had with their unjust oppressing
Governor, and told them I conceived all was not right, and therefore I judged
my self bound in duty and conscience both before God and man, to tell them what
I apprehended of things, and how near their danger and ruin was at hand, and
if they would not help to save themselves according to the law of Nature,
their ruin be upon themselves; they desiring of me to let them know, what I
would advise them to, I told them my advise was, for as many of them to go with
me to Colonel King once again, as they thought fit, and let us jointly press
him to send to Linne for men, and if he would not do it, that then we might do
it without him.

Upon which, we went, and at first found him obstinate till (as I remember)
Alderman Tilson told him that if he would not join with them, they would
write to the Governor without him) upon which he was drawn to subscribe, but
my Lord of Manchester and the Governor of Line, or some others in authority;
being mindful of us in our straits, had ordered Col. Waltons Major, Major
Franckling, a stout and gallant man, with about 400. men, to come by Sea to us,
and as I remember, his orders were, that he should secure Boston; upon the
arivall of whom, Col. King immediately commanded them out of the Town, to go
and besiedge Crowland, which a little before by treachery or his own absolute
wilful negligence, he had given up unto the declared Traitors, and professed
enemies of the State and Kingdom.

Of which as soon as I fully understood, I went to Major Frankling, and
desired to see his order by virtue of which he came to Boston, and told him how
things stood with us, and in what temper I conceived my Colonel to be, and
therefore entreated him to be sensible of the trust reposed in him, and of his
own Honor, and reputation, professing unto him, that if he at the command of
Col King, marched away with all his men, considering his orders, and the
condition which the Town was in, I should look upon it as a mere design betiwxt
him and Col King to betray the Town indeed, telling him how weak and
unfortified the Town was, in a manner all round about, being in diverse places
easy for a man with a Pike staff to leap over it, and therefore there was no
way in the eye of reason to preserve it, seeing the Enemies intention (as we
heard) was to fall upon it, unless his men stayed in it, or at least the major
part of them.

Whereupon he went to Col. King, and (as I remember) in Alderman Tilsons Hall,
debated with him his positive command, and with much ado prevailed that
himself and a great part of his Soldiers should stay to defend the Town, and
my self being left by Col. King, with the consent of the Major and Aldermen,
to take care of the town, I went to Major Frankling, and desired him to go
with me to Colonel King, to know what Ammunition he had in his Magazine, who
assured us upon his reputation, that he had a hundred barrels of powder, and
all things fitting besides, and therefore bid us take no care for Ammunition
and, being very busy in sending away men, guns, etc. to the intended leaguer
of Crowland.

I did not go to the Magazine, to see whether be had told us truth or no, he
having taken a quantity of powder with him, and an other sent him, he sends his
warrant to the Magazine Keeper, for ten barrels more, not signifying one word
of his mind to me, who was then betrusted with the Town, upon the reciet of
which old Mr. Coney the Magazine keeper, came and told me that he had received
an order from the Colonel, to send him ten barrels of powder, and says he
what shall I do, for there is but ten barrels in all in the Magazine:

At the hearing of which I stood amazed, and told him it could not be
possible, for (said I) such a day I went to the Colonel with Major Frankling,
and he did assure us that he had 100. barrels in store, but Mr. Coney assured
me, that there was not one more then 10, the which if we send to him, there is
none to keep their guards (says he) I asked him if there were not a private
storehouse for powder, and he told me none at all, then we began to reckon how
many barrels were gone out, since he assured Major Frankling and my self that
he had 100 in store, and all that both the Magazine Keeper, and my self could
reckon, with those 10 in his hands, and all he had since that day delivered
out, was (as I remember) 24 or 26:

Whereupon I went to Alderman Tilsons, and asked him whether the Major,
himself, and the rest of his Brethren, had not a private Magazine, and he told
me no, but asked me wherefore I demanded such a question of him, whereupon I
told him all the story, ^t which he stood amazed, and from him I went to
Colonel Kings wife, and desired to know of her, whether she knew of any
private Magazine of powder that her husband had, and she told me no.

Then I told her all the business, and said to her, that I wondered her Husband
should assure Major Frankling and my self, that he had 100 barreles of powder,
when he had but 28, and that he should send for all that he had left, out of
the Garrison, assuring her that if the ten barrels he had sent for, should be
sent him, we should not have one left in the Magazine to defend the Town with,
being then in expectation of the Enemy to Assault us, I told her for my part I
could not pick out the English of it.

And I being by the General sent post to London to the Committee of both
Kingdoms, about his marching to take Lincoln again, and from thence to march
to York, to join with the Scots, I in the third place ceased not to put that
(which lay upon me as a duty) forwards, as soon as an opportunity served, and
renewed my complaint against him at Lincoln, and desired it might receive a
fair hearing before the General and a Counsel of War, and that justice
might be done according to the rules of War, and Mr. Archer and others of the
Committee of Lincoln, drew up a very heinous charge against King, and labored
hard for a trial, and in the third place the Major, Aldermen, and town
Clerk, of Boston, came to Lincoln with their Articles against him, which were
home enough, and to my knowledge pressed Leu. Genesis Crumwell, to use all his
interest in my Lord, that they might be admitted to make them good, before him,
and a Counsel of war, but we could not all prevail, the reason of which I
am not able to render, unless it were that his two Chaplains Lee, and Garter,
prevailed with the Earls two Chaplains, Mr. Ash and Good, to cast a clergy
mist, over their Lords eyes, that he should not be able to see any deformity in
Colonel King, but this I dare confidently say, if there we had, had but fair
play, and justice impartially, King had as surely dyed, as ever malifactor in
England did, and to use the words once again of his own bosom friend, and
Counselor, Mr. Prinne, in page the 6 of the fore cited book, if the late Baron
of Graystock, who was a Lord, and one of the Pears of the Realm, and had
taken upon him safely to keep to the a foresaid Grandfather (King of England)
the town of Berwick: The said Barron perceiving afterward, that the said
Grandfather, addressed himself to ride into France, the said Barron (without
command of the said Granfather) committed the said town of Barwick to a
valiant Esquire Robert Deogle, as Leiu. to the said Barron, for to keep safe
the town of Barwick to the said Grandfather, and the said Barron went as an
horseman to the said parts of France, to the said Grandfather, and there
remained in his company. During which time an assault of war, was made upon
the said Town of Barwick, by the said Scots, and the said Robert as Leiu. to
the said Barron, valiantly defended the same, and at last by such forceable
assaults, the said Town was taken upon the said Robert, and two of the sons
of the said Robert there slain in the defense of the same, notwithstanding
that the said Barron himself, had taken upon him the safeguard of the said
Town, to the said Grandfather, and depart^d himself without command of the
said Grandfather, and the said town of Barwick lost, in the absence of the
Barron, he being in the company of the said Grandfather, in the parts of
France, as aforesaid, It was adjudged in Parliament, before his Pears, that
the said Town was lost, in default of the said Barron, and for this cause he
had judgment of life, and member, and that he should forfeit all that he had. I
say if this Lord, deserved to dye who left a Deputy so manfully to defend the
Town, and also was himself with the King in the service, much more King,
merely in reference to Crowland singly, who being Governer thereof, and having
placed Captain Cony therein as his Deputy, with a company of men, sent for him
in a bravado humor to Newwarke, when he had no urgent necessity for him,
unless it were that the world might see the bravery of his Regiment, with by
his agumentation amounted to about 1400, when Cap. Cony certified him, that the
Town being generally Malignant etc would be in great danger by the Beverkers
of being lost if he should come away, yet notwithstanding King sent to him
again, and did command him away, and put in a guard of slander and unsafe men,
which presaged alosse of it to the Committee residing in Holland, upon which
they acquainted Com^^ssary Gennerall; Ireton then Deputy, Governor of the I Will
of Ely, and ernestly entreated him to send a strong guard to preserve and keep
it, and he accordingly sent (as I remember) Captain Underwood, astout man with
about a 100 soldiers etc. of which when King heard, he was exceeding mad, and
did write a most imperious bitter letter, to command them out of his
Jurisdiction, where upon they were nec^ssi^ated to dep^rt, and leave Crowland
to his own slender and treacherous guard, by means of which, within a little
while after the Enemy had advantage to supprise that Town without oposition,
or difficulty, and did it, so that to speak in the words of the Articles
remaining in Parliament against him, he betrayed that Town, which was not
regained without much hazzord and loss, the expense of a great deal of
treasure and many men's lives, the blood of all which he^ upon his head, for the
loss of which alone (besides his treachery both to the state universal and
representative) he ought to dye without mercy, by the Moral and undispensable
Law of God, made long before that ever the Jews were a Nation, or had any
Ceremonial Law given unto them, which Law is expressed in Gen 9 5, 6. where
God speaking to Noah and his sons, says thus: And surely your blood of your
lives will I require* at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the
hand of man: at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man.

Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image
of God made he man, read Revel. 13.10. But King, though his own hands did not
murder the soldiers that lost their lives in taking it in again, yet he was
the true fountain and cause wherefore their blood was shed, Deuteronomy. 22.8. Judge
9.24. 2 Samuel 12.9. having apparently, by his wilfulness and treachery, lost
the Town; and therefore, wilful blood being upon his heat, he ought to make a
legal satisfaction, and expiation by his own blood: I wish with all my soul
the Parliament (your Lordship, and all the rest of the Judges of this Kingdom)
would seriously consider and ponder upon this unrepealable law of God, that so
wilful murderers and blood-thirsty men might not escape the hands of Justice,
and so bring wrath from God upon the whole Kingdom, Genesis 4.10, 11, 12. Deuteronomy.
19.10. Psalm. 106.38. Jer. 7.5, 6. and 19.^, 4 Lament 4 13, 14. Hosea 4.2, 3
Joel 3.19. Heb. 2.8. which cannot be expiated but by the blood of him that shed
it, Numb. 35.33. Deuteronomy. 19 12, 13. 2 Samuel 4 11, 12, 1 King. 2.5.6.3^, 32, 33.
and 21 19. and 2 King. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 36.33. and Chap. 24. 2, 3, 4. but
especially that you would think upon the grand Murderer of England (for by
this impartial Law of God there is no exemption of Kings, Princes, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, Judges, or Gentlemen, more then of Fishermen, Cobblers,
Tinkers, and Chimney- sweepers) upon whose shoulders all the innocent blood
that has in such abundance been shed in this Kingdom, etc. lies, for which
reckoning I am sure the score is not acquitted in the account of God, nor ought
it not to be in the account of man, For if the innocent and righteous blood of
one Abel, cried so loud for vengean^e in the ears of God, against Cain, that
God cursed him and all he went about: How much more will the blood of
thousands, and ten thousands of innocent persons, that has been lately shed in
England, cry loud in the cares of God, for wrath and vengeance against those
that have been the true fountain and cause of it, for shall it is, and upon
some body the guilt of it lies; and therefore it is but a folly and madness,
for the King, Parliament, or People, to talk of peace, till inquisition be
made for Englands innocent blood, and Justice done upon the guilty, and wilful
sh^ders of it, for besides the Law of God in Genesis 9 he says plainly, Numb.
35.31. That there shall no satisfaction be taken for the life of a murderer,
but that he shall surely be put to death, and in verse. 33. God declares that
the shedding innocent blood defiles and polluteth a Land, and that, that
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it, and for the innocent blood that Manasseth shed in Jerusalem
(although a King) God sent bands of the Caldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and
Ammonites to destroy Judah, and remove them out of his sight, for the sins of
Manass^h their King, and for the innocent blood that he had shed, (which the
text says) The Lord would not pardon, 2 King. 24.2, 3, 4. Yea, and because
Saul (though a King) slew some of the Gahonites contrary to the Covenant made
with them, God sent a famine upon all Israel for three years, for that very
innocent blood shed by the King, and there was no expiation, or satisfaction to
be made therefore, but by the blood of him that had shed it; and therefore
because he himself was dead and his blood could not be had, seven of his sons
(of his own blood) must and was hanged up to make satisfactions therefore,
Sam. 2.21.1, 2, 3, 4. to the 9.

My Lord, the unsufferable provocation of Colonel King, forces me to present
these lines unto you, and I doubt not, but these will tend to his long deserved
ruin; and therefore to speak in the words of his friend Mr. Prinne, in a case
of the like nature It is the just hand of God, many times so far to demen^ate
the very wisest politicians, as to make themselves the principal contrivers of
their own infamy and ruin: for his Knavery, lying in a hole as it were, now
he has by his arresting me, and bringing me before your Lordship (who I
conceive have nothing to do with the business, being it is dependant in
Parliament the supreme Court of the Kindome,) necessitated me to publish the
whole state of the business betwixt him and me to the view of the world,
because at your Bar I cannot make a plea at large to the whole body of the
Articles, but must be tied up, as I am told, to a single plea, that is to say,
to plead either guilty, or not guilty, unto which I cannot without snares yield
unto, besides I must, as I am told, plead at your Bar by Sergeants at Law,
none of which I know, and therefore will not trust them, come ruin and
destruction, and what ever will of me. Again, my Lord, I must there be tried
by a Jury that neither knows me, nor I them, nor knows any of Kings
habituated knavery, nor understands any thing of Martial Law, the only rule to
try him and me in this case, and that which is worst of all, they are chosen
(as I am told) by the under Sheriff, of which kind of creatures I never heard
any great commendation for their honesty, but have heard of much judging and
packing betwixt them and such kind of crafty and large conscioned fellows, as
my Adversary King the Lawyer is. Again, my Lord, that which is the greatest
mischief of all, and the oppressing bondage of England ever since the Norman
yoke, is this, I must be tried before you by a Law (called the Common Law) that
I know not, nor I think no man else, neither do I know where to find it, or
read it; and how I can in such a case be punished by it, I know not: For, my
Lord, I have been with diverse Lawyers about this very business, I cannot find
two of them of one mind, or that can plainly describe unto me what is the way
of your goings; so that I profess I am in the dark amongst briers and
thorns, and fast in a trap by the heels, and enemies round about me ready to
destroy me, if I be not very wary with my tongue and which way to get out, or
how, or to whom to call to for help I know not, for such an unfathomable gulf
have I by a little search found, the Law practices in Westminster Hall to be,
that seriously I think there is neither end nor bottom of them, so many
uncertainties, formalities, puntillo's, and that which is worse, all the
entryes and proceedings in Latin, a language I understand not, nor one of a
thousand of my native Country men, so that my Lord, when J read the Scripture,
and the House of Commons late unparaleld Declaration, it makes me think that
the practizes in the Courts at Westminster, flow not from God nor his Law, nor
the law of Nature and reason, no nor yet from the understanding of any
righteous, just or honest men, but from the Devil, and the will of Tyrants.

First my Lord, the House of Commons declaration April 17. 1646 tells me, that
their intentions are not to change the ancient frame of Government within this
Kingdom, but to obtain the end of the Primitive institution of all
Government, the safty and weal of the people, (amost goulden saying) but I am
sure it cannot be for the peoples safety, nor welfare, to have their lives,
liberties, and estates, Judged by a law^ the entrings and proceedings of which
are in Latin, and so without there understanding there cases in Heathen Greek
of Pedlers French, and so beyond their knowledge, and man of their rules in the
orracles of Judges breasts, whose judments many times have been destructive to
the lives liberties and estates, of all the free men of England, witness there
late Judgment in shipmoney etc. neiteer are such practizes agreeable to the
Ancient constitutions of Kingdoms.

And secondly when God gives his law unto the sons of men, he does it
plainly, without ambiguous terms, and in their own language, as first for
Adam, the law God gave him was plain and short, with a declared penalty
annexed unto it, Genesis 2.16.17. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of
every tree of the Garden thou may freely eat. But of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. And his law in the 9. of Genesis about
murder is as plain as this, for who so sheadeth man's blood (says he) by man
shall his blood be shed, for in the Image of God made he man, and so likewise
when God comes to give a law unto the Isralites as a nation, yea* and that law
which we call the Morrall law, and observe as binding to us to this day, he
does it in plain words, without amibguous or doubtful terms, short and in
their own tongue Exo. 20 and that the people might be at a certainty, Moses
as his Minister, and officer, writ, and read it in the audience of the people,
unto which they gau^ their consent, Exo. 24 4.6. and after that God writ them
himself with his finger, and delivered them to Moses, that so the people might
be taught them, Exo. 24.12. and 31.18. and chap. 34. yea, and in this
plainness, was all the Laws God gave unto them, which he did not only barely
rank, and so let the people go seek them where they could find them, but he
also with Majesty, proclaims them openly and as if that were not enough, that
so they might know the Law and not in the least plead ignorance of it, Moses
declares it to them again, and again Deu. 5 and chap. 6. and chap. 9. and 11.
Yea and commands them to teach their Children, and to speak of them, when they
fit in their house, and when they go abroad, and when they lie down, and rise
up, yea and that they should write them upon the posts of their houses, and
upon their gates D^u 11.19.20. yea and that they should write them very plainly
Deuteronomy. 27.8. and the reason is because the just God has done, and will do just
and righteous things, and will not be so unjust as to punnish men for
transgressing a law they know not, and therefore says Moses to Israel in the
behalf of the just God, and his law, Its not hidden from thee, neither is it
far off It is not in Heaven, that thou shouldests say who shall go up for us
to Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it; neither is
it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for us,
and bring it unto us, that we may heart it, and do it: But the word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it, so
(says he) I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evil Deuteronomy.
30.11.12.13, 14.19 yea and that the generations to come, might not think that
God dealt hardly with them, in exacting obedience from them, who lived not in
Moses days, to hear the Law so sollemnly published, he delivers it a stnading
Law (in future generations) unto the Priests Elders, and people, that at the
end of every seven Years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the
feast of Tabernacles: When all Israel is com to appear before the Lord thy
God, in the place which he shall choose: Thou shall read this Law before all
Israel in their hearing. Gather the people together, men and women, and
children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and
that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the
words of this Law: And that their Children which have not known any thing, may
hear and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as you live, Deuteronomy.
31.9.10.11.12.13. So we see how just and exact God is to the people, in giving
them a short, plain and easy to be understood Law, in their own tongue, and
not in the language of strangers, and what care he takes to have it published
and taught unto the people.

But if we will but impartially read our English histories, we shall clearly
find, that the tedious, unknown, and impossible to be understood, common law
practices in Westnmister Hall, came in by the will of a Tyrant, namly William
the Conqueror, who by his sword conquered this Kingdom, and professed he had
it from none but God and his sword Danniel 42. subdued their honest and just
law ( Speed 424.) commonly called the law of Edward the Confess. and as Daniel
says fol. 44. set up new terms, new constitutions, new forms of pleas, new
offices, and Courts, and that whereas (says he fol. 46) before the causes of
the Kingdom were determined in every Shire, and by Law of King Edwad se. all
matters in question should upon especial penalty, with out further deferment,
be finally decided in their Gemote or conventions held monthly in every
hundred, he ordained, that four times in the year for certain days, the same
businsse should be determined in such place as he would appoint, where he
constituted Judges to attend for that purpose, and others from whom, was from
the bosom of the Prince, all litigators should have justice, and from whom was
no appeal, and made his Judges (says Martin in his history folo 5.) follow
his Court upon all removes, which tired out the English Nation, with
extreordinary troubles and excessive charges in the prosecution of their suites
in Law, and says fol 4. he also enacted, and established strait and severe
Laws, and published them in his own language (as all the practizes of the
Law, and all petitions and business of the court were) by means whereof many
(who were of great estate, and of much worth) tough ignorance did transgress,
and their smalest offenses, were gerat enough to entitle the Conqueror to the
lands, and riches which they did possess: all which he seized on and took
from them without remorse.

And although the agrieved Lords, and sad People of England, humbly petitioned
him, that according to his oath (twice formerly taken) that he would restore
them the Laws of St. Edward, under which they were born and bred, and not add
unto all the rest of their misery, to deliver them up to be judged by a strange
Law they understood not, whose importunity so far prevailed with him, that he
took his oath the third time, to preserve their Laws, and liberties, but like
a perjured Tyrant, never observed any of his oaths, and the same (says Daniel
Fol. 43.) did Henry the first, Henry the second, and King John. etc. and yet
notwithstanding these followed (says he) a great innovation, both in the Laws
and Government of England, so that this seems rather to be done to acquit the
People, with the show of the continuation of their ancient Customs and
Liberties, then that they enjoyed them in effect. For the little conformity
between them of former times, and these that followed upon this change of
State, and though there may be some veins issuing from former originals, yet
the main stream of our Common law, with the practice thereof, flowed out of
Normandy, notwithstanding all objections can be made to the contrary, and
therefore J say it came from the Will of a Tyrant.

But it may be objected, that the Law it self, is not now either in French or
Latin, and therefore not so bad as you would make it.

I shall answer in the words of Daniel, Follio 251. That it is true, upon the
Petition of the Commons to Edward the third, He caused Pleas which before were
in French, to be made in English, that the Subjects might understand the Law by
which he houlds what he has, and is to know what he does, a blessed Act, and
worthy so great a King; If he could thereby have rendered the same also
perspicuous, it had been a work of eternal honor, but such (says he) is the
Fate of Law, that in what language soever it speaks, it never speaks plain, but
is wrapped up in such difficulties and mysteries, (as all proffessions of profit
are) as it gives more affiction to the People, then it does remedy, and
therefore when Magna Charta, after many a bloody Battle, and the purchase of
many hundred thousands of pounds, was obtained and confirmed by Edward the
first, in the 27. year of his Reign, diverse Patrons of their Country, as Sir
Edward Cook. in his Proem before the second part of his Institutes, declares,
that after the making of Magna Charta, etc. diverse learned men in the Laws,
(that I may use the words of the Record) kept Schools of the Law in the City
of London, and taught such as resorted to them, the Laws of the Realm, taking
their foundation from Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta, which the King
sought to impeach, and therefore, in the 19th year of his Reign, by his Writ,
commanded the M^^or and Sheriffs of London, to suppress all such Schools,
under great penalties, ( such enemies are Tyrants, to the Peoples knowledge and
understanding of their Laws and Liberties, that so they may rule by their wills
and pleasures, for the impugning and infringing of which etc. this wicked and
lewd King, was dis-throned, at the doing of which, he confessed, that he had
been mis-guided, and done many things whereof now (too late) he repented, which
if be were to govern again, he would become a new man, and was most sorrowful
to have offended the State, as it should thus utterly reject him, but yet gave
them thanks that they were so gracious unto him, as to elect his eldest son
for King.

And Henry the third, in the 2.8th years of his Reign confirmed the great
Charter, which notwithstanding he continually broke them, and fetched over the
Poictonians, by the advice of his evil Council, to overawe his People, and
annih late their Liberties, wherefore his Nobles etc. sent him express word,
That unless he would amend his doings they would expel him and his evil
Counselors out of the Land, and deal for the creation of a new King. Daniel.
Fol. 154.

But I desire not to be mis-understood, for in the harshnes of my expressions
again the Common Law, I put (as J conceive) a clear distinction of it, from
the Statute Law, which though there be many faults in it, as I could easily
show, yet I desire not here to say any greater evil of it then this, that the
28, 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the late Act for
abolishing the Star Chamber, are gallant Laws, and the best I can find in the
whole vollumnious Book of Statutes, for in my apprehension they fall far
short, in a sufficiently providing for that which lately the Honorable House
of Commons says is the end of all Government, (the safety and weal of the
People, for in my judgment, they do not positively and legally hold out a
sufficient security to hedge about to keep in peace and to preserve the
splendour and glory of that underived Ma^est^ and King ship, that inherently
resides in the People, or the State universal, (the representation or
derivation of which, is formally and legally in the State (...) r^^resentative,
and none elce, (whose actions ought all to tend to that end) against (...)
usurpations, and violences of all it is creatures, officers and Ministers, in
the number of which are Kings themselves, from whom, and for whom they have
all their Power and authority, as the executions of their will and mind, for
their good and benefit, to whom they are accountable for the faithful
discharge of that trust reposed in them, as not only Scripture, but nature and
reas^n, does fully prove, yea, and our own writers, especially the late
Observator, and Mr. Prinne, in his Sovereign power of Parliaments, and
Kingdoms, printed by special authority from the house of Commons.

2. Although Magna Charta be commonly called the English man's inheritance,
because it is the best in that kind he has, and which was purchased with so
much brave English blood, and money, by our forefathers, before they could
wring it out of the hands of their tiranicall Kings (the successors of William
the Conqueror) as I have largely elsewhere clearly manifested, yet alas in my
aprehension, it falls short of Edward the Confessors laws, which the
Conqueror robbed England of, and in stead of them, set up the dictates of his
own will, whose Norman rules, and practizes to this day yet remains in the
administrations of the Common Law at Westminster Hall, by reason of their
tediousness, ambiguities, uncertainties, the entryes in Lattine ( as bad at
the French) because it is not our own tongue, their forcing men to plead by
Lawyers, and not permitting themselves to plead their own causes, their
compelling of persons to come from all places of the Kingdom, to seek for
justice at Westminster, which is such an iron Norman Yoke, with fangs and teeth
in it, that if we were free in every particular elce, that our hearts can
think of, yet were we slaves by this alone, the burden of which singly, will
pierce and gall our shouldiers, and make us bow and stoop to the ground, ready
to be made a prey, not only by great men, but even by every cunning sharking
knave.

O therefore that your Lordshp would desire and solicit our honorable
Parliament, according to the late Declaration, forever to annihilate this
Norman innovation, and reduce us back to that part of the ancient frame of
government in this Kingdom, before the Conquers days, and that we may have
all causes and differences decided in the County, or Hundred, where they are
committed, or do arise, without any appeal but to a Parliament, and that they
may monthly be Judged by twelve men, of free and honest condition, chosen by
themselves, with their grave or chief Officer amongst them, and that they may
swear to judge every man's cause aright, without Fear, Favor, or affection,
and then farewell jangling Lawyers, the wildfire destroyers, and bane of all
just, rational, and right governed Commonwealths; and for the faciliating of
this work, and the prevention of Frauds, I shall only make use of Mr. John
Cooks words a Lawyer of Grayes-Inne, in the 66. page of his late published
Book called a vindication of the professors, and profession of the Law, where
he prescribes a ready remedy against frauds, which is that there might be a
public Office in every County, to register all Leases made for any Land, in
that County, and also all Conveiances whatsoever, and all charges upon the
Lands, and all Bonds, and Contracts of any vall^^, for (says he) it is a hard
matter, to find out all Recognizances, Judgments, extents, and other charges,
and too chargeable for the Subject) that for 12 d. or some such small matter,
might know in whom he interest of Land remains, and what encumbrances lie upon
it, and every estate or charge not entered there to be void in Law, and that the
country have^h choosing of the Registers in their respective Counties once a
year, upon a fixed day, and tha they have plain-rules and limitations, made by
the authority of Parliament, and severe penalties inacted for the transgressing
them

My Lord, I hope you will not be offended at me for my plainness, especially if
you consider the necessities laid upon me, for I profess really, I am not able
to imagine any other remedy for my preservation but this, (having had my
Petition about this business, above a month in diverse of my friends hands in
the House of Commons, but cannot get it read.

And having contested this 7. years, with all sorts, and kind of persons, that
would destroy me, and having often been in the field, amongst Ballets and
Swords, to maintain the Common Liberties and Freedoms of England, against all
the traytorly oppugners thereof, and having by the goodness of my God, escaped
many dangers and deaths and being in my own apprehension, ready to be ruinated
and destroyed, by a weapon, Inferior to a T^ylors Bodkin, (namely) a
Formallity, or Puntillo in the Law, it has rouzed up my spirits, to charge it
with a Soldiers pure resolution, in a new and unwonted manner, being
necessitated to cast all care behind me, and say unto myself, that as hitherto
I have not lived by any man's favor and grace, so, for my own safety, I will
now be afraid of no man's indignation or displeasure, cost what it will, and if
J perish, I per^sh.

2. If your Lordship, or any other great man, be moved with choler or
indignation against me, (as I desire you may not) and shall, endeavor to do
me a mischief, for this my plain dealing, I hope I shall be kept out of
danger, by the authority of the Parliaments own Declarations, but especially by
those words of theirs, in their exhortation to men to take their Covenant,
which are thus.

And as for those Clergy men, who pretend, that they (above all others) can
not Covenant to extirpate Episcopal Government, because they have (as they
say) taken a solemn oath to obey the Bishops, in licitis and honestis, they
can tell and if they please, that they that have sworn obedience to the Laws
of the Land, are not thereby prohibited from endeavoring by all lawful means
the abolition of those Laws, when they prove inconvenient or mischievous etc.

And I am confident, that if J fall into the hands of those that made the
Covenant, (who are the fittest interpreters of it) I shall do well enough; But
from the Sect of the Adamites, that would have no man live in England that are
honester then themselves, and from the late London Remonstrators, that would
have all men disfranchized (although never so honest) that are not of their
minds, and Judgments, and who do, and would rob the representative body of
all the Commons of England, of their Legislative power, and from the Executors
of strange and unknown Laws, which destroy and undo men, (though never so
upright) by formallities and puntillo's, good Lord deliver

Your Lordships Servant, and a true bred Englishman, JOHN LILBVRNE.
From my House in Halfe-Moon Alley in P^tty-France, near Bishops Gate, Land.
June, 6th 1646.
The forementioned Petition thus follows.
To the Right Honorable, the Representative Body of the Commons OF ENGLAND: In
PARLIAMENT assembled. The humble Petition of Lievt. Col. JOHN LILBVRNE,
Shows,
THat upon the differences betwixt the King, and Parliament, the Commons of
England, for the defense and preservation of their Laws and just Liberties, by
authority of Parliament were necessitated to take up Arms, for the suppression
of the Forces raised by the King. In this War against the Parliament, the
Forces raised in the Eastern Association, were committed and entrusted under
the command of the Earl of Manchester, as Major General there, from whom your
Petitioner had a Commission to be Major to Col. King, and particular
instructions, and private directions, from Lievt. Genesis Crumwel, to take and
give unto them, or one of them, (upon all occasions) Information, and
Intelligence, of the State and condition of Lincolnshire, under the command of
the said Colonel King, and of the carriage and, behavior of the said Col. King,
toward the Country, and Soldiery, and how he discharged his place and trust.
Which your Petitioner with all faithfulness and diligence did accordingly, to
his extraordinary expenses, not neglecting any advantage, or opportunity, which
might further the public service, or discover the designs of the Enemy, or
the said Col. Kings miscariage and neglect, of his trust and duty, the said
Col. King taking upon him an unlimited and unwarrantable power destructive to
the trust reposed in him.

Tha^ upon your Ptitioners discovery and making known both unto the Earl, and
L. Genesis Crumwel, (according to his instructions and trust reposed in him) the
malignancy, insolences, and unfaithfulness of the said Col. King, to the
State, in the neglect of his charge, and his bad usage of the Country, to the
great dis-service of the Parliament, and danger of the loss of the whole
Country, ( Crowland being by him betrayed unto the Enemy, and was not regained,
without great charge and hazard, yea, and the loss of many men's lives, the
said Col King was thereupon discharged, and put out of all his commands, and
offices, (being then very many, and profitable) but was not brought to trial
for his said offenses, at a Council of War, which your Petitioner and others
much endeavored to have done. Whereupon Mr. Mussenden, Mr. Wolley, and diverse
others (Gentlemen of quallity) of the Commit of Lincoln, in August 1644.
exhibited to this Honorable House, several Articles, (since printed) a Copy
whereof is hereunto annexed, against the said Col. King, thereby chargeing him
with several Treasons, Insolences, setting up and exercising an Arbitrary,
exorbitant, and unlimited power, over the Country, and Soldiery, with many
other insolences, and soul misdemeanors, all which are yet depending before
this honorable House, and not yet determined, being some of them, for, or
concerning the loss and surrender of Towns to the Enemy, through his
treachery or negligence, and so the offense Capital, and properly examinable,
and only tryable in Parliament, as appears Rot. Parl. 1. Rich.. 2. Nu.
38.39.40. Rot. Parl. 7. Rich. 2. Number. 17.22.

Now the said Col. King, being privy to his own guiltiness, and well knowing
your Petitioner to be a principal witness for the proof of diverse of the
said Articles, out of his malice and wickedness to your Petitioner, upon a
groundless complaint, and untrue surmises, made by him to this Honorable
House, in July last, procured your Petitioner to be committed to the custody of
the Sergeant at Arms, attending this honorable House, your Petitioner being
thence removed to Newgate, but he, nor any other, prosecuting any charge
against him, after he had lain abuot 13. weakes there, he was discharged of his
imprisonment by order of this House.

And the said Col King, the more to vex, and unjustly trouble your Petitioner
and to the end to take away his testimony, and deter others from appearing
against the said Col. King, upon his trial upon the said Articles, a little
before Easter Term last, caused your Petitioner to be arested at his own
suite, upon an action of 2000 l, for pretended words, alleging by his
Declaration, that your Petitioner should have said that the said Col. King was
a traitor, and he gives forth in speeches, he will undoubtedly recover the same
against your Petitioner, and thereby utterly ruin him, and is indeed verry
likely to do the same, by these his sinister practizes, if by this Honorable
House, your Petitioner be not relieved and protected, according to justice and
equity.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly desires this Honorable House will be
pleased, in regard your Petitioner has not done or said any thing against the
said Col. King, but what will be proved when he shall be brought to Trial
before this honorable House, upon the said Articles and Charge; and for that
your Petitioner cannot at Law give any Plea in Bar, or justification of the
words pretended to be spoken by him, until the said Col. King be either
conv^cted, or acquitted upon his Trial, upon the said Articles and charge, to
give Order, and direction to the said Col. King, and to the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas, (where the Action depends) to sur-cease, and no
further proceed upon the said Action of 2000l. against your Petitioner. And for
the good, and satisfaction of the Kingdom, and the freeing and vindication of
your Petitioners integrity and faithfulness in what he has said or done
touching the premyses, to bring the said Col. King to trial (in a
Parliamentary way) that so he may receive co^digne punishment for the injuries
and wrongs he has done, and wherewith he is charged in the said Articles.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.

Courteous Reader, if I had had room here should have been an Errata, but the
principal fault passed the Press, in Page 14. line. 16. read, which King
Edward 2. for which the King.

Articles exhibited against Col. Edward King, for his insolences and
misdemenors in the County of Lincoln, to the Honorable House of Commons, in
August 1644. by Mr. Mussenden, Mr. Wolley, and diverse others of the Committee
of Lincoln.
Imprimis, That to the great discouragement of the County, he does openly
declare, his slighting of all men's good affections to the Parliaments service,
by expressing that he valueth not that men should do the Parliament serviee
voluntarily, but that he would by his power force them to serve.

2. That he does pay those great sums of money raised by him out of the
Country, only to whom he pleases, against all equity and justice,
notwithstanding the Lord of Manchesters Order to the contrary.

3. That he has publicly declared his slighting the ordnances of Parliament,
and done very many tyranicall and arbitrary actions, by imprisoning diverse
persons at his pleasure, and exacting great sums of money, at such time when
necessity could be no plea, with many other particulars.

4. When he was before Newark he sent for a Captain who kept Crowland, who
obeyed his command, yet sent word to him of the danger that town was in, and
therefore desired his second pleasure, which was that he should march, who
accordingly did, the Gentlemen of the Country, fearing the enemy, procured
Major Ireton to send a 100. Musketeers to keep Crowland, which he hearing of
took ill that without order from him any should come into his liberties and
commanded them to be gone, who accordingly departed, the enemy presently
surprised the town, and those few that he had left in it, by which means he
betrayed the town unto the enemy, which was not regained without much charge,
hazard, and loss of many men's lives.

5. That he gives protections for securing both person and goods, to those who
are professed enemies to the Parliament.

6. That he imployeth such officers, as are altogether unfit for the Countries
service.

7. That he does most grossly and unworthily affront and abuse the
well-affected Gentry of the Country.

8 That he does encourage desperate Malignants, and animateth them against the
well-affected.

9. That he and his officers have imprisoned men well-affected to the
Parliament, and caused their houses, chests, trunks, etc. to be searched for
pewter, brass, and linen, and threatened that they would make it cost one of
them his whole estate, and that one of his officers would not take three
hundred pounds for his own satisfaction.

10. That at the siedge before Newark such provision as the country had
voluntarily and freely sent in to Col. Kings quarters at Winthorp, for the
maintenance of the soldiers, his officers would not deliver without money,
although they had not pay, to the extreme oppression and discouragement of the
Country.

11. That he sent three warrants to Capt. Bushy at Tatte^shall, to take away a
great quantity of Wool which was bought by Mr Rawson one of the Committee, and
paid for with his own money, and so the said Rawson is likely to lose his
estate, although he has been a sufferer both for Church and common wealth this
twenty years, and has made him a malignant, both in his words and letters, as
much as in him did lie.

12. That when the enemy took Grantham, they being b^a^en from one part of the
town, wheeled about to fall upon the other side, at a place called the
Spittle-gate, which Major Sarvil, being then Major of the town perceiving,
commanded Col. King, being then Capt. of a Company thereto march with his
Company to defend that place, Col. King answered, that he scorned to be
commanded by him, and rather then he would be commanded by him, he would take
his company and let the enemy into the town, and he delayed so long, before he
would go, that the enemy was entered at the said Port, before he came thither,
by which means he betrayed that town.

13. That when Commissary James had brought in certain sheep from a malignant
for the relief of the siedge at Newarke, being then in great want, Col. King
caused the the said sheep to be restored to the malignant, and told the
Commisary that he deserved to be hanged, with diverse other threatening and
reviling speeches; notwithstanding he had order from Sir John Meldrum and the
Committee for the taking of them.

14. That Colonel King having promised the Lord of Manchester to raise a great
number of Horse and Foot, the said Col. King, as did appear, not knowing how
to raise so great a number, did to the great discouragement of the Country,
take this course; In the first place he cashiered Major Syler, with him three
hundred Volunteers, which served on their own charge, who with the townsmen had
always defended the town of Boston, that he might press them to serve under
him for pay; And secondly, he did sieze upon and detain four or five of the
Foot Companies belonging to the Lord Willoughby and did cashiere some of the
Captains, because they refused to forsake my Lord to serve under him.

15. That the Troops of Colonel Crumwel, which were lost at Coleby and
Waddington were treacherously or ignorantly betrayed by Colonel King.

16. That to the great discouragement of the Country, he does oppose and
quarrel, with such as have been most serviceable to the Country, and such in
whom the power of Religion is most eminent (viz) L. G. Crumwel, Mr Ram and
others, and that he imprisoned diverse other very godly men, and that for
exercising the very power of godliness, which he did in a very vile manner,
and still continues an utter ememy and such men, as namely, L C. Berry, Major
Lilburne, Capt. Camebridge, and others.

17. That to the great discontent and discouragement of the Country, he and his
Officers did quarrel with, and slight the Committee at Lincoln, which was
settled by ordnance of Parl. who were men of the best estates, quallity and
integrity, and such as were especially commended to serve the Country, and
publicly villifying them and their actions, and assuming their power without
any authority.

18. That before this War began, he was an open and public scoffer of
religious men.

19. That he is a man of a turbulant and factious spirit, of mean condition and
estate for so absolute a command, that he has received vast sums of money,
amounting to about 20000l. much of which he has levied in an illegal and
obscure way, and issued out accordingly for which it is desired he may give a
speedy account, and likewise of the rest of his actions.

20 That in a factious and seditious manner he did employ some Agents to
deliver blue Ribbonds to such as would stand for him, and show themselves his
friends, to the great terror and discontent of the Country, and the hazard of
raising a dangerous mutiny.

21. That he kept about twenty men to wait on him, whom he called his Life
guard, to whom he gave extraordinary pay though they were exempted from all
duty, except it were to wayt upon him, advance his reputation and awe and
affright the Country.

22. That he did awe and gain the Country wholly after him, and that he might
with better color domineere, falsely stiling himself Lievtennant General of
the County of Lincoln.

FINJS.

