A new complaint of an old grievance, made by Lievt Col. John Lilburne,
Prerogative prisoner in the Tower of London. Nove. 23. 1647. To every
Individual Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
MY exceeding urgent necessities, and my extraordinary sufferings by your
neglect in doing me justice and right, according to your many oaths and
declarations, presses me above measure still to play the part of the poor
importunate widow, mentioned in the Gospel, and to resolve whatever befalls me
never to give over till I have attained her end, viz. Justice.

You may please truly to take notice (and the rather because many of you are
new Members) that in the year 1637. and 1638. I suffered a most ba rbarous
sentence by the Star Chamber, occasioned by two false oaths sworn against me
by Edmond Chillington, now a Lieutenant under Col. Whaly, and by my refusing to
answer interrogatories against my self, in executing of which sentence the 18.
of April 1638. I was tied to a Carts tail at Fleet bridge, and whipped through
the streets to West minster, and had given me above the number of 500. stripes,
with a threefold knotted corded whip, the weeles made in my back thereby being
bigger then Tobacco pipes, etc. And set two hours upon the Pillory bare head
in an extraordinary hot day, and a gag out into my mouth above an hour, to the
almost renting of my jaws in sunder See my printed relation of my business
before the Lords bar the 13. Feb. 1645 where all this with much more is proved
upon Oath.

And upon that very day, 10. Judges of the said Star Chamber made an Order to
murder and starve me, the very words of which Order being, that the said John
Lilburn shall be laid alone with irons on his hands and legs, in the wards of
the Fleet, where the basest and meanest sort of prisoners are used to be put:
and that the Warden of the Fleet, take especial care to hinder the resort of
any persons whatsoever unto him, and particularly, that he be not supplied with
money from any friend. And yet they nor any for them during all my imprisonment
never allowed me the value of one farthing token to live upon, but executed the
said Order upon me with so much barbaritie, that my pining, tormenting
condition, was a thousand times worse, and less to be endured, then any sudden
death whatever, under which without doubt I had perished, had it not been for
the timely relief of this Parliament, by which said sufferings I was robbed of
a profitable trade, in the flower of my days.

And being by you set at liberty the first week of your sitting, J was by the
malice of one Littleton a Courtier, by the Kings especial command arrested of
high Treason, and the 4. May 1641. by the Kings own direction, I received a
kind of an Arraignment at the Lords bar, where the said Littleton most falsely
swore point blanke against me, to the apparent hazard of my life and being if
he had not been contradicted by the oath of his own friend Mr. Andrews a
Counceller, upon which day and at that very time, the House of Commons were so
sencible of my sad and suffering condition, that they were pleased upon the
report of Mr. Rouse to make these Votes for me.

Resolved upon the question. That the sentence of the Star Chamber given
against John Lilburne, is illegal and against the liberty of the Subject, and
also bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous, and tyrannical.

Resolved upon the question, that reparations ought to be given to Mr Lilburne,
for his imprisonment, suffering and loss^s sustained by that illegal sentence.

And yet I never had to this hour one penny of separations, although J dare
safely say it, I have spent above a thousand pound one way and another in
following you therefore, above the space of seven years, which is a longer
time, for any thing I can read of in Scripture, then ever the importunate widow
followed the unrighteous judge (that neither feared God nor reverenced man) and
yet obtained justice at his hands.

That upon my deliverance, by the assistance of one of my friends, I betook my
self to a^ride for my livelihood, and of my own and my foresaid friend, stockt
it with almost 1500. l. ready money, and the late wars coming on, at the
desires of many eminent men of this kingdom, my then choice friends, I left my
trade, and in judgment and conscience girded my sword unto my thigh, with an
honest resolution to spend my heart blood for the preservation of the laws and
liberties of my native country, which then the Parliament by their
Declarations, made me and the Kingdom believe was endeavored to be dist^oyed
by the King and his evil Council. And having like a man of undaunted
resolution adventured my life at Edge Hill and Brainford, with good and
advantageous successes to the Parliament, though with ill to my self, being to
a good value plundered at both places, and at the last taken prisoner, where by
the inhumaine barbaritie of several Lords and others, I was d^vers times in
danger aster quarter given ( before I came at Oxford) to be ^n in pieces, being
pinioned with my arms behind me, and tied to another, and forced on foot
through all the dirt and mire to march two days together. And being arrived a
prisoner at Oxford Castle, I was visited by four Lords, ( viz The Lord
Newarke, now Marquess of Durchester, the Lord Dunsmore, now Earl of
Chichester, the Lord Mattravers now Earl of Arundell, and the Lord And ver) as
messeng^rs from the King as they told me, and in his name proferred whatever in
reason I could desire in h^ then prosperous condition, so I would forsake the
Parliament, and my present principles, and desire his pardon, which they all
unanimously promised to git for me, but I told their Lordships they were
mastaken in me, if they thought I was to be courted out of my principles, and
as for His Majesty's pardon, I told them I scorned either the craving or
accepting of it, having in obedience to the Parliaments then commands done
nothing but what I did then believe was just and legal, and for which I would
willingly lay my life down. and the desiring or accepting of a pardon would
argue guiltiness, which I told them I believed I had no need to confess.
Whereupon I was clapped in irons n^ght and day, forced to lie in my clothes upon
the flore, locked up close in a chamber, when I had not a penny of money about
me, being lately plundered of all I had, and a centry set at my door, that I
could not speak with any of my fellow prisoners, to borrow a penny to buy me
bread, by means of which, I was exposed to the greatest of straights; and
immediately in irons arraigned as a Trator, before Sir Robert Heath and Sir
Thomas Gardner, for levying war against the King, by authority from the
Parliament, and I pleaded to my Indictment, telling the Judge, I girded my
sword unto my thigh in judgment and conscience, by virtue of the greatest
authority in the land, with a resolution to spend the last drop of my blood,
for the preservation of the just laws and liberties of my native country,
being seduced thereunto by no flesh alive, acting not by an implicit faith,
but upon principles of judgment and understanding, in the defense whereof I
told him I was then as ready to dye by a balter, as before I had been either by
a Bullet or a Sword, and having escaped that danger of hanging by a letter of
the Speakers of this House, threatening unto them, Lex taliones. As you may read
in the first part book Decl. page 802. 803.

I contracted there, by my hard usage, a desparate and dangerous sickness, of
which I lay speechless diverse days, the inhumanitie of the barbarous Marshall
Smith being such toward me, that he would neither suffer Physician, Apothecary,
Surgion, nor Nurse to come near me, and though some Gentlemen, then in bonds
with me, got a poor half starved prisoner to look to me, yet he was clapped up
twice close prisoner for helping me in those great straights, and I could not
freely enjoy his help till I purchased it for money at the hands of one of
Smiths cruel tormentors.

By which imprisonment (besides my large expenses there) I lost at London in
debts, etc. (my Debtors taking the advantage of my arraigment for treason,
would as they said pay no Traitors debts) about 600. l. every penny of which
lay upon my own particular shoulders. And coming out with the same Principles
I went in, I betook my self to my sword again, having refused here at London,
diverse places of ease, profit and honor, and with much resolution and
integrity, in the midest of many discouragements, I fought under the Earl of
Manchesters command so long, tell (by the visible apostatising from the first
declared ends, and by the wickedness, treachery, baseness, and
perfididiousnesse I found there) I had lost all my principles, and could not
for all the world any longer kill Cavieleers, in whose service I was plundered
the third time at Newarke, to the value almost of 100. l. besides many scores
of pounds of my own money in that service I spent, more then ever there I
received, there being due unto me at this day for my arreers there, the
greatest part of a thousand pounds, as I doubt not upon just and true g^ounds
clearly when you please to make appear.

That at the laying down my command I vigorously, with all the interest I had
in England betook myself to an earnest prosecution to obtain at the hands of
your House, my just and long expected and promised reparations from my cruel
Star Chamber Judges (one of which sits in your house at this day) in the
following of which I met with such heard and unreasonable measure (not only
from the hands of your house it self, but also from its Committees, in being
causl^sly tossed and tumbled out of the hands of one Messenger to another and
from one gaol to another) that it made me almost as weary of the Land of my
nativity, as ever the Israelites were of Egypt when the cruel tyrant Pharaoh
made them to make bricks without straw, especially when I considered that all
this was done unto me by those for the saving alive, and preserving of whom, I
had so often, freely, and resolutely with my sword in my hand adventured my
life, and in the days of their greatest straights and calamities been as
faithful to them, as ever Jonathan was to David, when he hazzarded ruin and
destruction from his father for siding with him. Yea, and if then it had been
in my power, could have done a thousand times more then I did, verily believing
they would have performed their just Declarations to the kingdom. But before
the storm of your indignation was well blown over, the fearcenes of which had
almost overwhelmed me, behold such a furious tempest the 10. July 1646. arises
against me by the house of Lords, as if it would have blown me into another
Horizon, or have Metamorphased me into the shape and habit of a bruit beast,
and have robbed me of all things that might give me the denominotion of a man,
levelling thereby the liberties and freedoms of all the Commons of England,
unto their arbitrary, Lordly wills. And having about 18. months ago fled unto
you (as justly I might) for shelter, protection, and justice against them,
which by my several Pleas before your Committees I have proved you ought long
since to have afforded me; and having the 11. of this instant in half a sheet
of Paper, presented ( here at your door, as now J do to your hands) an
abstract of the Lords tyrannical; illegal dealing with me. And of all by way
of Plea, I have for my self to say; with a desire to stand or fall under your
judgment thereupon, which yet I cannot obtain from you, and therefore
referring you to that Abstract, and to my Grand plea before Mr. Maynard, upon
the 20. October last, and my Aditionall Plea annexed unto it, for all the
particulars I crave and challenge at your hands as my right and due. I adjure
you before Heaven and Earth, and before the Lord Jehovah, and his mighty and
glorious Angels, without any more delay, to adjudge my cause betwixt the Lords
and me, either to my justification or condemnation, and to do me justice and
right, by helping me to my own, kept from me by you, and do not by your 7
years delay of justice, lay more provokations upon me, then my strength and
ability is able to bear, and then go about to distroy me, for my crying out
of your oppressiion; when in the eye of reason I have no other remedy left me
in this world but that, or to distroy my self, wife and children, which even
nature it self abhors, or else to live upon the kindnesses of those, that in
future time to my reproach shall (as some from whom I should little have
expected it, have lately done) hit me in the teeth with it, which makes the
proffer of their courtesies a scorn unto me, and the thoughts of not being
able to repay them again; a burden to my spirit. And therefore to conclude,
let me in the bitterness of my spirit, say unto you as the unrighteous Judge
said unto himself, although by your actings toward me, you declare you neither
fear God, nor reverence man, ye for my necessity and pressing importunities
sake, now at last do me justice and right; for if I must dye by yours and the
Lords murdering oppression, I am resolved, if I can help it, I will not dye
alone, nor in a corner in silence. Therefore help me to my own, to leave
subsistence unto my wife and children, that they may not beg their bread when I
am dead and gone. And if nothing but my blood will serve my cruel adversaries,
if they be men, I challenge the stoutest of them in England, hand to hand, with
his sword in his hand like a man to put a period to my days, being ready to
answer any man in England, Lord or Commoner, that has any thing to lay to my
charge: Either, First, as a rational man: Or, Secondly, as a resolved man: Or,
Thirdly, at an English man.
In the last of which I sh^l desire no more favor then every Traitor, Rogue,
or Murderer, that is arraigned for his life at Newgate Sessions injoyes, viz.
the benefit of the declared, known law of England. And so at present I rest.

From my starving, murdering, tyrannical, and most illegal imprisonment in
the Tower of London, this 23 Novem. 1647. g^ing in the eight year of my
fruitl^sse expecting justice from the deaf and hard hearted house of Commons.
Your oppressed friend, that loudly cries out to you for justice and right. John
Lilburne.

FINIS.

