A PLEA FOR COMMON-RIGHT AND FREEDOM.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, THE LORD General Fairfax, and the Commission-Officers of
the ARMY.

OR, The serious Addresses, and earnest Desires of their Faithful Friends,
inhabiting in the Cities of London and Westminster, the Borough of Southvvark,
Hamblets, and Places Adjacent: Promoters and Presenters of the late
Large-Petition of the Eleventh of September, MDCXLVIII.

As it was presented to his Excellency, December. 28. 1648. By L.C. John Lilburn.
George Middlemore. Rob. Davis. Ed. Tench. Dan. Linton. Will. Bottom. Rob.
Cobbett. Richard Overton. John Harris. Tho. Daffern. Tho. Goddard. Tho. Prince.
Sam. Blaicklock. Andr. Dednam. John Walters. Rich. Pechel.


LONDON, Printed by JA. and JO. MOXON, for Will. Larnar, at the Sign of the
Black-Moor near Bishops-gate. 1648.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General FAIRFAX, and the Commission-Officers of the
Army.
The serious Addresses, and earnest Desires of Your faithful Friends,
inhabiting in the Cities of London and Westminster, the Borough of Southwark,
Hamblets, and Places Adjacent. Promoters and Presenters of the late Large
Petition, of the eleventh of September, 1648.
Shows,
THat upon serious consideration of a perverse and partial demeanor of a
prevalent party in Parliament toward those who stood firm to them in their
greatest necessities, and how by insensible degrees they brought in diverse
Interests directly opposite and destructive to them; and under pretense of zeal
to God, joined in Covenant for their extirpation, under the notion of
Sectaries: and how, notwithstanding their beginnings were gentle, and the most
plausible Interpretations put upon their doings, yet in short space after,
violent effects followed; as, the erection of the Inquisition Committee, where
Colonel Leigh had the Chair, the burning of Petitions by the hand of the
Common Hangman, Imprisoning Petitioners, the persecuting Ordinance against
what they were pleased to call Heresy and Schism, and those several
oppressive Ordinances, enforcing tripple Damages for non-payment of Tithes; all
which gave rise to the cruel Remonstrance of the then Common Counsel of London,
and to many desperate and treasonable engagements: From all which proceeded a
violent opposition against the Army under your command, as, an Army of
Sectaries: and so passed on from one degree of evil to another, until at length
they brought themselves into a most miserable and dangerous condition, being
neither able to help themselves nor others, but are justly at the mercy of
those they despised, serving only as the Pillar of Salt, warning all men to
beware how they forsake their just principles, or neglect their first and
fastest friends, or their counsels, or let slip opportunities of doing good,
for any allurements in the world. And we heartily desire it may prove so to
every one of you in particular, and to the whole Army in general, and we are
yet hopeful it will be so; though when we call to mind how and with what danger
we appeared with Petitions to the Parliament in your behalf, and with what
extreme hazard of our lives, and all we had, we made way for your easy and
unbloudy entrance into Southwark, and passage to and through the City, whereas
others whom you immediately took into your bosoms, and rejected us, either
durst not, or would not own you: When we call to mind how our wholesome counsels
all along have bin rejected, as about a guard for the Tower and City, by
well-affected housekeepers in and about the City and Borough, as a means to
continue trade and quietness, and not by a new raised Regiment of a mercenary
establishment, as those others ill advised, which by its consequence proved to
be but partial and pernicious counsel. When we consider how exceedingly we were
condemned in our solicitous endeavors for purging the House of those corrupt
members that voted the King to London, and denounced war against you, though
you your selves had Remonstrated the same, and when mischiefs have since besaln
for want thereof. When we remember how unkindly (to say no more) many were used
for endeavoring the performance of your engagements, promises, and
declarations, and what troubles and dangers befell the Nation and this Army for
default therein; and how for all our most affectionate endeavors for common
Peace and Freedom, we were rewarded only with the groundless aspersion of
Levellers, and other vile reproaches; whilst those who most abused us, were
still most acceptable with you.

These and the like evil effects we thought worthy our fear, and of your
serious consideration, and enquiry from what evil influence they might proceed,
that so there might be timely prevention before it grew too powerful.

Yet were we not so alienated by any hard measure we had found, but that (your
necessities being urgent through the general risings, invasions and revolts) we
(ceasing to dispute our grievances) cordially assisted you in our several
places to the utmost of our power, as hoping thereby to have buried the
remembrance of all dis-satisfactions, and God blessing your endeavors against
the enemy, to incline you both really and affectionately to the settlement of
the Peace of the Nation upon those grounds of Common Right and Freedom, which
had been long held forth, and were well understood and approved by the Army and
their friends in all places; as appears by their general concurrence in our
large Petition of the 11. of September. 1648.

And we were very much satisfied, that your last Remonstrance terminated in
proposing An Agreement of the People, as the only proper means for quieting the
long and woeful distractions of the Nation, and the matter of our foresaid
Petition of the 11. of Sept. as requisite to be seriously considered: both
which intimated a nearer compliance with our desires than we had formerly
found; but much more satisfactory it was, that you allowed us to choose out
certain friends from amongst us, to be joined with you, in the drawing up of an
Agreement for the People, to be offered unto them for their union therein.

And which (though with great expense of time and much contest) was at length
effected: so that our hopes revived, and our confidence was great, that the
work would then go on currantly amongst you without stop or interuption.

But since the same has been tendered to the consideration of your Council,
the long time spent already therein, and the tedious disputes and contests held
thereupon, and that in things so essential unto our Freedom, as without which
we account the Agreement of no vallue: for what freedom is there to
Conscientious people where the Magistrate shall be entrusted with a Restrictive
power in matters of Religion? or to judge and punish in cases where no Law has
been before provided? which are the points that as yet remain in suspense, and
about which most of the time has been spent; though they are such as wherein
all the cordial friends of this Army are fully satisfied, as clearly appears
by their adhering to our foresaid Petition of the 11. of September. And when we
consider how many in this Council have appeared in behalf of these unreasonable
Powers in the Magistrate, how they have been countenanced that have spoken for
them, and how dis-countenanced that have spoken against them, and that at
length, Interests directly opposite to Freedom of Conscience in point of Gods
Worship, are nevertheless called for to receive satisfaction, whose principles
and Covenant lead to no less then persecution in matters of that nature, and
which (upon the least hope of power) they have eagerly practiced, as, in Col.
Leighs Committee; and since at present reproaches of Leveller, Jesuit, and the
like, begin a fresh to be as rife as ever, which usually have fore-run the
destruction of good endeavors.

We profess; these are such manifest effects of evil influences, and do so
evidently demonstrate, that both you and we are almost overgrown with
destructive Interests, and administers so much occasion to doubt the Agreement
pretended, is not really, or not effectually intended in that fullness of Right,
Freedom, and Redress of Grievances, as all true hearted friends expected: That
we deem it a fresh, worthy all our fears, and of your more then ordinary
intention, to discover from whence those evil and dangerous effects do proceed;
lest before you are aware (as it befell the wel-minded Members in Parliament)
you be entangled in such perplexities, that when you would, it shall not be in
your power to help your selves, or to free this Commonwealth from misery and
bondage. All which, as a people under God preserved by you, and embarked in
one and the same bottom with you, and whose preservation in honor and
prosperity we heartily desire: We judged our selves bound in Conscience thus
timely to advertise you of. And do most earnestly entreat, that you would
bend your utmost endeavors both jointly and severally, to a full and clear
discovery of the original and growth of any evil that threatens your
disturbance or obstruction in your pursuance of the Peace and Freedom of the
Commonwealth; and by all good means to prevent your and our being overgrovvn
with destructive Interests, or with persons promoting the same: that you
will employ all your might to the speedy Production of so full and ample
Agreement for the people, as (to the restoring all true Freedom, and for
removing of all known Grievances) may deserve the stamp of so successful an
Army, and that therein you would have regard to what is right, and consisting
with the Freedom of your most faithful Friends, trusting God with the
success, rather than to deviate from Principles of Right, and for politic ends
become pleasers of unreasonable men, who pretend Conscience for power to
deprive us of the very life of all our Liberties, as in the particulars
forementioned is fully manifested, and who when you shall need them will (as
they have done) prove but as a broken reed, that to these just and necessary
ends you will instantly reduce your Council into a certain method of orderly
proceeding, which will much conduce to the furthering and clearing of your
debates and resolutions, wherein we are now exceedingly concerned.

As first, to agree what certain number of Officers, and no less, shall make a
Council, which we humbly conceive, ought not to be less, than the major part
of the Commission Officers, at the Head Quarters, and adjacent thereunto, not
excluding of others.

2. That all persons in Council may sit in a distinct orderly way, so as they
may be observed by the President when they are inclined to speak.

3. That you will agree how many times any person may speak to a Question.

4. That you will free your Determinations from all pretenses of a Negative
Voice, and from all dis-countenance and check by any superior Officer.

And being so regulated, 1. That you will consider and resolve, what is the
most proper way for advance of Officers so as to preserve them entire to the
interest of the People, and from a servile condition, or necessary dependence
upon the favor or will of any: and seriously to consider, whether your
Articles of Martial Law (as now they are) are not of too Tyranous a nature for
an Army of Freeborn English men, and to reduce the same to reason and an equal
constitution.

2. To take special care of the principles of any Officer to be admitted, that
they be not tainted with those of Arbytrary power or of persecution for matters
of Religion.

3. That there be no disbanding of any sort of men, but by consent of the
General Council nor admission or listing of any for Horse or Foot, but
according to provision made by the said Council; it being reported that very
many of late are listed of bad and doubtful condition: by all which means, if
conscionably observed, (and we trust you will not be the less sencible because
we advise) the growth of any corrupt interest will be effectually prevented.
And if it shall seem good or any way useful unto you, we shall choose and
appoint four of our Friends always to attend and assist though not to Vote
with you. Nor will these things or these desires of ours seem strange unto you,
if you shall consider at how high a rate we have al-along vallued our just
Liberties; and how by breaking all Authority you have taken upon your selves
the care, protection and restoration thereof, you will not only cease to
wonder, but resolve, that we have cause to mind you thereof, and of whatsoever
we observe may be prejudicial thereunto, being well assured, that it highly
concerns you in the condition you have put your selves, not to be strait or
narrow hearted to your friends in point of Liberty, or removal of known
grievances, but to be as large in both as the utmost reason of these knowing
Times can plead for or desire; and as less then that is not expected from you
in the Agreement you have in hand; So if less in a tittle, it will not be
regarded, but very much under-vallue your Affection to the Common wealth, as,
being that without which your extraordinary proceedings, in overturning all the
visible supreme authority of the Nation, can never be justified before God or
man.

And therefore as in all your Remonstrances, Papers, and Declarations you have
made the Liberties of the People your Banner and Standard, for which you have
contested: so (now you having assumed all Power into your own hands) let it
appear to the world you meant so indeed: and as no strength has been able to
hinder you, so now let no craft or policy of man hold you in suspense till new
troubles arise, and the season be over; but since you are thus far engaged, do
it with all your might, that God may be glorified in your success, we and all
good men encouraged to stand by you, and the People enjoy their long wished for
Peace, whom we desire may be made absolutely Free and Happy by this Army for
which ends only it was raised; that so this Army, your Excellency, and the
worthy Officers thereof may be the joy and rejoicing of this Nation to all
future Generations.

Signed by us in behalf of our selves and our Friends that sent us. December. 28.
1648. John Lilburne. George Middlemore. Rob, Davis. Ed. Tench, Dan. Linton.
William Bottom. Robert Cobbet. Richard Overton. John Harris. Tho. Daffern.
Tho. Goddard. Thomas Prince. Sam. Blaicklock. Andr. Dednam. John Walters. Rich.
Pechel.



