Strength out of Weakness.

OR, The final and absolute Plea of Lieutenant-Col. John Lilburn, prisoner in
the Tower of London, against the present Ruling Power siting at Westminster.

Being an Epistle writ by him, Sep. 30. 1649. To his much honored and highly
esteemed Friend, Master John Wood, Mr. Robert Everard, Mr. Humphrey Marson, Mr.
Hugh Hust, Mr. William Huchinson, Mr. James Carpen; whose names are subscribed
Aug. 20. 1649. to that excellent Piece, entitled The Levellers (falsely so
called) Vindicated; being the stated Case of the late defeated Burford Troops.
And to Charles Collins, Anthony Bristlebolt, William Trabret, Stephen Smith,
Edward Walgrave, Thomas Frisby, Edward Stanley, William White, Nicholas Blowd,
and John Floyd; whose names are subscribed, August 29. 1649. to that choicest
of Pieces, Entitled An Outcry of the Young Men and Apprentices of London,
after the lost fundamentall-Lawes and Liberties of England.

Which said Plea or Epistle, does principally contein the substance of a
Conference, betwixt Master Edmond Prideaux, the (falsely so called)
Attorney-Generall, and Lievetenant-Colonell John Lilburne, upon Friday the 14
of September 1649. at the Chamber of the said Mr. Prideaux, in the Inner Temple.

PSALM 8.2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou Ordained
Strength, because of thine Enemies, that thou might still the Enemy and
Avenger.

MAT. 10.19.20. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what you
shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
speak: For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaks in you.

LONDON, Printed 1649.

Gentlemen, and loving Frinds,
I Know no men in England that in my own Spirit I more highly prize and honor
then your selves, for your Parts in making, and Mettle in subscribing the two
forementioned Discourses; which, without flattery, appears to me to be two
of the most sensible and choice Pieces, for the present times, that ever I did
see with mine eyes; and for which, in my opinion, the honest plaine-hearted men
of England are as much obliged to you, as possibly they can be to men for two
Papers: at the last of which I hear (in especial manner) the great men in
Power are exceeding mad; and well may they, for in the 11 page of the Outcry,
you have light upon the true Remedy of all England 's Maladies, and the
reall-Way to its Peace and Freedom (viz.) The choosing out of Agents amongst
those that yet are honest in the Army and Country, to promote the calling of a
new Parliament, upon the Principles of the Paper called The Agreement of the
People, Dated 1 May 1649. which they hate above all things in the Earth and
Hell besides; as that which unavoydably will put a certain Period to their
hateful and most detestable, new, upstart-Tyranny; and therefore to affright
you from the farther prosequuting of those excellent things you there promise,
they have granted a Commission (as it is said) to set up a Bull-begger, called
A Court of Oyer and Terminer, to try you for your Lives, which Commission (of
Oyer and Terminer) is a mere Innovation upon our Liberties and Freedoms, and
against the tenor of Magna Charta, and so void and null in Law, by the very
letter of the late Act that abolished the Star Chamber, as at the latter end
hereof I intend more fully and particularly to show you; it being an
Extraordinary, Surprising, Partial, Prae-judging manner of Trial; and
therefore null, void, and illegal; being of the same Nature with the House of
Lords, the High Court of Justice, and the Council of State; and therefore the
same Arguments that I used against them, will serve against this pretended
Court of Oyer and Terminer: But my main and principal Exception against it,
you will find contained in the following Narrative of my late Discourse with
Mr. Prideaux, the nicknamed Attorney-Generall, which is, That the present
pretended-Power is no true-Power, Authority, or Parliament in any sense; upon
the strength of which Arguments, I am resolved (through the Power of my Lord
God Omnipotent) to venture my Life, and all that in this world is dear to me,
and therefore out of my indeered affection to you, shall exhort you to do the
same, as the most just, safe and honorable-Plea in the World (as things now
stand) that you can east your Lives upon; The substance of which, without any
intentionall or desirable wronging of Mr. Prideaux, thus follows.

UPON Friday, being the 14. of September 1649. I was carried by the Lieutenant
of the Tower to Mr. Prideaux's Chamber in the Inner Temple, who when I came
there, the Lieutenant went in unto him, and as I conceive acquainted him with
my Salua Liberate that I had given him at the Tower, which is now in Print,
which I believe Mr. Prideaux read, and after a little space of time I was
called in to Mr. Prideaux's Chamber, who civily saluted me by my name, and I
him by his; the rest that passed, so near as my memory will enable me, I shall
here set down without wilfully wronging of Mr. Prideaux in the least, who was
very civil in his behavior toward me, though other wise smoothly cunning in
his pretended Examining of me; but to go on, diverse of my friend in London (it
seems) had notice of my going thither, although I my self had little above
two hours notice, and out of their Affection they hear (I hope) to those
Principles of Righteousness and Justice, for which I suffer, and publicly
hold out unto the world, came to see what would become of me, and therefore
several of them being in the outter Chamber with me, when I was called in to
Mr Prideaux's inner Chamber, my friends followed me at my heels, which Mr.
Prideaux seeing, after he and I had done our Salute, desired them to withdraw,
which because I was resolved not to own his Attorney Generall-ship, but
merely to talk with him as a private man, I was not solicitous for their
staying in: but the door, as I perceived, being left open they stood there,
and I am sure the most of them might easily hear me what I said, for I spoke
high enough, although Mr. Prideaux spoake with a lower voice, who said to this
effect; Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, I am authorized by the Parliament, by
virtue of my place I hold under them, to pursue some things that does concern
you, and having taken some evidences of consequence about high matters that you
are and will be charged with; I thought it convenient before a Trial upon
them came, to acquaint you first with them to see what you would say to them,
and receive your answer about them; and judging it the most civil way I could,
I sent for you by word of mouth, at which, if seems, you took some distaste,
therefore I writ my warrant for you the moderatest way I could word it;
therefore to begin, there is a Book with your name to it (which he handed
over the Table to me) Entitled, An Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver
Cromwell, etc. wherein you lay grievous things to his charge, and I doubt not
but you will make them good by proof, and own the Book, will you not? So
after a little pause, having stood bare while he stood bare, I put on my hat
when he put on his, and pulling out a new book out of my glove, I said with
an audible voice to this effect, Mr. Prideaux, there is a new book with my
name to it, which is of my own writing, every line of which (saving the
Printers errors, which are many) I will own and seal with my blood; in it
you may read of Sir Arthur Haslerigs barbarous and Arbitrary dealing with me,
in Robbing me, by the Rules of his own will of my estate; just Cutter like,
while you unjustly keep me Prisoner in the Tower of London; but Sir, for to
return you an answer to your question, which is, whether that book be mine
or no? I cannot, nor will not, because in the first place, I neither own your
Power, nor the Power of those that impow^ed you, which you call the Parliament;
and therefore not knowing any such man as Attorney General Prideaux, neither
being resolved to own Prideaux Postmaster General of England, and discourse
with him upon any Subject he pleases as long as he pleases let him make the
best advantage he can; and this I will do for that end that you may see I
have some ingenuitie in me, and am able in any ground in England where ever I
come, to say something for my self and my sufferings without dauntednesse or
amazement of Spirit in the least, at all the storms and tempests that it is
possible to raise against me* And therefore Mr. Prideaux having known you many
years as a gentleman of some note, I will upon these terms (if you please)
discourse with you and be as civil unto you both in word and jesture, as you
can desire, and I shall (I hope) so continue, unless you break out first.

Well Mr. Lilburne (said he) I shall be as civil as you, as it is possible
for a man to be with faithfulness to my trust and place; but I wonder that
you should renounce the Parliaments Authoritie^; I have known you when you
have owned even this that now sits. So he beckning to me to sit down, I told
him no I was resolved to stand while he stood, and to sit down when he did,
so we stood, he at one end of the Ta^le and my self at the other all the time
of our discourse; but I answered him and said; Well Mr. Prideaux we are, it
seems, resolved to be civil each to other, and for my part I say, let him
he judged an uncivil man that first breaks the Rules of Civil^tie betwixt
us: but Sir, are you freely willing to hear me, and I will freely and
ingeniously speak to that point of the Parliament? I with all my heart Mr.
Liburne (said he.)

Well then Mr. Prideaux thus, you may remember the last year the Personal
Treaty was hotly going on, which the Princes of the Army, thought to be
destructive not only to them, but also to the Peace, Freedom, and Liberties of
the Nation* and thereupon there was some overtures from them (amongst others)
to a company of honest and plain People here at London, commonly (but most
unjustly) called Levellers, to join interest with them for the accomplishment
of those ends we all (at least in pretense) had been long sighing for, viz.
the Liberties and Freedemes of the Nation, and accordingly the Principles of
the Army in their large Remonstrance from St. Albanes of the 16. of November
1648. most gloriously and most transc^ndently Declare, it was the thirstings of
their Souls to see the Peace and Liberties of this Nation settled, and that not
upon old rotten Principles, but upon the firm and stable Principles of Reason
and common equity, that so Justice and Righteousness might run down the
streets like a mighty stream; and Tyranny and Oppression (as much as humane
Reason could provide for) be banished for ever out of the Land of England, in
which great work they Declare, so to Act as before the Lord, and to approve
themselves both to God and good men, unto both whose Jugements they desired to
submit, abhorring and detest^ng the minding of themselves, or particular
Interests or Parties; [See page 6. 7. 8. 12. 14. 15. 22. 23. 43. 45. 47. 48.
57. 62. 65. 66. 67. 69.] and least Generals should signify nothing to the
People (as indeed they do not) toward the latter end of that Remonstrance,
they fix upon the things particularly, that will really make the People happy,
which are; first, The fixing upon a set and speedy day for ending this long
Parliament: And Secondly, For providing for the speedy settling of the Nations
Peace upon the Principles or grounds of common Right, Freedom and Safety, viz.
the often and certain meeting, sitting and ending of Parliaments, flowing from
as near an equal choice of the People as may be, with other bounds and
limitations that might render them more fust and less arbitrary then in times
by past they have been: and all this by that unparralel'd way of contract or
Agreement amongst the f^ee People; yea, and they also there earnestly desire,
that the good things of those well minded People (or well wishers to common
good) contained in the Petition of the 11. of Septemb^r 1648. may seriously be
considered of, and thereby the grievances of the Peeple removed, for their
ease, benefit and prosperity, that so the Parliament may, when it lays down
it is trust, leave a good savor behind them, both to the name of Pa^liaments
and also of men professing Godllinesse.

And Sir, I say, there was not only overtures to such kind of ingenious men
upon the coming out of the aforesaid Remonstrance, but also in their shor^
Declaration dated the -- (...) 1648. at Windsor, which exp^esseth the Reasons
of their then Advance with the A^my to London, they positively declare, that
the Parliament Treating with the King, and rejecting all be^ter and wholsomer
Counsels given them; is no less then a treache^ous or Corrupt neglect of, and
aposing from the public trust reposed in them, yet not assuming to themselves
(as there in words they say) a standing Power of Judgment (as of Right or
T^u^^) to conclude others thereby, acknowledging that to lie ^^st properly in
those whom the People duly choose and trust to judge for them. But considering
that such power, as where ever it is, is committed but in trust, and hat
neither this Nation nor any other People did ever give up their Natural
capacities of common sense or reason, as to the ends and fundamentalls of that
trust: And as for the Parliaments breach of trust, there being no formal power
of man in being to appeal to, in the present case, they positively Declare,
They cannot but exercise that common Judgment which in their natural capacity
is left to them, and therefore considering that the Parliaments then breach of
Trust, so transendently great, as that it was a total hazard of destruction to
that Interest, and to those People, for which especially (they say) the trust
was reposed; and seeing there is no orderly and open way left for a just
succession of another formal and proper Judicature to be appealed unto in due
time, therefore they there renounced the then Parliament, and with confidence
appealed to the common Judgments of indifferent and uncorrupted men, exciting
all those that yet were faithful to their trust in the Parliament to come out
and join with them, and in such a case of extremity the) promise to look
upon them (not as a Parliament, but) as Persons materially having the chief
trust of the Kingdom remaining in them, though not a formal standing and if
not a formal standing Power, then at most they can pretend to no power at all,
but to govern according to those wholesome Laws and Ordinances they found in
being, at this the Armies final forcing and disolving of them, till a just and
unquestionable Representative can be chosen and sit, having by this their own
confession no power in the least to make any new Laws at all, or any Orders to
bear so much as the pretended name or stamp of Laws; but they have verified
the old Proverb, that opportunity makes a these, for their success has made
them Tyrants and regardlesse of all their promises.
power, to be continued in them or drawn into ordinary Presidents; yet the
best and most Rightful that can be had, as the present state and exigency of
Affairs then stood; and we shall (say they) accordingly own them, adhere to
them, and be guided by them (not in all their commands) but in their faithful
prosecution of their trust (according to the sense, will and mind of the
Principles of the Army, our Law givers) which they there Declare to be only in
order unto (mark it well) and until the introducing of a more full and
formal Power in a just Representative to be speedily endeavored and ratified
by an Agreement and subscription of the People thereunto. O vile Apostates,
never seriously to think of this more, after they had Declared, but Crush,
Murder and Destroy all those that effectually shall put them in mind of it,
which short Declaration is so fully fraught with glorious expressions of Truth,
Justice, Honesty and selse denyingn^sse, as that they call God to witness,
they did not seek themselves in their then Proceedings, but were even Resolved
they would not take advantager to themselves, either in point of profit or
Power; but rather lay down themselves: That it was enough to ravish the heart
or any ingenious man in the World, and to seal it after them, and I confess
unto you Sir, it did mine.

But besides those Declarations, I must truly tell you Sir, upon their
forementioned first overtures and invitations of Conjunction of Interests, with
my forementioned friends the nicknamed Levellers, I was chosen by them to be
one of their four Commissi^ners, to go to windsor to Treat with the Princes
of the Army, who upon the place openly, constantly, and avowedly, called the
then Parliament; a Traiterous Apostatised Parliament, that had but the name,
and was but the Carcass, Shadow, or Shell of a Parliament, having again and
again broke and forfeited their Trust, and confessing that those they should
pick out of them could be no Parliament in any sense, either in Law or Reason,
but only at most a mock Power or a mock Parliament, which they said they must
be forced for a little time to keep up, to keep the People in quietness, as
the fiction or shadow of Majestrates, seeing the People so much doted upon and
looked after such kind of outside things; and this was not only I^etons and
Harrisons frequent expressions, but also Mr. Cornelius Hollands; not only at
Windsor, but also at London, both before and after their breaking and by force
dissolving your House? to the two first of which, if they shall be so unworthy
and base as to deny what now I say and aver to you, I will make it good as a
Soldier, with my Sword in my hand, in any ground in England to the teeth of
them both or either of them: and for the third and last of which I know if he
and I were face to-face he durst not be so unworthy to deny it, but if he
should I could easily, by plurality of honest witnesses, prove it to his face,
and I believe Sir, I might safely produce your acquaintance and my by past
faithful friend Barron Rigby for the proof of a great part of it.

Nay Sir I say further unto you, That they engaged and contracted with us, as
solemnly as could be, That they would keep up the men they picked out of the
Paliament to join with, for no other end in the World, but for the avoiding of
a new War; for the better, easier and speedier obtaining of a new and equal
Parliament or Representative, which they Declared, again and again, their
Souls as much thirsted after as any of ours. And truly Sir, upon this score
and account, as the safest and unhazardablest way that I could possibly see to
settle the Freedoms and Liberties of the Nation, I was willing and desirous in
a crowd, to go along with other men, (and not to be singular) to give the Name
and Title of a Parliament to their again and again Declared mock-Power, or
shadow, or shell of Power; and if I did evil in so doing, I am sure my intent
was the quietness of the Nation; and my sin and evil in so doing I have seen
and Repented of, and am heartily sorry for it, and hope I shall (have strength
enough) for the future to do so no more.

But Sir, when I clearly and visibly saw that when they had accomplished their
own ends, by all their fair and smooth Promises and Declarations, and made use
of them for no other end in the World, but merely to enable them to be Princes
over the People, and to have their Lives, Liberties and Estates at their be^k
and Command, and began to challenge a right to Rule over them at their will and
Pleasure; my Souse began to loath and abhominate them, for the vilest and
gross^st Apostates that ever the Sun did shine upon; and with the same
indignation I began to loath their mock-Parliament, whose fictionated Power I
thought it my duty (and to render my self faithful and upright in my
generation) to discover to my friends and Contrymen; which when a Member of
the pretended House viz. Mr. Holland perceived [in the inner Court of Wards he
took me sharply to taske] and told me we were not able to move them, for they
had an Army strong enough to stand by them to back them, but I told him to this
effect, That I thought they had had Consciences which would have compelled them
to have made good their many solemn Engagements see those notable instances of
God's vengeance upon Faith and Covenant breakers Recorded in the 9, 10, 12, 13,
pages of my book of the 31 of May 1647. called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, and
in the 2. edition of my Book of the 9 of June 1649. Entitled The Legal
Fundamental Liberties of the People of England Revived pa. 16, 17, and in that
most remarkable Epistle of Mr. James Freize Merchant, (Prisoner in the Fleet)
to the General, dated 25 Aug. 1649. and Entitled the Levellers Vindication,
page 6, 7, 8.
and Promises, but seeing you have not, nor it seems never intended really to
perform what you engaged, but do intend to cheat both God and Man, and then
make it good with your Swords; for all your Force and Arm of Flesh, Mr.
Holland, I tell you to your face, we will force you, in spite of your teeth,
to the one of these two things: first, either to do honest Actions, though
your hearts are never so base, or else, secondly, we will by our constant and
vigorous endeavors for our freedoms and Liberties, put you so to it, that you
shall judge your selves necessitated, for your own base preservation, to run
such violent and barbarous ways, as either in a short time shall break your
neeks, or else make you as abominable to the People of this Nation, of all
sorts and kinds, as ever men on earth were, and in the doing of this Sir, I
tell you plainly, make the best or worst use of it you can, I will be one of
those herein shall lead the Van, as long as I have breath.

And Mr. Prideaux, though at that time I knew in a manner, as much of your
pretended Parliaments nothingnesse, as I do at this day; yet being an
Englishman, that indeeredly loved my native Country, yea the Peace and Welfare
of which I then did, and still do value above my own Life, or the lives of my
Wife and Posterity; and knowing the danger and mischief that in the eye of
Reason might probably ensue, by Declaring openly and nakedly unto the People,
That all the Magistracy of England was broke by the Army; who had by their
Swords reduced us into the Original state or Chaos of Confusion, wherein every
man's lusts becomes his Law, and his depraved will and forcible Power his Judge
and Controller: I say I did not then what since I have inavoidibly been forced
to do, for, it is true, I did the 26 of Feb 1648 at the Bar of the present
pretended House of Commons present a Petition or Address, fronted with a title
as if it were as unquestionable a Representative of the People as could be
chosen; but that was out of the considerations before premised, and because
without such a style we could not have had any access unto them, although our
danger was then very great; the Petition is since printed, and Entitled
Englands n^w Chains Discovered, which if you please seriously to cast your
eyes upon, you will clearly see that we that made it and presented it,
understood the condition of that House, and that we gave them sufficient hints
to understand us, that so ours, and the Kingdoms safety might speedily by them
be provided for, without any more struggling, or running any more desperate
hazards therefore. But when we could get no answer unto that, I helped to draw
up a second Adresse, now in print, Entitled The second part of Englands new
Chains discovered wherein we spoke more plain; and in the last page of which,
we appealed to the next speedy Parliament, Declaring this in effect to be, what
in truth it is, over awed by the Sword [and now Mr. Prideaux, to speak in
plain English] whose ^^e^re. Schoolboyes, and no better, you are; But Sir, I
say, the last forementioned Address, touching Prince Cromwell and his
associates to the quick, he most unjustly compelled your mock House, in
effect, to vote me a Traitor in general, which Sir, as you are a Lawyer I
know you know to be nothing in Law, for it must be a particular act, as
abundance of your own Declarations declare; that in the eye of the Law,
renders a man capable of being taxed with Treason, Felony, etc. without
hearring me speak for my self or ever calling me in^o your house, although
a good part of that day I was at your very door, seen often, and spoke unto by
some of your Members; yea I am confident of it, my greatest Adversaries I had
in the house knew I was at the door part of that very day, for Barron Rigby,
from some of their Agents, at the very door spoke unto me, and in their names
proffered me no small thing, so I would be a good boy and learn the lesson
they would teach me, which when to his face I scorned with the greatest
detestation in the World; it was not many hou^es after, till I was in general
voted a Traitor, without hearing or knowing any Accuser or Accusation; which is
such a piece of Justice, that the very Pagans and Heathen in Paul's time would
have blush't at; and then the next morning, although I over night knew what was
done and could have run away, or hid my self, if I had pleased, which I
scorned; I was sent for; not by Bayliffes, Constables, or Justices of the
Peace; but, as if I bad been a most pestilent or monstrous man, that with my
breath had brene able to have destroyed an ordinary Generation of men, and was
hauld out of my bed and house, from my wife and Children, by a hundred, two or
three, of Armed horse and foot, and guarded, as a poor Algier slave or
captiv^, through the streets by them; although alas, I had never forcibly
resisted the Parliament in my life, nor never so much as committed a single
contempt against he most Arbirary and Irregular of their Committees, but
always came at their first sending for me, although the Messenger was my
professed Enemy, and although I had been several times imprisoned for nothing
by them, yet for all this, must I now be dealt with [because I had sinned
against Prince Cromwell] as if I had fortified my house against the Parliament,
or Army, or had had three or four hundred Armed men in it for my guard; when
as alas Sir, the Design is easily seen through, which was no more but this;
Crowell was resolved to play the knave, and I stood in his way, and neither by
fair words and fair promises, nor by threats would be brought over to a
compliance with him in his visible base ways, and therefore I must be taken
out of the way in the plausiblest manner he could; and for that end he got
me prejudged and condemned before hearing, and that by a pretended Law, made
after the Fact committed, and then sent hundreds of his Armed and mercinarie
Janzaries, who are no executers of the Law, to apprehend me, knowing I was of
a hot spirit, and was in my own Soul glued unto my Freedoms, for the
maintaining of which he hoped I would have resisted and so should therefore
have been knock's on the head, or run through by his guard, which for any
thing I know he had instructed to that end and purpose; which Act if they had
done, Cromwells creatures would have Justified it, and said they had but killed
a voted and declared Traitor, who being privy and conscious of and to his own
guilt, therefore resisted those that came to apprehend him to bring him to a
legall-Triall, for his Crime must needs be transcendently great, or else the
Wisdom of the Parliament, and the Council of State would never have sent such
a Guard to apprehend him, and therefore, seeing he is gone let him go; and
there is a good riddance of him, for he was a stiff and troublesome Man.

But Sir (said I) after my apprehension, I was by the Officers and Soldiers
carried away to the Guard at Paul's in London, and from thence to Hall, and
from thence to the Council of State, Gentlemen. I am necessitated to acquaint
you, that the difficulties accompanying the Press, by reason of the late Act
against unlicensed Printing, has occasioned abundance of faults in this my
present Epistle, and has likewise been the occasion of leaving out almost a
whole page of my Copy, betwixt the latter end of the first sheet, and the
beginning of the second, which has constrained me to insert it after this
manner.
as you catil and coming there before Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Cromwell, Sir Arthur
Haslerig, and several other Gentlement I have known many years together, and
some of whom I very much honored, which induced me to give them more civil
respect then otherwise I would, and considering with my self, (as is before
declared) that I was condemned before I was heard, without Witnesses or
Accuser, without the least shadow of any Legal and Judicial Proceedings; and
seeing I was apprehended in such a manner, in terrorem, and carried to the
Council of State, to be again there prejudged, and it might be to be turned
over by them, with all these clogs and prejudgements upon me, to a Trial at
Law; and considering with my self, that never a Jury in England durst do
otherwise then condemn me after all this (though otherwise never so innosent)
I had no other rational course left me in the World, to make any desence for
my life, or to dye any otherwise (which I every day look for) then as a
perfect Scoundrell; but absolutely and positively to Protest against the Power
of the Council of State, and the Authority of those that empowered them; which
I did to Mr. Bradshaw's face, and gave him extempore my Reasons and Arguments
therefore, which you may fully read in the second Edition of my Book
Entitled, The Picture of the Council of State, especially in page 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 11. which Book, Master Prideaux, without answering to any of your
Interrogatories (but of my own accord) I tell you is mine, and I will (by Gods
assistance) seal the truth of every line in it (saving the Printers Errataes)
with my heart blood.

And Sir, by the said Council of State I was committed to the Tower of London,
without any manner of Crime laid to my Charge; whereupon diverse honest people,
in and about London, old and young, male and female; yea, and in several
Counties too, being sensible of the wrong particularly done to me and my
fellow Prisoners, and of the wound their own Freedoms had received, in that
unjust and irregular dealing that was exercised toward me, etc. and being
understanding and well-wishing People to the Peace of England, were loath to be
just occasioners of new Disturbances in the Nation, to avoid which, They
presented several fair, just, and reasonable Petitions to the Parliament, as
you call it, in which they entreated them not to be too hasty, or too sudden
in their Proceedings against us, nor anticipate the just, quiet, and regular
Proceedings of the Law, and that we forthwith might be set at Liberty from our
irregular Imprisonment, putting in security to be forthwith coming to Answer
(according to Law) whatsoever could be laid to our Charge; That so de novo,
from the beginning to the end we may have, before a Justice of Peace, etc. such
a Proceeding in every particular as the Law requires.

And truly Sir, for any thing I know, if that had been granted, I should have
absolutely cast my self upon such a Trial, although I then did although I
then did (as well as now) know that all your Justices of the Peace, and Judges
of the Law, are no more Justices or Judges than my selfs, or the meanest man in
England, either in the ey of Law or Reason, and that all those men that are
Executed by their Judgments, in the ey of the Law are merely murdered and
butchered.

But seeing no just or rational answer could be got to any of their Petitions,
but on the contrary, all other Petitions from the base, bloody, and unworthy
Ringleaders of the pretended Churches that came in against us, were hugg^d,
and exceedingly embraced; and unworthy mercenary Imps set at work to write
base, lying, and most abominable scandalous Books against us, to the fiting the
People to tear us in pieces, and to be unsatisfied with any thing but our
Laves; and seeing that you your self was by a special Order authorized to
proceed at Common Law, to give us a Trial after we were condemned, and our
condemnation by special letters from the Council of State, (to all the Sheriffs
in England) proclaimed in all the Market Towns thereof; And seeing yourself had,
(as I was most certainly again and again informed) many meetings with the
Judges at Sergeants Inn, etc about out Trial; I say, considering all this, I
was necessitated and compelled to draw up my Plea, and publish it to the view
of the Nation, Wherein I have renounced your Authority, and fully proved you no
more a Parliament then so many Thieves upon the high way: To which Plea (by the
strength of God) I will stand so long as I have a life and being; which Plea is
contained in the second Edition of my Book of the eight of June 16.19 entitled
The Legal Fundamental Liberties of the People of England revived, asserted, and
vindicated, which (M. Prideaux of mine own voluntary accord, I tell you) I
caused to be printed, But as for answering your question; Whether that printed
Impeachment of Cromwell, which you ask me whether it be mine or no, I tell you,
I scorn to be so unworthy and base, and such a Traitor to my Liberty, as to
answer you to your question.

Whereupon M. Prideaux spoke to this effect, M. Lilburn, As for that irregular
proceeding toward you (as you call it) it was from a Parliament, and you must
know, That a Parliament is not tied to the punctillio's of the Law in their
proceedings, as other Inferior Courts are.

Unto which I replied to this effect, but M. Prideaux, with your good favor,
you are too nimble for me, for you take that for granted which I deny, and
which I am sure you can never prove while you breath; for I aver you are no
Parliament, either upon the principles of Law or Reason. But secondly, for
Argument sake, Admit you to be a Parliament, yet by your own Principles, and by
the Principles of the Law of England, Law makers are not, cannot, nor ought to
be Law Executors. But thirdly, upon your own Principles I answer, and do
believe, you have not bin so long a Lawyer, but you have carefully read over
the fourth part of Cooks Institutes, that great Oracle among you Lawyers, and
if you please to recollect your memory, you may very well remember in several
places of his chapter of High Court of Parliament, there he often urges and
presses, and also lays down Arguments and Reasons to prove, That the
Parliament ought to be more just and righteous in their proceedings, then other
Inferior * Courts, and ought to be Presidents of Righteousness and Justice to
other Courts; and I am sure that Book is published by the special Order of the
late Parliament for good Law.

Whose expressions there, f. 37, 38, 39. in the Case of the L. Cromwell in H. 8.
time, and in the case of Sir Jo. Mortimer, in H. 6. time, and El. Barton, and
other in H. 8. time, are so just, excellent, transcendent, and glorious, that
they deserve to be written in letters of gold, and posted upon all the public
places of the Nation, a witnesses and testimonies of condemnation against the
base proceeding of the present large pretenders to righteousness, with my self
and diverse other

But Sir, said M. Prideaux, Did you not own that for a Parliament that sat at
West-minster before the Armies last coming to London; I am sure you ventured
your life at their command, and to maintain their Authority, and also suffered
much for them at Oxford.

Its true M. Prideaux, if I had not owned the Lords and Commons siting at
West-minster, for a Parliamont, according to the constitution of England, five,
six, or seven year, ago, and also bin satisfied in my own Conscience of the
justness of their quarrel with the King, I would never have ventured my life so
heartily for them as I did, for I must truly tell you, without much vaunting, I
fought as resolutely, and served them (or rather, the Nation, and its Liberties
in them, or by them) as faithfully as any man in England did, yea, and did more
(when I was like to be hanged at Oxford for them) then ever I heard of any in
England did for them; for I pleaded to my Indictment resolutely and
understandingly, as a man that well knew and understood what I went about, and
was resolved to die in the justification of it, defyingly to his adversaries.
And after my deliverance from them, I took up Arms again in their service, and
served them faithfully and heartily, till I see them begin to change their
Principles, and to turn their backs upon their Primitive Declarations and
Promises, to make the People free and happy; yea, and see them in their-own
persons to practice that that they condemned in the King, and pretended they
took up Arms against for; which when I thoroughly saw, I threw down my sword,
and could never since be induced to serve them; yet I never served against
them, nor never forsook the Principles that they owned and declared, when they
first engaged; And as for the Lords and Commons, since for necessities sake,
and quietness sake, I never since dis-owned them, although I never durst act
under them, especially considering I had so much in my own thoughts to say
against them, especially the House of Commons, who I am sure intentionally,
were never originally betrusted by the people that choose them, to sit above a
year at most; and their out-striping their Commission in length of time,
nullifies their Trust. But Sir, What of all this to you that sit now?

Sir (said he) very much; For my self, I am sure I am as much chosen and
betrusted now as ever.

That I deny Sir, for upon your own single Principles of the Law, The Kings
single death nullifies you, for you were summoned, chosen, and sent, to consult
with him, which ^ou cannot do when he is dead.

Well Sir (said M. Prideaux) if you had no more to say but the Kings death for
the dissolution of the Parliament that would be easily answered.

Sir (said I) let me tell you with confidence, that I am confident it is so
strong in Law, as all the Law in your brains will never be able to answer it,
and if you please, I will argue the case out with you in Law: You know it was
so resolved in the case of the death of Henry the fourth, and you know it is so
declared by the Lord Cook in his fourth part of his Institutes, f. 46. and by
the whole stream of all the Law Books, and Lawyers of England, without so much
as one single contradiction that ever I could hear or read of: But besides Sir,
I tell you, There was an UNDENIABLE NULLITY TO YOUR HOUSE BEFORE YOU TRIED THE
KING, FOR THE POWER OF THE SWORD HAD TOTALLY DISSOLVED YOU, So that now you in
no sense sit by the Peoples Choice and Trust, but merely and singly, by your
Masters and Impowrers, the Soldiers; who broke you all to pieces, and kept out
above four parts of five, and only let such go in, as the PRINCES among them
thought their servants, or did engage so to be: and Sir, let me tell you, to my
knowledge you your self were at that t^me as much against the Soldiers
proceedings with you, as a man could be, nor their proceedings against the King
and Lords you did not like, for you engaged against none of them visibly
although your place of Aturney Generalship, led you out to have ^^n the
chiefest man in prosecuting of them all.

Ah M. Liburn (said he,) you are in a great error, neither the Kings death, nor
the Soldiers force upon the House does dissolve us; for we now sit by virtue of
an Act of Parliament which impowers us to be a House till we our selves
dissolve our selves.

Well Sir, to that I answer thus; your trust by those that at first chose you,
WAS INTENTIONALLY BUT FOR ONE YEAR AT MOST, for by the Fundamental Liberties
of England, and three several Acts of Parliament yet in force, the People of
this Nation ought to have a Parliament once every year, or oftener if need
require, and Sir, let me freely tell you, that if the King were an Officer of
Trust, as you have declared he was (and I believe he was) then Sir let me tell
you, that his passing of the perpetual Act, was the greatest breach of Trust
that ever he committed in his li^e, for which he paid deer enough, for that
single Act alone, has bin the chief instrumental occasion of the Wars, and of
both the loss of his Crown and life. And Sir let me tell you further, or ^ou
that were chosen and trusted by the people, to make them more free, but not
less free* and authorized by them to continue in that trust but for a year at
most. TO GO ABOUT TO DESTROY BY A LAW THE VERY SOUL AND LIFE OF ALL THE PEOPLES
LIBERTIES, viz. CONSTANT AND SUCCESSIVE PARLIAMENTS; And to instate in your
selves by the perpetual Act for ever (if you please) an Arbytrary Power,
WITHOUT BOVNDS, LIMITS, CHECK, OR CONTROWLE, is the highest Treason (in your so
doing) that ever was acted, or committed by the sons of men.

But Secondly Sir, you your selves have broak that Act to pieces, in that you
have destroyed two parts of three, that by that Act you were to treat, and join
with to make I awes, nay, and not only so, but also above two parts in three of
the third part, viz. your selves, by the power of the Sword are destroyed, and
your selves that remain sit not, nor Act not in Freedom as a Parliament ought
to do, but have your work cut out, and have the Power of the Sword held over
you, by which indeed at the present to speak properly, you are chosen and
trusted; they themselves (I mean the PRINCES OF THE ARMY) having put a Period
to your first Trust, and instated you by their wills and Swords into a second,
upon their own individual score so at the most you are but the Armies
Parliament, and not the Peoples; and your Votes or Orders (in any sense) now,
cannot be binding to them; for if in your own thoughts you were not absolutely
instated in a new Trust, but remained in the old, how come you to have power to
set up new Constitutions, and to alter the Government of the Nation from a
Kingdom to a Commonwealth? which power the People never gave you.

M. Lilburn (says he) we come to have that power by our first Trust, for I
hope you will not say, but a People for their own benefit, may alter the Form
of their own Government in a Nation, may they not? Yes (said I) they may* but
M. Prideaux what is that to you? Yes much said be; which way I beseech you? I
hope you will not say your power is absolute? Yes but I will said M. Prideaux.

Well then Sir, show me which way you came by it, for your affirmation is a
Paradox to me, for you have confessed (again and again) you a^e at most but a
deligated or betrusted Power, and I am sure of it, no betrusted Power is
absolute* the People choose you, and yet you are absolute, I pray Sir reconcile
me these contrarieties.

And besides Sir, the People choose you not in the least to set up
Commonwealths, but to treat and consult with the King and Lords, and therefore
your seting up a Commonwealth without any shadow, or presence of power or
Commission from them, is an imperious and yranical usurpation; For let me aver
it to you, that thought the People may by a common consent alter their
Government (for no Form of Civil Government is Iure Divino) yet none can do it
for them but only themselves or their Commissioners, chosen and empowered by
them for that end and purpose, which your House Sir was never in the least.

But M. Lilburn, for all your thus reasoning, I know you have in times by past
liked a Commonwealth better then the Government of a King, have you not? Yes
that I have, and still do, provided it be rightly Constituted, from the consent
of the People, with just bounds and limitations, that as little as may be is
left to arbitraries: but all its Magistrates annualy elective, and accountable,
and upon these terms I am withal my heart f^r a C^mmon wealth: But to have
the name of a Commonwealth imposed upon us by the Sword, wherein we are and
shall be more slaves then ever we were under Kingship, with a suprem pretended
power held over us, that in their Original and Fundamental constituti^n admit
of no boundaries, but judge themselves as absolutely arbitrary; as the Great
Turk; and that they do not make such Vassels and slaves of us as he does of
his people, is their Civillity and courtisie (more then any thing of
obligation, or duty) such a Commonwealth as this I abhor and detest as the
Devil himself; BUT SVCH A ONE IS YOVRS, and therefore I had rather (as the case
stands) be under a King reasonable bounded then under you, and your new Sword
Tyranny, called a Commonwealth.

But Sir (says he) you have bin very stiff against the King, its true said I,
but not QVA KING, but against his Arbitrary and Tyrannical Will, when he made
it a rule unto himself, and the People above the Law; I tell you Sir, the same
principle that led me to hate Will in the King, leads me a thousand times more
to hate Will in you, seeing you have promised better things, ye absolute
Freedom, and vet perform nothing, but do worse then ever he did; by Governing
us purely by the Sword and your own Wills. You wrong us M. Lilburn (said he you
are governed by a just Magistracy, for the Parliament votes freely, without
compulsion.

Phy for shame M. Prideaux, that you should talk so against your own
Conscience, I know your Conscience tells you, there is no Magistracy in
England, either upon the Principles of Law, or Reason: for the Princes of the
Army by their Swords (Conqueror like) have broak it to pieces in every
particular, ye also your House, and have kept out four part, of five, and at
first would let none go in to sit there, but those that they had listed in a
paper, and had some assurance of, would be good boys, and learn to say their
Lesson as they their Lords and Masters would teach them, and then they gave to
those instructions, to form a pretended Committee to Catechize all that since
have bin admitted and unless to that Committee they gave good assurances (of
which also the pretended House must appro^e of) that they had forgot, or at
least laid aside their English ^meu^ and language; and perfectly learned the
Armies canting language, or at least were will^ng to say after them, till they
have absolutely learned it, there was ^o admittance for the (...) this you know
to be true, and therefore M. Pridea^x I WONDER WITH WHAT FACE YOU CAN CALL THIS
A PARLIAMENT, who indeed and in ^^^^h are nothing else, but the PRINCES OF THE
ARMIES SLAVES AND VAS^^^S, and Sir let me be plain with you, I and tell you, I
know you dare as well eat ^our ^iles, and bite off your fingers ends, as to the
purpose to Vote against their Wills and mi^^^; which if you should do, I know
you your selves know; they would purge you, and purge you, again and again, to
SVCH LOATHSOME DREGS, THAT YOUR VERY SELVES SHOULD ABHOR YOUR SELVES: But Sir
it seems; you judge it better to go hand in hand with them, and to be at their
becks, that so you may go sharers with them, in the spoils of the Nation, and
in taking the Peoples money from them, and deviding it amongst your s^lves,
then to contest with them; and you may say it is good being in such a
condition; for you can do any thing, and every thing to any man, and crush him
to pieces and destroy him: but he can have no Right, or Justice against you.

Why will you say so M. Lilburn (said he) I am sure the Parliament has given
up their Privileges in answering men's actions, more then ever Parliament did.

Sir, said I, I say that which is truth; Its true of ancient time (when
Parliaments were often and short) Priviledging of the Persons of Parli^men from
arrests, might have some pretense of Justice and Equity in it, BUT IN AN
ETERNAL, OR A NINE YEARS PARLIAMENT, IT CAN HAVE NONE; and I tell you Sir, I
know it is enough to destroy a man (though a Member of your House do him never
so much wrong) if he do but so much as open his lips against him: and how many
men have bin undone for complaining of the villainous and visible baseness of
your Members? It is as the sin against the holy Ghost mong you: And as for a
pet^y inconsiderable Member of your House now and then (OF BOON AND COURTESY)
to be ordered, in point of debt or the like, to answer the Law, Alas, what is
it, It is no more then a cheat, for it is nor only before a Judge of his own
making, who with his Under Officers will find tricks enough to ple^se their
Lord and Master. And besides Sir, The thing that I drive is to show, That it is
an inherent Principle in you, that this is not done out of Right, but permited
out of Grace and Favor: this remaining still at the bottom, That there is an
inherent Principle of Arbytrariness, Vnboundedness, and Absoluteness inherent
in you, at your pleasure to make absolute slaves of the People (if you will)
and to make your selves absolutely nuaccomptable if you please.

Why M* Lilburn, would you have no Government?

Yes (M. Prideaux) that I would; But yet such a Government as has not at the
root and bottom of it, all the Principles of Tyranie in the World, to make the
People absolute slaves at the Will and Pleasure of their Governors: But I would
have such a Government, that is founded upon the Basis of Freedom, Reason,
Justice, and Common Equity, and shall so ty the hand of the Governor, that he
shall not be able at his Will and Pleasure to destroy the Governed, without
running an apparent and visible hazard of destruction to Himself, Estate, and
Family.

I but M. Lilburn, who shall be Judge said he?

Sir, (said I) Reason is demonstrable of it self, and every man (less or more)
is endued with it; and it has but one balance to weigh it in, or one
touchstone to try it by, viz. To teach a man to do as he would be done to. The
Sun is demonstrable of it self by its heat and light, and stands in need of no
man's Judgment when it shines, to judge whether it does so or no, or of reasons
to prove it the Sun; Even so, Reason is demonstrable by its innate glory* life,
and efficacy; and man being a reasonable creature, is Judge for himself: But by
reason of his present corrupted estate, and want of perfection, he is something
partial in his own case, and therefore wherein many are concerned, Reason tells
him, Commissioners chosen out, and tied to such rational Instructions as the
Chusers give them, are the most proper, and equallest Judges: But yet Sir let
me tell you, That a Commission given unto them against the Rules of common
Reason, IS VOID IN IT SELF; and a power exercised by the Commissioners beyond
the Rule of Common Reason, Is not OBLIGATORY, or BINDING in the least.

Well then Sir (said M. Prideaux) the Parliament now siting are the
Commissioners of the People, and they have authorized me to ask you whether
this be your Book or no?

By your favor M. Prideaux, you are to quick, for you take that for granted,
which I absolutely again deny, and which your self is never able to prove while
you live; and I tell you again. They are no more a Parliament then I am; But
admit they were a Parliament, They cannot authorize you to examine me against
my self and therefore Sir, I detest the returning you any answer to your
question.

Without doubt (said he) M. Lilburn you are mistaken, for I never yet knew it
an evil, or illegal to ask a question.

But by your favor M Prideaux, I say it is against the Law of England to compel
a man to answer to a question against himself; and your House did so adjudge it
in the days of their Primitive purity, in mine own Case, in reference to the
Star Chamber proceedings against me.

But (said he) They never adjudged the Kings Atrurnies General asking you
questions, to be illegal.

Yes Sir (said I) but they did, for though in the Star Chamber I was
principally sentenced for refusing in open Court to take an Oath to answer to
all the questions that should b^ demanded of me; the latitude of which oath did
not barely extend (if I had take it) to such questions as the Court siting
should demand of me, but also to all such questions as the Attorney General (by
Order from the Court) should have demanded of me: to whose interrogatories I
refused to answer, a though he examined me by the Orders of that Court; Of
which he bitterly complained: and I am sure of it, The House of Commons, and
the House of Lords both, did not only judge the Sentence it self, but the
whole proceeding upon it, (anteceding as well as following) to be illegal most
unjust, barbarous etc.

But Sir (said he) You sent one of these Books (meaning the impeachment of
Cromwell) down to Colonel Airs at Warwick Castle, and ordered the bearer to
deliver it to him a^ a token from you, did you not?

Sir, I scorn to tell you whether I did or I did not; it may be I did, it may
be I did not, I will not tell you; but if I did, this I aver to you, I know no
evil in so doing. So he showed me the Apprentises Outcry; Sir, said he, you
had a finger too in the making this book, had you not? Said I, it may be I had
not only a finger in it, but also a thumb too; and what then? but it may be I
had nor, and what then? But whether I had, or had not, I will not tell you; But
this Sir of mine own voluntary accord I will tell you, I have mettle enough in
me to set my Name to all Books I write, without fear or dread: I pray see if
you find my name there.

No Sir (says he) it is not; but it seems then, that all books that has your
name to them, are yours: Will you own this impeachment, for here is your name to
it?

No Sir, with your favor, it does not therefore follow, that all books that
have my name to them, are mine, for it is as easy to counterfeit my name, as to
counterfeit another man's; and it may be it is so now, it may be it is not so, I
will not tell you; but this I will tell you of mine own accord, That I have
read the Book, and there I find the substance of an Impeachment of high Treason
against Cromwell, that I delivered at your open Bar, the 19 of January 1647. for
which you committed me to the Tower, as a Traitor in general. And M. Prideaux,
I know that you know, at your Bar I offered the House upon my life, to prove
and make good what I said; and therefore, why did not you or Cromwell then put
me to it? But it seems, he was conscious of his own guilt, and durst not do it.

But M. Lilburn, will you own this Book and make it good now; for it is yours?

Sir, I scorn to deny any Book that ever I made in my life, for I never made a
book, but upon mature, sollid, and substantial d^liberation considering well
before hand what it would cost me; and all the fear in such cases that I am in,
is only till I have got it printed, that I may keep it close and private from
the fingers of your Catch-poles, and when it is abroad, I have part of mine
end, and use to tell no body, but as many as I can of it: and the desperatest
book I ever made in my life, I was never so unworthy to renounce or deny: and I
will not say that is not my book, neither will I grant it to be mine. But
methinks M Prideaux you are uncivil, that you will not receive an answer when
again and again it is given you: and alas Sir, admit it was mine, what fair or
just play could I expect to fi^d now to make good the things contained in it,
Seeing Cromwell by his sword has dissolved the Parliament, and set up a sew of
his slaves among you for a mock-Parliament, that dare not do but what he will
have you?

Sir (says he) Cromwell is absent, and you lay mighty things to his charge;
methinks you should not be backward to make them good.

Sir (said I) if Cromwell were in this room, I would tell him to his teeth, he
is a base unworthy fellow, and has underhand by base and indirect means, for
these 2 years together, sought to take awa^ my life and blood, for nothing but
my honesty; and in his dealing with me, has not so much as manifested one bit
of a gallant man, or that he has an ounce of Personal Valor in him; for a man
of mettle, and pure Valor, would have scorn^d to have dealt so basely with me
as he has done.

Well then Sir, it seems there is a Personal quarrel betwixt you and General
Cromwell.

Yes Sir, said I, He has made it partly so, but I am only Defendant; and were
he here, I would let him know I scorn to give him an inch of ground, but would
answer him upon equal terms in any way he himself would choose: and Sir, I tell
you he is the man, yea the principal instrument that has destroyed the Peace
and Liberties of this Nation; yea, and by force of Arms has nulled and
destroyed the Parliament, and has left no Majestracy at all in the Nation; for
which, he is (upon both the Principles of I aw and reason) a Traitor, and ought
to die therefore.

Sir, said he, I tell you the Parliament by force cannot be destroyed; for its
continued by an Act, till themselves please to dissolve themselves.

I tell you Mr Prideauz I have answered that already, and showed the fallacy
and weakness of it, but seeing you will not be answered, I will upon your and
their own decla^ed principals give it you a little more fully. I find in the
Armies Book of Dealarations, that upon the 26. of July, 1647. the Apprentises
of London, and some other of the rude Rabble, (but for a few hour) forced the
House with a few threats, without Arms, and yet they never came down, but one
part of a day; and when they did come, they did not pick and cull, and keep out
five parts of six, as the Army has done: and yet the PRINCES of the Army
themselves, has declared that Act Treason, and the Actors in it Traitors; yea,
and have declared, that that force upon the Parliament tends to the dissolution
of all Government: and though there was but about forty or fifty of both
Houses. LIKE VALIANT MEN, that ran away from the avowed discharge of their
Trust, to the Army; and left abundantly the major part behind them, who the
next day of their sitting, and the other day after-sat quietly without the
Apprentices force; yet the Army would not own them, BUT CALLED THEM A PRETENDED
PARLIAMENT, A FEW LORDS AND GENTS^MEN, SITTING AT WESTMINSTER THAT
TREACHEROVSLY ACTED AGAINST THE PEACE AND SAFETY OF THE KINGDOM: ASSVMING TO
THEMSELVES THE NAME OF PARLIAMENT, all whose Acts, ORDERS AND ORDINANCES* they
declared to be null and void, and not PARLIAMENTARY, NOR BINDING, (See the
Armies Book of Declarations, most full in all these particulars, page 49. 53,
54. 67. 82. 100, 101. 106, 107. 111. 123. 125, 126, 127. 134, 135, 136. 138,
139, 140, 141. 143, 144.) for being Abbettors to that force: (See Article 4.)
yea, and impeached some of the eleven Members as Traitors: nay, and the Speaker
himself in his Declaration, calls their forced Votes, NOT THE VOTES OF THE
REPRESENTATIVE BODY OF THE KINGDOM, BUT THE VOTES OF A TVMVLTVOVS MVLTITVDE.
Now Sir, if a little force of the Apprentises for a few hours-nutrifie the
Votes and Orders of Parliament, and make them no Parliament that sit under that
force, (being far more the major part) in the place where they ought to sit,
yea and is so infectious, as that it tends to the dissolution of all
Government; abundantly much more upon their and your own grounds must a far
greater force of the Soldiers, dissolve the Parliament* and nullify all their
Votes and Orders, and absolutely tend to the dissolution of all Government.

Sir (says he) it is very true, there were such Declarations that did declare
the house that sat in the absence of us, that were forced to fly to Hounsloe
Heath, to be no Parliament, and all their Votes and Orders they made in our
absence, to be null and void; but yet the Parliament was kept on soote by our
coming back and sitting; and so was not dissolved.

Why Mr. Prideaux, do you think I have lost all my brains and reason? for the
forced Parliament, as you call it, was either a house of Parliament, or no
hou^e of Parliament, but if a house of Parliament, you that adhered to the Army
were sa pack of Traitors, so voted and declared by them, and by consequence all
the rest of their votes and Orders were Legal and Binding: But if it were no
house of Parliament, then there was none in England, for your house as a house
never adjourned to Hounsloe Heath, but to the usual place in Westminster, and
if those that met and sat there were no house of Parliament, then your house
was sine die, and so dissolved, and your coming back from Housloe Heath to sit
again, could not make it a house; for being sine die, and so, in Law,
dissolved, you could as a Parliament meet no more, without a new Summons,
either from King or People; I am sure not without a new choice Election, and
impowring from the People; and therefore every way upon your own grounds you
are no Parliament, but absolute Usurpers, and all your Actions null and void in
Law, and you liable to severe punishment for your Usurpations.

But Sir says Mr. Prideaux, you had a finger in dispersing this book of the
Prentises; for I have evidence that you gave some of them away, and that you
sent those to whom you gave them to a place where they should have more, did
you not?

Truly Mr. Prideaux, I must now tell you, you are not civil (nor so ingenious
a man as I had thought you had been) thus with cunning tricks to force me to
answer your Interrogatories, and without doubt Sir, your brains are not in
temper, that you are not capable to receive an answer, although I have given
you it over and over again and again, and told you I am not bound to answer
you in Law, neither will I; but if I were bound, yet you are no Majestrate at
all, in any sense, and therefore I should countenance an Usurper against my
own Judgment and Conscience if I should answer you; but yet this of my own
accord I will say to you, I have read that book of the Prentices, and I find
no evil in it, but a great many clear truths and honest things; and it may
be I bestowed a shilling or three in them liking the Book well, and it may
be I gave them away when I had so done, and what is that to any man, my money
is mine own, and he that can pick an advantage against me let him do it; but
it may be I bought never a one of them, nor gave none of them away, but
whether I did or did not, I will not tell you, and therefore Mr. Prideaux, I
pray have so much brains and ingenuitie in you, as to apprehend and judge you
are Answered, and ask me no more Questions, for if you do I will vex you, and
again I tell you, I renounce your Authority, and those that empowered you.

Good Mr. Lilburn be not Angry, but give me leave to be faithful in the
discharge of the Trust reposed in me.

Good Mr Prideaux your authority and your trusters, I both renounce, as a
fiction and Usurpation, and I beseech you be not mistaken in me, to take me
for a silly novice, for I have my brains, wit, and nimblenesse lively about
me, which are beyond your abilities to catch; for Sir, I must tell you, when I
was a stripling boy of about twenty years of age* and was examined by Sir John
Banks, the Kings Attorney General, in the year 1637. which Sir John Banks I
owned for a legal Majestrate, as also his Master the King, and the Judges of
the Star Chamber, that in that particular set him at work, and at that time
I had never been in trouble before, nor never had to my remembrance read any
of the printed Laws and Statutes of England, but barely the Petition of Right,
from which Law alone, and Paul's Plea before the Pagan Roman Governors, I had
learned so much Law for my own defense, that I then bastled Sir John Banks and
would answer none of his Interrogatories; and does Mr. Prideaux think, that now
at this age, after I have been learning this twelve years together, all the
learning that the grand School of experience can teach me, and read
abundance of the Laws of England through and through, and been tossed and
tumbled again and again from Goal to Goal, for standing for my Legal
Rights; that Mr. Prideaux (that I know to be no Majestrate) can bastle, catch,
ensnare, or entrap me, with his often (as he thinks unawares) asking me one
and the same question twenty times over, no i will warrant you Sir, you are
mistaken; and therefore again I tell you finally; I renounce both your Power
and your Masters the Parliament, as you call them. But yet notwithstanding
this, I will freely say to you, that so you may know that I am a true English
man, that happily loves the Peace and Prosperity of my Native Country and have
no guilt in my own Conscience to recuse me of any misdoings to man, though I
must and do ingeniously confess, as to God, I have my failings and infirmites
with other men, there being here on earth in these fleshly mortal bodies or
houses of our, no perfection: But yet Sir, I say as to man, that I may clearly
demonstrate my inward Peace and my real affection to my Native Country, and
that there may be no pretense of Commotions or troubles occasioned any more
about me; on that condition that you, that now pretend your selves a
Parliament, will be willing in six months time we shall have a new one, and
give good cautionary security for the performance of your promises, that
really we may have a new Parliament, either upon the old Principles or upon
the Principles of an Agreement of the free People (the latter of which
abountdanly I more desire) I will be willing to remain in Prison till then,
and give good security not to write a line, no nor directly nor indirectly to
endeavor any public disturbance, and also I will engage freely to surrender
my self up to a Trial at Law before Judges of the next Parliaments making,
and plead to the Indictment let all the adversaries I have in England, upon
this condition, lay the greatest load upon me that possible they can, or if
this will not be embraced: then,

Secondly, as I have diverse months ago proffered in the Tower, face to face,
to Mr. Dell, who has been General Fairfax his Chaplain, and also Cromwells
and who in Interest is engaged with them, being largely as I understand
promoted by them; and yet notwithstanding being conscious of my own integrity
and uprightness, and that upon their own primitive declared Principles; and
believing that the said Mr. Dell has a Conscience, I will be willing to avoid
any further public disturbance, that my adversaries shall choose Mr. Peter's,
my already provoked, engaged and incensed adversary, and I will choose Mr.
Dell, which two I shall be willing shall be final Arbitrators, Umpires or
Judges to decide all manner of differences betwixt us, unto whose final
Judgment (all though it reach to life) I will tie my self to stand: provided
we may have a fair, free, public and open hearing, indifferently for the
accuser and accused; and this Mr. Prideaux I desire you to acquaint your
Masters with, and further I tell you, if you please, I will give it you now
under my hand, and if this will serve their turn, or satisfy them, well and
good, if not; let them do their worst, I renounce their Power and bid defiance
to their malice.

Nay further Mr. Prideaux that you may know I am ingeni^^^ and not a dry stick,
although I cannot own nor discourse with Mr. Prideaux Attorney General yet if
Mr. Prideaux the Lawyer or Mr. Prideaux as a private gentleman please a any
time to send for me, I will at his desire without dispute, come to him (if the
Lieutenant of the Tower will let me) and I will friendly and fairly discourse
with him an hour, two or three, or as long as he pleases, even till he be
weary, upon any subject he pleases, either upon Law or Divinity, mirth or
sorrow; nay I will be willing that if Mr. Prideaux please, he shall have
present six, eight, ten, or twelve of his fellow Members the ablest he can
pick amongst them, and I will discourse with you all one after another, make
the best advantage to your selves you can of my discouse; provided I may have
two or three friends quietly to fit by, to observe what passes, that so I be
not belyed behind my back when the discourse is done.

I but Mr. Lilburne a man does not know well how to talk to you, you are so
subject to print every thing is said to you.

Truly Mr. Prideaux, I would have you to know, I can if I please keep a secret
as well as your self, and I yet never discoursed with any man about my Trade,
or any other thing, that ever I publicly made use of to his detriment, and I
would have you to know Mr. Prideaux, if any man, what ever, communicate a
secret in discourse to me, I scorn to be so base and unworthy, and to be so
ignorant of the rules of humane society, as to publish it to his prejudice, or
to make any other use of it but according to the engagement made by me to him,
when he communicated his secret to me; but Mr. Prideaux, if any man under the
pretense of frindship, shall discouse with me merely as a Rogue to take
advantage of it, to my detriment, or if any man through weakness, shall make
use of my discourse with him to my prejudice: truly Mr. Prideaux in both these
cases I will publish or otherwise, as I please, make use of his discouse with
me, for my justification or vindication, and in this I commit no act of
baseness or incivilitie, neither is it in the least against the rules of
friendship or humane converse, or,

Thirdly, Mr. Prideaux, if any man shall send for me on set purpose to
discourse with me to catch me, as I know you now do, let him look well to
himself, for I will dress him if I can, and therefore Sir I tell you, I look
upon you as my Antagonist, who against my own free will and consent, have
caused me to be brought before you, on purpose to discourse with me (not in
friendship but to ensnare and entrap me, and therefore Mr. Prideaux) seeing I
know this, I have set all my Guards upon you, and look to your self as well
as you can, and catch a hole in my coat if you can, for I am in the vain to
discourse with you as long as you please, and will not give over till your self
declare your weariness, and that you will discourse no more, and this I do
assure you aforehand, that say what you will, I will observe it as well as I
can, and if I be like to be in a strait, I will make use of your discourse
for my own best advantage, yea, and if I judge it advantageous to me, I will
also print it, therefore look to your self,

True it is Mr. Lilburn, in the sense you speak, to print any man's discourse
is not blame worthy, but just; and it is true, I am your Antagonist, and my
place and office leads me out to be so, and I wish I had no occasion at this
time to be your Antagonist, but truly Mr. Liburne, I am afraid I shall shortly
meet with you at a place where I shall be your Antagonist upon more
uneven-termes then now I am.

Truly Mr. Prideaux it may very well be so, for you must needs be upon
unequal terms with me, when you have at your command ten thousand Swords to
make good what ever you say against me, and I have nothing to defend my self
withal but this poor single Cane; and it is true. Mr. Prideaux, being already
prejudged, yea and condemned without hearing; You, who represent those you call
the supreme Authority, and who by virtue of your being a Member of the House,
are Judge of the Judges before whom you plead, as also a Lawyer, full of
Sophistry, and therefore an unequal Proseq^utor; in all which respects you
must needs be too hard for me, if you shall bring me to the Bar, before those
Judges, to Try me, that are made by your selves and others that have already
condemn^d me before ever you heard me speak one word for my self: (but yet
Sir, whenever you shall press me to do this, I doubt not but so to handle
you, that you shall get neither Credit, safety nor gain by it, (for the King
himself never did the like) But Sir, upon equal terms, unprejudged before a
just Majestracy, I dare with confidence meet you and all the Lawyers in your
House at any Bar in England, and doubt not but with your own weapons, not only
to baffle but sufficiently beat you, but Sir, bring me when you please, upon
all your own, unequal terms, I value you not the paring of my rail, for, I
bless God, I am fitted for you, having cast up my Account long since, and I am
at peace with Death, and I tell you Sir, no man can be a Slave but he that is
afraid to die, which I bless God I am not in the least, and therefore desire
you.

Well, said Mr. Prideaux, you will be tried by a just Magistracy shortly. No
Sir said I, I deny th^^, for of you Try me before any in present being, it must
be such a Magistracy as Will the Conqueror, or the^se took away Englishmen;
Lives and Estates with and by, viz. his will and Sword; but when ever you do
it, it will be nothing for your credit or honor to lay me in Prison for
nothing, and koepe me six Months together in prison without laying ever any
pretense of a Crime, in Law, unto my Charge all that time, but deal more
Tyrannically with me then the Pagans did with Paul, in denying me the visits
and access of my friends, nay locking me up cl^sse-Prisoner from the Society
of my fellow Prisoners, robing me of my Estate to a great value, without any
pretense of trial at Law, as you will read in that book I gave you, Sir
Arthur Haslerigg has done, and yet notwithstanding deny me that Legal and
Customary allowance that is my right by the custom of the place where I am a
Prisoner, to live upon; yea, and endeavor when you can find no Crime in me, to
hire false witnesses to swear against me to take away my Life, as is truly
discovered also in that book, page 8 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. I say Sir, considering
all these things, for you to lay me in Prison for nothing, and then Month
after Month for you to lay all the provocations upon me that possibly you can
to compel me either to sink under, or cry out upon your oppression, and when
they are more then I can well hear; for you then to p^ck advantage of my
c^ying out, and go about to hang me therefore, weighing all your original
pretenses of Crimes for which you imprisoned me, will be nothing for your
honor or credit, but will be a clear demonstration that I was an Innocent,
Righteous, Unspotted man when you first committed me, and that mere Malice
was the ground of your Commitment, and nothing else: But Mr. Prideaux do your
worst, all of you put together, I weigh you not, nor value you not; for I tell
you Sir, as I told the L. Heath when I was arraigned at Oxford, for fighting in
your first War against the King, I bless God I have already learned to die,
having ever since my first contest with the Bishops always carried my lift in
my hand, ready at a quarter of an hours warning to lay it down; and I tell
you again Sir, I bless God I did look round about me, to every side and
corner of the quarrel that I am in, and did seriously weigh, consider and
debate betwixt God and my own Soul, whether my present engagement was worth
the hazard of my little finger; For, and upon a clear debate in my own
Conscience, I found it to be worth the engaging of my Life for; it being for
the maintaining of that that differs and distinguishes me from a Beast, viz.
for my Liberties and Freedoms; yea for the main^aining of the absolute
Sovereignty of God, and that alegiance, by natural creation, that I owe him;
which is to own him alone as the absolute Sovereign and Law giver by his Will
and Pleasure, without any competitor in the World; and Sir (...) you I am
knowingly, deliberately and understandingly engaged, and by the gracious
assistance of the Lord Almighty, being so deeply engaged as I am, I will spend
the last drop of my heart blood before I will violate my inward Peace, by
sinning against my own understanding, in giving ground one inch, or turning my
back upon my present engagement.

But will not the care of the future welfare of your Wife and Children
prevail with you to desist.

No Sir, said I, not in the least, although I love my wife as dearly as any
Man in the world loves his, for I bless God he has endowed me with that
Judgment and understanding that he has enabled me to look upon my Wife and
Children, but as subordinate things to his Will and Pleasure; and to look upon
himself as the sum and perfection of all Good, who alone, of right, is to be
owned, in the disowning of all other things, if he require it: and I tell you
Sir, what ever you and others may think of me for a rash man, yet upon a clear
trial of me you will not find me so, but a man that walks by Judgment,
Counsel, and deliberation; yea and that by the Counsel of the greatest
Counselor that ever was; for I tell you Sir, I am not easily engaged upon any
business; but, when I am about an undertaking, I look round about it, and
into the midst of it, as well as all that reason and understanding my Creator
has given me will enable me, and if I find God satisfying my understanding,
that the engagement is Just and righteous, and that in duty and Conscience I am
engaged in a kind of necessity to undertake it, let men and Devils stand
before me in it, I will either through with it or dye in it; and engaged over
head and ears I am at the present, and therefore res^lved I am never to look
back while I breath, cost it what it will, for Money. Gould nor Honor are none
of my prime objects, but ly under me as the dust of my feet.

But Mr. Lilburne, may not you be mistaken in your Engagements as well as
other men.

Yes Mr. Prideaux, it is possible I may, for I assume unto my self noe Spirit
or infalibilitie, but if I should be mistaken in my Engagement, the punishment
is principally to my self, but sure I am in my present engagement, I am not
mistaken, but am upon as sollid, clea^e and substantial a ground, as ever any
engagement I was upon in my life; therefore if in the prosecution of it I
perish, I perish.

Well Mr. Lilburne (says he) I think you have engaged against (and c^ntested
with) all the Powers in this Nation, both King, Lords, and Commons, have you
not?

Mr. Prideaux, if I mistake you not, you ask me if I have not engaged against
King Lo^ds and Commons, because they were Powers, to which I answer no.

No Mr. Lilburne, I ask you if you have not engaged against all them Powers.

Yes Sir, that I have and more too; but not because they were Powers, but
because they left and forsook that declared and known Rule, by which they
themselves were to be Ruled and guided, in the exercise of that Power, for
Sir, I say no Power on earth is absolute but God alone, and all other Powers
are dependants upon him, and those Principles of Reason and Righteousness that
he has endowed man with, upon the true Ba^sis of which all earthly power or
Majestracy ought to be founded, and when a power or Majestracy degenerates from
that Rule, by which it is to me Ruled, and betakes it self to its crooked and
innovating will; it is to be no more a Power or Majestracy, but an obnoxtious
Tyranny to be resisted by all those that would not willingly have man to usurp
the Soveraigntie of God to Rule by his will and pleasure* and therefore it was
that l opposed the Bishops and Star Chamber, because they left the Declared Law
of England, their Rule and guide and would have Ruled ever me by their crooked
wills and pleasures; and either this my contest with them was just and
righteous, or else you in the house of Commons and also in the house of Lords,
were a company of unjust men, so eminently to justify me in it by your Votes
O^ders and Decrees as you have done, which Votes, Orders and Decrees etc.
became grounds, encouragements and incitements to me to oppose the Kings will
ye and not only his but the Lords and yours also, and as for my contest with
the King and house of Lords, you your selves have done more then Justified me
in both of them, for you have extirpated the functions of them both, which was
higher then ever my c^ntest with either of them, for my contest with both was
cleer^ly but against U^urpations and as for my contest with your selves (I
mean the h^use of Commons, as it is commonly taken) you your selves have
always hither toward Justified me in that; for although I have been seven,
eight or nine several times your Prisoner, yet hithe to you never in all your
life laid any pretense of Crime to my Charge, but always released me as an
Innocent and honest man.

I but Sir, said he, that was their lenity, mercy and compassion toward you.

No Mr Prideaux by your favor you are very much mistaken, for I never craved
any from them, but always scorned it, continually standing upon my
Justification and biding defiance to them, as in my present imprisonment I am
resolved to the death to do.

But Mr. Lilburne, why may not you as well own our Authority (I mean the
Parliament) as own Barron Rigby that is made by us: for you have called him
Barr^n Rigby once or twice, and I am sure he was noe Barron till the present
Parliament made him one.

Truly Mr. Prideaux, I heartily cry you mercy, forgive me this crime or error
and I do assure you, you shall never catch me in the like fault; but truly
Sir to excuse it, I must tell you I have many material things in my discourse
to think upon and I conceive this but a circumstantiall or accidental one,
occasioned by mere forgetfullnesse; having many things at present in my head:
but truly Sir, having the other day occasion to write him a Letter, at a time
when my brain was troubled with nothing else; I styled him only Colonel
Alexander Rigby, and if you will not believe me I have the copy of it about
me, which I will read to you if you please, which though I did not then, yet
because I was unawares catch's upon the hip, take here the copy of it.

For my honored Friend Col. Alexander Rigby, at his lodging in Sarjeants Inn,
either in Fleete-street or Chancery lainc.
Honored Sir,
MY Particular obligations to your self in times by past, I cannot but in
Ingenuitie acknowledge have been very many, and I could wish it had been in
my power really to express them in any other manner then words; Sir, the
Reason of my troubling you with these lines is, because I understand your man
was at my house a few hours ago as from your self, as my wife tells me;
therefore, although I had rather be silent then my scribbling give distaste to a
man I have found so much reality in as I have done in your self, yet out of
the lowest degree of Civiltie and ingenuitie, I cannot do less (though I must
freely let you know, I look upon you and my self as now positively engaged in
two contrary Interests that can never subsist one by th'othe, without
continual Wars each with other) then tender my hearty respects personally to
you, and further let you know that I should be very desirous (if you conceive
it might not be prejudicial to your self) to wait upon you at the time and
place you please to appoint to exchange a few words with you, and so I commit
you to God and rest,

Yours particularly very much Obliged, John Lilburne.
Winchester house this 24. of August 1649.

But Sir, I must confess unto you Col. Righy is a man (setting his present
place aside) I have a great deal of cause to love and honor; he has been
my faithful and true friend, and I have always, to me in particular, found
him a very just, righteous and obliging man; and in that regard being my self
but a frail man, may be like the rest of the men of the world, and out of
partiallity give him (on a sudden) a style more then is his due; but as I
said before Sir, so I continue still beging your pardon for this one fault, and
I do assure you, you shall not catch me commiting the like.

So Mr. Prideaux, it seems, being almost wearied with discourse, takes up my
book against Sir Arthur Haslerig, and reads a preparrative to an Hue and Cry
after Sir Arthur Haslerig, a late Member of the forceable dissolved house of
Commons, and now the present wicked, bloody and tyrannical governor of New
Castle upon Tyne.

Says he in Lataine to this purpose, good words would have done well and have
been better Mr. Lilburne.

Believe me Mr. Prideaux, for any thing I know those very words are too good
for his base actions toward me, as I believe you will clearly find it so when
you read the book seriously through, which I earnestly entreat you to do, and
then it may be it will take off the hear of your prosecuting me: for can any
words he too bad for a man, that by his will without legal cause casts
another man in prison, and when he has him there endeavors to hire false
witnesses to take away his life, yea and robs him of his Estate by will and
power that should buy him, and his, bread to keep them alive. So he spoke
another sentence in latin, which I being not able to understand, entreated him
to speak in English, for I was but a ba^e English man, understanding no Latin
but a company of common words, and therefore entreated him to speak only
English if he would talk any more, but if he was weary he might give over
when he pleased, but for my part I was not weary, nor would not give over the
discourse so long as he pleased to hold it:

Truly Mr. Lilburne says he, for my surious prosecuting of you, the duty of
my place requires me to do what I do, and I do assure you I do not know
that ever personally I did you any wrong, did I.

Truly Mr. Prideaux, at present I do not remember, but if ever you did; I do
not call to mind at present that ever personally I gave you a provocation, or
did you personally any wrong; but it is likely Mr. Prideaux, when you do me
wrong, either personally or officially, that you shall hear sufficiently of it.

Whereupon he took up my book, and looking upon it, said to this effect; Mr.
Lilburn, without doubt you scarce sleep for studying and writing of books. do
you? Yes Mr. Prideaux that I do, as well and as heartily as you or any man in
England, and as or such a book as that is, if I be well in my health and my
eyes, and be in the vein of studying, I can make such a book, upon any subject
in 3 or 4 days space.

I but sa^h he preces and lacremae in your suffernigs were better.

I confess Sir to you it were so, for then you might commit all manner of
oppression and Tyranny toward me without sear or dread of ever-beeing told
of it again; but Sir, I know no man has so much cause to use Prayers and
tears as oppressors and Tyrants, for the wrong and injury they do to other
men; but Sir, this Argument was the Bishops old weapon which they used to keep
the People in peace with; but sure I am Paul made use of his Reason to defend
himself against his adversaries as well as Prayers and Tears; yea and with it
to save himself, with it set them together by the ears. Act 23.6, 7, 8, 9.
But I pray Sir, why did not you your selve (I mean the house of Commons) make
use of these weapons and none else against the King? who I am sure upon your
own Principles was a legal Majestrate; and therefore Sir, if you believe that
Prayers and Tears are the only weapons that Christians must use against
oppressing Majestrates, you your selves might have done well to have led us the
example (for examples are most commonly of the strongest operation upon the
mind) and have sussered the King (a lawful Majestrate) to have out your
throats, without either your Reason. (in your Declarations and Remon: strances
against him, or your Force and Swords, in Fights and Battles) against him, and
therefore Sir, you your selves having in your Actions and Practice (which are
the most forcible Preachers) made use of other weapons then Prayers and Tears
against the King when he oppressed you; give me leave I beseech you to walk
toward your selves in you own steps, to make use of your own weapons against
your selves when you oppress me; but I assure you Sir, if you will not give
me leave I will take and use it, and teach it to be used to the utmost of my
Power and as far as I am able; and therefore Sir, it is a vain thing for you
to Preach any such old Popish Doctrine to me, especially considering your own
is quite contra^y to your present verbal Doctrine; and therefore right or
wrong; if I do by you as you have done by others, you (of all men in the
World) cannot say it is unjust in me so to do.

Thus my true friends I have given you as exactly as my memory will enable me,
the true substance of my discourse with Mr. Prideaux the nik-named Attorney
General; who appearing to me pretty well exhausted of matter, fairly and
civilly told me he had done with me at present, and therefore bid me
farewell, and I him; and coming out into his next room, we found it very
full of my old acquaintance and true friends, at the sight of so many I could
not but wonder, considering that the Lieutenant of the Tower did so surprise
me in time, as is before declared, before he let me know of his warrant,
that considering the framing and writing of my forementioned Salva; I had
scarce time or opportunity to give notice to any of my friends that lives
nighest to me; but coming back to the Tower, the twenty-seveneth of September
1649. Collonell West was pleased to show me a warrant which several days
before he had in his hands, the copy of which thus follows.

Whereas Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne has been formerly committed
prisoner to the Tower of London for High Treason and that we are informed,
that there is sufficient evidence against him, for bringing him to his Trial
for Treason: These are therefore to will and require you forthwith to take into
your custody the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, and him safely to
keep in the said Tower of London in order to his Trial, for the said crime,
of which you are in no wise to fail, and for which this shall be your
sufficient warrant.

Given at the Council of State at White Hall this 19. of Sept. 1649. Signed in
the name, and by Order of the Council of State, appointed by Authority of
Parliament: John Bradshaw, President.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower.

And since the knowledge of this Warrant, I understand they have in Order to my
particular Trial, signed at the great Seal (as they call it) a pretended
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer for London and Middlesex, to which I
cannot so fully speak, as by Gods assistance I intend, till I have seen a Copy
of the Commission, which I hope shortly to do, and therefore must now crave
your favor to suspend the performance of my promise expressed in the foregoing,
page 2. for a little time longer, and entreat of you to accept this which here
already I have writ to you in good part, till more come, and to look upon this
as the substance of my Plea and defense against them, whenever I come before
them; upon which, by the strength of God I will dye, for which (I bless his
name) I am prepared, as scorning their courtesy, and bidding defiance to their
malice, who are to me no more a Parliament or Majestrates in any sense, then so
many strong robbing Thieves in the high way; whose Power or Authority, by the
Assistance of the Almighty, I shall never while I breath stoop unto, or so
much as hereafter directly or indirectly address unto, or suffer any in my
name, or for my benefit (so far as I am able to hinder) to address unto;
only this I entreat of you, that if I should die in this contest (for putting
them in mind of their promises) that you will improve your utmost interest,
that this Epistle may live, and many Thousands of them be reprinted, and
seeing by their new pretended Act about Printing they cannot be sold, they may
be thrown away, and given, and sent all up and down the Nation; So with my true
love presented to you all, I commit you to the safe Protection of the Lord God
omnipotent, and rest,

From my unjust and causeless captivity in the Tower of London, this 30. of
Sept. 1649. Your faithful friend and Countreyman, so long as he is. John
Lilburne.

Postscript
ALL The Petitions to the pretended House, for their Courtesy or Favor
toward me, by any Persons whatsoever, though never so nigh to me; I totally
disavow, disclaim, and disowne, as altogether done against my Consent, Will,
and Mind, being absolutely Resolved, by the strength of God, to lay down the
last drop of my blood, in Defense of my foregoing Discourse.

October 13. 1649. John Lilburne.


