THE Oppressed Man's Oppressions declared: OR An Epistle written by Lieut. Col.
JOHN LILBURNE, Prerogative-prisoner (by the illegal and arbitrary Authority of
the House of Lords) in the Tower of London, to Col. Francis West, Lieutenant
thereof: In which the oppressing cruelty of all the Gaolers of England is
declared, and particularly the Lieutenants of the Tower. As also, there is
thrown unto Tho. Edwards, the Author of the 3d. Vlcerous Gangraena, a bone or
two to pick: In which also, diverse things are handled, of special concernment
to the present times.
Prove. 21.7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse
to do judgment.

Prove. 21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgment, and

chap. 29 10. The blood-thirsty hate the upright, but the just seek his soul.


SIR,
IT is the saying of the Spirit of God, in the 12. Prove. 10. That a righteous
man regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the wicked are
cruel. How far your actions, and carriages with me, that am more then a Beast,
have been point-blanke contrary to the first part of that divine Sentence, but,
consonant to the conclusion of it; is very easy to demonstrate with pen and
(...) view of the World; and as facill to your face, before any competent
Judges to justice and prove: And this is the Theme I have chosen a little to
insist upon at this present time: but being resolved, to be as concise as I
can, I shall not now make any ample repetition of your harsh dealing with me at
the first; in divourcing me by the law of our own Will from my Wife, and
getting the Lords to make an order to bear you out in it after you had done it;
and that I should speak with none of my friends, but in the presence and
hearing of my Keeper, etc. Which cruel Order, merely obtained and got by your
solicitation, the Reader may read in the (...). p. of Vox Plebis. Therefore, in
regard that the Author of that Book has pretty well discovered your cruel and
illegal dealing with me, at my first coming to the Tower, especially in the
45, 46, 47, 48, 49. pages thereof: And the Author of a late book called Regal
tyranny discovered, in the 48, 49. pages, And my self has pretty well laid
it open in the 16, 17, 18, 20. pages of my printed Relation before the
Committee of the honorable house of Commons November. 6. 1646. called An Anotomy
of the Lords tyranny, to which I refer the Reader, and in regard you are not
ashamed of your cruel and illegal carriages toward me, but persevere in them
(as though you would justify one tyranny, with backing it with continual
acts of tyranny) I shall therefore go on as effectual and punctual as I
can, more fully to anotamise you, and your unjust, illegal, cruel, and
unrighteous dealing with me, and for matter of fact, shall lay nothing to your
charge, but what I will justify before any legal Authority in England.

But in the first place, I desire to let you understand, that I am a freeborn
Englishman, and have lived a legal man thereof all my days, being never yet
convicted of any attempt or design undertaken, or countenanced by me, that did
tend to the subversion of the Fundamental Laws and constitution thereof; but
have always sided with the Parliament it self, who has pretended nothing so
much, as the preservation of the laws liberties, and Fundamental Freedoms of
England, and the peace and tranquillity of the people; as you may read in their
own Declarations, 1 part col. Dec. page 172. 195. 214. 281. 342. 464. 498.
663. 666. 673. 750. for the preservation of which, I have constantly,
courageously, and as freely adventured my life, as any of themselves, what ever
he be: And therefore in every particular, have just and grounded cause to
expect the utmost privilege and benefit that the Law of England will afford
any man whatever, that is under the obedience and subjection thereof: Nay more
over, having to do with those men as my Judges, that made all or the most of
these Declarations, and who have also declared, it lies not in their power to
inslave or invasalize, the people, being trusted for their good, not for their
mischief, to provide for their weal, but not for their woe, 1 part Col. dec
page 150. 214, 266. 267. 494. 497. 636. 659. 660. 694. 696. and who in these
and other of their own Declarations, imprecate and pray that the wrath and
vengeance of Heaven and Earth may fall upon them, and theirs, when they cease
actually to perform what verbally they there declare, unto whtch I say AMEN:
And there they protest, vow, and swear, they will maintain the fundamental
Laws, and Liberties of the people, and therefore in that respect, you cannot
groundedly, in the least, think, that I should Issacar-like stoop willingly
unto any other buthens, impositions, or commands laid upon me by you, or any
other whatsoever, that are not warrantable and justifiable by the fundamental
Laws of the Land, and whether your practices have been so with me, I-will
compare them to the Law, and leave every rational man to judge.

First, I do not find any Law that makes prisons, places of executions,
punishment, or torment, but only places of safe custody, for the Law of England
(as Sir Edward Cook in the second part of his institutes fol. 28. excellently
declares) is a Law of mercy, (yet as he then said, so I much more say now) it
is now turned into a mere shadow, which is the most we now enjoy of it) and
therefore as the Author of the late book, called Liberty vindicated against
Slavery, very well says, p. 7. from Sir Edward Cook in the 1. part of his
instit. f. 260. that by the Law, prisons are ordained not for destruction, but
for securing of men's persons, until they be brought forth unto due and speedy
trial (for being in prison, they are under the most especial protection of
the Law, and the most tender care thereof) and are therefore to be humanly,
courteously, and in all Civillity, ordered and used; otherwise Goalers are not
keepers, but tormentors and executioners of men untryed, and uncondemned, but
this were not (salvo custodia) to keep men in safety, which the Law implies
(and is all it requires) but (diseruere) to distroy before the time, which the
Law abhors and detests, yea and that prisoners (though never so notorious in
their crimes) may be the more honestly and carefully provided for, and the
better and more civilly used, and to the end, that Goalers and Keepers of
prisons, should not have any color or excuse, for exacting any thing from
prisoners, (under what color or pretense soever, whether the same be called
fees, or Chamber-rent) who are in custody of the Law: It is provided, and
declared by the Law, that all prisons and Goales what ever, be the Kings, for
the public good, and therefore are to be repared and furnished as prisons at
the common Charge, see Cook on the 1. E. 2. Satutum de frangent bus prisonum,
in his second part institutes fol. 589 and on the 26. Chap. of Magna Charta
fol. 74. Ibim, and on the statute of Westminster.

The first Chap. 26. fol. 209. 210. Ibim.

Yea, and the Law takes care that in case the prisoner when he is in prison,
have no means of his own to live upon, that then by the public he is to be
maintained, 14. Eliz. 5.21. James 28. Vox Plebis, page 57. for a freeman of
England (as I am) is not brought to prison to be starved with cold, or hunger,
but to the end justice upon him may be done: The prison, at most, in Law, is
but a safe preserver but not a destroyer of the prisoner, who with all
convenient speed according to Law, is to come to his trial, and either
according unto Law to be condemned, or else to be delivered in convenient time
without delay, 4 E. 3.2. See my answer to Mr. Pryn, called Innocence and Truth
justified, page 32. who by the Law is never to remain in prison above 6.
months at most, for Goal deliveries are by the 4. E. 3.2. to be kept and made
three times a year, which is once in four months, and oftener, if need shall
be.

And as the Author of Vox Plebis page 55. says, out of Stamf. pl. Cor. f. 30.
Imprisonment by Law, is (neither ought to be) no more then a bare restraint of
Liberty, without those illegal distinctions, of close and open imprisonment,
and therefore Bracton fo. 18. says, that if a Jailer keep his prisoner more
close then of right he ought, whereof the prisoner dies, this is felony in
the Jailer.

And Horn, in the mirror of Justice. page 288. says that it is an abusion of
the Law that prisoners are put into Irons, or other pain, before they are
attainted. And page 34. 36. he reckons the sterving of prisoners by famine, to
be among the crimes of homicide in a Jailer.

And we find in the 3. E. 3. Fitz. H. Tit. pl. Cor. 295. that it was felony at
Common Law, in Goalers to compel their prisoners by hard imprisonment to be.
come approvers, whereby to get their goods: which Law is since confirmed by the
statute of 14. E. 3. Chap. 10. with some enlargement; as to under keepers of
prisons, and the penalty of the Law, and that Goalers having done this, have
been hanged for it, you may read 3. E. 3.8. Northampton, Fitzh. pl. Cor. 295.
and else where, but this for a rast to them.

In the second place, I will tell you what the Law says about Gaolers Fees.
The mirror of Justice page 288. tells us, that it is an abusion of the Law,
that prisoners or others for them, pay any thing for their entries into the
Goal, or for their going out; this is the Common Law; there is no see at all
due to any Goalers whatsoever by the Common Law; See what the statutes say. The
statute of Westminster 1. Chap. 26. being the 3. E. 1.26. says, that no
Sheriff, nor other the Kings Officer, take any reward to do his Office, but
shall be paid of that which they take of the King, and he that so does shall
yield twice as much, and shall be polished at the Kings pleasure, under which
word Officer, is concluded Jailer, Coroner, etc. so Sir Edward Cook 2. part
institutes fol. 209. Stam. pl. Cor. 49. nay, by the statute of 4. E. 3.10.
Goalers are to receive thieves, and fellons, taking nothing by way of fees for
the receipt of them, so odious is this extortion of Goalers, that very thieves
and fellons are exempt from payment of fees. It is true, that by an incroaching
statute upon our liberties, made in the 23. H. 6.10. there is a fee given to
the Jailer to be paid him by his prisoner, but yet it is very small, the words
of the statures are these; nor that any of the said Officers and Ministers, by
occasion or under color of their Office, shall take any other thing by them,
nor by any other person to their use, profit, or avaise of any person by them
or any of them to be arrested, or attached, nor of any other of them for the
omitting of any arrest, or attachment to be made by their body, or of any
person by them or any of them, by force or color of their Office, arrested or
attached for fine, fee, suit of prison, mainprise, letting to bail, or showing
any ease or favor to any such person so arrested, or to be arrested for their
reward or Profit, but such as follow; that is to say, for the Sheriff 20. d.
the Bayliffe which makes the arrest or attachment 4 d. and the Jailer, if the
prisoner be committed to his ward, four pence; and that the Sheriff,
under-Sheriffe, Sheriffs, Clerk, Steward, or Baylife of Franchise, Servant or
Bayliffe, or Coroner, shall not take any thing by color of his office by him
nor by any other person to his use, of any person for the making of any return
or panell, and for the copy of any panel, but 4. d.

And it follows in the same Statute, that all Sheriffs, under-Sherffes,
Clerks, Bayliffes, Goalers, Coroners, Stewards, Bayliffes of Franchises, or any
other Officers or Ministers, which do contrary to this Ordinance in any point
of the same, shall lose to the party in this behalf indammaged or grieved, his
treble damages, and shall forfeit the sum of 40. l. at every time they or any
of them do the contrary thereof in any point of the same, where of the King
shall have the one half to be employed in the use of his house, and in no
otherwise, and the party that shall sue the other half.

But (as Sir Edward Cook well observes, on the 25. chap of Magna Charta, 2.
part Institut. fol. 74.) after the rule of the Common Law was altered, and that
the Sheriff Coroner, Jailer, and other the Kings Ministers, might in some case
take of the subject; it is not credible what extortions and oppressions have
hereupon ensued. So dangerous a thing it is (says he) to shake or alter any of
the Rules or Fundamental points of the Common Law, which in truth are the main
Pillors and Supportars of the Fabric of the Commonwealth, as elsewhere I
have noted more at large viz. fol. 51, 210.249. Ibim. see the Preface to the 4.
part of his Reports, and the 4. part of his institutes capof the High Court of
Parliament, f. 41.

Now Sir, having laid this sure foundation, I will assume the boldness, to
compare your dealings with me, to the forementioned rules that the Law
prescribe you: And first to the matter of usage, you know very well, you of
your own head at first kept my wife from me, and made me a close prisoner, as
in the forementioned books, page 2. is truly declared.

And then secondly, although you could not but know that by the Lords, etc. in
the Star Chamber, I, for about four years together before this Parliament,
under-went a great destruction by them, both in my body, goods, and trade: and
fince this Parliament, have spent many hundred pounds to obtain my just
reparations (besides other great losses I have had) and yet have not got a
penny, and being a younger brother, and in Land have not 6. d. in coming in
the year; and being robbed of my trade, calling, and livelihood, by the
Merchant Monopolizers: so that I could not with freedom transport one Cloth
into the Low Countries, to get any livelihood thereby: all which, above a
year ago, I was necessitated publicly to declare, in answer to William Pryns
lies and falsehoods, in my book called Innocence and Truth justified, which
there you may read, especially in page 39. 43. 47. 48. 62. 65. 75. and now
being committed to your custody in the Tower, the chargeablest Prison this day
in all England, and where I am denied the just and legal usage and allowance
that the King himself used to allow all prisoners committed to this place,
although they had great estates of their own, in their own hands and
possession, whose allowance was to find them diet, lodging, and pay their fees,
Vox Plebis, p. 50. 56. 57.

Nay, when I came in, and desired you, that I might have my diet from my wife
out of the town, which I did for two reasons.

First, for safety, having heard much of sir Thomas Overburies being poisoned
when he was a prisoner in the Tower.

Secondly, for the saving of money, which stood me much upon; but you
absolutely denied me that legal and just privilege, and tied me either to
fast, or have my diet from the Cooks in the Tower.

Thirdly, being thus committed to this extraordinary chargeable expensive
place, and being in so mean a condition, as I must ingeniously confess I was,
you took in the third place, the ready way to sterve and destroy me; and of
your own head, ordered your Warders to take the names and places of
habitation, of all those that came to see me, or speak with me, a distructive
bugbear to any captived prisoner, which the Law of England does not in the
least authorize and enable you to do: but this was not all, but in the fourth
place, my friends, though they gave their names, were by your Warders, set on
by your self (for upon your score, I must, and do lay it all) exceedingly in
words abused, and diverse of them turned away, and not suffered to come and
speak with me: O bloody and cruel man! what is this else, but an absolute
Declaration of your resolved intention, to destroy me in my imprisonment under
your custody? which the Law abhors: but if for the sake of the Law, or for my
sake, you will not square your dealings with me, according to the known law of
the kingdom, then for your own sake, I desire you to remember your
Predecessor, Sir Garvase Elvish, who was indicted by the name of Jailer of the
Tower of London, and hanged upon Tower Hill, for consenting to the poisoning of
his Prisoner, Sir Thomas Overbury, Vox Plebis, page 47.

In the fifth place, seeing by all the forementioned ways and means you
could not scare all my friends from me, and so by consequence destroy me.

Then you devise another way, and set one of your old Mastive dogs upon me, to
bait and to worry me with lies, reproaches, and calumniations: and for that
end, printed and published a most base and scandalous book against me, thereby
to make me odious to all men whatsoever, that would believe that book, which
was published against me at such a time; when by your self, my hands were fast
tied behind my back, being kept by your order very strictly from Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and so in a condition unable publicly to vindicate my self, and much
importunity was I forced to use to your self, before I could obtain leave
from you to answer it, and necessitated to tie my, self by promise to such and
such conditions: and amongst the rest, that you should read it all over, before
it was published: And I, for my part, performed my promise, and was
necessitated to give the original into your hands in such have, that I could
not take a Copy of it: out of whose hands, I could not get it, tell I was in
some respect necessitated to an arbitration: and being not able to do what I
would for my own vindication. I was in a manner compelled by you to be content
with what I could do, which was to accept a submission from him for my
wounded, rent, and torn reputation by him: although, if I could have
accomplished what I desired, I should first have published my answer to his
lies: and then if he had a mind put it to arbitration, but necessity has no
other Law but a stooping to it: but I was in hope, that I should have found so
much cancor and ingenuity in you, and your Agent old John White, as that I
should not have had the like abuses from you after that arbitration, that I had
before it from you both; but in regard that he at the gate, as my friends
informs me, does not cease in his rancour and venim against me; I must be
necessitated to publish my answer to him; especially, seeing as I conceive,
Tho. Edwards the cankered Gangraena, is joined in confederacy with him: But at
the prefent, I shall content my self with the inserting of his recantation, or
acknowledgement, and refer the Reader for a full relation of that
arbitration, to the 59. 60, 61, 62, 63. pages of my late book, called Londons
Liberty in Chains discovered; the aforesaid acknowledgement thus follows:

I, John White, one of the Warders of the Tower of London, do acknowledge,
that I have uniustly wronged Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, in, and by my writing,
and publishing in print, in such such sort as I did; that he was the writer,
Author, or Contriver of a book, called Liberty vindicated against Slavery, and
of a printed letter thereunto annexed; and of a Book or Treatise called An
Alarm to the house of Lords: for all which, and for the unjust and scandalous
matters and language alleged and used by me, in my said Book, reslecting
upon the said Lieu. Col. Lilburn, I am heartily: sorry and

in testimony thereof, I have hereunto subscribed my hand the 8.day of October.
1646. John White.
Subscribed, pronounced, and accepted,

the 9. Day of October, 1646. in the presence of us, Knights
John Strangwayes Lewis Dive. John Glanvil. William Morton. Henry Vaughan.
Christopher Comport, Warder in the Tower.




Sixthly, after all this, by means of my Wifes Petition, which was delivered
to the House of Commons 23. September 1646. and which you may read in the last
mentioned book. pap. 65, 66., 67, 68 etc. by means of which, there was a
Committee of the honorable house of Commons appointed, to hear and receive my
complaint against the Lords, and the 6. of November. 1646. was the last time I
was before the Committee; where I had an opportunity, in part, to declare unto
them, your illegal dealing with me: which Declaration, you may read in the 17,
18, 20. pages of that relation, now in print; and I must confess unto you, I
did think that you durst not have run the hazard of persevering in your
illegal dealings with me: but in regard you do, it clearly demonstrates unto
me, that you judge the streams of Justice so muddy and corrupted (by the
interest and power of your Lords, and their factions, who would have no other
rule, but their own base and corrnpt wills to walk by, and therefore lay the
rule of the Law and Justice aside) that they will never run clear, nor purely
again, to punish such transgressors as you are.

But that you may know (although I have had exceeding hard measure, in being so
long delayed in the making of my report) that I am not out of hopes, nor in
despair, I give you this fresh charge and tell you, that after I had done with
the Committee, your next illegal design that you executed upon me, was, that
my friends could not pass your guard, unless my keeper were there present to
conduct them unto me; by means of which, some of them have been forced to
come four several times, before they could find him at the Gate; and others
have been forced to stay, and sit in the guard an hour, and sometimes two,
expecting his coming; without whose presence, they could not have excess to
me; and diverse of them in the time of their stay at the Guard, examined whether
they be not Independents, or no, and whether they never preached in Tubs, or
no: And if they answer crosly to the questions, as well they may, then they are
fallen upon, and both they and I in words exceedingly abused: and I am told,
that an old tall man in black, with a great staff in his hand, is not wanting
to play his part, which I judge to be Mr White.

Now sir, is not this the height of illegality, cruelty, tyranny, and
bloud-thirstinesse in you, thus to deal with me; indevouring thereby strongly
to scare away all my friends from me? For, who in so many difficulties and
abuses would come to visit a man, unless he bore a very great affections to
him? the which, if he do, the continual meeting with these base and
unwarantable affronts, in conclusion will make him weary.

And truly sir, let me tell you, this is not to use me with civility, and
humanity in my imprisonment, as the Law requires I should, but this is to
torment, punish, and destroy me, which, the Law, and all just and honest men
abhors and detests.

In the 8. place, being in the condition that I am in, and being guilty of no
legal crime in this world; unless it be for being over honest and zealous for
the preservation of the just and public Liberties of the Kingdom; I know no
reason, why I may not enjoy the utmost privilege and liberty in the Tower,
that any prisoner in it does enjoy: yet notwithstanding, not many weeks ago, I
was but going with a fellow-prisoner in the path that leads to the Record
office; and coming back to my Lodging under the Gate, that is just against the
Traitors Gate, I met your pretended Gentleman Jailer, and immediately Mr.
Comport, my Landlord and Keeper came and delivered a message from you to me,
which was to this effect: That Mr. Leiutenant did understand, that I was beyond
the Ring: but it was his pleasure, that J should forbear to go any more
beyond it: Unto which, I replied, Landlord, I had only thought, that to go
beyond the Ring, had been for a man when he came to it, to have turned on the
right hand, and so to have gone, as if he would have gone out of the Gate,
which I did not in the least: for I turned on the left hand with one of my
fellow prisoners, and walked in the path that goes to his Chamber, and diverse
other Chambers of my fellow prisoners, which path they do and may walk in
every day in the week, and every hour in the day. And therefore, tell your
Master from me, I shall not obey his order, for I have as good right to enjoy
any privilege within the Tower, as any prisoner in it: and therefore will walk
that way again, seeing all my fellow prisoners enjoy the same liberty.

In the 9. place, the other night there being a friend with me, about 6. or 7 a
clock at night, I walked out of my chamber with him; which is a privilege that
all my fellow prisoners enjoy, and he having a candle and lanthorn in his hand,
passing under Cole Harbor Gate, I was roughly and suddenly demanded whether I
went? And I replied, along with my friend, to conduct him as far as my
liberty would extend (which was down to the Ring, which is as I conceive, at
least three or four score yards on this side of the gate where your guard
stands) and I was replied unto in these words, Sir, you shall not go: At
which, looking well about me (it being very dark) to see who it was, that was
so malipart, I perceived it to be your self (who had with you, as I conceived
some of your Warders) unto which I replied: Truly sir, I do not like the word
shall; it is but unhansome language, to tell me, I shall not go.

No sir I say (said you) you shall not go; for you ought not to stir out of
your chamber after candles are lighted.

Truly sir (said I) I know no such order. Unto which, you replied, Well, then
sir, I now give you such an order: and I bid you give it to those that would
obey it; for I would not: and I gave you the reason of it; which was, that I
was a freeborn Englishman, a Kingdom that pretends (at least) to be
governed by Law, and not by Will, and I am not to be subject unto those orders
in my imprisonment, that have no other Warrant, but the Gaolers Will. Neither
will I willingly be subject in the Tower unto any other orders but what are
consonant and agreeable to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Unto which you replied; Sir, you shall obey my orders, and I will make you.

Sir, said I, I will not obey your orders, nor you shall not make me: And I
tell you to your face, I scorn both you and your orders, and that I value you
not, the paring of my nail.

Unto which, you replied, Sir I will make you, for I will lock you fastenough
in your chamber: And I bid you do your worst, that either you could, or durst
do, I cared not a straw for you: But I bad you take notice of this, by the
way; that if you locked me up by the power of your own unbinding will, and did
not make your docres very strong, I would make work for your Carpencers, by
breaking them into as many pieces as I could.

You replied, you would make them up again. And I told you I would break them
again.

You told me, your ordering us to keep our Chamders after candle was lighted
was for your own security.

I shall now take liberty, to return you a more full answer to this, then I did
before to you, which is this; That I for my part, for all the gold in London,
would not give just cause to be counted so base and unworthy, to do upon
deliberation that action, that I would not justify to the death: But if I
should in the least, step afide, I should contract unto my self that guilt,
which I am confident, all the enemies I have in England, are not able in the
least to fix upon me: For, I understand by the Law of this Kingdom, that he
that is committed to prison for Felony, or Treason; although really and truly
he be guilty of neither, yet if he break prison, and be taken again, he shall
dye like a Fellon or Fraytor that is legally convicted, 1. E. 2. de
frangentibus prisonam. See Cooks 2. part. instit. fol. 590. 591. For his
flight, in the eye of the Law, argues guiltiness.

And besides, my friend and I had a horn Lanthorn and Candle, which put all out
of suspicion of going out in the dark.

But thirdly, what ground have you, upon any pretense whatever framed by your
self, to lock me up in my chamber, as soon as candles are lighted, seeing I am
in a moated and double walled Prison, where you have not only a Train-band, but
also great store of your own Warders to secure me?

And therefore, I tell you plainly, I shall never condescend to be locked up
sooner then that convenient hour of 8. a clock, the accustomed hour of the
place, which is much sooner then they are in other prisons, that I have been in.

Fourthly, if under pretense of your security, I should give way for you to
confine or lock me up in my chamber, at candlelight, which then was before five
a clock, may not you as well and as groundedly upon the same pretense (if you
please to say it is for your security) keep me locked up in my chamber till 12.
a clock, yea, the whole day, if you please: And if I should suffer this in the
least, what am I less then traitorous to my self, and to my liberties, to
give you a power by your own mere will, to make and impose a law upon me,
whenever you shall please to say that its for your security? when the Law
provides and enjoynes you no more, but to keep me in safe custody within your
prison, and to use me and all that come to me, civillie, and with all
humanity, and leaves me not in the least to your will, but only in some
extraordinary case, as in doing or offering violence to the Jailer, or Goalers,
or to my fellow prisoners, to the apparent breach of the peace of the prison:
and yet in this I have not in the least done, either to you, or the poorest boy
belonging to you, nor by Gods assistance will not: but yet on the contrary:
before you shall make me a slave to your will, you shall have the heart-blood
our of my body.

Now in the last place, I will compare the fees taken and demanded in the Tower
with those the Law gives; and what they are, you may fully read before.

Now, by the Author of Vox plebis, who to me seems to be a knowing man in the
practices of the Lieutenants of the Tower, who in his 48, 49. pages, says.
That there is demanded for the admittance of an Ecrl 100. l for a Baron 80. l
for a Knight and Baroner 70. l. for a Baronet 60. l. for a Knight 50 l, and for
an Esqui^ 40. pound, and 30. s. a week of every prisoner for liberty to but and
dross his own diet, and 10. s. 15 s. 20. s. per week, for his Chamber rent,
and of some more.

For Sir Richard Garney sometimes Lord Mayor of London, and now prisoner in the
Tower, has paid as I have beard him aver it 3. l. a week for his Chamber-rent;
and in the time of a Predecessor of yours, dieted 3 weeks at the Lievtenants
table: for which he had the impudency to demand for it 25 l. per week. o
horrible and monstrous extortion and oppression: and yet this is not all, for
the last mentioned author in his 48. page says, There is a new erected Office,
and an intruded Officer, called the Gentleman Jailer, one Yates a bufie fellow,
who pretends to a fee of 50 s 10 he paid him, at the going away of every
prisoner, page 51. ibim.

But yet this is not all, for in p. 49 of the late printed book called Regal
Tyranny discovered, he says, that the Gentleman Porter demands for his fee 5.
l. and a man's upper garment: 40. s. to the Warders, 10. s. to the Lievtenants
Clarke, 10. s. to the Minister; and diverse of any fellow prisoners tell me,
that their Keepers have and do demand of them, either their diet, or 5. s. a
week, for locking them up at night in their Chamber, and opening their
chamber-dores.

O horrible and monstrous injustice, oppression, and cruelty, to demand and
take these fees; whereas, by Law, there is not one farthing token of all these
fees due to be paid by the prisoner, but one bare groat at most, and that given
away by an oppressing and incroaching law upon our ancient and just liberties,
as is before truly observed.

And yet prisoners are destined in prison by your will, after they are legally
discharged, because they will not paythese undue and unjust fees, which at this
very day is Sir Henry Andersons case, and has formetly been others; as the
Author of Vox Plebis truly observes; although the arrantest Rogue and thief
that ever breathed, had, or has, as true aright to any purse that ever he did
or shall take from an honest man upon the high way by force and violence, as
you or any other has to any of the forementioned fees. O ye proud and
impuden man, that dare assume unto your self of your own head, more then a
regal power, to levy and raise money by the Law of your own will, upon the free
people of England.

Sir, let me tell you, this very thing was one of those things, that was the
Earl of Straffords great crimes, for which he paid very dear; and is it not
impossible, but you and others that use it, may pay as dear for it in
conclusion: therefore look to it, and think of it.

And if you please to read the Petition of Right, made by the Lords and Commons
unto this King, in the 3. of his Reign, you shall find in the beginning of it,
they; show him that by the statute of the 34. E. 1. called Stdtutum de tailigio
non concedend^ that no tallage or aid shall be la^d or levied by the King or
his Heirs in this Realm, withaut the good will and assent of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other the
freemen of the Commonalty of this Kealme, and by authority of Parliament
holden in the 25. E. 3. it is declared and enacted; that from thence-forth no
person should be compelled to make any Loanes to the King against his will;
because such Loan, were against reason, and the franchise of the Land, and by
other Laws of this Realm, ( viz. 1. E 3.6.11. R. 2.9.1. R. 3.2.) it is
provided; That none shall be charged by any charge or imposition, called
abenevolence, nor by such like charge, by which the statutes beforementioned,
and other the good laws and f^at^teo, of this Realm your subjects have
inherited this freedom; that, they should not be composed to contribute to any
tax, tallage, aid, or other like charge, not fet by common consent in
Parliament. All which, the King confirms.

And by the statute made this present Parliament, that abolished Ship money;
All and every the particulars, prayed or desired in the said Petition of Right,
shall from hence sorth be put in execution accordingly, and shall be firmly and
strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are prayed and
expressed: yea, in this very statute it is declared and enacted to be against
Law for his Majesty upon any pretense what ever, to levy money of the people
of England, without common consent in Parliament.

And truly sir, let me tell you without fear or flattery, that if your great
Masters th Lords, and their true prerogative friends, which fill nor up a few
places in the House of Commons, had any true and real intentions to preserve
the Fundamental Laws and Lioerties of England, or had any time to spare (to
punish those that justly and groundedly infringe them, and do as much as in
them lies, to destrey them) from their weighty employment, of deviding great
and vast sums of the Common wealths money amonst themselves, without either
doing justice and rightin the, like nature to any man breathing, unless it be
themselves, or some of their sons, kinsmen, or near friends; whose principles,
are to serve their ends to the breadth of a hair in all they enjoyne them;
they would scorn to give cause to be reputed so base and unworthy as they are,
to deny the King the power (unto whom ever and anon, they give such glorious
and transcendent titles unto) to levy and raise money without common consent
in Parliament; when they allow every paultery Iaylor in England to do it at
his pleasure; yea, and for any thing I can perceive abet: and countenance him
in it, for they will not nor have not done all this long Parliament, any man
any effectual justice against them that have complained of them, but every man
is crushed, and in a manner destroyed, that meddles any thing to the purpose
with them.

I pray sir, tell me, whether this be to Keep the Solemn League and Covenant
(which is now made a cloak for all kind of knavery and villanic) which they
and you took with your hands lifted up to the most high God, and swore to
maintain the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: But this I dare
boldly tell you, you never intended it as by your practices, appears.

But sir, in the second place, I should desire to know of you, the reason why
laylors are so impudent and oppressive as they are, and go so scot free from
punishment (though often complained of) as they do.

Truly, for my part, I am nor able to render any more probable on then this:
That it may be some powerful Parliament Man, or men, are sharers with them in
their profits. (for as gross, if not groser things, are commonly reported, yea
printed o^ some of them: See the 99. 100, 101, 102: 103. etc. pages of the
forementioned book; called Regal Tyranny discovered) and therefore must, and
do improve their interest and power, to protect them in their knaverys and
oppressions. For within these few days, I was talking with an understanding
knowing Gentleman, that came to visit me; and he told me, he durst venture his
life to make it evident to any rational man in the world; that there is one
Jailer about this City, that makes of his Prison above 20000 l. a year, and
commits all manner of villainies, and yet no Justice can be had against him,
though he has often and powerfully been complained against to the Parliament
it self, where he said, he had more favor, countenance, and protection, then
the honestest man that complained of him; yea, more then them all put all in
one.

Now sir, in the last place, I come to acquaint you, what moneys I have paid,
since I came to the Tower for my Chamber-rent only; the 10. of July last I came
hither and you sent me to the Lodging where I am, with extraordinary strict
and severe command upon my Keeper, who within certain days after I came to
him, demanded chamber-rent of me at a great deal higher rate then I pay, and I
told him necessity had no law; and I therefore desired him to ask me
reasonably, and he should see what I would say to him: So at last, he asked me
15. s. a week. I told him I knew well the laws of all prisons in England, and
15. s. a week was a great deal of money for bear Lodging; but in regard it
was with me, as it was, conditionally that he for his part would use me, and
those my friends that should come to see me, with civilitie and humanity, I
would give him 15. s. a week, and find my own linen besides, protesting unto
him, that the first time he used me, or any that came to see me, churlishly, I
would not pay him one penny more of money; and I must ingeniously confess, I
have no cause in the least to complain of the man in point of civility, nor he
of me in performing my promise: for I have paid him, though it has been with
some straights to me, betwixt 20. and 30. l. which I am now able no longer to
pay.

And therefore I desire you, according to your duty which by law you are bound
unto, to provide me a prison lodging gratis: for I profess unto you, no more
rent I can, nor will pay, though it cost me a dungeon (or as bad) for my pains.
And truly, Sir, I shall deal ingeniously with you, and give you the true
reason wherefore I condescended to pay chamber rent at first, and have done it
so long; it was because I had extraordinary potent adversaries to deal
withal, viz. the House of Lords, or Peers, as they are called, who had pretty
well managed their dealings with like tyrants, in keeping very strictly my
friends from me, and also pen, ink, and paper, that so I was debarred of all
ability in the world, to publish to the view of the whole Kingdom, my own
innocence, and their inhumane and barbarous tyranny, which they knew well
enough I would do, if I had not been debarred of all means to do it, and
then fell upon me, and transcendently sentenced me to pay 4000. l. etc. and
illegally and unjustly entered notorious crimes against me in their records.
And you know I told you at my first coming to the Tower, I was refreshed at
the hopes of my being freed from my close imprisonment; but your falling so
heavily upon me as you did, struck me to the heart, and made me believe it was
possible I might have been destroyed before I should have an oppertunity
publicly to clear my own unspotted innocence in reference to the Lords, and
to anotamize their tyranny; both of which my soul thirsted after, and therefore
if I had been able, I would have purchased an oppertunity to have done it,
through it had cost me 20. l. a week. And truly Sir, I have done my do, and in
dispite of all the Lords, published, and truly and faithfully stated my cause
to the view of the whole Kingdom. First, in my Wives Petition, delivered by
her to the House of Commons, Septem. 23. 1646. which I penned and framed my
self without the help or assistance of any Lawyer in England. And secondly, in
my Book called, Londons Liberty in Chains discovered. And thirdly, twice
before the Committee of the Honorable House of Commons. The last discourse of
which I published to the view of all the Commons of England, and called it, An
Anotamy of the Lords tyranny. And besides, some of my friends, or well-wishers
have done it excellent well for me, in those two notable discourses called, Vox
Plebis, and Regal Tyranny discovered, which will live when I am dead; and be (
I hope) as good as winding sheets unto the Lords; and therefore I am now ready
for a Dungeon, or Irons, or Death it self, or any torture or torment that
their malice can inflict upon me; and seeing that I cannot by any means I can
use, get my report made to the House of Commons, and so enjoy justice and right
at their hands, (which J beg not of them as a Boon, but challenge of them as my
due and right) by reason of the Lords, and the rest of their Prerogative
Copartners influence in the House of Commons to divert them from the great
affairs of the Kingdom, in doing justice and right unto the oppressed, and
putting them upon making Laws, Edicts, and Declarations, to persecute and
destroy the generation of the righteous, and so bring the wrath and vengeance
of heaven and earth upon them and theirs: ( Read Mr. Thomas Goodwins Sermon
preached before them Feb 25. 1645. called, The great Jnterest of States and
Kingdoms) and also lay a great blot of reproach upon them by all the rational
men in the world, for endeavoring to destroy a generation of peaceable and
quiet-minded men, that have contributed all they had and have in the world, for
their preservation; and by whose undaunted valor and bloodshed, as principal
instruments they enjoy liberty at this day, to sit in the House of Commons, and
to be what they are. (Sure I am, the Spirit of God says, That he that
rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart feom his House, Prove. 17.13.)
And yet for any thing I can perceive, the best reward is intended these men
from those they have done so much for, is ruin and destruction, that so that
Antichristian office and function of Priesthood, newly transformed into a
pretended godly and reformed Presbyter, may again be established, although by
the second Article of the Covenant (now more magnified by the sons of
darkness and blindness then the book of God) they have expressly sworn to root
up that Function by the root. The words of the Covenunt are, That we shall in
like manner. without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, (that is Church Government by Arch Bishops, Bishops, their Chancellors
and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other
Ecclesiastical officers depending on that Hierarchy) superstition, beresie,
schism, profaneness, etc. Mark the sentence, And all other Ecclesiastical
Officers depending on that Hierarchy In the number of which are those pretended
reformed Presbyter-Ministers, that either sit in the Assembly, or are in any
other place in the Kingdom, that officiate by virtue of their Ordination,
which they had from the Bishops, or any, by virtue of their Authority. And I
will maintain it with my life, that he is a for sworn man (whether he be
Parliament Man or other) that has token the Covenant, and does contribute any
of his assistance to maintain, preserve, and uphold that Ordination of the
Presbyterian Ministers, that they recerved from the Bishops; or punish any man
for writing, preaching, or speaking against it, or any other ways endeavoring
the destruction or extirpation thereof. For the express words, of the Covenant
are, that we must endeavor the extirpation of all Officers (without exception)
depending on that Hierarchy; part of which, all the forementioned Ministers
are, being ordained Priests and Deacons by the Bishops, and have no other
Ordination to this very day, but what they had from them. But if they shall
say, they were ordained by them not as Bishops, but as Presbyters, I answer,
This is a simple foppish distinction: For as well may the Bishops say, They
were not ordained by the Pope, or his Bishops, quatenus Pope or Bishops, but
quatenus Presbyter, or Presbyters, and so are in every particular as lawful
Minister, as any of these men that have their ordination from them, and yet
have endeavored to draw the whole Kingdom into a Covenant sinfully to
extirpate them that are Christ's Ministers upon their own Principles, as really
truly, and formally, as any of themselves But in the second place, if they were
ordained Presbyters by the Bishops, not as Bishops, but as Presbyters, then are
these present reformed Ministers less then Presbyters. For the Author to the
Hebrews, chap. 7. v. 7. says, without all contradiction, the less is blessed
of the better, or greater. And I desire the learned Presbyters to show me one
example in all the New Testament, that ever any Officer ordained another
Officer in the same Office and Function that he himself was in. Thirdly, I
desire to know of these reformed Presbyterian Ministers, that seeing as they
themselves confess, the Bishops Office and function was and is AntiChristian,
how is it possible their Ministerial Function, or Ordination, can be
Christian, that like a stream flowed from them the fountain? Sure I am, Job
demands this question; Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? And by
the Spirit of God he answers; Not one Job 14 4. And James interrogates, saying,
Does a fountain send forth at the same place, sweet water and bitter? Or can
the Fig tree, my brethren, bear Olive-berries? either a Vane; Figs?
Therefore in a positive negation he concludes, that no fountain can both yield
salt water and fresh. James 4.11.12.

And therefore seeing THOMAS THE GANGRAENA, the R^abshaksh Champion of the new
sprung-up Sect in England of Presbyters, who may more truly and properly be
called Schismatickes, then of those he so brands; for they have separated from
their Ghostly Fathers the Bishops, and yet are glad to hold their ordinatien,
and are therefore schismatic.

And therefore seeing in his last GANGRAENA he has fallen so point blanke upon
me, for no other cause but for standing for the Fundamental Laws of England,
which, if he had not an absolute desire to be notoriously forsworn, he might
know his Covenant binds him to do the same, But seeing he there plays the
simple man to fight with his own shadow, and does not in the least meddle, for
any thing I can perceive (by so much as I have read of his Book, which, so
near as I could find, was every place where I was mentioned) with the Statutes
and other Legal Authorities, that I cite in my wives petition, and elsewhere,
to prove, That all the Commoners of England ought in all criminal cases to be
tried by their Peers, that is, Equals; and that the House of Lords, in the
least, are not the Peers of Commoners: And therefore seeing seemingly by that
ulcerous book, he has given me something to answer that concerns me, I will
really and substantially give him something to answer, that in good earnest
concerns him, and all the rest of his bloody-minded, pretended reformed
fellow-Clergy Presbyters; that lying, deceitful, forsworn, and bloodye Sect,
of whom it is true that the Prophet said of the Prophets of old, That they make
the people to err, and bite with their teeth, and cry peace; and he that
puts not (...) these mouths, they even prepare war against him, Micah
3.5. And that at present I have to put him to answer, shall be certain
Arguments which I made when I was close prisoner in irons in the Fleet, against
the then Episcopal Ministers of the Church of England, which will serve in
every particular, against the present Presbyteriall Ministers, and you shall
find them thus laid down in the 23. page of my Book called, An Answer, of 9.
Arguments written by T.B. and printed at London, 1645.

First, That every lawful Pastor, Bishop, Minister, or Officer in the visible
Church of Christ, ought to have a lawful call, and be lawfully chosen into his
Office, before be can be a true Officer in the Church of Christ, Acts 1.23, 24,
25. and 6.3.5, 6. and 14.23. Gal. 1.1. Heb. 5.4.

But the Ministers and Officers in the Church of England, (as well Presbyterian
as Episcopal) have not a lawful call, neither are lawfully chosen to be
officers in the Church of Christ See the book of Ordination of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, as also the Directory, and compare them with the
Scripture.

Therefore all your Ministers are false and Antichristian Officers, Rev. 9.3.
and 13.2. and 16.13.

Secondly, the doing of those actions that belong to the execution of an
Officer, does not prove a man to be a lawful Officer, but a lawful power
instating him into his Office, Acts 8.4. and 11.19, 20. and 28.24.25, 26. 1
Cor. 14.29, 30, 31. 1 Pet. 4.10.

But all the Ministers in the Church of England have nothing to prove the
Lawfullnesse of their standing in the Ministry, but the actions of a Minister,
and are not in the least able to prove that they are instated in the Ministry
by virtue of a lawful power and authority.

Therefore they are no true Ministers of Christ, but false and Antichristian
Ministers of Antichrist.

Thirdly, again in the third place upon your own grounds, I frame this
Argument.

Those that by their Ministry do not accomplish the same ends, that the
Ministry of the Apostles did, are no true Ministers.

But the Ministers of the Church of England, do not accomplish the same ends
by their Ministry that the Ministry of the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 11.2.

Therefore your Ministers are no true Ministers of Jesus Christ. But Gangraena
one word more at present-to-you, seeing in the 271, 281. p. of your late 3 d.
Gangraena, you fall so exceeding heavy upon me, and my honest Comrade Mr,
Overton, and say that if these two audacious men, their daring books shall
escape without exemplary punishment, and instead there of be countenanced and
set free; I do as a Minister pronounce (but I say it is as one of Satan's)
that the plague of God will fall upon the heads of those that are the cause of
it.

Come Antagonist, let us come to a period; for I hope, for all your malice you
are not yet so far gone beyond your self as to desire to have me hanged or
killed, and then condemned and adjudged, and therefore I will make you two
fair propositions,

First, (in reference to the Lords whose Goliath and Rabshaka-like Champion you
are) that if you please to join with me in a desire to both Houses, I will so
for go below my self, and my present appeal now in the House of Commons,
(always provided it may not be no prejudice to the benefit I shall justly
expect from my said appeal, and join with you in this desire, that there may
be by both House, a proportionable number thereof, mutually by themselves
chosen out to sit openly, and publicly in the painted Chamber, where I will
against you by the established Laws of this Land, maintain against you and
all the Lawyers you can bring, this position (which is absolutely the contest
betwixt the Lords and me) THAT THE LORDS AS A HOUSE OF PEERS, HAS NO
JURISDICTION AT ALL OVER ANY COMMONER IN ENGLAND, IN ANY CRIMINAL CASE
WHATSOEVER, and if you will, I will wholly as in reference to the contest
betwixt you and me, stand to the vote, and abide the judgment and sentence of
that very Committee, whose vote upon the forementioned terms, if you will
tie your self, J will tie my self, either actually to execute, or passively
to suffer and undergo it.

Jn the second place, because so far as J am able to understand your meaning
in your fore mentioned pages, you would have me dealt withal, as the Earl of
Strafford, and the Bishop of Canterbury was, for endeavoring (as you say) with
so much violence, the overthrow of the three Estates, and the Laws of the
Kingdom, and in the stead of the fundamental Government and constitution of
this Kingdom, to set up an Utopian Anarchy of the promiscuous multitude and
the lusts and uncertain fancies of weak people, for Laws and Rules.

Now in regard of the distractions of the Kingdom which are many, and that
they might not be made wider by new books from either of us, J shall be very
willing for peace and quiet sake, to join with you in a Petition to the House
of Commons to appoint a select Committee publicly to examine all things that
are amrsse in your books and mine, and to punish either, or both, according to
Law and Justice without partiality, and J appeal to all rational men in the
world; whether I have not offered fair or no.

But in regard I know not whether you will embrace my proffer, I shall speak a
little more for my self, and reduce all to these three heads.

First, whether the Lords have by the known Law of the Land any jurisdiction
over the Commoners, or no?

Secondly, whether in the Parliaments own public declarations in Mr. Prinns
sovereign power of Parliaments, and in the Assemblies exhortation to take the
solemn League and Covenant, and other Presbyterian books, licenced by public
authority, and others fold without control, there be not more said to
justify and maintain, that which Gangraena calls Utoplan Anarchy, then in any
books whatsoever published by these be calls Sectaries?

Thirdly, whether or no that out of my own words in my book called INNOCENCE
AND TRVTH IVSTIFIED, there can any thing be drawn to justify the Lords in that
which now I condemn them in? as Gangraen a affirms, page 159. 148.

For the first, see what the 29. Chapter of Magne Charta says.

No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his free hold, or
Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
judgment of his PEERS, or by the Law of the Land.

See the 3. of E. 1. chapter 6. And that no City Borough, nor Town, nor any man be
amerced without reasonable cause, and according to the quantity of his
trespass, 9. H. 3. 14. that is to say, every free man, saving his free hold, a
Merchant saving his Merchandise, a villain saving his waynage, and that by his
or their Peers.

Now here is the express Law of the land against the Lords jurisdiction over
Commons in criminal cases.

Now in the second place, let us see what one of the ablest expositors of the
Law that ever writ in England says, of this very thing, and that is Sir Edward
Cook, in his exposition of Magna Charta, 2. part institutes, which book is
published by two special orders of the Present Houser of Commons, as in the
last page thereof you may read: who, in his expounding the 1^. Chapter of Magna
Charta, page 28 says, Peers sign^e, E^lls, and page 29. be says, the general
div^sion of persons by the Law of England is either one that is noble, and in
respect of his nobility, of the Lords House in Parliament; or one of the
Commons of the Realm, and in respect thereof, of the House of Commons in
Parliament and as there be diverse degrees of Nobility, as Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, and Barrons, and yet all of them are comprehended within
this ward, PARES; so of the Commons of the Realm, there be Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, and Burgesses of sever all degrees, and yet all
of them of the COMMONS of the Realm, and as every of the Nobles is one Peer
to another, though he be of a sever all degree, so is it of the Commons; and as
it bath been said of men, so does it hold of Noble-women, either by birth, or
by marriage, but see hereof, Chap. 29.

And in Chap. 29. page 46. Ibim he says, no man shall be disseised, that is,
put out of season, or disposed of his freehold (that is) Lands or livelihood,
or his liberties, or free Customs, that is, of such franchises and freedoms,
and free Cusiomes, as belong to him by his birthright, unless it be by
lawful judgment, that is, verdict of his equals (that is men of his own
condition) or by the law of the Land, (that is to speak it once for all) by the
due course and process of Law.

No man shall be in any sort destroyed, (to distroy id est; what was first
built and made, wholly to overthrow and pull down) unless it be by the verdict
of his equals, or according to the law of the Land.

And so says he is the sentence (neither will we pass upon him) to be
understood, but by the judgment of his Peers, that is equails, or according to
the Law of the Land, see him page 48. upon this sentence, per judicium Pacium
suorum, and page 50. he says it was inacted that the Lords and Peers of the
Realm should not give judgment upon any but their Peers: cites Rot. Parl. 4.
E. 3. nu. 6. but making inquiry at the Reco^r Office in the Tower. I had this
which follows; from under the hand of Mr. William Collet the Record-Keeper.

Out of the Roll of the Parliament of the fourth year of Edward the third.
The First Roll
Records and Remembrances of those things which were done in the Parliament
summoned at Westminster, on Monday next after the Feast of Saint Katherine, in
the year of the reign of King Edward the third, from the Conquest, the
fourth, delivered into the Chancery, by Henry de Edenstone Clerk of the
Parliament.
THese are the Treasons, Felonies, Wickednesses, The judgment of Roger de
Mortimer.
done to our Lord the King, and his people, by Roger de Mortimer, and others of
his confederacy. First of all, whereas it was ordained at the Parliament of
our lord the King, which was held next after his coronation at Westminster,
that four Bishops, four Earls, and six Barons, should abide near the King for
to counsel him; so always that there may be four of them, viz. one Bishop,
one Earl, and two Barons, at the least, And that no great business be done
without their assent, and that each of them should answer for his deeds, during
his time. After which Parliament, the said Roger Mortimer, (not having regard
to the said assent) took upon himself Royal power. and the government of the
Realm, and encroacht upon the State of the King, and ousted, and caused to be
ousted, and placed Officers in the Kings House and else where, throughout the
Realm at his pleasure, of such which were of his mind, and placed John Wyard
and others over the King, to espy his actions and sayings; so that our Lord the
King was in such manner environed of such, as that he could not do any thing
at his pleasure, but was as a man which is kept in ward.

Also whereas the Father of our LORD the KING, was at Kenilwarth, by ordinance
and assent of the Peers of the Land, there to stay at his pleasure for to be
served as becomes such a Lord, the said Roger, by Royal power taken unto
himself, did not permit him to have any money at his will; and ordered that he
was sent to Rarkly Castle, where by him and his, he was traitorously and falsely
murdered and slain.

But that which is this to my purpose, is Roll the second, being the judgment
of Sir Samon de Bereford, which verbatim follows thus.

The Second Roll.
ALso in the same Parliament, our Lord the King did charge the said Earls and
Barons, to give right and lawful judgment, as appertained to Simon de
Bereford, Knight, who was aiding and counselling the said Roger de Mortimer in
all the treasons, felonies, and wickednesses, for the which, the aforesaid
Roger so was awarded and ajudged to death, as it is a known and notorious thing
to the said Peers, as to that which the King intends.

The which Earls, Barons, and Peers, came before our Lord the King in the same
Parliament, and said all with one voice, that the foresaid Simon was not their
Peer, wherefore they were not bound to judge him as a Peer of the Land.

But because it is a notorious thing and known to all, that the aforesaid Simon
was aiding and counselling the said Roger in all the treasons, felonies, and
wickednesses abovesaid, (the which things are in usurpation of Royal power,
Murder of the Liege Lord, and destruction of Blood-Royall) and that he was
also guilty of diverse other felonies and Roberies, and a principal maintainner
of Robbers, and felons: and the said Earls, Barons, and Peers, did award and
adjudge as judges of Parliament by the assent of the KING, in the same
Parliament, that the said Simon as a Traitor, and enemy of the Realm, be drawn
and hanged. And, thereupon it was commanded to the Martial, to do execution
of the said judgment. The which execution was done, and performed the Monday
next after the Feast of St. Thomas the Apostle.

In the same Roll.
And it is assented and agreed by our Lord the King, Agreement not to be drawn
into example.
and all the Grandees in full Parliament, that albeit the said Peers as Judges
of Parliament, took upon them in the presence of our Lord the King to make and
give the said judgment by the assent of the King upon some of them which were
not their Peers, and that by reason of the murder of the Liege Lord, and
distinction of him which was so new of the blood-Royall, and Son of the King?
that therefore the said Peers which now are, or the Peers which shall be for
the time to come, be not bound or charged to give judgment upon others then
upon their Peers, nor shall do it: But let the Peers of the Land have power)
but of that for ever they be discharged and aquit, and that the aforesaid
judgment now given, be not drawn into example, or consequent for the time to
come, by which the said Peers may be charged hereafter, to judge others then
their Peers, against the Law of the Land, if any such case happen, which God
defend.

Agrees with the Record. William Colet.

It is the saying of the spirit of God Eccle. 4.9.12. two are better then one,
and a threefold cord is not easily broken, so that to prove my position true
for all the Rabsh^ka Language of Gangraena, I have first the fundament all Law
point blank on my side, and secondly the judgment of on of the ablest Lawyers
that ever writ in England, and his Judgment authorized (as good and sound) by
the present House of Commons, to be published to the view of the whole
Kingdom, and thirdly, the Lords own confession, for if you mark well, the
two last lines, of the forecited record, you shall find, they ingeniously
confess and declare, that it is against the Law of the Land, for them to judge
a Commoner, and for further confirmation of this, read Vox Plebis page 18, 19.
36. 37, 38. 39, 40. 41, 42, 44, 45. But if the Vicerous Gangraena please to
read a late printed book, called Regal tyranny discovered, he shall find that
the Author of that Book, in his 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 86. pages, lays downne
many strong a guments to prove, That the house of Lords have no legislative
power at all And in his 94. 95, 96. 97 pages he declares and proves, That
before Will. the Conqueror subdued the rights and Privileges of Parliaments,
that the King and the Commons held and kept Parliaments without temporal
Lords, Bishops, or Abbets. The two last of which, he proves, had as true and
goed right to sit in Parliament, as any of the present Lords now sitting at
westminster, either now have, or ever had.

For the second thing, which is, Whether or no there be not in the present
Parliaments Declarations, and in the Assemblies exhortation to take the
Covenant, and in Mr. Prynns Sovereign power of Parliaments, and other
Presbyterian books publicly licenced, and others sold without control, as
much, if not more, said, to setup, or maintain that which Gangrena calls Vtopian
Anarchy, then in any Books what ever published by those he calls Sectaries? And
I aver it positively, There is, and shall join issue with Gangraena to prove
it in every particular. Therefore let him publish an exact Catalogue of any of
our Positions, when he pleases, and I doubt not but to make it evident, that
it cannot justly by them be counted any vice in us, to tread in their steps,
especially seeing they have accounted them so full of piety, truth and honesty;
as they have done.

Now first, for the Parliaments Declarations, read but the Kings answers to
them, and you shall easily see he lays it as deeply to their charge of
endeavon ring to set up Anarchy, as Gangraena does either to mine or Mr
Overtons; yea, and instances the particulars, and tells them plainly, The
Arguments they use against him, will very well in time serve the people to turn
against themselves.

And as for Mr. Prynnes Sovereign power of Parliaments, I never read more of
that Doctrine (in any Book in all my life) that Gangraena so much condemns in
me, etc. then in that very Book, which is licenced by Mr White, a member of the
House of Commons, and in his days as stiff a Presbyterian as Gangraena
himself. See his 1. part Sover. page 5, 7, 8, 9, 19, 26, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37.
But especially 42, 43, 44. 47 57, 92. And 2. part page 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
and 73, 74, 75, 76. and 3. part, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 61, 62, 63,
64, 65. and 131, 132, 133.

And 4. part, page 10, 11. 15, 16. See his Appendix there, unto page 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. and 11, 13, 13 etc.

Besides these, see the first and second part of the Observations; Maxims
unfolded; the case of Ship Money briefly discoursed; A new Plea for the
Parliament; A fuller Answer to a Treatife, written by Dr. Fern, with diverse
others.

Now for the third thing which is the tyrumph Gangrena makes in his 3 part
Gangrena, page 1^8, which is that in my Book called Innocence and truth
justified, which I published the last year, 1645) I give that to the Lords,
which now I in 1646 in many wicked Pamplets would take a way from them: such
new light, says he, has the success of the new model: and the recruit of
the house of Commons brough to the Sectaries: Well! will the man stand to this?
if he will, then I desire the impartial Reader to judge betwixt us, and turn
to the 11, 12. 36, 37. 74 pages of that Book, in which pages, is contained all
that any way makes to his purpose; or esle turn to the 157 page of his book,
and see if in all my words there quoted by him, there is any thing that carries
the shadow of giving that to the Lords, that now I would take from them; for
there I am areasoning with Mr. Pryn, or the House of Commons, not upon my
principles, but their own.

And therefore, I say, a Committee of the House of Commons, is not the whole
Parliament; no, nor the whole House of Commons it self, according to their own
principles, which is the only clause he can fix upon.

And good Mr. Gangrena, is it not as just, and as man-like in me, if I be set
upon, by you, when I have no better weapons to cudgel you with, then your own,
to take them from you, and knocked your pate, as to make use of my own propper
weapons, to cut you soundly, or any other man that shall assault me to the
hazard of my being, and this is just my case, that you count such a disgrace
untome.

But say you there, I have owned their legislative power, and their judicative
power over commons: Therefore, you draw an inference to condemn me from mine
own practice. Alas man! may not I Lawfully seek or receive a good turn from
the hands of any man; and yet as lawfully do my best, to refuse a mischief
from him?

But secondly I answer, what though the 4. of May. 1641. I stooped to arryall
at the Lords Bar, upon an impeachment against me, by the King, does that ever
the more justify their Authority, or declare me to be mutable and unstable?
no, not in the least; for you cannot but know the saying of that most excellent
Apostle Paul, 1 Co. 13 11 'When J was a child, J spoke as a child, I under
stood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away
childesh things. So say I to you: five or six years ago, I knew nothing but
the Lords Jurisdiction was as much more above the House of commons (over
Commons) as their Robes and Grandeur in which they sat was above them;
especially seeing at all conferences betwix both Houses I sec the members of
the house of commons stand bare before the Lords: for which action I now see no
ground for; especially having of late read so many books which discourses
upon the Lords jurisdiction, which was upon this ground about a month or six
weeks before the Lords cast me in prison.

A Gentleman, a Member of the house of Commons, and one that I believe, which
wishes me well, bid me look to my self, for to his knowledge, there was a
design amongst some of the Lords (the grounds of reasons of which, he then
told me) to clap me by the heels, and to fall so heavy upon me, as to crush
me in pieces, or else make me at least an example, to terrisie others, that
they should not dare to stand for their Rights.

And being thus forewarned, I was half a med, which made me discourse upon
every opportunity with any that I though knew any thing of the Lords
Jurisdiction, and I found by a general concurence, that the 29. Chapter of Magna
Charta, was expressly against the Lords jurisdiction over Commoners in all
criminal cases: And upon that ground I protested against them: and then upon
further inquiry, I found Sir Edward Cooks Judgment expressly against them, as
is before recited: which book, Mr: Gangraena, I must tell you, is published
since my first trial before the Lords, and was not publicly in being when I
then stooped unto their jurisdiction; and then coming prisoner to the Tower,
one of my fellow-prisones very honestly told me of the forementioned Record of
Sir Simon de Bereford, which presently with all speed under Mr. Collets hand I
got out of the Records office.

All which just and legal authorities and testimonies makes me so stiff
against the Lords as I am: and I hope I shall continue to the death against
them in the thing in question betwixt us, as unmovable as a brazen Wall; come
hanging, come burning, or cutting in pieces, or starving, or the worst that all
their malice and ulcerous Gangraena Priests put together can inflict: for all
that I principally care for, is to see if the thing I engage in, be just; and
if my conscience upon solid and mature deliberation, tell me it is, I will not
by the strength of God, if once I be engaged in it, either go through with it
or dye in them dest of it, though there be not one man in the world absolutely
of my mind, to back me in it.

But lastly, admit in former times, I had been as absolute a Pleader for the
Lords jurisdiction over Commoners, as now I am against them.

Yet truly, a man of Mr. Gangraenes coat is the unfittest man in the Kingdom
to reprove me for it. For his Tribe, I mean of Priests and Deacons, those
littie toes of Antichrist, now called reformed Presbyters, are such a
Weathercock, unstabled generation of wavering minded men, as the like are not
in the whole Kingdom.

For their predecessors in Henry the 8. days were first for the Pope, and al
bis Drudgeries, and then for the King and his new Religion, and then 3. in his
time returned to their vomit again: and then fourthly in Edward the 6. days
became by his proclamation, godly reformed Protestants: and then 5. in Queen
Mary's days, by the authority of her, and her Parliament (which Parliament I
do aver it, and will maintain, had as true a ground to set up compulsive
Popery, as this present Parliament has to set up compulsive Presbytery) became
for the generality of them bloody and persecuting Papists and then 6. by the
authority of Queen Elizabeth and her Parliament, who had no power at all, no
more then this present Parliament to wrest the Scepter of Christ out of his
hands, and usurpedly to assume the Legislative power of Christ, to make Laws
to govern the Consciences of his people; which they have nothing at all to do
with, He, having made perfect, complete, and unchangeable, Laws himself,
Esaias. 9.6.7. and 33.20, 22. Act, 1.3. and 3.22, 23. and 20.26, 27. 1 Cor.
11.1.2.1 Tim. 6.13.18. Heb. 3.2 3, 6. became again a Generation of pure and
reformed Protestants, and have so continued to this present Parliament: But now
like a company of notorious forsworn men (who will be of any Religion in the
world, so it carry along with it profit and power) after they have for the
generallity of them, taken and sworn six or seven Oaths, that the Bishops were
the only true Church Government, and that they would be true to them to the
death.

Yet, have now turned the 7. time. and engaged the Parliament and Kingdom in
an impossible-to-be-kept oath and Covenant, to root up their ghostly Fathers
the Bishops, as Antichristian, from whom as Ministers they received their life
and Being.

Yea, and now the 8th. time have turned and fallen from that Covenant and Oath,
by which they mode all swear that took it; not only to root out Bisheps but
all Officers whatsoever that depends upon them. In the number of which, are
all the m^lves, having no other ordination to their Ministry, but what they
had from them, and so are properly, really, and truly dependents upon them; and
yet now of late have by themselves and instruments, as it were forced the House
of Commons to pass a vote, to declare themselves all forsworn, that had a
finger in that vote, and so a people not fit to be trusted, For, by their late
vote, no man what ever must preach and declare Jesus Christ, but be that is
Ordained, that is to say, unless they be depending on the Bishops by
Ordination or else on the Presbyters; who are no Presbyters, unless they
depend on the Bispops for their Ordination: for they have no other: and what is
this else, but to punish every one that shall truly endeavor the true and
real performance of the Covenant? Truly, we have lived to a fine forsworn age,
that men must be punished, and made incapable to be are any office in the
Kingdom, if they will not take the Covenant.

And then if they do take it, it shall be as bad, it they will not forswear
themselves every moment of time, that the assembly shall judge it convenient,
and the house of Commons vote it.

And truly, there is in my judgment a good stalking horse for this practice in
the Assembly of Dry-vines ( alias Divines, Deuteronomy 32.32.33. Esa 44.25) Ehortation
to take the Covenant in these words, and if yet there should any oath be found,
into which any Ministers or others have entered, not warranted by the Laws of
God, and the Land, in this case, they must teach themselves and others, that
such Oaths call for repentance, not partinary in them; that is to say, that
neither the Covenant, nor any other Oath whatsoever, that they have before, or
hereafter shall take, binds them any longer then the time that they please to
say it is not warrantable by the Laws of God, and the Land, and so by this
Synodian Doctrine, a man may take a hundred Oaths in a day, and not be bound
by any of them, if he please,

Besides, I would feign know, if by the Parliaments so eager pressing of the
Covenant, they do not press the hastening of many of their own destructions:
For by the Covenant every man that takes it, is bound thereby to maintain and
preserve the Fundamental laws of the Kingdom, which is every day trodden
under foot, by some of the members of both Houses arbitray practices, not only
toward Cavaliers, (for which they have some color by pleading necessity) but
also toward those of their own party, that have as freely and uprightly
adventured their lives to preserve the laws and liberties of the Kingdom, as
any of themselves: for justice and right effectually they have scarce done to
any man that is a suitor to them. And therefore I here challenge all the
Members of both Houses, from the first day of their sitting to this present
hour, to instance me, that man in England, that is none of themselves, nor
dependence upon themselves, that they have done effectual justice to, though
they have had thousands of Petitioners and Complainants for grand grievances
before the Parliament; some of which have, to my knowledge, even spent
themselves with prosecuting their business before them, and run themselves
many hundred pounds thick into debt to manage their business before them, and
yet to this hour not one penny the better; and yet they can find time enough
since I came prisoner to the Tower, to vote or share about 200000 l. of the
Common wealths money amongst themselves, as may clearly be particularized by
their own news books, etc. licensed by one of their Clerks. O horrible and
tyrannical wickedness! Was a Parliament in England ever called for that end,
as to rob and poll the poor common people, and to force those that have scarce
bread to put in their mouths, to pay excise, and other taxations, or else to
rob and poll the poor common people, and to force those that have scarce bread
to put in their mouths, to pay excise, and other taxations, or else to rob and
plunder them of all they have, and then share it amongst the members of both
houses: as 10000. l. to one man, 6000. l. to another, 5000. l. etc to another,
and this many times to those that never hazarded their lives for the
Weal-publique; no, nor some of them never intended, I am confident of it, good
to the generality of the people, but that they should be as absolutely their
vassals and slaves (if not more) as ever they were the King O thou righteous
and powerful Judge of Heaven and Earth, that of all the base things in the
world, hate and abhorrest dissemblers and hypocrires. Ier. 7.9, 10, 11, 12.
to 16. Mat 23. deal with these the greatest of Dissemblers thy self, who like
so many bloody and cruel men, have engaged this poor Kingdom in a bloody and
cruel war, pretendedly for the preservation of their laws and liberties; when
as God knows by a constant series of actiont, they declare they never truly
and really intended any such thing, but merely by the blood and treasure of the
people, to make themselves tyrannical Lords and Masters over them: So that for
my part, if I should take the Covenant, I protest ^t before the God of Heaven
and Earth; without fear or dread of any man breathing: I should judge it my
duty and that I were bound unto it, in conscience, by virtue of my oath, to do
my utmost to prosecute even to the death, with my sword in my hand, every
member of both Houses, that should visibly engage in the destruction of the
Fundamental Laws and liberties of England, and prosecute them with as much
zeal, as ever any of them prosecuted the King: for tyranny, is tyranny,
exercised by whom soever; yea, though it be by members of Parliament; as well
as by the King and they themselves have taught us by their Declarations and
practices, that tyranny is resistable; and therefore, their Arguments against
the King, may very well serve against themselves, if speedily they turn not
over a new leaf: for what is tyranny, but to admit no rule to govern by, but
their own wills? 1. part col. declar page 284. 694.

But Thomas Gangraena, one word more to you, and your threatening to write a
book against liberty of Conscience, and toleration of Religion: I pray let me
ask you this question, if the Magistrate, quatenus Magistrate, be Judge of the
Conscience, and thereby is endowed with a power to punish all men, that he
judges, conceives, or confidently believes, are erroneous and heretical, or
because in religion he differs from the magisteriall Religion in the place
where he lives, Then I pray tell me, whether all Magistrates, quatenus,
Magistrates, have not the very same power? And if so, then does it not
undeniably follow, that Queen Mary and her Parliament did just in her days, in
making a law to bu^ne those Heretics, that dissented from her established
Religion? who were as gross in their tenants in the then present Magistrates
eyes: as any of your Sectaries tenants, are now in the present Magistrates
eyes: and if you, and your bloody brethren of the Clergy-Presbytery, shall
engage the present Parliament and Magistracy, to persecute the Saints and
people of God, under pretense of heretical Opinions, I will upon the hazard of
my life justify and prove it against you, and the present Parliament, that you
and they thereby justify Queen Mary in murdering and burning the Saints in her
days, yea, and all the bloody, persecuring Roman Emperors, that caused to be
murdered thousanes of the Saints, for bearing witness to the restimony of
Jesus; yea, and all the persecutions of the Jews, against Christ and his
Apostles, yea, and the putting them to death, and so bring upon your own heads
all the righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the days of righteous Abel,
to this present day, Matthew. 23.29, 30.32.33.34, 35. which I warrant you will
bring wrath and vengeance enough upon you.

Now Mr. Lieutenant, a few words more to you, and so conclude; I desire you in
the next place, not only to provide me gratis, a prison Lodging, for I can pay
Chamber tent no longer; but also to provide me my diet according to the custom
of the place; for you cannot but know, and if you do not, I now tell you, that
the King was always so noble and just, as to do it to all the Prisoners be
committed to this place, of what quality soever, of the truth of which Who as
I have lately heard, confessed he spent his Majesty 1500. l. while he was a
prisoner here.
Col. Long, Col. Hollis, and Mr. Seldom, etc. now members of the house of
Commons, can inform you, and how that themselves, when they were the Kings
prisoners here in the 3. of His Reign, for speaking and acting freely in the
Parliament, were maintained by the King, according to their qualities, though
some of them had great estates of their own, in their own possessions and
enjoyments, and now as the news books tell me, are voted 5000. l. piece, for
their then illegal sufferings. And Sir, the Lords who committed me hither,
have in gareat measure the Kings Revenue in their hands at their dispose, and
therefore, I expect now I seek for it, they shall be as just as their Master
(whom they have so much condemned for injustice) and provide for me according
to my quality. And, Sir, I must tell you, that I am very confident I have as
many noble qualities in me, and as much of a man in every respect, as any of
those that sent me hither: (For Titles of Honor, without Honesty and Justice,
are no excellenter then a gold ring in a Swines snout,) Yea, and have given as
large a declaration of it to the view of the world, as any of them, whatever
has done, And therefore Sir, if they shall deny me this piece of justice and
equity, I will, by Gods assistance, tell them as well of it, as ever they were
told in their lives.

But, fir, in the third place, if this fail me, I desire you to speak to them
to allow me interest for my two thousand pounds, (it being scarce twice so much
as I have spent since I first became a suitor for it,) that they the last year
decreed me, for my illegal, bloody barbarous, and inhuman sufferings by the
Star Chamber; which, I dare confidently say, were more tormenting then all the
sufferings of the above mentioned Gentlemen, and their copartners. (See my
printed Relation of it made at the Lords Bar 13. Feb. 1645.) For which as I
understand, there is 50000. l. reparations voted them by the House of Commons,)
that so I may have something of my own to live upon. For without all, or most
of the three forementioned things be done for me; I must either perish, or run
exceedingly into debt, which I confess I am very loath to do: or lastly, live
upon the alms of my friends, which I profess, is not pleasant unto me, And
besides, the freest horse, or horses in the world, with continual riding, they
not only be weatied, but also jaded and tired.

But if they will not yield that I shall have my lodging gratis, and my diet
found by them, nor interest for my many years expected, and long-looked for
2000 l. that last year they decreed me; nor the remainder of my just arreares,
which (yet is devils hundreds of pounds, that I faithfully, valiantly, and
dearly earned with the loss of my blood) to maintain and keep me alive, and my
wife and small children.

Then, as my last request, I entreat from you to desire them to call me out to
alegall trial, and by the law of the Kingdom, (but not their arbitrary wills)
either to be Justified or condemned. And here under my hand, I profess, I
crave nor desire, neither mercy, nor favor at their hands, but bid defiance to
all the adversary I have in England both great and small, to do the worst
their malice can unto me; always provided, I may have a legal trial, by my
Peers, my Equals, men of my own condition; according to the just,
established, unrepealed, fundamental law of the Land, contained in Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right; And truly, Sir, if upon these terms they
will not call me out, but resolve to keep me here still, I will, by Gods
assistance, before many months be expired, give them cause (with a witness)
to call me out: for here, if I can help it, I will not be destroyed with a
languishing death, though, it cost me hewing to pieces, as small as flesh to
the pot. For if it had not been that my report has lain so long dormant in the
hand of Col. Henry Martin the glory of his age amongst Parliament men: for a
lover of his Country; whose credit and reputation I ingeniously confess, I
should be very loath in the least, (if I could avoid it) to bespatter.

But in regard by all the means and friends I can use to him, I cannot get him
to make my report; though I desire nothing at his hands but a bate endeavor of
the discharge of his duty, to quit himself of it, let the issue be good or
bad, all is one to me, so it were but done, or endeavored to be done: I had
long since made a formal appeal to the people, but in regard of my constant
hard usage both from diverse Lords and Commons, and their laylors, and other
instruments, and the many unresistable prickings forward of my own spirit,
which presses me rather to hazard the undergoing of Sampsons portion, Judge.
16.21. then to be forced to degenerate from the principles of Reason (the King
or chief of all creatures) into the habit of a bruit beast, and so to live a
slave or vassal under any power under the Cope of Heaven, whether Regal, or
Parliamentary, or what ever it be.

And therefore, having now with a long deliberated delibertation, committed my
wife and children to the tuition, care and protection of a powerful God, whom
for above these ten years, I have feelingly, and sensibly known as my God in
Jesus Christ; who with a mighty protection, and preservation has been with me
in six troubles, and in seven, and from the very day of my public Contest
with the Bishops; has enabled me to carry my life in my hands, and to have it
always in a readienesse, to lay it down in a quarter of an hours warning,
knowing that he has in store for me a mansion of eternal glory.

All these things considered, I am now determined, by the strenght of God, if I
speedily have not that Justice, which the Law of England affords me, which is
all I crave, or stand in need of, no longer to wait upon the destructive
seasons of prudentiall men: but forthwith to make a for mall Appeal to all the
Commons of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and set my credit
upon the tenters to get money to print 20000. of them, and send them gratis to
all the Counties thereof: the ingredients of which shall be filled with the
Parliaments own Declarations and Arguments against the King, turned upon
themselves, and their present practice, and with a little narrative of my
Star Chamber tyrannical sufferings; and those I have there to complain of, are
first Dr. Lamb, Guin, and Aliot, for committing me. And 2. Lord Keeper
Coventry, Lord Privy. Seal Manchester (that corruptest of men, whose unworthy
Son is now, and has been for some years, the chief Prosecut or of my ruin,
for no other cause, but that I have been honest, valiant, and faithful in
discharging the trust reposed in me, which he himself was not (my Lord
Newburgh, old Sir Henry Vane ( a man as full of guilt, as any is in England,
whose baseness and unworthiness I shall anotamize to the purpose) the Lord
chief Justice Bramstone, and Judge Jones, who sentenced me to the Pillory, and
to be whipped, etc. And then 3. Canterbury, Coventry, Manchester, Bish. of
London, E. of Arundel, E. of Salithury, L Cottington L. Newbnrgh, Secretary
Cook, and Windebank, who sentenced me to lie in irons, and to be starved in the
prison of the Fleet; With a short Narrative of my usage by Lords and Commons
this present Parliament; and conclude with a Declaration of what is the end,
wherefore Parliaments by law ought and should be called, which is to redress
mischiefs and grievances, etc. but not to increase them, 4. E. 3.14. and 36.
E. 3.10. to provide for the peoples weal, but not for their woe, Book Declar.
1. part, page 150. and yet notwith standing all the trust reposed in them, and
all the Protestations they have in public Declarations, made, faithfully,
without any private aims or ends of their own to discharge it: And
notwithstanding all the blood and money, that has been shed, and spent at
their beck and and commands. I would feign have any of them to instance me any
one Act or Ordinance, since the wars begun, that they have done or made, that
is for the universal good of the Commons of England who have born the bu then
of the day. Sure I am, they have made several Ordinances to establish
Monopolies against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and thereby have
robbed free men of their trades and livell hoods, that at their command have
been abroad a fighting for maintaining the Law; and in practice, annihilated
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right: So that a man (though of their own
Party) may suffer much if committed by a Parliament Man, or Parliament men,
before he can get the Judges to grant an Habeas Corpus, to bring him and his
cause up to their Bar there to receive a trial (secundum legem terrae) that is
according to the Law of the Land, although the Judges be sworn by their oaths
to do it.

So Sir, desiring you seriously to consider of the premises, which I could not
conveniently send you, but in print, I rest.

From my illegal and chargeable captivity in Cole-harbour in the Tower of
London, this 30. Ian. 1646. Your abused Prisoner, who is resolved to turn all
the stones in England, that lie in his way, but he will have right and justice
against you, John Lilburne, semper idem.

FJNJS.

