The resolved man's Resolution, to maintain with the last drop of his heart
blood, his civil Liberties, and freedoms, granted unto him by the good just,
and honest declared laws of England, (his native Country) and never to sit
still, so long as he has a tongue to speak, or a hand to write, til he has
either necessitated his Adversaries, the house of Lords, and their Arbitrary
Associates in the house of Commons, either to do him justice and right, by
delivering him from his causeless and illegal imprisonment, and handing out
unto him, legal and ample reparations for all his unjust sufferings or else
send him to Tyburns: of which he is not afraid, and doubts not if they do
it, but at and by his death, to do them ( Sampson like) more mischief, then
he did them all his life.
All which is expressed and declared in the following Epistle written by Lieut.
Coll. John Lilburne, Prerogative Prisoner in the Tower of London, to a true
friend of his, a Citizen thereof, April 1647.
Isai^h 1.23, 24. Thy Princes are rebellious and Compa^o^^ of Th^^v^^, every
one loves gifts, ^^d follows after rewards: they Judge not the fatherless,
neither does the cause of the widow ^^m^ unto them. Therefore says the Lord,
the Lord of h^st, the mighty one of Israel, Abel will ^^^se ^^e of my
adversaries, and avenge me of ^ine enemies. Acts 13 6, 7, 8. But when Paul
perceived that the one part were Sodduces, and the other Phe^^s^es, be cried
out in the Council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a
Pharisee: of ^^e hope and resurrection of the dead, I am called in question.
And when be had so said, there a^^^e a dissertion between the Pharisees and the
Sadd^^es: and the multitude was divided. For ^^e Sadduces say that there is no
resurrection neither Angel nor Spirit: but, the Pharisees confess ^^th. And
there arose a great cry: and the Scribes that were of the Pharisees part, arose
and ^^rove ^^ying; We find no evil in this men: but if a Spirit, or an Angel
has spoken to him, let us not ^b^ against God. Acts ^^.8. While he answered
for himself, Neither against the law of the Jews, neither (...) ^^^st the
Temple, nor yet against Cesor, have I offerded any thing at all. Verse 16. To
who (...) ^^swered, it is not the manner of the Roman^ to deliver any man to
d^e^ before that he which is ac^^sed, have the accuser face to face, and have
license to answer for himself conc^^ning the crime ^^d against him. Acts
22.25. And as they bound him with things, Paul said unto the Centurion that
stood by, is (...) lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and (...)
can denned, and verse 28. But Paul said, ^^t I was free borne.
TRue friend, after my real respect presented unto ^ou etc. I desire in
inform you^ that I am told, you are very much troubled at my proceedings with
the Committee of the House of Commons, upon Monday, the 8. of Feb. 16^6. That
after I had stood so stiffly at the beginning with them, upon the Lowes, Rights
and privileges every free man of the Kingdom, that I should undo all, and
^^^ny fi^me hold go, by answe^ ^^^g at last to their Interrogatories, by which
you say, I updid all I had done, and went against m^^ own declared principles,
and not only so but by owning my book, have exposed my self to a gre^^^ deal
of hazard and danger, which I might easily have avoided, if I had not answered
their Interrogatory.

Upon serious consideration hereof, I judge my self bound in duty to my self,
to write these lines unto you, for your satisfaction, and my own vindication,
and therefore I shall begin to gi^^ you so true and real a Narrative of my
whole proceedings with them, as the utmost of my memory will enable me, part of
which you your self were an eye and ear witness unto, and it was in this
manner. About 9. a clock upon the foresaid Monday, Lewis a servant to the
Sergeant at Arms, came to my lodging in the Tower, and showed me a Warrant he
had to take my wife into safe ^^stody, for dispersing some of my last books,
and I told him it was very hard, for any Committee of Parliament, to send forth
a warrant to make my wife a Prisoner, before they had heard her sp^^ for her
self, or so much as summoned her to appear before them, and I plainly told
him it was was more then by law they could justify, but how ever, I bore so
much honorable respect unto the House of Commons, and all its Committees, that
I would not persuade my wife to conte^^^ their warrants, but if he pleased to
take my word for her appearance, I would engage my life for her, that she
should be punctually at the hour appointed, to wait upon the Committee to
know their pleasure: which engagement he was pleased to take, but withal told
me, he had brought^ warrant to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to carry me before
the Committee at two a clock in the afternoon, but I told him, unless I see
and read the warrant, I should not go, but by force (...) compulsion, and
^^^refore if he pleased to go with me to the Lieutenant, and get him to let me
read the warrant, I should readily obey it, which he did accordingly, but time
being very short, I considered with my self what was most fit for me to do,
for I assured my self I was to go before those, diverse of which, would bend
all their insensed malice and indignation against me, and make use of all
their power and wits, to entrap and ensnare me, and therefore, I listed up my
soul to my old and faithful Counceller, the Lord Jehovah; and in my
ejaculations, pressed my Lo^^ and master, with a great deal of grounded
confidence and cleernesse of spirit, to declare and manifest his
faithfulness, in being present with me, to counsel, direct, encourage and
stand by me, according to his promise of old (made unto me) in the tenth of
Matthew, and to his praise and glory I desire to speak it, he presently came
into my soul with a mighty power, and raised me high above my self, and gave
me that present resolution that was able to lead me, with a great deal of
assured confidence to grapple with an whole host of men; But in my own spirit
I was led presently to take care, to do something for my wife as the weaker
vessel, that so she might not be to see^ in case she were called before them,
and for that end, I drew her presently up a few lines, which I read unto her,
and gave her instructions, that upon the very first question they should ask
her, she should give them her paper, as her absolute answer to their question:
unto which she readily assented, and set her name to it, which verbarum thus
follows.

To the Honorable the Committee of the Honorable, the House of Commons, for
suppressing of scandalous Pamphlets. The humble addresses of Elizabeth
Lilburne, wife to Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, prerogative prisoner in the tower
of London. Feb. 8. 1646.
Gentlemen,
YOu have all of you taken the Covenant, (for you have made an Order, that no
man shall sit in your House, that will not take it) where you have sworn to
maintain the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and for you to examine me upon
Interrogatories, is contrary to the fundamental Law of the Kingdom, (and for
me to answer to them, is to be traitorous to my own liberty) or for you to
proceed by any other rules to punish me, for any real or pretended crime, but
what is declared by the Law, is unjust and unrighteous, and therefore I humbly
entreat this honorable Committee, seriously to read and consider the Statute
of the 42. of Edward the third, Chapter 3. which thus follows. Item, At the
request of the Commons by their Petitions put forth in this Parliament, to
eschew the mischiefs and damage done to diverse of his Commons by false
^^^users, which often times have made their a^^^ a^onmo^ for revenge, and since
for benefit the^ for the profit of the King, or of his people, which (...) used
persons, some have been taken, and sometime caused to come before the Kings
Counsel, Which the Par^^ament is.
by (...) or otherwise upon grievious pain against the Law this assented and
accorded, for the good governa^ce of the Commons, that no man be put to answer
without presentment before Justices, or matter of record, or by due process
and writ original according (...) to the old Law of the land, and if any thing
from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be (...) ^oid in the Law, and
holden for error. And suitable to this is the 19. chap of Magna Charta, and ^he
5 E. 3.9. and 25. ^. 3.4 and 28. E. 3.5.37. E. 3.18 which are all and every of
them con^^rmed by the Pe^^tion of Right, made in the third year of the present
King, which expressly says. "No (...) man ought to be adjudged, but by the
laws established in the Realm, and not otherwise, which ^et^tion of Right, you
your selves have in every point confirmed, as appears by the Seatu^e that
aboli^^th the Star Chamber, and by the Statute that abol^sheth Ship Money, and
you your selves with your and lifted up to the most high God, have often
sworn, vowed, protested and declared, you will main^ine, preserve and defend,
the fundamental laws of the land, and square your actions accordingly, and
^^recate the wrath and vengeance of the great God of Heaven and Earth to fall
upon you, when you ^ase to perform what there you swear to, and declare, and
therefore Gentle men, what thoughts soever d^spleasure you have toward me, I
hope you will be so tender of your own honors and reputations, that will not
in the least indervou^ to deal with me contrary to the true intent and mea^ing
of the forementioned laws, but if you should, I cannot stoop unto any tried
that i^ contrary to the pattern of the ^rem^ntioned honest, just and good
laws, and if you please to ^e me ^^^y the benefit of them, I shall be ^^^dy to
joyce issue with you, whenever you please, and legally to answer whatsoever.
I have said and ^on^, and so I humbly take my leave of your honors, and rest.
^^sbr. 8. 1646.

Your servant, El^zabeth Lilburne.


And having finished hers, and taken care to get a copy of it, I begun to
think what to do for ^y self, and being very confidently persuaded, that
they would show me my book, and ask me if I ^ould own it for mine, because
this was their method the last year with me, as you may fully ^ad, in a
printed Epistle I writ to you last year, when I was a prisoner under the
S^rgeant at Arms ^f the house of Commons, which Epistle is dated July 25. 1645.

And in my answer to William Prinus notorious lies and fal^hoods, Which he was
so ^ree of, that he did print 13, or 14 in ^ight lines, as you there may read,
page ^, 5, 6. see also page ^5. ^him.
called Innoceney and truth justified, page 6. 13, 14. 15. 16.

And therefore I fell to my pen and ^^k^, but before I had writ a quarte^ of
that I intended, my self to give into the Committee, my keeper came, and told
me it was paston^ a clock, and therefore full time for us to be gone, being we
were to be there by two, and in regard it was so very cold, we marched all the
way by land, and coming to the outward Court of of wards before the. Committee
said, I fell to perfect what I had begun, and as I was at work, out came to me
a Citizen and told me there was a young Gentleman in a for ^acket who looked
something a squi^^, pressed with a great deal of cho^er and indignation, that
I might be imediately called (...) to answer for my notorious crime, or writing
the Oppressed man's oppressions declared, which I say (...) a book of truth and
honesty, and ^^^st as I had done, I was called in before the Committee, wh^^e I
found (as I conceived them) (...) ^reat many of the little better then the
evish catch-poule Stationers, whose trade it is for diverse of them illegally
and little better then felloniously, to break open honest men's houses and I
(...) Thieves and Rogues, carry away their true and proper goods, As lately
whit taker the Bookseller, etc. did mine the other day, loading away 3.
Porters with my proper and truly come by goods, for which by Gods assistance I
intend to arraign them as fellons, and hang them if Law will do it.
and a very large company of Parliament men, as ever I see at a Committee to my
remembrance before, and looking well about me, the most of them were to me men
of new faces, and one of them appeared to me, to be one of Pryns infants or
Minors, not above 18. years old as I conceived, but amongst them all I see not
the face of one of my old acquaintance. And after I had ^endered my respects to
Mr. Corbet, the Chairman thereof, he took a little book and read the title of
it, The Oppressed man's Oppressions declared, etc. and also turned to the last
end of it, and read the conclusion, which was subscribed John Lilburn Semper
idem, and told me he was commanded by the Committee, to ask me this question,
whether I would own that book for mine or no? unto which I answered. Sir, with
the favor of this honorable Committee, I shall humbly desire to speak a few
words, well said Mr. Corbet, answer to the question,

Sir, said I, if you please to give me leave to speak, well and good, if not,
if you please to command me silence I shall obey you. Says he the question is
but short therefore answer to it, either I or no, Sir said I, I am now past a
schole boy, and have long since learned to say my A, B, C, after my master, but
have now attained to a more ripe understanding, so that I am now able to speak
without being dictated unto what I should say, and therefore if you please to
give me leave to speak my own words in my own manner and form, well and good,
if not, I have no more to say unto you: Sir says he, the question is but
short, therefore you are commanded to give a possitive answer to it, unto which
I replied, Sir if you will not let me speak my own words, in my own way, I
will neither tell you, whether I will own it or disavow it, and with that he
took his pen and writ part of what I said, and read it to me. Sir said I, what
you have writ, is not full what I said, and therefore if you please to give me
pen, ink and paper, I shall write what I said my self, and set my hand unto
it, which he refused, but diverse of the Parliament men, pressed him to keep me
to the question. Unto which I said, Gentlemen, if you please to give me leave
to speak, well and good, if not lets come to an issu^, and command me out of
doors, for I will not answer you till I have free liberty to speak, upon which
one or two of the Committee said, let him speak, but says Mr. Corbet, if after
you have liberty for to speak, will you return a possitive answer to the
question? yea, Sir said I, that I will, well then speak said he speak. Sir said
I what I have to say, is in the first place, in reference to the house of
Commons, for apprehending with my self, that my carriage and speeches this day
before the Committee, may be represented to the honorable House of Commons, to
my detriment and damage, I therefore judge it convenient for me to fortify my
self as well as I can, and therefore I desire humbly to declare; that I own the
constitu^ion of the honorable house of Commons, as the greatest, best, and
legallest interest, that the Commons of England have for the preservation of
their Rights and Liberties, and I do not only own their constitution but also
I honor their authority and power, and the power and authority of all
Committees, legally deriving their power therefrom, and shall readily and
cheerfully, yield obedience to all their commands, provided they act according
to the rules of justice, and to the good known laws of the hand, but not
otherwise.

And in the second place, I desire to speak a few words of my thoughts of this
Committee, but I was exceedingly interrupted, not only by the Chairman, but
also by other Members of the House, and very much pressed to give an answer to
the question, which made me say, Mr. Corbet, if you please to let me go on in
my own way, well and good, if not I have no more to say to you, for I came not
hither of my own head, to make a complaint unto you of my own, but I was sent
for by you, (as I conceive) in a criminal way, to answer something before you
in which regard, it behooves me to stand upon the best guard that either law,
reason, or judgment can furnish me with, and being that I apprehend, I am so
much concerned in my present appearance before you, it exceeding much concerns
me, to be very considerate and wise, in managing my business before you,
therefore i^ you please, let me go on to speak out what I have to say, and I
think in conclusion, I shall give you as possitive an answer to the question
as you desire.

So up stepped a welsh Gentleman, one Mr. Harbert, as I remember his name, and
desired Mr. Corbet to let me speak on for says he, you hear him promise to
give you a possitive answer to your question.

Well then says Mr Corbet, but will you as soon as you have spoken give a
possitive answer to the question? Yea, Sir said I, (and clapped my hand upon my
breast) upon my credit and reputation will I, then go one says he.

Well then Sir said I, two words concerning this Committee, and that at present
I have to say is this, that I look upon this Committee, as a branch deriving
its power from the House of Commons, and therefore honor it, and I look upon
you in the capacity you fit here, as a Court of justice, and I conceive you
look upon your selves in the very self same capacity, but in case you do not,
I have no more to say unto you, neither if ye be not a Court of Justice, do I
conceive have you in law, any power at all to examine me. But none of them
replying upon me, made me take it for granted, they took themselves for a Court
of justice, and therefore I went one and said, if you so do, that is own your
selves for a Court of justice, then I desire you to deal with me as it does
become a Court of Justice, and as by law you are bound, which is to let me have
a free, open, and public hearing. For Gentlemen, you have all of you taken
the Covenant, in which you have lifted up your hands to the most high God, and
sworn to maintain the laws of the Land. And it is the law of the land, that
all Courts of Justice ever have been, are, and ought to be held openly and
publicly, (not close like a Cabinet Counsel) from whence no Auditers are, or
ought to be excluded, See Mr. Pryns relation of Colonel Fines his trial, page
11. 12, 13. and Regal Tyranny discovered, page 81. 82. 83.
and therefore as you would not give cause to me to Judge you a company of
forsworn men, I desire you to command your door to be opened that so all the
people, that have a mind to hear and see you, and bear witness, that you
proceed with justice and righteousness, may without check or comptrole, have
free access to behold you, they behaving themselves like civil men. But here
arose a mighty stir by some Parliament men, who declared, fiery indignation in
their very countenances against me, but especially, a Gentleman that sa^e on
the left hand of the forementioned Gentleman in the fur jacket, who pressed
vehemently to hold me close to the question, and keep to their Committee
proceedings, but truly I conceived the Gentleman to be but a very young
Parliament man, and one that neither had read, nor understood the laws of
England, and therefore Sir said I to him, to stop your mouth, I tell you, I
bless God, I am not now before a Spanish Inquisition, but a Committee of an
English Parliament, that have sworn to maintain and preserve the laws of the
Kingdom, and therefore Mr. Corbet, I know you are a Lawyer, and know and
understand the laws of the Kingdom, and I appeal to your very conscience,
whether my desire of an open and public hearing, be any otherwise then
according to Law, sure J am Sir, it was the constant practice of this very
Parliament at the beginning thereof that in all their Committees whatever,
where they sat to hear and examine criminal causes, that they always sat
open, and I speak it out of my own knowledge, that you were then angry with
any man amongst your selves, that did press or move that you might fit in a
cabinit and clandestine way, and truly Mr. Corbet, I think this Committee
would take it very ill at my hands, if I should affirm you are more unjust and
unrighteous now, then you were at the beginning, for I my self, had about half
a score public hearings at a Committee about my Star Chamber business, and
therefore being now before you, upon a business in my thoughts, of as much
concernment to me as that was: I beseech you, let me have the same fare and
just play now, that then I had, and give for the ^ust cause to me and others,
to say your actions and proceedings are unrighteous and u^^ost, and therefore
you sit in holes and cornt^s, and dare not abide the public view of your
actions, which will be too clear a demonstration to all the world, that your
deeds are evil, John, ^.10.21. Well Sir said Mr. Corbet, here is company
enough to hear you, therefore you may go on, true is is Sir, here is enough
of my enemies, but I see never a one of my friends: therefore if your please to
command the door to be s^t wide open, well and good, if not will not say one
word more unto you, so I was commanded to withdraw, which I did And being
called in again, Mr. Corbet told me, be was commanded by the Committee to ask
me the question again, whether J would own the took of no^ But I told him I
was the same man now, that I was when I withdrew, and therefore I said nul^^le
they would command and order the door to be openned, that every man that had a
mind to co^^ in, might come in without let or molestation, I would retur^^ a^
ans^er i^ all.

With that one of the Gentlemen said, the door is open, and so it was, and
whether they had given a private Order to the door keeper so to do I know
not. Well Mr. Corbet said I, it is not an accidental or casual openning of
the door will serve ^oy turn, but an orderly and legal openning of it, as
that which ought to be done of ^ight and justice, and therefore Mr. Corbet, if
you please as you are Chairman of this Committee, to command the do^^ to be
set and stand wide open, I shall go on, it not, I shall be silent.

Well then door keeper (says he) set open the door, now Sir said I, with
your favor, I shall express my self a little further to this Committee,
whereupon I openned a written paper I had in my hand, and began to look upon
it, but Mr. Corbet told me, the question was so short, that it needed no long
answer to it, and therefore I might spare the labor of using my paper Good Sir
saill, beseech you, afford me but so much privilege as you do every ma^cena^y
Lawyer, that pleads his Clients cause for a fee before you, to whom you never
deny the benefit of pleading by ^lse help of his notes or papers, and I know no
reason why I should be denied the same privilege in my own case, and therefore
I humbly entreat you, to afford me the benefit of looking upon my own paper,
but said Mr. Corbet, how came you to write these paper? did you know before
hand what we would say to you? O Sir said I, you may remember I was several
times before you in this manner the last year, and very well remember the
method of your illegal proceedings with me then, Which you may fully read in
the forementioned Epistled ^ited July 25. 1645. and lanocencency and Truth
justified.
and being by you summoned now again to come before you, I eid very strongly
conjecture, that you would tread in the method of your old steps of
Interrgatones, and therefore I judged it but wisdom and foresight in me, to
sit my self for you, and accordingly I have writ down the substance of what I
have to say to you in this paper, says Mr. Corbet, give me the paper and we
will consider of it, no Sir said I, I beseech you excuse me, for you have been
so hasty with me, that I had no time to copy it over, and I do not love to
part with my papers in this nature, without keeping copies of them, but if you
please to let me go on, either to read it to you, or to say it by ^eart to
you, now and then looking upon it I shall very willingly give you a true copy
of it under my hand. I pray you Mr Corbet, said the before mentioned, Mr.
Harbert let him go on, which he assented unto, and I purposely past over the
preamble of it, having already as I told them touched upon it, and begun in
that place, where mention is made of the Star Chamber. With which Sir William
Stri^kland interrupted me, and laid Mr. Corbet, I do not like nor approve of
raiking up these things, much less in comparing us to the Star Chamber,
therefore I wish Mr. Lilburne would be persuaded to forbear these
dishonorable expressions, for they are not handsome. Good Mr. Corbet J beseech
you hear me a little, for under Sir Williams favor, I do not compare you to
the ^^^ar Chamber, but if you would not be compared unto it, then you must not
walk in its unjust, (...) illegal ways, but Sir said I, for Sir Williams
further satisfaction, I desire to let him know, I do honor the true and just
power of the House of Commons, as much as himself, and have adven^^ed my life
and blood, for the preservation thereof, as cordially, really and heartily, in
the single^^sse and uprightness of my soul, as any man that at this day sits
within the Walls of that house, ^^ha^^ver he be, and I have still the same love
and affections, to the just interest of that house, and ^^^e same zeal to
maintain it that ever I had, and it does not in the least repent me of what J
have ^^^merly done or suffered for it, though I think by their late dealings
with me, I have as true and ^^^ounded cause admin^stred unto me by them, to
repent, as any man in England either has or ever (...), and therefore Sir,
under your favor, although I be very unwilling like a simple man, to part with
^y just and legal rights to this Committee, a branch of the Honorable House of
Commons, it does ^o^ in the least therefore follow, that I am disaffected or
dis^^spective of the just interest and power of ^^e House of Commons, but
rather it does follow, that I am the same man now that eve^ I was be^^re. and
Sir under your favor I tell you, it is neither for the honor, interest nor
benefit of the house (...) Commons, for any of its Committees, to swallow, down
or destroy, the public interest and liberties of the people, the preservation
of which, (by their own Declarations See the Oat cries (...) Oppressed
Com^ons. page 4, 5. 6. (...) and Regal Ty^nny page 33. 34. ^^. 72. 73.
) being the principal end wherefore the people choose and trusted them to sit
where they do, and therefore Sir, I pray you, let me go on, which was
granted, but before I could get through my paper, there was a great hurly burly
amongst the Parliament men, being extremely netled at my par per which many of
them expressed in their speeches to Mr. Corbet, and desired him to silence me
in the way I then was in, and hold me to the question. Gentlemen said I this is
very strange proceedings, that you will neither let, ^e alone, nor let me
speak. Be it known unto you, that I conceive J stand in need neither of mer^^
nor favor ^^om you, but only what reason, Law and justice affords me, neither
do I crave any ^her privilege at your hands, but what the E^rle of Strafford
enjoyed from you, (although you (...) selves judged him the greatest of
offenders) which was a free and uninterrupted liberty to ^^^k for himself, in
the best manner he could, and to make the best defense for himself, that
^^ssible all the wit and parts he had, would enable him to do, and sure I am
this is a privilege due by law to every Murderer, Rogue, and These, (...)
See 1. H. 7. sol. (...) in S^r Humphe^^ Straffords case.
which I am sure the arrantest Villain that is arraigned at Newgate Sessions
(for the no^orioust of crimes) injoyes this privilege as his right by law, to
speak his own words, in his own manner, for the best advantage of himself,
to his own understanding, and it is very strange to me, that I who am after man
of Eng^ed, and am not conscious to the committing of (...) crime against the
Law, shall not be suffered by a ^^^^ittee of Parl^ament, that have solemnly
swor^^ to maintain the laws, to enjoy that legal pri^^ledge to speak my own
word, in my own manner, for my most advantage and best defense, that is (...)
nor legally, nor cannot be denied, at any Assizes, or Sessions, to the most
capital, bloody, and a^r^n^^ Rog^t in England. Truly Gentlemen, I must plainly
tell you, I never was convicted of any crime (...), that did in the least
disfranchise me of my hereditary and legal Rights and Liberties, nor ^^er was
legally in the least made incapable of enjoying the utmost benefit and
privilege that the (...) of England will afford or hand out to any legal man
of England, But have at your command, ^^y times and often adventured my life
and all that (...) had in the world, l^^ the maintenance and pre^^^ation of the
laws and liberties of England, with as much uprightness of heart* and as much
man (...) ^^rrage, and resolution, as any member of the House of Commons what
ever he be, and therefore I tell (...) before this Committee, or any power in
England, what ever it be, shall rob me of my just ex^^^ed recompense of reward
for all my labors, travels and hazards (which recompense of reward is the
enjoyment of the just pri^iledges and benefits of the good laws of the
Kingdom, I will spend my beart blood against you, yea, if I had a million of
lives, I would sacrifice them all against y^^, and therefore seeing you have
all of you solemnly lifted up your hands to the most high God: and sworn to
maintain the Laws of the Kingdom, I desire you for your own credits ^ake,
to deal with me so, as not to give me to just cause, to avouch it (...) your
faces, you are a company if forsworn men, and so to publish and declare you to
the whole Kingdom. With this Mr Wever, Burgess for Stamford spoke. Mr
Corbet, I conceive such reproachful and dishonorable expressions as Mr.
Lilburn gives us to our fates, is not to be endured or suffered, and therefore
I beseech you, let us be sensible of the honor due to our Authority, and the
house whereof we are Members.

Good Mr. Corlet, I entreat you hear me, for J desire to let that Gentleman
know, J am very confident I have not you said any thing that is dishonorable
to the legal and just interest and power either of this Committee, or the
house of Commons whereof you are Members, and Sir if I should, I conceive you
are enough to bear witness against me, and I think you judge your selves
sufficiently endowed with power to punish me, if I should do as that Gentleman
pretends, I have done, and truly Mr. Corbet, J must again aver it before you,
that I am no contemner nor despiser of the just and legal authority of the
house of Commons, neither do I desire to affront or repro^ch this Committee,
but I pray consider, I am but a man, and a prisoner under many provocations,
and to be so tosly ^alne upon as I am, by half a dozen of you at a time, and
interrupted in making my legal defense, and not suffered to speak my own
words, is very hard and it is possible hereby, I may be provoked to hear, and
in heat say that that is not convenient and sitting, the which if J should do
I hope you Mr. Corbet, have understanding enough to judge, and to reprove me
for it, and truly Sit upon your reproof, if I can possibly apprehend and see I
have done amiss, I shall presently Cry you peccavic.

But here abouts, my wife seeing Mr. Wever so furious upon me as he was, burst
out with aloud voice and said, I told thee often enough long since, that thou
would serve the Parliamen^, and venture thy life so long for them, till they
would hang thee for thy pains, and give thee Tyburn for thy recompense, and I
told thee besides, thou should in conclusion find them a company of unjust,
and unrighteous Judges, that more sought themselves, and their own ends, then
the public good of the Kingdom, or any of those that faithfully adventured
their lives therefore.

But J desired Mr. Corbet to pass by what in the bitterness of her heart
being a woman she had said unto them, and desired him to let me conclude my
paper, and then J would give him a possitive answer to their question, which
was granted, and I read out my paper, the true copy of which at large thus
follows.

To the Honorable Committee of the Honorable House of Commons, for
suppressing of scandalous Pamphlets.
The humble Addresses of Li^ut. Col. John Lilburne, Prerogative Prisoner in the
Tower of London Feb. 8. 1646.
May it please this honorable Committee, this any I see and read a warrant
under the hand of Mr. Miles Corbet, d^^^sed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to
bring me before your honors, s^^^ng in the inner Cour^s of wards, at two a
clock this present afternoon, but no cause wherefore is expressed in the
warr^^^, therefore in the first pla^e, I desire and humble entreat this
honorable Committee, to take ^o^^e that I ho^^^^ and ^^vere^ce the
constitution, authority and power of the honorable house of Commons, and look
upon it in its constitution, at the greatest and legal, best interest that the
Commons of England ^ath, and of all the Committees thereof, that legally and
^ustly derive their power therefrom, and act according to the Law and just
customs of Parliament, within their bounds, unto all whose commands so far
as the established law of England requires me, I shall yield all cheerful and
ready obedience, but having the last year very large experience of the
arbitrary and illegal proceedings of some Committee or Committees of the House
of Commons, and the Chair-manor Chair-men thereof, and fearing to meet with the
like now again^, by way of prevention I amnec^ssitated humbly to declare unto
this honorable Committee, that in the days of the Star Chamber, I was there
sentenced for no other cause, but for refusing to answer to their
interrogateries or questions, and upon the 4. of May, 1641. the honorable
house of Commons, whereof you are Members upon the report of Mr. Francis Rouse
made these ensuing Votes.

Resolved upon the question.

That the sentence of the Star Chamber given against John Lilburn l^illegall
and against the the liberty of the Subject, and also bloody, wicked, cruel,
barberous and tyrannical.

Resolved upon the question, that reparations ought to be given to Mr. Lilburn
for his imprisonment, sufferings and losses, sustained by that illegal
sentence.

Here is your own just and legal Votes in my own case, to condemn as illegal
and unjust; all inquisition proceedings upon self accusing interrogatories,
and your Votes are suitable to the ancient and fundamental laws of this land,
as appears by the 29. chap. of Mag^a Carta, and the 5. E. 3 9 and 25. E. 3.4.
and 2^, E. 3.3. and 37. E. 3.18. and 42. E. 3.3. the words of which last cited
Statute thus follows.

Item at the request of the Commons by their Petitions, put forth in this
Parliament, to eschew the mischiefs and damages done to diverse of his Commons
by false accusers, which oftentimes have made their accusations more for
revenge and singular benefit, then for the profit of the King or of his people,
which accused persons, some have been taken, and sometime caused to come before
the Kings Counsel Which the Parliament is.
by writ and otherwise, upon grievous pain against the law. It is assented and
accorded, for the good governance of the Commons, that no man be put to answer
without presentment before Justices or matter of record, or by due process and
writ original, according to the old Law of the land, and if any thing from
henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in the Law, and holden
forerrour.

All which forementioned good Laws are all and every of them confirmed by the
Petition of right made in the third year of the present King Charle^, which
expressly says, no man ought to be adjudged but by the laws establ^shed in the
Realm, and not otherwise, which Petition of right, you your selves in this
present Parliament have in every point confirmed, as appears by the Statute
that abolish^th the Star Chamber, and by the Statute that abolishe^h ship
money, and you your selves with your hands lifted up to the most high God, have
often sworn, vowed, pro^^^ted and d^e^^red, you will maintain, preserve and
defend the fundamental laws of the land, and square you actions accordingly,
and imprecate the wrath and vengeance of the great God of Heaven an dearth to
fail upon you, when you cease to perform what there you swear to and declare.
And therefore honorable Gentlemen, what thoughts soever of ind^gnation and
displeasure you have toward me, I hope you will be so tender of your own
honors and reputations that you will not in the least endeavor, to deal with
me contrary to the true intent and meaning of the for^^entioned good and just
laws. But if you should, I cannot, nor shall not willingly stoop unto ^^y
trial, that is contrary to the pattern of the forementioned honest, just and
good laws, and if you please to let me ^^ioy the benefit of them, J shall be
ready to join issue with you, whenever you please, without craving any
mercy, pity or compassion at your hands, and legally to answer whatsoever J
have said or done.

But under the favor of this honorable Committee, I die humbly conceive it
will neither b^lu^ nor honorable for the house of Commas to pun^sh me either
for a pretended or real crime committed by me in a bard, tedious, provoking
and u^iust imprisonment, while my case is depending before themselves, and I by
themselves extr^amly delayed in receiving justice and right, therefore I make
it my humble suite unto this honorable Committee, to represent myiust desire
to the honorable house of Commons, that they would first adiudge my cause
betwixt the house of Lords and me, which has been dependant before them about
this 8, months, and either according to the laws and constitutions of the
land, justify we or condemn me, and then in the second place, when they have
done righteous and true judgment in this, then I desire them if they have any
real or pretended crime or crimes to^ay to my charge, committed by me in my
present, hard, unjust and extraordinary provoking imprisonment, whilst J am
managing my buslnesse before them, that then they would proceed according to
law with me, and according thereunto to punish me without mercy or compassion,
which proposition I hope is so rational, that in iustiece it cannot be denied
me. So humbly taking leave of your honors, I subscribe my self.

A true and faithful servant to the honorable House of Commons, to be
commanded by them according to law and justice but no further. John Lilburne.
From the outward Court of Wards 8. day of February. 1646.
And having concluded my paper, now Mr. Corbet said I, if you please lets go
to the question, well then said he will you renounce this book or no? Sir said
I, I had rather give you leave to hough ^e in ten thousand pieces, then
renounce any act of mine, done by me upon grounded, mature and deliberate
consideration, and therefore Sir, somethings before hand premised, J shall give
you a possitive and satisfactory answer to the question.

And therefore in the first place, I desire you and all here present to take
notice, that I do not return you an answer to your question our of any opinion
that J am bound in duty or conscience unto your Authority to do it, because
you command me to do it, for I know J am (actively) only to obey you in
lawful things, which this is not in the least, for by law no man what ever is
bound to betray himself.

Nor secondly, J do not return you an answer to it, as though I were bound by
any law in England thereto; for I have before punctually proved it to your
faces out of my paper, that it is altogether unlawful by the law of the land,
to press or force me to answer to interrogatories. Neither lastly, do^ I
answer your interrogation, out of any base tymerousnesse to betray the
liberties and priveledges of the laws of England, or to save my from self
your insenced indignation, and therefore protesting that my answering your
question, neither is, shall or justly can be drawn into president in future
time, to compel me or any other free men of England, to answer to
interrogatories, and therefore having (premised these things) affirmatively, I
re^^turn you an answer to your question out of this consideration, that when I
pend that book, I was inwardly exceedingly pricked forward to it, and framed
it, with a resolution to lay down my life in the justification of it. And
secondly, J return you an answer to the question out of this consideration,
that upon your summons, I came before you with an absolute resolution to own
and avow that book, (though I have been much by some of my friends persuaded
to the contrary) always provided I could get some things effected before I did
own it, which I have already done, (that so I might set it in a way to come to
a legal justification.) For first J have got the door openned, that so I
might have a rublique hearing as my right by law. And secondly, have obtained
liberty (though with much ado) to declare before you, in the presence and
hearing of all these people, the illegallity of all yours, and all other
Committees proceedings, enforcing the free men of England, (against the known
and fundamental laws, of the land, and your own oather,) to answer to self
accusing interrogatories, and now having sully effected what I desired and
thirsted after, I come now with as much willingness and readiness to answer
to your question, as you are to have me answer to it, and avowedly I tell you,
I invented, compiled and writ that book, and caused it to be printed and
dispersed, and every word in it I will own and avouch to the death, saving the
Printers Erratas, which if you please to give me the book, and liberty of pen
and ink, I will correct and amend them under my own hand, and return you the
book again, with my name annexed, under my own hand at the conclusion of it.
Well then said Mr. Corbet, take the book and pen and ink, and go mend it,
truly Sir, said I, I have but one good eye to see with, and yet for that, I am
forced to use the helped of spectacles, and I have very much this day wrained
the strength of my eyes, with reading and writing, and besides the book is fut
sheets of-paper, so that it is almost impossible for me seriously and carefully
(with my weak eyes) to read it over this night, but if you please to give me
but any reasonable time, I will be very punctual in returning it to you
again; so I had tell wednesday in the afternoon given me, and accordingly I
amended the faults under my own hand, which principally were litterall and
verbal faults, and at the conclusion of the book, I writ, examined and avoned
by me John Lilburn, 10. Feb. 1646.

And upon wednesday, I enclosed the book with a copy of my forecited paper that
I read at the Committee) in a letter sealed to Mr. Corbet the Chairman of the
foresaid Committee, the true copy of which letter thus follows.

Sir,
ACcording to my promise, J have corrected the Printers Er^^tas, and subscribed
my hand thereto, (...) and sent you back enclosed the very book you delivered
to me with a tru^copy of my paper I read before you at the Committee, which is
all I have at present to trouble you with, but to subscribe mysefe.

From my prerogative, illegal and tyrannical imprisonment, in the tower of
London this 10. of February 1646. A true and faithful friend to the Common
wealth of England, and your real servant, if you will be true to the public
trust reposed in you, and act for the preservation of the fundamental lawc^ of
the land, John Lilburn.


But after this little digression, I return to the rest of that which followed
at the Committee, which was to this effect, as soon as I had ownd the book,
and received the book from Mr. Corbet, I said Gentlemen, you having as I
perceive done with me, I shall humbly crave liberty to make one motion to this
Committee, for the discharge of my wife, for by virtue of your warrant she is a
prisoner, for dispersing some of my books, and truly gentlemen she is my wife,
and set at work to do what she did at the earnest desire of me her (unjust
imprisoned) husband, and truly I appeal to every one of your own consciences,
whether you would not have taken it very ill at the hands of any of your wives?
if you were in my case, and she should refuse at your earnest desire to do
that for you that she by my persuasions has done for me, therefore I entreat
you toser her at liberty, and set the punishment of that her action upon my
score, so with one consent she was discharged, for which I thanked them. Now
Gentlemen with your favor and patience I humbly entreat you to hear me but
one word more, which is this, I was the other day tobd, or at least plundered,
and had my house violently, forceably, and without any color of law or
conscience entered, and an Iron larch drawn, as I am info^m^d by one Whittaker a
bookseller, who dwells in Paul's Churchyard, who with others lik^ high
contemneis and ^i^laters of the law, loaded away, as I am informed three
potters with me u^e and proper goods, that I bought with my own proper money,
and he pretended he did it by virtue of a warrant from this Committee,
therefore I humbly desire to know, whether this Committee will avow his action,
and b^ are him out in what he has so done? No says Mr. Corbet, he had no such
power from this Committee, as forceably to enter your house, nor to meddle with
any of your good or books, but only at random to seize upon all of this
book where he could find them. Well gentlemen, then here is a high act of
violence and contempt of the law committed, for here is my house by violence
entered, and so many of my goods as they pleased to seize upon carried away,
none belonging to me being present to see what they did, and my doors by them
left wide open, for any that had a mind to go in and take away, and rob me of
all the rest of my goods that they left, for which actions I hope I shall
obtain justice in time, but in regard you say your warrant did not authorize
him to take any of my books, but The Oppressed man's Oppressions declared* and
yet he took away abundance of several other books besides that, which I
bought with my money I hope this honorable Committee will be so just as to
command him faithfully to restore me them all again, or at least all but the
hundred of the present books in controversy, and I was fairly promised I
should have but the hundred of the present books in controversy, and I was
fairly promised I should have them, but as yet I have found no performance at
all, though truly I do conceive there was is many books carried away by him as
stood me in about twenty or thirty pounds, for there was the greatest part of a
thousand of my books, called London Charters, the printing of which* with the
paying for the copies of the original Charters, etc. (which I had out of the
Record office in the Tower) cost me almost twenty pounds, besides a great many
of several oth^^ sorts, And at my withdrawing, the people eryed out, they
never would answer to close Committees any more, being the doors by law ought
to be open, which they never kn^w before. Now friend, I know you are acquainted
very well with some able and honest Lawyers, and therefore I pray do me the
favor as inquire of them, whether all these things laid together, it be not an
act of Felony in the forementioned Whittaker, etc* thus forceably to enter my
house, and without any real or pretended warrant to take away my good^^; but
if it be not felony, I desire to know of them, what effectual course, I may
take in saw, to obtain my just and legal satisfaction for this illegal
wrone, and making these catch-poule Knaves (who art as bad if not worse then
the Bishops Rookes and Catch-poules) examples to all their fellow* Knaves and
Catch-poules.

Thirdly, I desire to know, whether by law, any free man's house in England can
be broken open, or forceably entered under any pretense whatever? unless if be
for felony and treason, or a strong and grounded suspicion of felony or
treason, or to serve an execution after judgment for the King?

Fourthly, if any person or persons whatever, shall indeavonr to break open, or
forece^bly enter my house, or any other free men^ of England, upon any precence
what ever, but the forementioned, (...) some other that is expressly warrantable
by the known law, whether according to law or no, I may not stand upon my own
defense in my own house being my Castle and Sanctuary, and kill any or all of
those that so illegally (though under specious authoritive pretenses) shall
assault me.

Fifthly, whether in law it be not as great a crime in the foresaid whittaker,
etc. for cably to enter my house, and carry away my own goods fawfully come
by, under a pretense of a warrant signed by a single Member of the House of
Commons, commonly called a Chairman of a Committee. As for Sir William Beacher
Clark of his Majesty's Privy Counsel, Old Sir Henry Vain a Privy
Counceller, and (it I mistake not then) Secretary of State, and Mr. Laurance
wh^tt^ker that old corrupt Monopolizer, now Member of the House of Commons, by
virtue of Regal, or Councell-Board authority, to sench the pockets, or break
open the study doors of the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Say, Mr. Hambden, Mr.
Pym, Mr. C^ue, or any other of those that was so served after the breaking up
of the short Parliament, for which by this present Parliament (as I am credibly
informed from knowing and good hands) Sir Wiliam Beacher was committed to the
Fleet, Mr. Laurance Whittaker to the Tower, and old Sir Henry Vain, who as it
is credibly said was this principal actor in this b^sinesse, and was in this
present House of Commons, strongly moved against, again, and again, and in
all probability had smarted soundly for it, if it had not been for the interest
that his Son young Sir Henry had in Mr. John Pym, and the rest of his bosom
associates, who as it plainly (now appears, for ends besides the p^bli^^e, had
use to make of him against the Earl of Strafford, who was one of the chief
men that stood in their way, and hind^ed them from possessing themselves of
those high and mighty places of honor and profit that is now too much apparent
they then aspired unto, and therefore truly when I seriously cast my eye upon
their continued serious of actions, (especially of late) my conscience is
overcome, and J am forced to think that there is a great deal of more truth
in many of the charges fixed upon them, in those two notable Declarations of
the Kings, (then at the first reading of them, I conceive there was) the first
of which is the 12. of August, 1642. and begins book Decl* 1. pan page 514.
some notable passages of which Mr. Rubard Overton and my self have published
in the 6 page of out late discourse, called The Outcry I of Oppressed Comm^ns,
unto which I shall desire toad one more, and that is of their partialli^y in
judgment, which the King charge them with (ibim) page 516 That they threw
out of their house some Monopolizers, as unfit to be Lawmakers, because their
principles was not fit for the present turns of the powerful party there, and
kept in other as great Monopolizers as those they threw out, because they did
comply with them in their ends and the King instances Sir Heary Mildmer, and
Mr. Laurance Whittaker, both of whom, for all their transgressions, still fit
in the hou^^. And if it be an act of treason to exercise an Arbitrary and
tyrannical power (for so it was charged upon the Earl of Strafford, etc.)
then I will maintain it, M. Laurance Whittaker is guilty of it, for he has
several times done it unto the free men of England, yea, upon mean particular,
as at large you may read in my book called Innocence and Truth, justified, to
the apparent hazard of my life and being, for which I will never forgive him,
tell he has acknowledged his fault, and made me leg^ll and just satisfaction,
the which if he do not the speedier, seeing by his unreasonable privilege, as
he is a Parliament man, that by law I cannot meddle either with his body or
goods, I will by Gods assistance (seeing I have no other re^edy) pay him with
my pen, as well as ever he wa^ paid since his eyes was open, cost it what it
will and therefore I now advise him, if he love his own reputation, without
any more ado to acknowledge his fault, by giving me legal satisfaction.

The King second Declaration, is an answer to the two Houses Declaration of the
proceeding of the Treaty at Oxfo^d, 1643. and in the second part book decl.
page 100. printed Anno 1646. where in page 10^. he charge them poss^^vely,
that the maintenance and advancement of Religion, justice, liberty, propriety
and peace, are really but their stalking ho^ses, and neither the g^ound of
their watre, nor of their demands, and I for my part must ingeniously protest
and declare unto you, that the dealings of both houses with me, and others of
the Kingdoms best friends is such, that as sure as the Lord lives, I should
sin against my own soul, if I should not really believe this particular charge
of his Majesty's to be most undeniable true and just, and to my understanding
he there gives notable demonstrations to evince and clear the forementioned
charge, I shall only instance that in page 112.113. Where his Majesty framing
an answer to something they say in their Declaration about the Judges, and
Members of Parliament, he says. That by never having appeared at all in the
favor, excuse or extenuation, of the fault of those Judges (who are to answer
for any unjust judgment, in all which his Majesty lest them wholly to their
consciences, and whenever they offended against that, they wronged his
Majesty no less then his people.) And by his being yet so careful of those
Lords and Gentlemen, it may appear that his Majesty conceires, that those
only adhere to him, who adhere to him according to law. And whether the
remaining part of the Houses be not more apt to repeal^ their own impeachments
and proceedings against those Judges, (if they conceive they may be made use of
and brought to adhere to them) then his Majesty is to require they should, may
appear by their requiring in their 14 propositions, that Sir John Bramston
(impeacht by then selves of so great misdemeaners) may be made chief Justice,
and by their freeing and returning Justice Barkly, (accused by themselves of
high Treason) to fit upon the bench, rather then free and employ Justice
Mallet, who was not legally committed at first, but feicht from the bench to
prison by a troop of Horse, and who after so many months imiprisonment,
remains not truly impeacht, but wholly without any knowledge of what crime he
is suspected.

And indeed their partiallity in doing justice and judgment, appears in no
one man in England (I think more, then in old Sir Henry Vain, who by all men
that I can talk with that knows him and his practices, renders him a man as
full of guilt (in the highest nature) and court baseness, as any man what ever
that was there. For I have credably been told by one that sat in the short
Parliament, that he was the maine and principal man, that instrumentally brok
up that Parliament, for in the House in the Kings name he strongly moved for
twelve Subsidies, when he had no such Commission from his Majesty, but did it
of purpose to set the Parliament in a heat, and make them fly high against the
King, of which heat he took advantage, and then went to the King, and incensed
him against them, and thereby provoked him to break it up, on set purpose to
save himself from being questioned about his dangerous and desparate Monopoly
of Gun powder, and other of his illegal Knaveries, in which he was deep enough
even over both boots and shoes. For Sir John Eveling was the old powder
master, and then Sir Henry Vain stepped in, and justled him out, and got in one
Mr. Samuel Cordwell one of his own servants that waited upon him in his
Chamber, who had the sole Monopoly of making all the powder in England, and
furnished powder for viid. ^b. into the Tower, which powder was sold out
commonly for 18. per. l. at the first hand, besides the charge of getting first
a warrant from the Counsel board, to the Lord Newport, then master of the
Ordinance^, to sell such and such so much powder, which warrant besides the
loss of time and trouble, cost dear enough, then there was a second warrant
from the Lord Newport, to be obtained to the officers of the Ordnance to
deliver the powder out, according to the warrant of the Counsel board, and
then there was a third warrant to be got from the officers of the Ordnance to
the particular Clarke that kept the powder, all which besides trouble, cost,
money, besides a see of a mark which was paid by the buyer to the officers of
the Ordnance, for every last of powder they delivered, and the forementioned
Cordwell, Sir Henry Veins Gunpowder Agent, constantly engaged to bring in
every month to the Tower 20. last, there being 24. barrells in every last, and
100. l in every barrel, and besides he (as the principal instrument of
setting this dangerous Monopoly on foot) forced the Merchants, and sea men,
many times for diverse days together, to stop their viages to their great and
extraordinary detriment, till they would give large bribes, or were forced to
use some other indirect means, to obtain his warrant, etc. to get powder out
of his unjust Monopolizing hands to furnish their ships, for which
notwithstanding they were forced to pay above double the price for it, (nay
almost trible) according to the rate it was sold at before his Monopoly.

Yea, and by this means, he wickedly and illegally disfurnished all the
Countries in the Kingdom, at is notoriously known to all the Deputy
Lieutenants, by means of which he laid the Kingdom open to the invasion and
overrunning of aferraign enemy, which did create, nourish and foment, strange
and strong jealousies in the people, that there was some strange and desparate
design upon them to inslave and inv^solize them, which was no little occasion
of out present wars, by blowing of coals to the fomenting and increasing of
devisions betwixt the King and the people.

Yea, and besides all this, he was not one of the least of Canterburies
Creatures, being not a little active in the Star Chamber, to serve his ends,
the smart of which with a witness, I am sure my shoulders selt. For upon the
13. of Feb. 1617. in the 13. year of the present King, the Lord Coventry,
Earl of Manchester, Lord Newburgh, old Sir Henry Vain, Judge Bramstone, and
Judge Jones, in the Star Chamber sentenced me for refusing to take an illegal
oath to answer to their Interrogatories to pay to the King 500. l to be bound
to my good be haviour to be whipped through the strect to Westminster, and there
to be set upon the Pillory, and then to remain in prison tell I conformd to
their tyrannical commands. Which decree or sentence you may at large read in
the 1, 2, 3. pages of my printed relation of my Star Chamber sufferings, as
they were presented by my Counsel, Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr. John Cook, before the
Lords at there Bar, and proved by witnesses, the 13. Feb. 1645. the barbarous
execution of which you may read not only in that relation, but also in a large
relation of it, made and printed by me, that year I suffered, called the
Christian man's trial, and lately reprinted by Mr. William Larnar in
Bishops-gate street, and in my books also then made, called, Come out of her
my people, the afflicted man's Complaint, A cry for justice, my Epistle to the
Aprentizes of London, and my Epistle to the Wardens of the fleet, which
foresaid sentence the House of Commons after a long and judicious examination
and debaite, thus voted.

Die Martis, May 4. 1641.
Mr. Rouse this day reported John Lilburn his cause, it was thereupon ordered
and resolved upon the question as follows.

Resolved upon the question,

That the sentence of the Star Chamber given against John Lilburn is illegal
and against the liberty of the Subject, and also bloody, Wicked, cruel,
barbarous and tyrannical

Resolved upon the question.

That reparations ought to be given to Mr. Lilburne for his Imprisonment,
sufferings, and losses sustained by that illegal sentence.

Ordered that the Committee shall prepare this case of Mr. Lilburnes to be
transmitted to the Lords, with those other of Doctor Bastwicks, Doctor
Leighton, Master Burton, and Mr. Pryn.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Dom. Com.

And though it war a matter of four years before I could get this my case
transmitted to the Lords, the obstructing of which I cannot altribute to any,
but principally to that old crafty For, Sir Henry Vain, (who I am confident of
it has long since deserved the Ax or Halter) and and his powerful interest
and influence, especially by his son, young Sir Henry, though ( Machiavel
like) he faces and looks another way, who for ^ll his religious pretenses, I
for my part think to be as crafty (though not so guilty a) Colt as his Father,
which I believe I could easily and visibly demonstrate, which I groundedly
apprehend I have sufficient cause administered unto me to do, especially for
some subtle, cunning, but mischievous late underhand dealings, by as gilded
instruments as himself, but at present for my own interest sake I will spare
him, though (my ^ingers itches,) yet I must tell him, I am very confident for
all his ^^^guises, he will shortly be known to conscientious men, to be but at
the best (if he be no more) then one of the p^e^^gative quench coals, to keep
the people in silence, from acting and ^^^ring t^ deliver themselves from
slavery and bondage.

And when^ came amongst the Lords, they the 13, Feb, 1645. decreed, that that
sentence, and all proceedings thereupon shall forthwith be for ever totally
vacuated, obliterated, and taken of the file (...) Cou^^s where they are yet
remaining, as illegal, and most unjust, against the liberty of the Subject,
and law of the land, and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon Record. And
(...) said L^lburn shall be for ever absolut^ly freed, and totally discharged
from the said s^^^^^ce, and all proc^e^ing* thereupon, as ^ully and ample as
though never any such thing h^^ ^^n, etc.

(...) may a^ large read in the foresaid relation, yea, and by an other decree,
ordered (...). And down into the House of Commons they send my Ordinance for
their c^ncu^rance, which is there again bl^ckt up, as I may too justly conceive
by the powerful and unjust (...) of the fore mentioned old, tyr^nnicall
Monopo^izer, Sir Henry Va^ne, for which by Gods a^^^sta^ce, s^eing I have no
other ^^medy, nor means left me, to obtain my right, and the (...) of the
Kingdom, I am resolved to pay him, (and all that I can g^oundedly know and
hear joins and concurs with him to destroy me, and hinder me of justice and
my right which should preserve me and keep me and mine alive) cost it hanging,
burning, drowning, strangling, poisoning, starving, cutting to pieces, or what
ever it will or can yea, though it loose me all the interest I have in the
world, in any or all the great ones thereof, put Lie^ Ge^^* Cromwell into the
number.

And therefore J desire not only your self, (but all impartial Readers that
reads these lines) to judge whether it be not the hight of partiallity and in
justice in the House of Commons, to ^^^^er him to sit and vote there,
especially they having thrown out diverse others, for ten times less faults
then he is publicly known to be guilty of, and I desire you to satisfy me,
whether or no the people for their own welfare are not bound, and may not
groundedly petition the House of Commons to throw out him, who is so great a
transgressor and violater of the Laws of England, and therefore altogether
unfit to be one of those that makes and gives laws unto the free men of
England, for in my apprehension if there were no more to be laid unto his
Charge, but to have been so unjust and unrighteous a Judge, as to have had a
^inger in inflicting a sentence that is voted by the house of Commons in the
days of their verginity, purity and uncorruptnesse, (to what it is visibly
now, yea, himself sitting as a Member there) to be not only illegal, and
against the liberty of the Subject, but also bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous,
and tyrannical, it alone were legally and justly cause enough for ever to
eject him. O England, England! woe unto thee! when thy chosen preservers turn
to be thy grand destroyers, and in stead of easing thee of thy grievances, with
a high hand of violence protect from justice those that commit them, and thou
see it and know it, and yet art like a silly Dove without heart, and dares
not open thy mouth wide to reprove it, and endeavor by petition or otherwise
the amending of it, surely and undeniably that body, who, or what ever it be
that is not able to evacuate its excrements, is nigh unto the giving up the
Ghost, or bursting out into such botches and ulcers, that it shall be an eye
sore to all that behold it, and stink in the nostrels of all men, that have
their senses.

But with your patience, I will trace this old For a little further, and see
how he has played his cards since this Parliament fate, and to let pass^ his
unfaithful dealings with his master the King, whose Secretary of State he was,
and yet could not, or would not keep his secrets, (which is an act base enough
in it self) although as J have been told by one very near and dear unto him,
his places he enjoyed under the King, were w^ith to him, 8^00 l. per ann^^, but
having as before is truly observed, before this Parliament (by acts of
baseness done, ^^he was a Courtice and a ^rivie Counselor) too himself over
boo^^ and ^hooes* and seeing that it was impossible for him and all his
confederates, to break of this Parliament, as they did the late short
Parliament, therefore it behoved him for the safety of his own head, to lay his
designs so, as that h^ might by the swaying party merit preservation to
himself, which to do being as he was a Secretary, p^^rie to all the King and
Court^ principal secrets, though he was under an Oath, and the strictest
obligation of se^^ecie that could be, yet they must all out, and out they went,
as in the case of the Earl of Strafford, of which I have heard some great ones
say, it was scrued to the highest pin, if it were not higher then in honesty
and justice it should, but all this was done, that he might not only save
himself, but gain an esteem in the present Parliament, and so be in a
possibillity by the interest of his son, Sir Heary, (although to men that were
half blind, there was, and I think still is a seeming enmity betwixt him and
his Father) in time to make himself amonds, for his 8000. l a year by his
places, which by disserting of the King (to save himself) he was likely to
loose, (and indeed it is commonly reported, that in his place as one of the
Committee of the Kings ^^venue, he has learned to lick his own fingers well)
and the first or grand step of honor he attaind to, by the Parliament, was to
be made Lord Lieutenant of the County of Durham, and the wars coming one
betwixt the King and Parliament, to indeare himself again unto the King
(knowing that the chance of war was doubtful) he sent his second son, Sir
George Vain to wa^e upon and serve the King, who in person was actually ^^^nd
in the baitell of Edgehill, with the rest of his fellow Courtiers, but to make
up his case the more with the King, though himself stard with the Parliament,
where as a seeming friend to them, he was able to do the King truer service,
yea, and did it then if he had been with him, for instead of protecting,
preserving, securing and defending the County of Durham, (of which he was
Lieutenant) according to the duty of his place, and those many importunare
desires expressed unto him by the well affected Gentlemen of the Country, which
were all in rain, for in stead of preserving the Country, he sent his Magazine
of Arms from his Castle at Raby, (by his t^o principal servants, Mr. Will em
Conyers Steward of his land, and Mr. Henry Dingly his Sol^citer at law) as a
present for the King, to the Earl of New Castle, then in Arms at New Castle
against the Parliament, who might then have been easily suppre^^ at his coming
to New Castle, if old Sir Henry Vain had been true to his trust the Parliament
reposed in him.

And that he sent them is visible enough, for they carried them openly and
avowedly in the day time through the Country, boasting of their act both in
their going and coming, and at New Castle from the hand of one of the Earls
s^rvant, or Officers, received a note for the receipt of those arms, that so
when time should serve, Sir Henry Vain might have it to justify his good
service done for his Majesty in being the principal instrument of raising the
Earl of New Castles Army, and giving the King so great a footing in the North
as there he had, for his Arms being sent to the Kings General so openly,
publicly and avowedly as they were, though his person were with the
Parliament, yet it ^^de all people there to conclude that he was himself
absolutely for the King against the Parliament, which presently (his influence
in those parts being grent) got the Earl of New Castle a mighty repute and
credit, and made those that were really for him to be impudent and bold in
their attempts, and made abundance of Newters then to declare, (all or most of
whom might at the first have been made serviceable to the Parliament, if they
had been look to betime^) and the most of those few of cordial, well affected
Gentlemen, were immediately forced to ^ly and leave all they had behind them,
and the test that stayed, were immediately taken prisoners and destroyed, (as
well as the other) in their estates, for which Sir Henry Veins land and
estate, ought i^ justice and conscience to go to the last penny of it, to make
them satisfaction, being the (...) isntrumental cause of all their losses, woe
and misery, and of all the woe and misery of the whole North, occasioned by the
Earl of New-Castles forces, and those that were necessi^^ted to be raised to
destroy them, which if they had never had a being, there had never been no need
of the Scots coming into this Kingdom to our dear bought aid, the evil
consequences of whose coming, I am afraid England this twice seven years
will not ^^^ke of without a great deal of blood shed and misery, the yo^k of
Presbyterian bondage alone, (besides then to-operations, if not co sharing in
the Civil government of England, to the unspeakable prejudice to the freemen
thereof) which they brought with them over Twe^d i^to this Kingdom, which is
likely to prove 100. times worse then the tyranny and Lordlinesse of the
Bishops. One thing more about Sir Henry Vain I desire you to take notice of,
and that is further to demonstrate, that his servants carried the Arms, not of
their own heads, but by his command, or at least good liking, is this, that he
never complained to the Parliament of it, nor never indeavouted to have them
punished for it, but rather protected and defended them, so that those that
complained of them, as well as of himself, by reason of his greatness, could
never be heard nor obtain justice, though it was with some zeal followed by
my Father, and my V^kle Mr. George Lilburn, with other Gentlemen of the same
Country, as you may partly read in Englands Birth R^ght page 19.20.21.

All this while if the King lost the day and the Parliament prevailed, here was
himself and his son, young Sir Henry to make good his interest here, so that
of which side soever the g^^t went, the old crafty Fox was sure in his own
thoughts to stand upon his legs, and be no looser, but perceiving the King
likely to go down the weather, by the Scots coming in, he whistles away his
son Sir George Vain from the Kings Army. And though the Parliament had upon
the 20 May 1642 voted. That when soever the King in kith war upon the
Parliament, it i^ ^breach of the trust reposed in him by his people, contrary
to his oath, and tends to the dissolution of this Government. And that
whosoever shall serve or assist him in such wars, are Traitors by the
fundament all laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by two Acts of
Parliament, viz. 11. R. 2. and 1 ll. 4:

And yet notwithstanding, though Sir George Vain did both serve and assist the
King actually at the battle at Edgehill, yet as soon as any footing by the
Parliament is gotten in the County of Durbam, he is by his Father, (and I
think I might say brother too) for it is impossible if young Sir Henry were
honest and true to the public interest of his Country, according to what he
seemingly professes, and would be thought to be, that his father and brother
should do such actions as they have done and daily do, and escape scot free,
and no man to be heard that complains of them, but rather crushed and
destroyed, which could not be, if he and his interest did not support them in
all their baseness) I say Sir George is by his Father sent down into the
Country, as the only fit man to govern it, by deserving well at the hands of
the Parliament for being with the King at the battle of Edgehill, and
therefore is made the receiver of the Kings sequestered revenue there, worth to
his particular a great many hundreds pounds per aunum, and is also made chief
Deputy Lieutenant, yea, as it were Deputy Lord Lieutenant, Justice of peace and
quorum, Committee man and Chairman of the Committee, and has also the Posse
commitatis of the whole County put into his hands, as being the fitte^^ man to
be High Sheriff there, yea, and no^irin that County, what ever a King is in
his Kingdom, that saying of Da^i^l, chap. 5.19. concerning the power of
^^^^bad nezzar, being too truly verified of him and his father, in ^efo^e^ce
their acted and executed power in that ^oore County, that whom they will they
set up, (yea, even as arch blades as Sir George himself) and whom they will
they pull down, and all the people there in a manner tumble and fear before
them.

But this is not all, for the Parliament upon the clearing of the Country, sent
a Magazine of Ammunition and Arms down, which was landed and laid up at
Sunderland in the possession of my Vn^le, Mr. George Lalburn; one of the Deputy
Lieutenants, and Justices of Peace, etc. of the County, which Sir George Vain
by his supreme prerogative sent for away, and put into his Fathers Castle of
R^b, no laid in store of Provisions there, but I will not say he sent for some
scores of Cavieliers from a Castle in York shire to come and take possession of
it so soon as be had so done, but this I will say, that they did come and take
possession of it with a great deal of ease, and it cost the Country some
thousands of pounds before they could take it again. So here you have at
present a brief relation of the game that Sir Henry Vain has played this many
years together, by means of which he has got a great estate, but I may say
an ill estate, to leave to his son Sir Henry principally, a man for all the
experience I have had of him, (and I have had not a little) no whit inferior in
my apprehension to his Father in Machiavels principles, for all his gilded
professions, and truly it is very strange tone what the Family of the Veins
has deserved of this Kingdom, that they must have so many thousands pounds a
year out of the Kingdoms Revenue, in its present great and extraordinary
poverty, as they have, never any of which ever hazarded the shedding of one
drop of blood for the Parliament or Kingdom. And besides the two sons before
mentioned, there is a third lately come out of Holland that was a Captain
there, and though he has not one foot of Land in the County of Durham, yet he
is as I am informed lately made a Justice of peace, and has besides profitable
and gainefull Offices there. I pray Sir, what do you think such doings as
this (of which the Parliament is full, as I could easily declare) does portend
to the whole Kingdom, do you think that it portends less then absolute
vassolage and slavery to the whole Kingdom, by a company of base and unworthy
men, set up by the people, whom they may if they please pull down by calling
them home, and choose honester men in their places, in a new Parliament to call
them to a strict account, without doing of which the laws and liberties of
England are destroyed, and our proprieties utterly overthrow, that do and will
tyrannise ten times worse ov^r us, then ever our prerogative task masters of
old did.

Sir, sure I am by the ancient, good, just and unrepealed laws of England, it
is inacted, that a Parliament should be holden every year once or m^re oftener
^f^^ed require for the maintenance of the laws, and the redress of diverse
mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, 4. E. 3.14. and 36. E. 3.10. And
by the act made this present Parliament in the 16. year of the King, called an
Act for the preventing of inconveniences happening by the long intermission of
Parliaments, there It is provided, in ease the King do not perform his duty
to the Kingdom, in summoning of Parliaments as he ought; that then we shall
have a Parliament once in 3. year whether he will or no, as appears by the
Act it self, which most excellent. Act is altogether fruitless to the
Kingdom, if we must have a perpetual Parliament, and therefore an everlasting
Parliament is the greatest abridgement and de^^ustion to our laws, liberties,
and proprieties that possibly can be imposed upon us, the present Parliament
men being in their own principles unpuestionable, lawless, and
uncontrowleable (and so are a kind of Monsters, rather of the Devils creation
then Gods, for he never created and made any man lawless) during all whose
fitting as they by their actions order the matter, we have no propriety in our
lives, liberties, estates or trades, for all of them are subject to be
destroyed by a Vote and (...) sometimes it may be carried but by the Vote of
one of D. Bastwicks N^nyes or (...) Prynt Minors or Infants, it may be but of
18. years old, 3. years younger then any (...) to be by law that can sit in
that House, nay to such a hight of tyranny are these (...) grown, that they by
Vote (without law of reason) take our liberties from us, upon (...) and false
report of any of their Members, or any of their secofanising Catch pouled,
(...) either the bearing us speak for ourselves, or so much as telling us the
cause wherefore (...) imprisonned, and this the last year in every particular
was my portion, by the mean^^ of (...) William ^^th^ll Speaker of the House of
Commons, D^. Bastwick, and that bas^ and (...) fellow, Col. Edward King, who
diverse years ago deserved to be hanged for be^^^ing (...) trust reposed in
him by the Parliament, and this was lately the portion of Major T^^^^ by (...)
means of M Hollis, Sir Walier Ea^le, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir Sam. Luke, and
the rest of their g^^ trusty and doubty Associates. O brave Parliament! Which
by its constitution on and primitive practices, was a Bulwark to secure the
Commons of England from being ca^e^ up and destroyed, by the prerogative and
wills of the Kings of England, but ha^^^^ now f^r taken this first station,
destroys us with unknown, unlimitted and arbitrary priviledger, more th^^
(...) the prerogatives of any King of England, since the first day of M^g^^
Ch^^tas estiblish^^^ and are unaccomptable for any thing they say and do, yea,
and do not only act the Parliamentary power, but also a regal power, yea, and
though they count themselves the great^^^ Judges in the Kingdom, yet contrary
to law, justice, reason, and conscience, take upon them for sees, (which I may
call bribes), to plead causes before Judges of their own making, who dare as
well ease their fingers ends, as displease them, and then in conclusion it may
be the very same causes by way of appeal comes before themselves as supreme
Judges, and judge yo^ how those causes must go in which they have been, and it
may be are Hackney Counselor, which they ought not in the least to be, it
being not only contrary to law, but the (...) of Judges that any Judge should
give Counsel or be a Counselor.

Yea, Parliaments in former times used to be so careful in the discharge of
their Da^, for the welfare of the people that did choose and be trust them, that
they would impose nothing upon the people that might be a burden to them,
without acquainting them first with^^^ (...) Sir Edward Cook that learned
Lawyer in the 4. part of his Inst^^^tes Chap. of the high Court of Parliament,
fol. 1^ declares his words are as follows, which is printed by the present
Parliaments special order.

It is also the law of the Parliament, that when any new device is moved on the
Kings (...) Parliament, for his aid on the like the Commons may answer that
they ^^^der^d the Kings sat, and are ready to aid the same, only in this new
device they dare not agree, without conser^^^ce with (...) Countryer, whereby
(says he) it appears that such conferences is warrantable by the law
^^^^stome of Parliament. And folio 34. (he says) that at the Parliament holden
in the 9. E. 3. when a m^^ion was made for a subsidy to be granted of a new
kind, the Commons answered that they would b^ve conference with those of their
several Countries and places, who had put th^^ (...) trust before they treated
of any such matter. Set my b^^k^^alled Innocence and truth just f^e^, page 60.

But now things by the present Parliament are so carried, as if they were
absolute Lords over all the estates of al and every individual in the Kindom,
that choose and trusted them, and as though they might leavie upon them at their
wills what they pleased, and dispose of it how they pleased, even to their own
particular pockets to the inrichment of their particular selves. See the
Opressed man's Oppressions declared; page 22, 35. Regal Tyranny, p. 10^, ^04,
105, 106. and Londons account.

So that the People now, are without a Bol-warke to preserve them from being
swallowed up by unlimited prerogative and unknown priviledg^^ exercised by them
so that by their own principles if they vote to set up ^o^ary, o^ the ^urki^^
A^^^^^, (...) it be cause they vote and declare it, and if they vote into their
own (...) (we must give) them unto them, or if they vote to monopolise unto
themselves, ^ll our ^ives and children we must part with them to them, because
they vote it, and have no remedy to help our selves, because we have trusted
them, (O brave Parliament principles) though we never intended them in the
least any power at all to do what they list, nor any other power, but only
ra^iona^ly to the best of their understandings, (according to justice* (...)
and right ^eason) to provide for our greater happiness and better well being
which they themselves before they had ^or the King and his party down, did
honestly confess, book ^ecl. 1, (...) page 1^ (...) to call the Judges to an
account, and to punish them if they should per^^^^ the law and justice of the
Kingdom, either by the King flatteries, letters, commands or threats, which
the law expressly ^aith, they are not in the least to regard, in the
administration of justice 9. (...) 8.5. E. 3.9.14 E. 3.14, 11. R. 2.10. And if
they see cause to call the Lord (...) etc. to account, to know and see, if the
public Treasure of the ^^^dome be (...) according to the end and uses that it
is assigned (...), for the good preservation safety and protection of the
Kingdom, and not to be imbe^elled or ^^^^^ed (...) ends or use (...)
warrantable not justifiable.

But they were never in the least betrusted with a power to protect and bear
out their own Members in all manner of treachery and baseness committed by
them against the Kingdom, (as I could easily instance they have done in
diverse) and to cheat and (...) them of great and vast sums of their money, and
yet not to be liable to be called to any account for it: see Mr. Andrew
Burrells Remostrance to the Parliament of England, and the state of Irish
affairs presented to the Parliament by the Committee of adventures in London,
for Ireland, and Regal Tyranny, page 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 10^ in which
pages i^ i^ declared, that a right reverend Gentleman of the House of Commons,
Sir John Clotworthy, and his agent Mr. Davis, have put in their particular
pockets, 97195. l. of the money raised for the relief of Ireland, and I have
heard that the foresaid Committee of L^^dou^r^ ha^ ^^s^^^ted Sir J^^^
Clotworthy to the purpose in the House of Commons, about 24000. d. that they
possitively say he has in his hands, if as I am informed, he had not by a
great deal of industry found some very great Citizens tardy (contrary to the
law,) in transporting beyond the Seas, Silver and Gold, who improved all their
interest to keep him from complaining, and it is thought prevailed on purpose
with the said Committee to cease prosecuting Sir John Clotworthy, that so he
might cease of securing them, for their transportations, nay it is verily
though some lickt their fingers soundly about this business, for I have from
very good hands heard, there are some notable blades about London, that can
easily discover so many great men about London capitally tardy, with
transporting of the Kingdom treasure beyond the Seas, that if there were any
that would do impartial justice in (...) the penalty of the laws, diverse
hundreds of thousands of pounds might easily be raised to be put into the
public purse, only it were worth the Commons of Englands serious looking to
it, that three quarters of it were not put into particular Parliament men's
pockets* Oh for a new chosen Parliament to find out that almost unfadomable
knavery that i^ amongst diverse of this Parliament, about mighty sums of the
publiques money, J d^re boldly aver it, that all the business against
Strafford, Canterbury, Lord Keeper Finch, Lord Chieft Justice Br^mstone, Judge
Ba^^let, Barron Tr^ver, Sir George Ratcl^ffe. The Farmers of the Custom house,
Alderman Abell Mr. C^^vet, and the rest of their Cater-piller brethren
Monopolisers, was never when they were openned, more odious to the people, then
the villanny and roguery of diverse of the present Parli^^^^^ men would end^ay
appear, if there were any uncorrupted and ^^partiall ^udge^^ (...) open, which
(...) they are, is impossible to be found or had, they being generally and
(...) (in a manner) so corrupted with ^^g^^ing the States money, that for my
part I am very (...) dea^ of it, they da^e not ^ip up one another knavery, for
^eare he that first begins gets a (...) himself before he has done. Yea, I
have observed it for diverse months together, that (...) a common practice in
the House of Commons, that as soon as a Soldier is chosen a Parliament man, of
whose honesty, valor and boldness, many people had high thoughts of, but
^^minatish him, and low up his lips, which gifts do Pa^^. 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19
Eccles. 1^.11 within a month or six weeke^ very commonly, order that he shall
have his Arrears can ^pa^^ paid him, of else a Vote for (...), or 5000. l. for
one loss or another, so that for my part I (...) though a man be never so
gallant when he is in the field, yer such bewitching baits of money etc. is in
the House of Commons, that as soon as he comes to sit there, he is in my
thought^ three quarters spoiled, yea, and it may be in a very little time will
be an enemy to that gall^^ try and down right honesty, he in the field
professed, so that for my part, of all the late Commanders that have been
chosen to fit in the House, (they are so taken with the Silver baits of that
House) that I profess for my part^ will not give a groat a dozen for them, (to
do the Common wealth service in their present plate) unless it be one or two
at most amongst them, therefore say I, let us earnestly contest for the
inioyment of our just, national liberties and the long and ancient, just laws
of B^gland to have every year afresh and new Parliament, to call this to an
account for all our money they have had, and all the injustice they have done
us, (...) our which we are destroyed, both in our laws, liberties and
proprieties, but if any shall (...) the Kingdom in general will ^^d great
hazards by a new choice, I say no, for if never ^^ch base men be chosen, if we
have a fresh Parliament every year, to sit three or four score d^yes a^ most,
it will be as a rod kept over their heads to awe them, that they shall not dare
to do the Kingdom one thousand part of that into slice that this Parliament
has done, for fear the next Parliament they shall be questioned, and then
loose their head, or estates. Therefore for the Kingdoms good in general, it
is worth the endeavoring to get the same provisor^ in a^ annual act, that now
is in the trianiall made the 16. year of the King, and to settle the
government of the Kingdom, either by the King again, of some otherway that
the Parliament shall think sit, by choosing out a Committee amongst themselves
to manage the great affairs of the Kingdom, till the next free and new
chosen Parliament, for now we are under a La^, when Parliament men please to
destroy us, and when the Law will not reach us, then their will shall, tell
which be done, England shall never enjoy justice, impartiallity, but be in the
absolute condition of as perfect vassolage and slaverie, as either the Turks in
Turkey, o^ the Pes^n^a France, or the Boor^ in Fl^nders, having neither the
inioyment of liberty nor propriety now; it being I will maintain it, the
greatest act of breach of trust that ever the King did in his life when he
passed the Act called the Act to prevent inconveniences, by untimely
dissolving the Parliament made 1641. to let both houses sit as long as they
pleased, and so make sitting in Parliament a Monopoly and heriditary to them
and their heirs for ever, which is such a palpable and visible violation of
our essential and fundamental liberties, that it is less to be induced by
the honest free men of England, then any act of injustice, or violence that
ever he did to us in his life, for this is so universal that it absolutely
destroys both our laws, liberties, trades, and proprieties, and makes us all
perfect and absolute slaves, but Parliament men and their new made and created
creatures, there being nothing wanting but the Kings consent to the twelfth
Proposition, that both houses by law may levy upon the People, what money they
please, and do with it what they please, and never be accountable, and
therefore I will adds ^^ft thing, to those things of g^^^^sh evil mentioned by
(...) i^ (...) del^^^ery, before ^^y book called To Charters of London, and
pray from the Popes (...), Kings ^^limited Prerogatives, Parliaments unknown
privileges, the Lord Major, Court of Alde^^^en, and the rest of the
prerogative Common-Counsell men of London^ impl^^^ says, ^ut especially from
an everlasting Parliament, Good Lord deliver honest John Li^b^rne.

Now Sir, I come to speak a few words unto the state that ye^^ are in by reason
of the trouble I have brought upon my self, (a you think) by owning of my
book, to which I answer.

Alass^ I profess it seriously, death it self is more acceptable to me, then
to live, and be without cause destroyed in a Jail, what should I be afraid
of? For I assuredly know God in Jesus Christ, is my reconciled father, in the
strength of which I have walked steadfastly above these ten years, so that I
without doubt know he has in store for me a crown of eternal glory in the
Kingdom of glory, And Cursed be he that is afraid of (...) that shall die, and
of the s^^^ of man which shall he made as grass, and forget test the Lord his
make, that stretches forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth,
Esaias 11.12, 13. And truly ^o extraordinary large experience have I had of God,
unfadomable loving kindness and truth, that there is nothing but sin can
make me afraid, ( For the Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do
unto (...), Psalm. 118.6 and 56, 4.11. Heb. 13.6) which I am principally tied
from by that over^owing, bounty, and goodness, that I have taisted in God.

And for my wife and children which most troubles me, unto who^^ I ought, and I
hope have and do^ bear a husband and fatherly affection unto, yet alas,
shall I for love of them sin against my own soul, and be silent, when my
conscience from sound grounds tells me God would have me to speak, to reprove
the perverseness and stiff nedeednesse of an Hypocritical, uncircumcised, in
heart generation of men, that under specious pretense a go about to inslave
their native Country, and so by consequences strongly endeavor to destroy my
wife and Children as well as my self, who must undeniably perish, if I should
live with them, if the law and justice of the Kingdom be overthrown, which
cannot in likelihood be avoided, if God should not open the mouths of some to
speak, reprove and inform, and God having ^^^asted me with a Talent, yea, and
by my unjust imprisonment, put an oppertunity into my ^and to improve it for
his advantage and glory, accursed should I be in my own apprehension, if I
should tie it up in a Napkin and hide it.

And besides when all ordinary means fails, to contest for my right (without
the enjoyment of which, my wife and children in the eye of reason most perish
and be destroyed) In my understanding is the only way to obtain it, but if in
the persuit of my present contest I should loose my life, I can lay it down
with a great deal of comfort, and commit my wife and children with a great
deal of confidence, to the faithfulness and come of God, who has manifested
so much unto me in all the straites and extremities that ever I was in, for the
faithful discharge of my duty to him in endeavoring to keep my conscience
unsported before him, I pray read my Epistle dated 11. Nov. 16^8 and printed at
the latter and of my answer to Pryn, called Innocence and truth justified.

Besides, in my present imprisonment, I am stripe of all industrious means to
provide for my wife and children, and am much more in the rode way by expenses
to destroy them, then to lay up six pence for their future subsistence, and
which if long continued, in the eye of reason, I must either eat them, or they
me. And therefore being in many straights in my own spirit, and under many
capital oppressions, contrary to the law and justice of the Kingdom, I looked
up to God, and plucked up my resolution, and put pen to Paper on purpose if it
were possibl^ to give them a provocation to bring the forth to a publ^que
trial, that so if possible I could I might know what to (...) to, and yet so
carrying ^^y business, that I would in my own appreh^ have the law of the land
of my side, and advantages sufficient to render my adversarie^ (...) and
contemptable for their unjust proceedings with me, and therefore it was that I
(...) ^^^pose before the forementioned Committee owned my book in that manner
that I did, which if I had not, the credit of the book would have been blasted,
and diverse other great inconveni^^ces to me would have followed.

And therefore knowing very well, that though diverse in the house of Commons
were (...) the book, yet by law they themselves in their Arbitrary way, could
not try me for it, the (...) if they should or had attempted, I should have
showed them their own Oaths and De^^^^tions, where they swear and declare to
maintain the laws and liberty of the land, and should, (...) shall say to
them, as Tam^r said to Judah after he had in his unadvised rashness (...) to
death, for being with child by (...), but when she was ^^ought forth; she sent
to Juda^ (...) Father in Law, saying, to the man whose th^se are, am I with
Child, (...), I pray the^, (...) these, the Sign^^, and ^ras^e^^, and S^^ffe
And Judah acknowledged them and said, she has (...) more righteous then I
(...) because I gave her not to Sh^^^h my son; and he knew her (...) more Gen
38, 14, 15, 16 etc.

Even so should I have said, if they should have fallen upon me with fury to
have tried me, (for writing my book) In their Arbitrary and Parliamentary way^
(and fallen upon me (...) as much heat for standing upon my legal privilege,
as Judah did upon Tamar, when he judged her to be burnt) whose Oaths? whose
Covenants? whose Declaration and Protestations (...) th^se? In all of which you
have solemnly engaged before the presence of the great God of Heaven (...), and
all the world, that you will (...) the laws and liberties of the land. Ye^,
the House of Commons in their most excellent Declaration of the 19. April,
1646. book (...) folio, 879 expressly say, Th^^ although the necessary of the
w^r has given some disturbance^ to all proceedings, stopped the usual course
of justice, enforced the Parliament, for the preservance of th^s S^ate* to
impose and require many great and unusual payments from the good Subjects of
the Kingdom, and to take extraordinary ways for pr^^^ring of m^neys for their
many pressing ^^si^ns, it having pleased God to reduce our affairs into a more
hopeful condition then heretofore we do declar^, (mark this well) That we
will not, nor any by color of any authority derived from us, shall interrupt,
the ordinary course of justice o^ the several Courts and Iudicatories of this
Kingdom, nor intermeddle in cases of Private interest other where
determinable, unless it be (...) case of male administration of justice
wherein we shall see and provide, that right be done, (...) inflicted as th^^^
shall be oc^^^sion, according to the laws of the Kingdom, and the trust
reposed in us, which elsewhere they say, i^ to provide for the peoples weal,
but not for their woe, and in other of their Declarations they declare, That
the l^w, and the ordinary course of justice, i^ the common birthright of every
Subject of England, and what the Law is in case of trial, they declare it to
be one and the same with that expressed in my forementioned paper, see ^., part
book Dec^^^a. page ^, 7.38.39.77 278.458.459.660.845. see also The A^^^otomy of
the (...), page 8, 9, 10. The Out-tryes of Oppressed Commons, page 7, 8. and
V^x Plebis, page 13.14, 15.6 etc.

And therefore if I be in an error, or have committed an evil in the judgment
of the Parliament, for standing upon my legal privileges against them, verily
by the men who^e are these, am I seduced, deluded, and led into error, discern
I pray you, whose are these, these Remonstrances, Declaratio^s, Protestations,
Oaths, Vows, and Covenants, the benefit of which I ought to (...), the which
if they let me, J shall let you know I was not, nor am not altogether ^os^^it
to know my own privileges at the Common Law, for I know if they indict me,
(...) they have wholly altered the government) it must be in the King name, and
for committing a crime against him, and this is expressly the form of their
^^dictment^^ and I am sure can be found guilty of no crime committed against
him, unless it be at their command for drawing my sword and fighting against
him and his Army, and in this I (...) plead their own Ordinances and
Declarations, where they promise to bear me hirm^^^sse for so doing, and I am
sure this is a good and sufficient plea before one of their own Judges, who
has no other power but what he detives from one of their own Ordinances,
which if he shall hang or destroy me, or any man, for actions done expressly in
obedience to their Ordinances, for any thing I know he ought to be hanged as a
wilful ^urtherer for destroying me, for doing actions in obedience to that
power (and expressly commanded by them) from which he has all his power, and
has no other power to sit as a Judge, but by virtue of an Ordinance of the two
Houses.

But if they should condemn me for this action, what do they else but
condemn in me, the whole Parliament, and all that have in these wars adhered
to them.

But if they should happen to indict me, for acting, committing, or
endeavoring to act, or commit treason, rebellion, or insurrection against the
Parliament: I very much question according to Law, and the present constitution
of the Kingdom, whether any such indictment can be made or no, but if it can?
I wonder then the Parliament does not then try the Caviele^^s in the several
prisons of London, that avowedly, and professedly have drawn their swords
against them to destroy them, yea, and glory in it as their duty so to do, and
truly it is the greatest injustice in the world, to let those go scot free
that are guilty in the highest nature, and to punish him or them that is not in
the hundred degree so guilty, and yet this is my case, where if here I could
not defend my self, (although I believe I should be able to give them good
store of strong and pulling reasons, which now I will not communicate to you)
but yet they would go one and press me to plead to the indictment, I should
desire to see and know, whether or no, my Jury of twelve men of my equals were
all legal men or no, yea, and something more besides.

And in the first place, if I were indicted for treason, I might by law, except
against 35. Jury men without tendering any reason for it, see the 32. H. 6.
folio. 26.^4 H. 7. folio 19. Stam. Pleas Crown, folio 158. Cocks 3. part
Institutes, folio 24. and 27. and then I might except against so many as I
could declare bore me a particular malice See 28 E. 3.13.^. H. 6.29.
for pre-judgement is a good challenge by the law, for the common law of the
land i^, that a Jury man must be in different, and impartial before he be
sworn, see Stanfords Pleat of the Crown, lib. 3. folio 158. and Britt^n in
his discourse of the laws of the Land, folio 12. and 25. l. 3. chap. 3, 12.
Ass. plea. 30. Br^. Challenge 42.101.120.142.1^6.

And so within the compass of malicions men against me would come all the
Presbyterians; that have taken the League and Covenant, in the second Article
of which b^d^^^ part fol. 415. they have iliegally and unjustly sworn to
destroy and extirpate all Heretique^^ one of which they judge me to be, because
I will not take that ilegall Oath, nor be conformable to their Scotch;
Antichristian Presbytery, and so have sworn to destroy me, before I be legally
convicted, which is wicked and unlawful.

For a man bound by an Oath before, to do that which he is to do upon the
indictment; evidence and proof thereof, is partial, and not in different, see
Cookers, pare institutes libr. 1. chap. 12. sect. 234. page 156. who says
expressly, I ^ers must be me^ without all exceptions.

And by the Statutes of 2. H. 5.3. and ^. H. 6.19. It is inacted, that ^o
person shall be admitted to pass in any inquest (or Jury) upon trial of the
death of a man, or i^ (any inquest betwixt p^^ty or party in Plea real, nor in
plea personal, whereof the debt or the dam^age declared, amount to forty
makes, if the same person, (or Jurer) have not lands or tenements of the
year^ly va^^ of forty shillings, always provided that the party to be tried
do make his challenge. And by the Statute of 17. Eliz chap. 6. It is inacted,
that is all cases where any l^rers to be returned for trial of any issue, or
issues joined in the Kings be^ch, Common pleas, and the Exchequer, or before
(...) isg^ates of Assize, shall every one of them have estate of free holdin
lands, I e^iments, or Heredi^^ments to the yearly value of 4. l. at the least,
and the Sheriff or other Ministers, unto whom the me^ing of the Pa^nell shall
appertain, shall not return many such pannell, any person, unless be ^^y
dispend four pound by the year at the least, of free hold out of ^^^ient
demesue, within the County where the issue is to be tried, upon pain to
forfeit for every person so returned in any such p^^^ll, that cannot dispend 4.
l. free hold, 20 s.

It is true that by the Statute of the 33. H 8.13. it is in^cted. That every
person and persons being the Kings natural Subject borne, which either by the
name of a Cuizen, or of a froe (...), or a^^ other name, does enjoy and use the
liberties and priv^ledge, of any City, Borough, or T^^^^^porate, where be
dwells, and m^k^th his abode, being worth in moveable goods and substance to
the clear value of 40 l, be from henceforth admitted in trial of m^rthers
and^el^nies in every (...), and Jail delivery kept and holden in and for the
liberty of such Cities, ^urrought and Town^^^^ p^rate, albeit they have no
frethold, provided always, that this act do not extendin any (...) of wise, to
any Knight, or Esquire, dwelling, abidi^g, or resorting in, or to any such
City, etc. And I by virtue of having been a Lieutenant Colonel, ^m an Esquire,
as may easily be proved one of the Herald of Arms Office, and therefore in
what place soever I am or shall be tried, (...) lawfully make ^y exceptions
against every man of my lury that is not worth in free land (...) ^lper annum:

And besides, if none of these will do me good, I have this last remedy, that
I am con^ident, I shall legally and fully prove any charge whatever; that in
that book I lay upon the Parliament in general, or any member of it in
particular, if I may from them enjoy the benefit of the law, and then I pray
what do they gain, or I loose by owning and arowing the (...) book.

But if you think that by owning of my book, they are thereby so exasperated,
that I (...) the hazard of being destroyed by them by an act of power and will,
to which I answer, by that law neither you no^ any man in England is safe, but
liable to be destroyed at their pleasure, jo^ the lesser part of themselves,
are liable by that law every hour to be destroyed by the Vo^^ of the Major
part, and then the Major part are liable every hour to be destroyed for
acompany of Tyrants and forsworn perjured men (for^re king all their Oaths
which they have taken is ^antaine the law of the Kingdom, and l^ke absolute
Tyrants, have made their will a law) by any company or multitude of men
stronger then themselves, which if they should go this way to work they would
every hour be justly in fear of, but if they should be so far be stuped and
b^fo^ted as to run the hazard of their own deserved ruin, by destroying me by
an act of power is cold blood, by the law of their own will, I for my own
particular should be no loose^ by ^y translation from an earthly death, to an
eternal life, and therefore I fear not their malice, nor care not a straw for
the worst they can do to (...), being (notwithstanding the fear of your
self, and other of my friends) resolved so to provoke them, that they shall
either be necessitated, and forced out of mere fear or shame to do me justice
and right, by making and hearing my report (now in the hands of slugg^s^ Mr.
Henry Martin, whose pris^ner principally I n^w a^) judging my case, and setting
me free at liberty, and giving me legal reparations for my illegal and unjust
sufferings, ^relse out of mere madness, surie and revenge, to send me to
Ryturne to be ^id of me, of which I am not in the least afraid, and doubt not
but if God should so ^orsake them, and the Devil ^o fure lead them as there to
hang me, but at and by my death, (...) should ( Sampson like, Judges
16.28.29.30.) do them more mischief then I did them all my life, by p^lling
away the two maine pillars, that upon is their i^^^afely to ^e (...) in house
of tyranny.

And therefore, if you would avoid the evil you fear to come upon me, I
intre^t you to press Mr. Martin (with whom I know you are acquainted) to make
my report to the house, which he has so unjustly kept in his hands so many
months, to my unspeakable prejudice, and the unconceiveable prejudice of the
whole Kingdom, and if he should say, that their house are not in atemper to do
either me, or the Kingdom concerned in me, justice, or right, and therefore it
is better for borne then made, les^ their house by Vote confirm what the Lords
have done to me, to answer which I must tell you, I am as sure as that I am a
man, that I have the Law of England on my side against the Lords, and which I
think is unanswerably demonstrated in the foremen ioned books, and therefore
let their house be in never so bad a temper, I most earnestly int eat you to
press him to endeavor to make it, and so quit his hands of it, I care not
what the issue be^so he do but discharge his duty, by attempting and
endeavoring to make it, and take some of his Comrades to bear witness of it,
and send me the names of those that in that House stand up against me to hinder
and pervert the justice of the Kingdom, in this particular case of mine, and I
shall think him an honest man, and that he has done his duty in endeavoring
to obtain justice and right for me, at the hands of those that ought
impartially to hand it out to me, or the meanest Commoner and l^gall man of
England, but this Sir I do assure you, that if I ^in upon good grounds know
the names of those that interpose their power and parts to hinder me of that
justice and right which is my due in this particular, by the good, just and
unrepealed law of the Kingdom, I will pay them with my pen upon the posts of
London, and to the view of the whole kingdom, as well as all the wit, praines
and parts I have will enable me to do, cost it what it will, I pray Sir press
Mr. Martin but to endeavor the making of my report, for while it is in his
hands, I am tied in a manner by him hand and foot, and cannot as I would stir
for my own good, till he has rid his hands of it, one half of whose ill
dealing with me, I should never bear nor take from all the professed
adyersaries I have in the world, which I must be necessitated in a large
Epistle shortly to signify to him, and publish his dealing with me to the
world.

In the next place, if you desire to prevent that evil that you fear will
befall to me, then I pr^y you improve your utmost intere^^ amongst the Commons
of England in City and Country, to petition to the House of Commons, either
according to justice and right, to justify or condemn me, and in case they
will not receive, read and satisfactorily answer their Petitions, then I
entreat you improve all your interest in them, to get them publicly and
avowedly to remonstrate and declare the Parliaments unjust dealings with them
to all their fellow Commons of England, tha^ I may not be necessitated to ^un
the bazard of making my single appeal against them to all my fellow Commons,
as well in the Army, as City and Country, which before I will be destroyed in
person without cause, I both must and will do, though I should loose my life
the next day after for so doing.

But now before I conclude, in regard I intend to make this Epistle public, I
will communicate to your consideration, two things of speci^ll concernment to
me, and the first is a peace of justice of the House of Lords in its kind, as
excellent as theirs to me is, and it is the case of one Mrs. Elizabeth Walter,
the breviat of which as she her self gave it me in writing with her (...)
subscribed to it, I shall recite here verba^^um, saving some of the Marginall
notes.

The proceedings of Mr. Walter in the Parliament with the House of LORDS.
SHrove Sunday last is seven year since my husband left me in this town with
three children, a house and family, and left me but seven pence for the
relief of me and them. J followed him into the Country two hundred miles of
this place, and came to him where he was in one C^^^pels house, who wrought
such dissension betwixt us, that as soon as he see me, he took the (...) and
by the Contents of that book he swore he would never more live with me, and
fell to be^^ (...) most truelly, and turned me out of doors.

1 My first Petition was the beginning of this Parliament. 2 See their Order of
the 2. June 1641. 3 See their Order of the 23. Iun. 1641. 4 See their Order of
the 27. November. 1641. 5 See their order of the 10. July, 1641. and 2. of
April, 1642. 6 Upon the 12. May, 1642. 7 See their order of the 13. May, 1642.
8 See his notable Decree, made 13. May, 1642. 9 See their order of the ^. June,
1646. and the Commissioners order of the 22. June, 1646. 10 See their order of
the 23. Nov 1646. and their order of the 1. Feb. 1646. 11 See their order of
the 28. Nov. 1646. 12 See the Moderate Jntilligence, upon the 23. Feb. 1646. 13
See their order of the 18. Feb. 1646. 14 See their fatal order of the 23. Feb.
1646 15 Whose husband Mr. Stavely, was lately high Sheriff of Leichestershire,
and a Committee man, and whose said, wife is suspected extraordinarily guilty
of a kind of processed and open incontinency, yet the house of Lords committed
him prisoner to the Fleet, about two years ago, for refusing to pay her Alley
money, to support her in her professed wickedness, where they have kept him
prisoner to this very day, a brave contradicting piece of justice, and worthy
to be sounded out abroad for their Lordships deserved commendations.
On which I returned back to London, and (...) to the House of Peers, 1 for
some relief for me and my children: who sent for my husband up, 2. (...) at a
full hearing, my husband being in place, before three score Lords, having
nothing to allege against me but that he would not live with me, they th^^
ordered by his own consent out of two (...) pounds a year, to pay me three
score pounds a year, and further what Estate should fall to him, either by the
death of Grandmother or mother, I should (...) the one half thereof, for the
relief of me and my three children, 3. which is five hundred pounds a year
more, All which orders my husband would never obey, but still stood under
contempt. 4. (...) the house referred it to the Judges, Foster (...) Heath, 5.
to draw a sequestration for my life, according to Law, which they did, 6. and
brought it to the house, and the House confirmed it, 7. and ordered it to my
Lord Keeper, who decreed it in Chancery, 8. and set it out under the great
s^^le of England, I having all this while received nothing from the Estate, the
great seal being made void, I petitioned to the house in ^^ay last, 1646, for
the new broad s^ale, which was granted me, 9. and J therewith sequestered part
of the Estate, but never ^^^ved but one five pounds thereof.


In the mean time my husband petitions to the house for a r^-bearing,
(alleging he could pr^^^ incontinency against me) it was granted him, and
coming with our Counsel to the bar, my counsel pleaded his several
contempts, at which time (...) were dismissed, the^ he petitions again, gets
of his contempt, paying me my arrears, 10. which was (...) hundred pounds,
before he should have a re-be^^ing then he petitions again, and then I was
ordered to suspend the arrears till after the hearing, 11. then we had a
hearing Counsel of both sides meet, without witnesses, on his side there was
nothing or little proved, and ^^l^^red of wh^^ ^spertions were laid upon me, i^
then the Lords referred it is all the (...) what alley money was due to a woman
by the law, 1^, who reported there (...) report they dissin^ulled all their
former orders, took of they s^^^stration, 14. and di^^^^ssed the cause, though
my Counsel cited to them several cases of wom^n, that were found g^^^ry of
incontinency, As Sta^ely, 15. Dutton and others.

I have spent above four hundred pounds in the suite, and now no less without
relase as at the beginning.

The Judges report was but verbal which is no^^^din^^^,

At the giving me an estate, there was three score or four scare Lords, at the
raking it away, there was not above twelve or fourteen, and two of them
protested against it, which was my Lord North and Moulgrave.

My Counsel were Mr. Maynard, Mr. Horn, and Mr. Nudi^^^.

Elizabeth Walter.

Now I pray you friend judge and consider, whether or no these Lords be not a
company of brave and gallant conscionable men, fit to be our Law makers indeed,
that can make a poor Gentlewoman dance above 6. years attendance for a little
relief to keep her and her children alive, (for you see that when her husband
left her, he left her ^^^eaven pence, and did not forsake her for any
undutifullnesse or incontinency but rather th^^ he^^igh^ have elbow room enough
to live as incontinent as his lust pleased) and yet in conclusion to expose the
poor Gentlewoman and her three children in the eye of reason to a perishing
and starving condition, after she has spent above 400. l. to obtain that at
their ^^^ds, that in it self is as just, equitable and conscionable, as any
thing in the world can he, c^nduf^^r they have made her order upon order, for
the possessing of her just desire, ((...) full I think for I have read the
mall) as it is possible to he comprised in paper, and I desire ^ot only you,
but all the Ladies and Gentlewomen in England, yea, all the Fathers of F^meni^e
creaturel, to consider what a sad thing it is, that if they shall bring up
their daughters well, and bestow large portions upon them, and marry them, and
their husbands shall live with them tell he has got three or four children
upon them, and then at his pleasure without any just cause given him by his
wife, (for ^he satisfying of his lust, upon a whore or whored) shall leave, his
wife and children to the wi^e world, and not allo^ them fix pence to live upon,
and then (which is worst of all) to be in such a condition, that they have no
legal way to compel him to do it, (for it see ^^es by the gallant, but not
unspotted justice of the House of Lords to this Gentle woman, there is none)
and yet they can find some to commit Mr. St^vely to prison, for refusing to pay
his wife ally-money, who I my self have heard him, etc. say, li^es in the
highes^ professed, and open incontinency that a woman can, I pray answer me
this, whether these very Lords do not by these two forementioned actions
visibly declare, that they are greater friends to whores and ^ogues then to
honest and chastmen and women and whether injustice and oppression be not more
delightsome to them, then justice, righteousness and truth? and whether or no
it is possible to be in a worse and a sadder condition, then when such men as
these fi^ at the Helm, and govern the stearn of it, not by true, just,
rational principles, but by the crooked, ^hir stand perverst principle of
their own crooked, partial, and depraved wills. (...) England, England! woe,
woe unto th^e, in this thy present sad condition, which thou seel, (...) will
not see, and which thou feel, but wilt not feel, but stoop Isakar like,
unto the burden, and no^ ^^ke any rational course for thy preservation, from
being as ^^^lla^^y and a prey to every from (...), which (...) neessity thou
must (...) in conclusion, in the way that is now ^^ad, ^^^^ly if the Lords of
C^^mons, or both of them put together, ^^y do unto thee what they please,
without my c^^trole, because they are thy Magi^^rates, and thou with all
submission must stoop unto a, (...) of necessity thou art guilty as a wilful
murtheter, in sh^ading the blood of all the Cavi^^^^, for endeavoring to
protect their King from thy violent and furiou^ hands, who is a hun^^ed times
more secured and for^^fied, with the expressed and declared law of the
Kingdom, then the Parliament is, who now do what they list, yea, levy money
upon us, and put it in that own pockets, and pretend we must (...) que^tion
them, and ask them wherefore they d^^s^, because we have rusted them. Oh brave
Parliament principles indeed! fitter for the gre^^ Turk, then for English
Parliament men.

The second thing I shall declare to you, is the scandalous and base dealing of
William (...) with me, a fellow so unworthy and base, and so fraught with
malice and blood th^^ (...), and so habituated in telling lies and falsehoods,
that a man of unspotted worth, honor and integrity, would scorn (as Job
says chap. 30.1^) ^o set him with the dogs of his flock, who a about this 3.
years has been an agent in the hands of the Devil, maliciously and
causeles^y to endeavor (with all his might) the destruction of the generation
of the righteous, pu^^^sed with the blood of the Lamb in this land and
Kingdom, and either to have them (...), hanged, killed, or banished of which
when (...) a well wi^^er alve^^^s^^ him, as you may read (...) primed spistle to
him, dated 7. January 1^45. and in my printed ^ra^ons delivered into the
Committee of Examinations, dated 13. June, 164^. the (...) was filled ^o fullo^
fury as (...) be would cate me up at a mouthfull, and tossed and c^mbled me at
Committees, so as if (...) would have beat me to dust and powder, as you may
partly read in my printed Epistles, (...) 25. July, 1635. and December 1645.
Yea, and one day in Westminster H^ll laid violent (...) upon me, having my
sword in my hand, to provoke me to strike him, that so I might loose (...) hand
by striking in the face of the Judges, fitting in the Kings ^ench (...)
Westminster hall, (...) afterward his two great Co^^^^ Dr. ^est^ick and Col
King, having b^ the Spea^en means, ( Pr^^s Patron) got me ^ni^stly clapped by
the heels, from the 19. of July 16^^ to the 14. of October. 1645. I was by the
whole house of Commons honorably released, as you may read in the 34. page of
J^nocency and fr^th justified, but yet in that unjust and untighteous
imprisonment, I was ordered by the House of Commons to be tried at Newgate
S^ff^^^ for my life, by the powerful influence of Mr. Speaker and Mr. Gline,
Recorder of London, in which business I have just cause to think that Pryn
had more then a finger, because that when he see I was likely honorably to be
delivered as a spotless and innocent man, he frames a book, and publishes it
Cumprivilegi^, and dedicates is to Mr. Speaker, in which book called The Liar
confounded, he possitively acculeth me of a most transcendent crime. viz th^^ I
have consp^^ed with other Separates and (...) to (...) out the Members of this
Parliament by degrees, beginning with Mr. Speaker, when if they could eat off
(he says) all the (...) would easily follow: and if this s^^^^ded not, then to
suppress and cut off this Parliament by force of Arms, and set up a new
Parliament of our own ^^^se and faction, by this ba^^^ charge, P^yn
manifestoth himself a perfect Knave, and enemy to the Kingdom, in that he
knew me guilty of such a thing, and never to this day durst question me or
prosecute me for it, and if it be but one of his false malicious suggestions,
then he proves and declares himself a liar to f^ix so notorious a falsehood
upon him that now, as well as formerly in this and all other things, bids
defiance to him, see my answer to this in the ^5. page of my book called
Innocence and truth Justified, yea, and in the some false scandalous and
transcendent lying book of his, beside scores of lies, he (...) po^sitively
13. or. 14. upon me in less then I. lines as I have truly declared in the 4,
5, 6. pages of the last ^^^^tioned book and there offered to his face,
publicly to prove that there I say against (...) ^^e lying and pa^lte^y
fellow durst never embrace my challenge there made to him, ^^r never so much as
in any of his late volumin^s lines, return one word of answer that ever I could
see to what there I justly (...) upon him, and therefore by his silence in
their particular, though be has pr^^^ed scores of she^^^ since, have given me
just cause now to procla^^^ him so (...), and base a liar, that he is not
ashamed ^o ^ell and publish above a dozer in ^, lines.

But the cowardly unworthy fellow, like one of (...) broad, who was (...) from
the beginning, John 8.44. knowing that I was fast by the h^^les, under a great
indignation of the house of Lo^ds, and knowing that my business by way of
appeal was depending in the house of Commons, and eady for a report, that he
might blast my reputation and credit, and so by consequence destroy me and
mine, some weeks ago at the house of Commons b^t, (as I have been informed
from many good hands) made a most false groundless and lying report of me,
that I was in their debt above 2000. l. which I had little be^^^ then co^^^ed
them of and in his late book published since, and dedicated to the House of
Commons, called the Sword of Christian Magistracy supported, in the 10.11.
pages of his Epistle, he strongly endeavors to (...) me more odious and
capital, then the late beheaded Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and there and else
where in his base lying book, presses them to punish me as se^^rely as they
did him, although I am confident he is not able to si^ any crime upon ^e, but
that I am honester and j^ster then himself, and stands for the laws and
liberties of England, which he endeavors to destroy and overthrow, and set up
a perfect tyranny, as by his late printed book^ is to evident, and though in
this book as well as the Epistle, he has so many bitter charges against me,
yet in regard I have proved him so base and notorious a liar already, which by
his not vindicating of himself, he to my understanding grants to be true, I
shall only at the present return as brief an answer as I can, to that most
notorious lie of his laid (...) in the 12. p. of his said Epistle, (after he
has expressed the Lords ^^^ity to me, i^ not mu^^hering and destroying of me
ask^ would have them, for no crime in the world but for maintaining the just
and good laws of the Kingdom, which they have all often sw^r^^ to preserve,)
he expresses himself in these words.

And yet this obstinate seditious ungrateful w^^ch, in stead of ^aving pardon
for his most insolent a fain like Libels Thou ^rt a calumniater for my books
are no Libels having my name to them to justify them.
contempts against the whole House of ^^ers, and several particular M^^^ers of
it, because your honorable House of Commons, will ^orr^l^^se him upon his
Libelle us Petition, (against all Law and justice, i^ affront of the Lords, Who
I say justly deserves it, for treading under their fe^^ the fundamental laws
and liberties of England, as in my cas^ they have (...), which (...) will (...)
the Pri^^, and all thy g^^gli^^, lying a^^^ciates in England.
and their privileges) in this his mutinous Libell, (viz. The Oppressed want
oppressions declared) railes more upon your honors then the House of Peets,
not only clamouring, upon you for arrears of pay, (when as there is not one
farthing (...) to him, for ought he could make appear upon the reference of
his Pe^^tion to the Committee of Accounts, who gave him a charge of ^^ove 1100.
l. received from the Earl of Manchester and his officers ^^ly, besides free
quarter which he took, of which he ^ever yet gave (...) account) but like a
most seditious unworthy creature, ^^^^ed^^ted of with so^e Malignants, in the
Tower (who have furnished him with ^^^taken law and Records, to drive on their
designs,) he th^^^ (...) you, etc.

Now for answers to which charge of 1100. l. that ^e falsely says I received,
for my ow^e vindication (...) ^^e world, I shall give you this account* that by
Commission under the hand and scale of (...) of Manchester, ^ated the 7. day of
October, I (...) I was made Major of a foot Regimens to Ch^^ Edward ^^y, and
then the 16. of May, (...) I was made Lieutenant Colonel to the Earl of
Ma^^hesters Regimen^ of Dragoons, which (...) sted^ill about or unto the last
of April, 1645* at which time I delivered the Troop and ^^^ment up to Col. John
Obely near Ab^ageon. By the first Commission there is due to (...). ^^s. for
223. days service, at 24 ^. per (...), and by the second Commission there is
(...) to me 612. l. 10^. (...) for. 350. ^^yes service at 3^. s. per d^^m, both
being (...) 2.5. of all which during my service under the Earl of Manchester
(I aver it) I never receive^ 200 l. as pay for all Prins lies, it is true, that
(...) or upon the 20. of December, 1645. I receive (...) Mr. Ne^thr^p, Col
Kings Treasures, (...) Mr. Tilsons House in Boston, by the hands of (...)
St^dders tho^ my Lieutenant, (...) Cap^^^ne in Sir Har^resse Wallers Regiment,
the (...) 51. l. 1. (...). 10. d. for so (...) ^id out for Col* King at London
by his own order, (...) guilt Sword, a Plush Coat with (...) and Silvey
Cl^ps^s, 10. yeards of ^lush for his wives (...) a Corn^t and ric^ banners, two
parts of Stockings, one Crimson velve^ saddle, one bl^^ (...) saddle, and one
Scarle^ saddle with f^rnitures three pair of bou^s^ers satable, and (...) and
padlock to pa^k them in, and then also I laid out for him 25 l 1.1* 6, l. and
delivered (...) a bill of particulars, and received my money of his man, for 7.
yeards of fine gray cloth, (...) ^^^ver tri^^^ung, three p^^re of Sp^^^, Sold^^
wi^^es, Gloves, a ^ath^rs cal^, a (...), and forty pair of gr^^^ bi^s, for
portage and ^^rriage from London to ^osto^ of ^55. l. (...) l. But I hope Col.
King does not inten^ to make either me or the State to pay for all this his
bravery.

After this I laid out for diverse other particulars mentioned in a note, which
I gave (...) and his clarke, 23. l. ^.^.7. d. which money I received in
February* 16^3. and being Ma^^ of the town of ^^ste^ under him, that often
occasion to lay but small sums of money for (...) fall things to the value of
above 50. l. the particulars of which I always gave him (...) clearke under my
hand, ^^d received my money in reference to such a ^^^e dated such (...) as by
my notes and receites under my own hand with him and his Clarke will fully
(...), I also the 13. January 1643. at Lincol^e, received of his Clarke 200. l.
which was laid (...) follows. Paid to Captai^e Cotton for the Colonels
company, and Lieutenant Col^ (...)* ^^srots, and Capt. ^res (...) a ^^^^le
town within half a mile of Lincol^e upon the (...) house ne^t the heath, 140.
(...). p^^d to Cap. D^t^^gs Lie^t. 15. l. paid to Capt. Wregs (...) l. paid to
him that Commands Capt. A^ers men as Quarter master upon the beating (...) of
their Quarters near Lincol^^, 4. l. that he is to be accountable for, and six
pound for himself by the Col^^ order, paid by his order to John ^^ost and John
H^gger two of his Soldiers, ^o carry them to Cambridge 2. l. laid out to my
Soldiers as per my roll of the 17. D^^^^er appears ^7. l. 3. s. ^. d. paid for
bringing arms ^^o^^ Lincol^e, (...) paid for carrying ammun^^^^ at several
times to S^mpringb^^^, and S^le^f^rd, 11. s. 4. d. and this note his Cle^^^
(...) self did a little while after the said 1^* January perfect, and he
received particular (...) from the several Officers upon their acknowledging
they had received the above said some of me, and I dare ^^ldly say it, I was as
exact in perfecting all such accounts as this with his (...), as an who pl^ce
p^^in England is in keeping his books, a^ by the notes of particulars in his
hands will manifestly app^^re, and then for my Soldiers with him, they were so
con^^^^^ly mustered under the Collon^l^ no^e by one of his own creatures, that
it (...) impo^^^^ (...) man had a mind unto it, to have paid the k^^ve,
especially either I or any under my particular command, being^^ ^^mity with his
Muster master, and besides J a^er it, that if one (...) we made a muster, and
the (...) we made another, if my one of the Soldiers that was in his muster
roll the week before, were absent by sickness the second time, although he
lay sick^ in the very same Town, and though we named the house where he was
sick, and were ready to go^ to show him to the Muster Master, yet so exact w^^
Col. King, that I nor my Lieutenant was not trusted with the pay of my
particular fie^ Soldiers, and as for the payment of them, their money was most
commonly received and paid by my Lieutenant, yet I commonly g^^e the rece^^^
for it inder my hand, in as exact a way as it was possible to make it, viz,
received such a day, so much money, far so many days pay, for say ^^figne, two
Sergeants, three Corporalls, and so many common Soldiers. My Lieutenant
himself usually received his own money, and I received of The. Hewer the Cols
man at three several payments about three sco^epoun^s, which in my receipts I
mentioned as my own porticular pay.

Besides this in February and March, 1643. I received of the ^^nd T^^ma^ Hewer
and one Mr. Brown, by Col. Kings appointment, betwixt two and three hundred
pounds, in part of payment for diverse things delivered at his e^^est desire in
his straights, into his Magazine at ^oston, at least by 20. l. in the hundred
cheaper then he there paid at the (...) time for the like, the exact copy of
which particulars, as I had them under (...) hand of his o^ne Magazine k^epet
(the original it self to my remembrance being delivered to Mr. (...) at
Lincol^^) thus follows.

A note of all the Swords, Belts, and Holsters for Pistols, and Bandel^ers That
Major Lilburuc caused to be brought into the Magazine at Boston.
February 5. 1643. Received from London by Major Lilburno^ appo^^^^^, two
hundred and ^i^^ty Swords, more received immediately after by M^^^r Lilburno^
(...), five hundred Swords, Feb. 1643 Received from Thomas Forman at Lyn by
^^^ior Lilburnes appointment, me chest of Swords, containing two hundred,
received (...) April, after from Ma^or Lilburne, that his men brought into the
Magazine and delivered (...) to my s^^ Sh^pherdson, twenty Sword^, so (...)
^^ceived in Swords 1010.

Received of Mayor Lilburn 80. pair of Holsters for Pistols, and th^^ hundred
^^^ts for Swords* ^^^ived of Mr. Wood and Mr. Wind by Mayor Lilburnes
^pp^^^^^^, ^e (...) s^^^d c^llers of ^^^del^rs, all these S^^ords, H^^^^^ers
for Pist^ls, (...), ^^^i^rec^^ved (...) the Magazine from Mayor Lilburn, but
what (...) is paid (...) for (...) of them I (...) not.

By me Richard Coney, keeper of the Magazine in Boston.

Now if you please to read the 42, 43, 44. and 46. pages of (...) ^^^^^y and
Truth i^^stifi^d, and the ^, 4, 5, 6, ^, 8, 9. pages of my painted Epistle to
^^^ge (...) called The just (...) you shall largely and particularly (...) the
cause of Kings ^^lling ^^^^nd ^i^^, which (...) principally for his
endeavoring in my apprehension in b^^^y hi^^^ust, ^f^^^ our fatal (...) at
Newar^e, at which time, all accounts betwixt him his cl^rke and me, was even
saving (...) own particular pay, and betwixt 100. and 200. l. for the foresaid
Swords, etc. (...) (...) when I was going away, I bro^ghut him in a true
account (...) head wh^^ was due to (...) for them, and what I had received; and
I am sure this was his answer, he had (...) money (...) ^^^^e then, but as
soon as any came in he would care to p^y^^^, so away I went to ^edford, ^^^y
Gener^ll, as in the two last mentioned books, you ^^y (...), and afterward to
L^, where we had notable bussing, to bring King to a Council of War, for his
gross and palpable knaverie and treachery, but we could not bring him to the
touchstone, because the harle of Manchester and his two Chaplins, Ash and Good,
protected him in his b^se^^sse, after that being at the seidge of York, Mr.
Tredwell a Cutler, living now at the Lion were Fleet-Bridge, pressing me to
perfect the account with him for the Swords I had of him, and being in a
straight how to get my money from King, who I knew was mad at me, for
prese^ting him so hard, I went unto Dr. Stains and complained to him, who gave
me this ensuing warrant.

By virtue of my Commission of Auditor General for the whole Association and
Army, and by virtue of my Lord of Manchesters present Order, these are to
require you to give an account, what moneys or payments have been made to
Major John L^lburn, Captain ^^bert Lilburn, and Captain Lieutenant Henry
Lilburn, and to send it by the le^ter hereof. Given under my hand, by my Lord
of Manchesters warrant this 11. of June, 1644.

Also you are to give an account under your hand, what moneys Major John
Lilbur^ h^^h received of you for Swords, Beles, Bandaleers, Holsters, etc.
delivered into the Magizine of Boston.

To Thomas Howet Clerk to Col. King and pay master to the forces there. per me
Will. Stain.

This warrant I sent away to Boston by a careful hand to my wife, to follow
the Clarke, Kings meniall servant for an account, but none she could get, and
then after Marston ^^^re sight, etc. we came into Lincolnshire, where I met
with the foresaid Mr. Tredwell, who pressed me for some money due to him for
the foresaid Swords, and I went to Col. King with him th^n at Boston, and after
an outside complement in his Hall, I told him I had got Auditer General to
send his warrant to his man for an account, but it would not be obeyed, and
therefore J was come to him my self with my friend to desire him to pay me the
rest of the money due to me, for the Swords, etc. he had had of me, that so I
might pay my friend that which I owed him, for some of them, whereupon he told
me he had none of me, unto which I replied you will not offer to say so, for at
your earnest entreaty I provided them for you, at cheaper rares a great deal
then here you could have them; and by your express order delivered them unto
your Magazine keeper, who under his hand has acknowledged unto me the receipt
of them, and you your self has often been at the Magazine with me to view
them, and thanked me for the cheapnesse and goodness of them, and has also
under your own hand sent me diverse orders for the issuing them out, at which
the man was in a mighty fury, and fell a raging at me, and bid me before my
friend as if I had been a dog, get me out of his doors, whereupon told him he
was a base impudent lying fellow, and if he durst manifest so much m^nhood as
to come out of his own doors, I would ^udgell his coat for abusing me, but he
played the coward and durst not ^^ir, and so we parted* Now let all the
rational men in England judge where the fault (...) that my account was not
made up, and upon this Mr. Tredwell and my self went to Li^^^^^, where we
fully made Lieutenant General Cromwell acquainted how it was with us, who by
his earnest importunity with the Earl of Manchester, got him as I remember to
order Mr. Whover to pay Mr. Tredwel 150. l. which he received of him, and
besides J per^^iving before first left Boston, that Col King intended to play
the Knave with me. I reserved above 200. p^ire of my Hou^sters which he should
have had from me in my own hands, and afterward got M^^^ackson of Boston in
his shop to sell some of them for me, and the rest by the Earl of Manchesters
express order, Col. Edward Ro^^^ter in his necessity had of me, for which
(...) remember I received 40. l. of M^^^aver, and besides reserved about 20. l.
worth of Sword belts which J was necessitated to bring to London, and have them
till in my own hands, and should willingly take for them less by 5. l. then
what they cost me, and so much for King.

And now in the second place, for money received by me when I was Lieutenant
Colonel of Dragoones, in which service I am sure I spent diverse months and
never received a penny, no not so much as to buy me a horse shoe, being forced
to lend my Soldiers money diverse times to shoe their horses, part of which I
lost for my reward, and I am sure that from Feb 1643. to September 1644. which
was 7. months time, I received not six pence pay, and then as we marched to
Banbury leager, at Daintery town, I and other of my Officers received at the
hands of the Northompton Committee. 800. l. as part of six weeks pay, 215. l.
of which Major Evers, my Major had for his troop, and Capt. Beama^t 185. l. for
his troop, and Capt. Abbot, 180. l. for his troop, and my self for my troop
220. l. which then by my muster roll and debenter daited from the 25. March,
to the 26. of August, 1644. excilu^ being 22. weeks consisted of my self,
Lieutenant, Cornet, Quitter master, two Sergeants, three Corporalls, two Drums,
and 85. common Soldiers, which said money at that Towns end was immediately
paid to the troop, every Cemmon Soldier having out of it sive weeks pay to
pacify the mutiny they were in, and I am sure there was not one Soldier in
the muster roll but had it to a penny, and the Officers slaid for theirs tell
we came to Ba^^bury, where I sent my Quartermaster and other Quarter Masters
to Mr. Golson. the Treasur^^ for the rest of the six weeks pay, which every
troop then and there received; and I am sure mine was faithfully disposed of
according to the Muster Roll to a penny, only as I remember, one or two had
lost their lives at the C^stle before the last money came, and then after that
seidge we marched to the seidge of Crowl^nd, a service hard and difficult
enough, Where my Cornet received 100. of the Cambridge Committee, in part of
the foresaid debenter, out of which I paid my Officers and all my Soldiers th^n
in being 14 days pay, which according to the rules and practice of War I
think is more then J ^^eded ^n strictness to have done, for 14 days pay
according to the forementioned Debenter comes to almost 130. l. all the slain
and dead pays of which tell the ^ext muster, I might if I Would justly h^ve
mode my own* and then in my absence at Stamford as I remember my Lieutenant
made a new muster, from Whom I received three W^^kes pay, and he himself paid
the Soldiers their pay, I think justly for when I came down to them at Sir
Richard Stones, near Huntlington, heard no complaints from any of them, Where
I (...) paid them 14 days pay I had r^^^ved for them at London, and they
having lately at Melton Mobury had a Skirmish with Sir M^^mad^ke Langd^^, some
of my Soldiers were wanting which my Lieutenant told me he did ^^nfidently
believe were slain, upon which at his desire, as I remember ^^paid three
Soldiers that he had listed since the last muster, but I was a looser by the
bargain, for the Soldiers supposed to be slain were only prisoners, whose pay
after their deliverance I faithfully in Glocestershire etc paid unto them, and
this is all the pay to a penny I received as an officer of D^^goons, being in
all 91* days pay, which for me, comes to 91. l. And after this being in London,
D^. Stai^es cold me my brother Robert owed him 10. l. which he lent him, which
he entreated me to p^y him, which I condiscended to, if he Would got me a
Warrant from my Lord for 20. l. which he did, and I received ten p^unds of the
Treasurer, and he ten pound more, and I gave him a receipt for 20 l. So here is
a true account for all the money and pay I received, and I was never un^^ll^^^^
to come to a true account, but having always truly sought for it, for when the
new Model was a framing, I was by no meine man profi^ted a good command in it,
but seeing that visibly there was such bitter designs against the poors people
of God, who then as well as now were strongly endeavored to be destroyed by
them who with all their might they had endeavored to preserve, and also the
laws and justice of the Kingdom to my understanding in a very sad condition,
I plainly told Lieut^nant General Cromwell, I would die for Tur^eps and
Carrets before I would fight to set up a power to make my self a sl^ve, which
expression be relished not Well, Whereupon I told him Sir I Will ( if I Were
fire to fight again) never serve a jealo^s master While I live, for the
Parliament by their late Vote has declared a i^ clousie in all men, that W^ll
not took the Covenant, Which I can never do, (...) any other of their ^athes,
and therefore seeing I have served them faithfully, and they are grown jealous
of me Without cause, after so much assured experience of my faithfulness, I
Will never in the mind I am now of s^^ve them as a Soldier, While I breath,
let them g^^ Whom they please and do what they p^ease.

And upon my ceasing the life of a Soldier, I with much industry and difficulty
upon the 1^. November, 1645. got a Petition read in the House of Commons for my
Arrear, etc. which Petition you may read verbatum with the Houses answer to it,
in the 64, 65, 66, 67. pag^s of ^^^oc^ncy and Truth ins^ified, where you will
find they order: That it be r^fo^ed to the C^^mittee of accounts, to cast up
and state the accounts of Lieut. Col. Lilburn, and ^ocertifie What is due to
him to this house.

Ordered that it be referred to the Committee of accounts to call Col. King,
and Dr. Stane before them and. to state their accounts, and What is due to
Lieut. Col. Lilburn from either of them.

And thought it were strange to me to be referred to William Prin my ^ortall,
malicious and deadly enemy, yet I went to the Committee of accounts, and what
passed betwixt us, you may read in the 68 page of the last mentioned book, the
sum of which was, William Pry^ being in the chair, tendered to me an oath,
which wa^ to this effect, that J should swear what what was due unto me, and
what I had received, and what free quarter I had had, what horses and arms
from the State, which oath for the reasons there mentioned I refused to take,
and am still resolved rather to loose all my money, and to be hanged, before I
will make my self such a slave, by depriving my self of the benefit of the
good and just law of England, by taking such a wicked and unlawful oath,
knowing very well that by the law of England, as well as the Law of God, a man
is not bound to swear against himself, where either his own honor, credit or
profit is concerned.

And therefore having besides been plundered of diverse of my papers concerning
my Soldiers and Muster rowle^ at the seidge of Nowa^k, whereby Kings meane^ I
lost four horses, my port man^le, and clothes, etc. to the value of almost
100. l. and was stripped from the Crown of the head to the sole of the foot, and
forced to march diverse miles without either has, cap or Perewig, (having lately
before lost my hair with sickness and cruel usage in Oxford Castle, by
William Smith, that merciless Turk) breaches or d^b^et, bouts or shoots, over
hedge and ditchs for the safety of my life.

By reason of the loss of which papers, it was impossible for me upon my oath
to give an exact account, and besides I never in my service dreamt of any such
thing, walking then by that rule that was established in the Ordinances then in
being, thinking that if the Army Comittee that was set over us to look to us
See the Ordinance for the Earl of Manchesters Army of the 15. July 1643. b. d.
2. pt f. 275, ^76, 178. and of the 10. Aug. 1643. fol. 286. and of the 11. ^ct.
1643. f. 360. and of the 20. Jan. 1643. f. 413 4^4, 415.416 and of the ^5. May
1644, 492, 493. and of the 26. Sept. 1614. f. 451.452. and compare them
altogether and see if the Committee of accounts, or their self accusing oath
be in any of them, and if not, why am I required to take it.
and the Counsel of War that was to punish us for any the least misdemeaner
committed, had nothing to say to me nor accuse me of, that I should have had my
accounts audited and signed by those persons named in the Ordinances under whom
I ser^ed, and not be brought to a Committee at London, that was not in being
when ^ingaged my ^se, nor had all the while I was a Soldier no power over us,
nor never was in the field to know that belongs unto a Soldier, and are merely
in my apprehension intentively erected to cheat and ensnare honest and faithful
Commanders of their just due, though for my part I do acknowledge I hate no
particular charge concerning my self against any of that Committee but ^ryn.

And when I told-them I had my commissions ready to justify my service, and
craved so much money as my right for my faithful service, and therefore
desired them to let me receive a charge what moneys, etc they could six upon
me, and I shall either acknowledge it or disprove (...), but they told me they
could do nothing in my business unless I would take the oath, then (...)
told them I must and would repair again to the House of Commons that sent me
thither, so I was dismissed without receiving any charge, though I earnestly
desired it, and so it remained and I followed my other business about
obtaining reparations from the houses about my Star Chamber sufferings, which
when I had got it into a good forwardness to divert and disinable me to follow
it by Pryns means, as I conceive, I was summoned to come before the Committee
of Accounts with a warrant in these words.

By virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament of the 12. of February, 1643. for
taking the general accounts of the Kingdom, these are to require you to
appear before us of the Committee appointed by the said Ordinance at the House
of sir Freeman in Cornhill London, on Wednesday, next at ten of the clock in
the forenoone hereof fail you not

dated the 9. of March, 1646. Authony Bidd^l. Thomas Hodges. Robert-Ellis.
Iohn-Gregory. Thomas Bramfi^^^. Henry Hunter. Richard Burren. Hump^rey Foord.


To Lieut. Col. John Lilburne.
And coming before them, I desired to know their plesaure with me, and Mr.
Pryn being in the Chair told me to this effect, Lieut. Col. you were some
months ago with us, by virtue of an order of the House of Commons about your
accounts, and we gave you time ever since to state them, but we hearing nothing
from you, according to our expectation about them, we have sent for you to
clear your self of above two thousand pounds that is fixed upon you to be
^eceived of Mr, Goulsone the treas^^ter, Mr. Weaver, and Col. King, unto which
I replied to this effect, with the favor of this Committee, I by my own
seeking procured the Order from the House of Commons that gave you particular
cognizence of my accounts, and accordingly I of my own accord brought it to
you, being not compelled thereunto by any man, and according to that which J
conceived just I ^^^^^estly desired of you, that the par^^es concerned ^o my
accounts might by you be summoned to come before you, and that face to face I
might rective a charge of what monys they had paid me, that so I might either
confess it or disprove it, and then obtain your certifica^^ for that which is
behind, as due to me, which I am very confident it diverse hundreds of pounds
for any pay for my hazard us, faithful and industrious service, and truly
Gentlement, you refusing this unto me as you did, and would ^^^e had me upon my
path to have charged my self, which J for my part though you have an Ordinance
of Parliament to ^^^horise you so to do, did, and still do conceive it
unjust, and therefore without hope from you departed to seek my right, in a
more legal and just way from those that sent me, (...) these was the terms
upon which we then parted, and I am sure you neither desired not commanded me
any more to come to you, neither did I promise to come to you, and besides th^^
loss of time, is no l^sse to you nor the State, but to me, in whose debt the
State is, and a^ I to them, and assure your selves, if I had not assuredly
known that the State is in my debt, I would never have taken so much pains, to
have run through so many difficulties to have got my accounts audited.

And set the 2000. l. and above, you say I am to account for, it is very
strange to me how it is possible to fix such a charge upon me, having never
received I am confident ^00. l. of the Earl of Manchester, or any under him,
for all my service under his command ^t is true, when I was a prisoner in New
gate by the House of Commons, they upon the petition of some of my friends in
London, (which you may read in Innocence and Truth justified, page, 29.^0. sent
me 100. l. which I was t^ld was in part of my arrears, though I did, and still
do l^ke upon it, as a gratitude of the house, for so unjustly imprisoning me,
as then they did, or else of Mr. Sp^^ker who was the principal instrument of
clapping me by the heels, without ever hearing me speak one word for my self
or examining one witness against me, or ever to his day telling me wherefore I
was so imprisonned.
and for the money for my Soldiers, it was most commonly paid unto my officers,
and besides it was so little, and so seldom, and so well known before we
received it, to the Soldiers, how much it was, that it was impossible for me or
any under me, to co^^^ them, much l^sse of any such sums, to be compared to
2000. l. And therefore I make it my earnest desire unto this Committee, that I
may receive a particular charge from you in writing, and that J may not be tied
up to a few days to answer it, but that I may have some competent time allowed
me, that so I may not be hindered or disinabled to perfect my business now
depending before the Lords, which I have already made a good progress into,
and have got a decree for 2000. l. for my Star Chamber sufferings, and am daily
to wait upon them to perfect an ordinance they intend to make and send down
to the house of Commons, to enable me effectually to receive the full benefit
of their decree, and hope Gentlemen, you will not hinder me to follow my
business, by commanding me to wait here upon you, when I must of necessity be
waiting upon the Lords or the Commons, and if you should command me to wait
here, and I not come, by reason of my business at Westminster, which J am sure
some of you known of, you would go near to take it for a contempt, yea, and
for it, it may be clap me by the heels, by means of which my business with
the houses would utterly be undon, and therefore I desire some competent time,
but as I remember it was possitively told me they could not give me such a
particular charge as I desired, before I had taken the oath, but yet diverse of
the Merchants said, God forbid they should hinder me from following my
business at Westminster, especially seeing as one of them said, my business
before (...) obtained by my own solicitation, which they conceived I would not
so earnestly have followed unless it had been for my own advantage, and hoped
for benefit, notwithstanding the ch^^pt of 2000. l. etc. against me, but Mr.
Pryn pressed that I might speedily come again, that so the state might not
suffer by reason of the moneys I had received, and before them stood charged
with. Truly Gentlemen for all this charge, I ^m every consider^^^ shall make it
evident that I have been, and am as free from defrauding the State, or any of
my officers or S^^^^e^s of a penny as any man in England that ever the
Parliament employed, and I am ^ure that J am not in the Parliaments debt, but
they in mine, and seeing that which J seek from them is but some hundreds of
pounds and the business I am now of following of concernment to me, two
thousand pounds thick, I pray give me leave for a time to lay the lesser
concernment aside, that so J may not be disinabled to prosecute the obtaining
of the greater, and Sir, if you Mr. Pryn think I am not responsible to answer
the charge, you may either put in a bar to make stoppage of the money I
expect to receive by my decree, or else I will put you in good security to
answer this charge. With which the Committee was satisfied, and demanded of me
what time I would demand, but I told them I conceived it not ^^^venient for me
to make my demand, before I heard how long time they were willing to give me,
and they bid me take a month or six weeks, for which I thanked them but
withal to^d them, I would be with them sooner if I g^t my business done, but
if I could not get it done, J ^old them I thought I should sca^ce be able to
wait upon them, ^ell I had perfected that, so they left it indifferent. And
this relation which here I have made for the substance of it, is a real truth,
I do protest it in the sight and presence of God, and therefore dear friend. I
pray you judge and consider seriously of the ^itter and implacable malice of
this lying and base fellow Will^am Pryn, for I do assure you to (...)
remembrance I failed not to be at Westminster every day the Parliament sat, to
follow my foresaid business, from the day of my being before he said
Commi^^^^ee of acc^unts, to the day of my unjust imprisonment, in New gate by
the Lords, which I am confident of, William Pryn by his secret and close
designs h^d a finger in, and that he labored by all the in a^^^s he could to
^inder me from obtaining my said two thousand pounds, for immediately upon my
good success in the Lords house, his brother in Evil Doctor Bastwick, put in
his business of purpose to clo^ mine, so they all sat still before I had
likely without rub to obtain my just desire, and being a Presbyter, obtained
quick dispatch there, and as I was informed fo^re thousand pounds, for his
damages, although I am confident of it, my bodily sufferin^s was twenty times
more then his, and I am confident of it in the eye of reason there was twenty
times more visible ground for his sufferings th^^ mine, I having not writ^ line
against the Bishops, etc. nor meddled with them, tell they forced me to fly
London, and he had avowedly writ diverse provoking, and invective books
against them before his sentence in the Star Chamber. And besides I am
confidently persuaded Pryn was the maine instru^e it to provoke his rea^^e our
Tyburne deserving comrad?, and extraordinary great associate, Colonel Edward
King to arrest me upon he 14. of April 1646. in a false and fained action of
two thousand pound, for calling him Traitor, which I aver he is to the
Parliament (if a man can commit treason against them) having ^s will easily be
proved, (if the Parliament would do any justice upon knaves and Vi^^ams)
betrayed his trust reposed in him derivitine from and by the Parliament at
Crow^a^d, etc. which said unjust arrest did not only disinable me to follow my
business, but necessitate me to write that f^^^ll Epistle to Judge Re^^^,
dated the 6, of June, 16^6, now in print, and called the Just man's
Iust^fication, in which I have so truly, and lively pictured, the said unworthy
follow King, that I believe all the picture drawers in England cannot mend it,
and being necessiated by way of defense to touch ^^e Lord of Manchesters
exceeding guilty conscience for protecting Col. King from the ^allowes,
contrary to justice and right and the Law marria^ established by ordidance of
Parliament under which authority they both fought, though J am apt to think
neither of th^^ ever ^ild anything that had more danger in it then a R^t, yet I
say for that very Epistle the Earl of Manchester as to me is visibly caused me
upon the 10 of June 1616. to be summoned up to the Lords bar, who by law ar^
none of my Judges Se Magna Charta, Chap. 29. and the Petition of Right, which
confirms i^ Cook 2. part institutes fol. 27, ^8. 46. 47, 48. V^^ Plebis, page
3^. 3^. 29 ^^. 41. Regalley^nny, page 43. 44 7^. 76. Londons Liberty in Chains
discovered, page 68, 69 the Oppressed man's oppressions declared, page 17, 18,
19, the out cries of oppressed Commons, page 2, 3. 4. also the Anotomy of the
Lords tyranny.
being not any Peers and Equals, and there himself being Speaker, would
c^ntrary (...) ^ined me upon inter regri^^ies, for which (...) necessitated in
writing to pro^^st against (...) which pioust you may read in the 5. 6. p^ges
(...) The Fr^^^ (...), ^et which they unjustly committed me, and for which to
this day I lie by the heels, so not doubting but I have fully (...) your
objection, I commit you to God, and rest, your faithful and true friend ready
to lay down his life for the liberties of his Country John Lilburn.

From my unjust captivity in the Tower of London, for the almost destroyed
laws and liberties of England, which condition I more highly price though in
misery enough outwardly, then the visablest best condition of any Member
whatsoever that sits in either or both houses, being all and every of them for
sworn, having all of them taken oaths to maintain the Laws and Liberties of
the Land, and yet in their daily practice destroy them of which sin and
wickedness they are all of them guilty, in regard they all sit there in
silence, and do not publicly and avowedly to the whole Kingdom according to
their duty declare their dislike of their crooked, unjust and Englands
destroying ways, this 30. April. 1647. John Lilburne.

FINIS.

