The Prisoners Plea for a Habeas Corpus, Or an Epistle writ by L. C. Joh.
Lilburne prerogative prisoner in the Tower of London the 4. of April, to the
Honorable Mr. W. Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons. In which is fully
proved, that the Judges are bound by Law and their Oaths to grant a Habeas
Corpus to any prisoner whatsoever that craves it, by whomsoever committed, and
to deny it (whosoever commands the contrary) is to forswear themselves, for
which they may be in Law indicted for perjury, and upon conviction, are for
ever to be discharged of their office, service and council. In which is also
declared the usurpation of Mr. Oliver Crumwell, who has forcibly usurped unto
himself the Office of L. G. in the Army, for almost 12. months together, and
thereby has robbed the Kingdom of its treasure, under pretense of pay, which
he has no right unto, and by the power of the said Office has tyrannized over
the lives Liberties, and estates of the freemen of England in a higher manner
then ever Straford or Canterbury did, all which John Lilburne will venture his
life according to the Law of the Land to make good, unto which he has annexed
his Epistle which he writ to the Prentices of London the 10th of May 1639 when
he was like to be murdered in the Fleet by the Bishops, as now he is like to be
murdered in the Tower, by Crumwell and his tirannicall fellow Grandees.
Mr. Speaker.
IT is the saying of the Spirit of God, That a righteous man regards the life
of his Be^st: but the tender mercies of the wicked as cruelty, Prove. 12.10. And
if a righteous man regards the late of his beast; much more of a man, that
did or does him service; but he that to such a one rewards evil for good,
declares to the purpose, that his tender mercies is cruelty indeed; but whether
your dealings in particular, and the dealings of your House in general have
been so un^o (...), yea or no, I will not now determine, but at present leave
it to the consciences of you and them (...) you have any left] to Judge.

But Sir, give me leave to put you in mind that I have contrary to all Law and
Justice been (...) almost two years a prisoner in the Tower of London;
committed originally by those [ viz the ^^use of Lords] that at your Bar the
19. Ian. last I averred and in (...) good measure proved As you may read in my
late printed speech, called a Whip for the present house of Lords, page 14, 15,
16, 17. and which is absolutely and fully proved by Mr. Lionel Harb^n in his
plea the 17. present for the imprisoned Aldermen of London, etc. page, 11, 15,
16, 17,
by Law had no more power to com^^ then so many Turks or Tart^rs has; But that
day I was by Vot^ of your House a new committed to prison, who if you please
believe the learned opinion of your brother Lawyers, Mr. Wil^^a^ Prin, declared
in his late plea for the Lords jurisdiction o^^^ Commoners, your House in Law
has not so much power to (...) me, as the Lords has, and they none at all.

But howsoever, whether they have or have not, I ought by (...) when I am
committed, by whomsoever to be brought to a speedy trial, as is excellently
well proved and illustrated by Sir Edward Cook in this exposition the 29 Chap
of Magna Charta in the 2 part instit. fol. 42, 43, also fol. 186, 189 515 and 1
part instit. lib 3, chap, 7. Sect. 438 fol 260. the oppressed man's oppressions
declared pa 1.3 4 and a Whip for the Lords page, 2, 25.
The Law of England i^ extreme tender and favorable of a man's freedom and
(...) And therefore it has appointed officers and ministers, to del^^ the
Goal three times a year or oftener 4 E. 3. chap, 2, prined in the peoples
prerogative page 6.
if need be, because in eye of the Law, the prison is a bad, or a hard mant^on
or dwellin^ And besides that all men committed for any trespass whatso^v^^ for
which he is not to lose life or member shall be See 3 Ed. 1.15. printed in tho
peoples P. page 6.
ba^^ed, Goal by the common law of England says Sir Edward Coo^ being the
pledge or surety of him that could find noe other, ^^ therefore by the ancient
common law of England, Treason Felony (in case the party that had committed it,
could find g^^ bail) was baileable; And in case the prisonner be long the^^
should be, See 2 part instit. fol 186 189.
detained in prison, and denied to be bailed according the law, the law has
provided a Habeas Corpus for his reme^^ to bring his body and cause up before
the Judges, with a Habeas Corpus is not to be denied to any that craves it,
whether he be b^^ able or See 2 H. 5 ch 2. and 11, chapter 10. Petition of Right in
the C R. bag case 11 part works reports and 2 p. insti. fol. 615. 616.
noe.

And to deny it to any man what ever that craves it, let his ca^^ which he is
committed for be it what it will, is to deny him the benefit of the Law of the
Land, for (...) the return of the Habeas Corpus, it does not Iudicially
appear for what cause he is imprison, but on the return it will appear: and
if upon the return it does appear, that he is imprison contrary to the known
and declared Laws of the Land; the Judges are bound by their Oat^ without any
more ado to deliver him whosoever commands to the contrary; And if it appear,
th^^ he is legally committed for a crime in Law, that is bailable, they are to
bail him, and if his er^^ be not bailable, they are to turn him back from
whence he came, and all this clearly appear^^ by Sir Edward Cook, upon the 29
chap, of Magna Charta fol. 55. published by your selves Law; And by the Judges
answer to the 25 Articles or objections that Richard Bancroft Are bishop of
Canterbury, exhibited in the name of the whole Clergy (then high enough) in
M^chaelmas Term, in the the third year of King James, to the Lords of the
privy counsel agai^^ the Judges of the Realm, for incroaching (as they
suppose upon their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which you may read at large in
the 2 part instit. fol. 191, 602 to fol. 618.
where in their Article, they complain against the Judges in Westminster ha^^
that they command and cause the Sheriff to bring before the into their Courts,
parties so committed by the Ecclesiastie^^ Judges, to prison, that by the Laws
of the Land, they ought not to deliver until the Ecclesias^^call Courts were
satisfied, and yet by their own discretion set them at liberty, without nor a
thereof given to the Ecclesiastical Judges, etc. Unto which all the Judges of
England, and all the Barrons of the Exchequer, upon mature deliberation and
consideration, in Easter Term followin^ with one unanimous consent, that if
the party imprisonned be in Law not bailable, yet we oug^^ [say they] upon
complaint to send the Kings Writ [of a Habeas Corpus] for the body and t^^
cause, And if in the return no cause, nor no sufficient cause appear, then we
do [as we ough^ set him at liberty; otherwise upon removing the body, the
matter appear to be of Eccelsiasticall cognizance, then we remit him again,
and this we ought to do in both cases, say they And in the 22 Article the
Clergy complains, that some of the temporal Judges are grown to such an
innovating humor upon their jurisdiction given them by Law, that they have
delive^ed certain lewd persons fined and imprisoned by them, for grievous
crimes, to the^ treading the Kings supreme Ecclesiastical authority under
their feet: unto which the Judges answer. W^ do not neither will we in any
wise impunge the Ecclesiastical authority, In any that pe^taines unto it, but
if any by the Ecclesiastical authority commit any man to prison, upon
complaint unto u^ that he is imprisoned without just cause, and if they will
not certify unto us (...) the particular cause, but generally, without
expresing any particular cause, whereby he it man appear unto us to be a
matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and his imprisonment just, (...) we do
and ought to deliver him, and this is their fault, and not ours; and although
some (...) us have dealt with them to make some such particular Certificate to
us, whereby we may be able to Judge upon it as by Law they ought to do, yet
they will by no means do it and there^^re their error is the cause of this,
and no fault in us, for if we see not a just cause of the parties imprisonment
by them, then we ought, and are bound by Oath to deliver him; And they ^ll
conclude, that the Judges doing what they ought, and by their Oaths are bound
to do, they ^^e not, nor ought no to be questioned therefore.

and that a Habeas Corpus, is not by law to be denied to any prisonner,
whatsoever his crime be, ^y whomsoever committed, I further make appear thus.

First, a man in execution for debt, is by the Law of the Land not bailable,
and yet a Habeas Corpus cannot nor ought to be denied 2 H. 5, chapter 2 and 11 H.
6. chap. 10.
to him.

Secondly, a man excommunicated is not baileable by Law, and as Law a Habeas
Corpus cannot nor ought not to be denied to ^^ 2 part insti. fol. 614, 615, 616.
such, and so for all offenses whatsoever; And among o^^ remedies against
unjust imprisonment, the Law of the Land (...) this remedy amongst many others,
as the Writ de homine pag^^^do, and the Writ de odia ^t atia, and the Writ
ponendo ^^idlium, and the Writ of false imprisonment, and an action of ^ See 2
part insti. fol. 42, 43 53 55. 187.
case, upon a false return made upon such a Habeas Corpus.

Thirdly, It is against the Judges Oath to deny it, in which Oath, he swears
to do equal Law (...) execution of right to all people, rich or poor, without
having regard to any person; and that ^^y deny to no man common right, by the
Kings letters, nor none other man's, nor for no other ^^se, and in case any
letters come to you, contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by such letters,
notify the King thereof, and proceed to execute the law, not ^standing the Sea
his Oath at large printed in Pultons coll. of statuts fol. 154. and my late
book called the peoples prerogative page 10.
letters.

But a Habeas Corpus is part of the Law of the Land, which (...) Judges ought
to grant to all men that demand them, by whom over committed, although their
crimes be unbaileable. There^^re the Judges denying of it to any man whatsoever
that craves against their Oath, by doing of which they forswear them^^lves,
and so are liable to be indicted for perjured persons, upon conviction of which
they for ever (...) their places and are for ever to he incapable to be
Counselors, etc. as appears by an act of ^arliament of the 11 H. Rot Parl. no
28 m. not printed in the statute book, but is printed in the 3 (...) instituts
fol. 224 22.

Fourthly; To deny a Habeas Corpus is against Magna bide 2 part insti. fol. 53.
55.
^^^arta, and the Petition of Right made in the third of the King, ^^d the act
that abolished both which you may read in the people perrogative page 1, 2, 3,
23, 24, 25.
the Star Chamber made in the (...) of the King, yea against your own
declarations, as appears, part dec. page 6, 8.

Fifth, To deny it, is to rob the people of their declared and un^^^ed
birthright, viz. the Law of the 1 part bo^ dec. page 7.38, 39, 77, 201, 278,
459, 650. 660, 845.
Land, and so to deny all the ends wherefore we fought in the late Warr^
against (...) King, which was principally to preserve our Laws and liber^^.

Sixthly, To deny it, is to contemn the declared authority of Parliament, who
in all their (...) Protestations, Vows, Covenants and Declarations have sworn,
Vowed, promised and ^^lared they will maintain unto the people their Laws and
Liberties, and again and ^^i^e imprecated the wrath and vengeance of Heaven to
fall upon them when they do ^i See and compare together 1 part bo. decl. p 17.
18, 214, 264* 266, 267, 340. 462, 464. 466. 473, 588 666, 673, 690. 750.
not solemnly declaring they have no aims at themselves, but wholly at the
public; But Habeas Corpus, is an essential part of their Laws and liberti^^

And therefore to deny it, is to contemn the Parliaments auth^rity. And for
then to suffer it, is to render them a company forsworn men, and so never fit
hereafter to be trusted.

But if it shall be objected that if you should maintain the la^^ you could
not now, or in your by past straights, preserve yo^^selves and the Kingdom
against the King.

To which I answer, there is a great disproportion in reason (and so adjudged
by your selves 1 part bo^^. decl. 205, 266, 276, 687, 690, 700.
betwixt that Law which concerns a single person, the King (who had so much
caused the Laws to be broken as in yo^ first Remonstrance you declared before
this Parliament as he did) and his prorogative, and b^twixt that law that
concerns millions of people (that never had a hand in being guilty in a^ such
thing,) viz. all that are or hereafter shall be in the Kingdom.

And besides, though the people in assisting you against the King, suffered you
in the time open and denounced war, to do, and did themselves, many things
that were not consonant to the strickt letter of the Law of England, walking
then in that great extremity by that rule of rig^^ reason, that universal
safety is above all Law, and that necessity has no law, which caused them
present to wink, at the stopping the usual and ordinary course of justice,
and to bear wi^ many other enormities in you besides, especially in the
arbitary proceedings of your illegal co^mittees, yet they never assisted you
against the King, with any such intention to help you subdue him or his
exorbitant and Tirannicall will, that you should then become their arbitra^^
Lords and masters (and they your perfect vassalls and slaves) and tread under
your feet their r^tionall and fundamental Laws and liberties; and destroy
their properties; but rather, that th^^ might by you, be set in a better
condition then you found them, and their Laws and liberti^^ r^n in a purer
stream and Channel, by regulating the insufferable exorb^tancies of the Cou^^
of Iust^ce, and abridging both the delays and changes of Law Suites, etc.
according to yo^^ promise in your Masculine first Remonstrance 1 part book
decla page 15. and that at the e^di^^ of the wars (which you in you late
declaration against (...) Scots Commissioners* of the four^ of March, 1647.
declare is now at an end page, 5 16) they might by you, according to you many
Solemn declarations and engagements, be put in the full possession and
enjoyment the de^re-bought-fruit of all their labors, expenced, travells and
hazards that they have (...) in assisting you in the date war against the
King, principally for their Laws and liberties: an^ all this you fully p^^^so^^
your excellent declaration of the 17 of April 1647. 2 part dec^ page. 879.
where you declare, It is your intentions and earnest desires to obtain the end
of the primitive institution of all government, viz. the safety and weal of
the people and though by the necessity of the wars, (you confess) you have
been compelled to d^ many irregular things, yet upon the ^educement of your
affairs; We do declare (say you that we will not, nor any by color of any
authority derived from us, shall interrupt the ordina^ry Courts of Justice in
the several Courts and judicators of this Kingdom, nor intermed in cases of
private interest otherwhere determinable, unless it be in case of male
administration of justice, wherein we shall see and provide that right be done,
and punishment inflicted (...) there shall be occasion, according to the Laws
of the Kingdom, and the Trust reposed in (...)

But the wars are ended, and your affairs (if you by your covetuousnesse and
selfishnesse (^^vastly deviding the public treasure against Law, reason and
justice amongst your selves] spoil them not againe] reduced to a very good
condition, the ordinary courts of justice being all open where solv^ only, and
alone the Law ought to be executed, if not in the least degree pertaining to
your House; the executing of the Law making or legislative power, being their
proper and sol^^ work.

And therefore if you would ever be reputed for honest men, [who it is commonly
said are a^^ ways as good as their words) then it is high time for you to make
good your declarations, and to ^^^^ease the exercising of all your arbitrary
and illegal power in executing Laws, and let the ordinary and proper Courts of
Justice only do it, lest the people never give credit to you any (...) for men
of faith, truth or honesty; but by your tirannising over them and robbing them
^^ the benefit of their Laws, they be necess^iously provoked and compelled to
rise up against you, afte^ward you for all your cruelty, with the severity
exercised upon them, as you have rewarded (...) all their love, bounty and
kindness toward you; and when you cry out to them for law and justice, they
Preach unto you your own doctine, which by soliciter St. John, you preached to
the ^arle of Straford, in his argument of Law against him page, 70 vizt.

That he in vain calls for the help of the law, that walks contrary unto Law,
and thou the Law of like for like* he that would not have others to have law,
why should (...) have any himself? Why should not that be done to him, that he
himself would have done to another? its true (says he) we give law to Hares
and Dear, because they be beasts of Chase, but it was never accounted either
cruelty or foul play ^^ knock Foxes or Wolves on the head, as they can be
found, because they be beasts of ^^rey; The Warrenner sets trapt for Poulcats,
and other vermin for preservation of the Warren. And that cruel tirant Adon^
Bezek, found the righteous God, a just executer of the Law of ^^ for like upon
him, who after his thumbs and his great toes were cut of; said, threescore and
(...) Kings having their Thumbs, and their great toes out off, gathered their
meat under my table ^^ I have done, so God says the Pagan] has required me,
Judges 1 6, 7. And says the Apostle (...) chap. 2.13. ^^e shall have Judgment
without mercy that has showed no mercy.

But Sin if you should object against me, as some ignorant men do, that your
House is above (...) laws of the Land, and therefore are not tied by them, nor
bound to act according to them.

I answer positively no: you are not in the least above the laws, but while
they are Laws and unrepealed, they are as binding unto you, as the meanest men
in England, and you have no privilege of exemption from the lash of them,
either for treason, Fel^^^y o^ breach of the 4 part inst^. chap. high. Cou.
Parli. fol. 25. 1 part boo. decl. p 48. 278.
peace) And excellent well worth observation is that of Sin Ed. Cook in his 4
pt. instit chapter high Court of Parli. fol 37, where speaking of the attainder in
Parliament of (...) Cromwell Earl of Essex in the 32 H. 8. who by the
Parliament was condemned of high Treason, and yet was never called to answer in
any of the Houses of Parliament: of the manner of whose proceedings against
him, he says, let oblivion take it a^^at. ^^ it may be, if (...) however let
silence cover it; for says he, the more high and absolute the ^^sdiction of
the Court is, the more just and honorable it ought to be in the proceeding,
and to give ^ample of justice to inferior Courts, which kind of proceedings
of the Parliament with the aforesaid Earl, be condemns as altogether
illegal, and cites the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, etc. (...) prove it against
the Law of England; and to prove it to be against the Law of God, he qu^te^ ^^
3.9. and 18.21. and Devt. 17.10. and 19.15.17. and Josh 7.19 20.22.23. Judge.
20.21.3.4. and Job, ^51. And that it is against the Law of reason engraven in
the hearts of Heathen^ ^he cits Act 25.^^ where the very Pagan Magistrates,
answer to the Jews, when they pressed for judgment against Paull, That it is
not the manner [or Law] of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he
which is accused, have the accuser face to face, and have license to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him; who when they were to send him
prisoner to (...), by the very light of Nature declared, That it seemed
unreasonable, to send a Prisonner and not withal to signify the crime laid
against him, Act. 25.27. And in fol. 35. ibi. he says that by Order of Law a
man cannot be attained of high treason, unless the offense in law be high
(...) he ought (...) to be attained by general words of High Treason by
authority of Parliament (at some time has been used) but high ^reason ought
specially to be to press^^, seeing that the Court of Parli^ment is the highest
and most honorable Court of justice, and ought (as has been said) give
exampl^ to inferior Courts. And in pa^^ 14 ibim, declaring the danger that
insueth to the Kingdom^ when any of the maxims, or fundamental Law of the
Kingdom is altered, which was great Empson and Dudlys rigid, executing that
unjust act of Parliament of the 11 H. 7. 3. he has the words. A good Cav^t to
Parliaments to leave all causes to be measu^ed by the Golden and streigh^
Af^erward of the Law and not to the incertaine and crooked Cord of discretion,
or will or pleasure.

But Secondly, I put a clear distinction betwixt you Legislative power, and
jurisdictive power and I grant you have a legal proportion of Legislative
power inherent in you according to the present constitution of the Kingdom; to
repeal those Laws that are amiss, and to make better i^ their places, always
provided you walk by the rules of common equity and reason, which I positively
conceive and Judge, a Law to all Legislators in the world.

And therefore for you to go about to punish me, or any other man whatsoever,
for any pretended crime whatsoever by an unknown Law, made after any fact is
committed, I am absolutely of opinion is the greatest injustice in the world.
And that I illustrate thus.

My action done or acted, is either a crime or no crime, a crime it cannot be,
unless it be a transgression of a known and declared Law in being before the
act done, ( for faith the Apostle where there is no Law there can be no
transgression, Rom 4 15.) and if so, to punish me for that act, which is no
crime, or at least was no crime declared when I committed it, or to punishment
any other ways; or by any other manner, then by that law against which I have
transgresse^ is expressed, and prescribed, is the highest of injustice, and the
most righteous and justest man in the world, under such principal or tenets,
can never be safe, being always in liberty, estate, and life; liable to be
leveled or destroyed, by the will, malice and pleasure of the present swaying
grand faction, in which condition a man differs nothing from a brute beast, but
in shape. And therefore Mr, Speaker all your Legislative power put forth to
make a Law to punish men after their pretended crimes committed: I judge to be
the desperatest injustice and wickedness that ever was committed, or acted in
the world, by men that had professed and fought for Law and justice all which
are so fully proved, in the 1, 2, 3, 4. pages of Englands birthright, and the
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. pages of the second edition of my epistle to Judge Reves,
and in the 11, 12, 13, 14. pages of Mr. Wildmans Truths Triumph, And in the
proem of my late book, called the people prerogative, and the 12. 13, 14, 15.
16. etc. Sir John Maynards case truly stated, And the Plea of A. B. a Citizen
of London published by Lionel Harbin Gentleman in page 11, 15, 76, 17, 18. That
I at present judge it is irrational to add any more reasons to justify them,
then to light a cancel to the Sun when it shins in its brightness.

And therefore Mr Speaker I earnestly entreat you, and by the duty of your
place require you, to communicate these lins to your House, in the conclusion
of which I humbly from the desire.

First, to yield me my two thousand pounds, already adjudged me from my
Starr-Chamber (bloody and cruel) judges, or else.

Secondly, it they judge it not proper by law, for the jurisdiction of their
House, that they would throw it out of doors, and totally leave it to the
common Law. Always provided that I may without interruption, have my legal
remedy against the Earl of Salisbury, and old Sir Henry Van^^ my potent and
bloody adversaries, who by their inhumane and unparleld decrees in
Starr-Chamber in the years 1637. and 1638. pas^ against Which bloody sentences
you may at large read 1, 2, 3, 4. p. of my relation before the Lords Feb. 13.
1645.
me, would have murdered, starved and destroyed me, And.

Thirdly, that your House immediately give me but one half o^ my arreares, that
they justly owe me (for the whole) to enable me to live, and follow my
business, And.

Fourthly, that they adjudge my appeal against the Lords, that so I may (...)
way or another get my liberty, or else freely and wholly leave me to the ^ommon
Law, without over awing or terrifying the Judges from granting me a Habeas
Corpus, which I conceive you cannot in the least legally forbid them to ^he,
especially considering by the forementioned act that abolisheth the
Star Chamber, you have enacted a pennalty, upon all these Judges that shall
deny a Habeas Corpus to any that demand it, although committed by the King
himself; yet the Judges are there in joined without delay or any pretense
whatsoever to grant it.

And therefore Mr. Speaker, I earnestly entreat you thoroughly to acquaint your
House with my present necessitated desires, and to take some effectual course,
that by their means I may not starve ^n Prison, as in the condition I am in
^ow, of necessity in time See my lamentable complaint made at your Bar in my
speech at the 29 I^^ 1647. called a Whippe for the Lords page 20. 21. 22.
I must, ^^^ you keep me in prison (and lay no ^ame at all to my charge) and
allow ^e not the value of one farthing token to live upon, to keep me, my wife
and ^ittle children alive, and yet keep almost three thousand pound of my just
and ^egall right from me, which is now all (after my 11 years sad sufferings) I
have ^eft me in the world to pay my debts and to live upon.

But Sir if you and your House will not take some speedy and effectual course
(...) my legal releife, seeing that a Habeas Corpus is my right by Law, and
see^ng the last Term I could get never (...) Lawyer to move for one for me,
al^hough I endeavored it, as much as if my life had lain upon it, and yet
could not prevail with any to venture to do (...) for fear the indignation
of your those or the Grandees of the Army would destroy For I know and am able
to prove it that whem Cromwell and his confederates accused the eleven Members
of Treason, they had all their matter in a manner against them to seek, and I
will prove to this effect to Crumwells face, that when by the Counsel, etc. it
was demanded of him, both at St. Albons, and Colbracke what he had against Sir
John Maynard, he positively answered he at present did not well know, but he
was a busy prating man, and therefore must be in, that so he might be taken
out of the way.
them as without ^all ground it has done others, the ^ower and tyranny of whom
does to^ly over awe them, of which every ^ng your selves remarkably com^ine in
the 8 page of your forementioned first Remonstrance; And seeing ^am in Prison,
I cannot come to the Kings Bench Bar to move for my self, if our House will,
do any thing that is suitable to Law and justice, which is all ^e mercy and
pity I crave at your hands, then I must of necessity be compell^ (as you in
your great straights did, to cry out to all those, that had any sense of my,
honor or honesty, to come in to aid a distressed State 1 part bo. decl. p.
98) earnestly and mournfully, to cry out allowd to all the honest Noune
substantive men in and about the City of London, to pity and (...) distressed
and oppressed estate and condition; and rather then to suffer me to murdered
and starved in Prison by the Tyranny of Cromwell and his Gra^dees; that have
now visably turned their backs of God, (of the Liberties their native Country,
of common honesty, humanity and justice) to use the utmost endeavors to bring
me to the Bar of justice, there to receive a try according to the known Law of
England for my life, and that justice with o^^ partiallity, mercy, pity, or
compassion may be executed upon me, either to (...) condemnation or
justification, which is all the favor, pity or compassion crave from all the
adversaries I have in the world.

And for that end Mr. Speaker, I shall with all earnestness and industry,
endeavor to get as many of them as I can the first day of the next Term to
g^^ up by 6 or 7 a clock in the morning, in person to Westminster hall, a^^
deliver me a Petition to the Judges there sitting, in the very following word^*

To the Honorable the Judges of the Kings Bench.
The Humble Petition of Levt. Col. John Lilburne Prisoner in the Tower of
London.
Shows
THat your Petitioner is an Englishman, and thereby intailed, and entitled to
the benefit* all the Laws of England which by your Oaths Which is printed in
Pultons col. of Statutes fol. 144. and the people prorogative p. 10.
you are sworn indifferently and equa^^^ without fear or partiallity to
administer gr^tis to all perso^^ rich and poor, without having regard to any
person, notwithstanding any command whatsoever to the contrary.

Now for as much as a Habeas Corpus is part of the Law England, and ought no^
by Law to be denied to any man See 2 H. 5. cha. 2 Petition of Right 3. C R. the
act that abolisheth ship money 17. C. R. 2 part insti. fol. 53. 55. 55. 615
616. See 26. ch of Magna Charta and Sir Ed. Cook exposition upon it, fol. 42
and 3 Ed. 1. chapter 26. and the exposition upon it in 2 part insti. fol. 210. and
the Statute of the 11 H. 4 Nu. 28. not printed in the Stat. book but as printed
in the 3 pt. insti. fol. 146. 224. 2^5.
whatsoever that demands it, which though your Petition earnestly endeavored
the last Term to obtain, yet occur not prevail with his Counsel to move
for it, although (...) has almost this two years been detained in prison in
t^^ Tower of London, without all shadow of Law or justic^ and by the
Lieutenant thereof, has been divorced from t^ society of his wife, debarred
from the free access of (...) friends, deprived of the use of Pen, Ink and
Paper; all wh^^^ usages are against the express Laws and Statutes of a^ Land;
your Petitioners birthright and Inheritance.

Therefore your Petitioner humbly prays, accordi^^ to his right, and your
Oaths, the benefit of a Habeas C^^pus (and that he may have it gratis according
to the L^^ of the land and you Oaths) to bring his body and car^^ before you
in open Court, there to receive your award and judgment, according to the
d^clared Law of England.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. John Lilburne.

And now Mr. Speaker I desire to acquaint your House, with my intentions to
bring my self up (...) the Kings bench bar, the first day of the next Term,
who I hope will not so far subvert the (...), as to go about to hinder me, but
there meet me according to law and justice, with whatsoe^r they have to lay
unto my charge, and not still keep me in Prison, by will and force of Arms,
without laying any crime at all unto my charge, and there think to murder or
starve me, unless ^ill stoop to their tyrannical lusts and wills; which if
they do Mr. Speaker, it is not the ^t palpable injustice that I have undergone
by you in particular and them in general, as I ^erly evinced and fully proved
to your faces in my speech the 19. of Ian. last at your open bar, which you
may now read in my Whip to the House of Lords page 19. 20. 21. 24. 25. 26. But
they shall do this, then I shall absolutely conclude the levellers, viz.
Cromwell and his grandee For in my Whip (...) the Lords I have ^dly proved that
fact (...) the absolutest Le^ellers in England, and those honest men they
nickname Le^lers, to be the principal supporters of ^^^ly and property in the
whole Kingdom page 2 3.
faction has in good earnest already de facto levelled all our laws and
liberties to their own corrupt lusts and wills, and have made England already,
to become like Turkey, London like Constantinople, the Army (that was raised to
preserve our laws liberties and freedoms) like the great Turks guard of
Janisaries, that will put all his commands in execution, whether it be right or
wrong, And White Hall and the Muse, like the Seralia ( in Constantinoppe being
the place of Randezvouz or lodging of the tyrants, mercenary law and liberty
destroyers.

For truly Mr. Speaker I must say and (...) it that Mr. Oliver Cromwell has
destroyed all our laws and liberties and properties, and set up an absolute
tyrannical arbitrary Government by sword (and principally over all those that
have fought in the sincerity of their hearts for the Parliament and their
Country) for worse then ever Strafford or Canterbury attempted to do, for
which they lost their heads, who yet in comparison to (...), were but fools
and chickins, scarce daring to think what he has executed and acted. But Mr.
Speaker if you would know the reasons why I do not call him Leivt. Genesis
Cromwell, It is because I would correct a vulgar cheat amongst the people,
which of right take him now to be lievt. Genesis to the Army, when as indeed and
in truth he is no such thing rightfully; for at the ^andellising of the present
Generals Army by the self denying (alias cheating) Ordinance, no member of
either House was to have any Office in the Army, yet at the special desire of
diverse ^est petitioners in London (who now are by Cromwell christened
Levellers) and the General and his Council of War, the Parliament by special
Ordinance made Mr. Cromwell Lievt. Genesis of the ^se of that Army for six months
(reserving still for ought I ever could hear, the sole making of General
Officers (of the Army) in their own hands, and never gave it in the least to
the General) and after the expiration of the six months, continued him by an
other special Ordinance for six months longer, but I could never hear that
after the expiration of that six months they redeemed it again; And if they
did (which I confidently believe the contrary,) yet I am sure a^^^t a year
ago, he, (and a^ I remember all the rest of the Colonells in the Army, that
were lately made members of the House) were by special Ordinance taken from
their commands in the Army, so that I am confident I may safely and positively
call him a palpable usurper, of his pre^^^ place and Office of Leivt. Genesis of
the Army; and if so, then he is no better then a Robber, and a Theif, in
forcing money from the Parliament and People (as he has done, for his pay; and
ought in equity and justice at least to make restitution of every penny he has
taken since he (...) cashiered, and hereafter to retire out of the Army (that
Soldier being no better then a fool that will obey him) and take no more.

Nay he is not only a Theife, a Robber and usurper but he is an absolute
murderer too. which I will maintain upon my life to prove him to be at the
Kings bench bar, and there or at the Assizes in ^^ertford sheire he may and
ought by the declared law of England to be indicted, and ought in justice, law
and conscience to loose his life for that wilful, malicious premeditated and
forethought of ^urther, that he committed upon the Soldier of my brother Col.
Robert Lilburnes Regiment, for Mr. Cromwell being indeed and in truth no
Officer but a palpable usurper, had not the least shadow or color to meddle
to adiudge the Soldier to death or cause him to be shot for any pretended
marshal crime whatsoever, but.

Secondly, if Mr. Oliver Cromwell should prove himself an Officer of the Army
then, (which I am confident he never can justly or legally do,) yet that would
do him no good to save his life For I am sure the Earl of Strafford was
general of an Army in Ireland by legal Commission, and did but do that which
many generals there before him had done, and by Martial law caused the Lord
Mount-Norris to be condemned to dye, and by this Parliament he was therefore
strongly impeached of treason, and amongst other things lost his head
therefore, and yet the Lord- Mount Norris i^ alive to this day, but the Soldier
condemned by Cromwell an Usurper is shot to death in the time of full peace,
Ergo* he undeniably deserves to dye.
for that murder, for it being done in a time of peace and not of war
[although an Army be up in in the Kingdome] and all the ordinary Courts of
justice free and open, where law and justice i^ d^ spenced and administered
according to its usual manner, where only and alone all Soldiers as well as
all other Englishmen, that are no Soldiers ought by the law of this land to be
punished and no where else, the law having made particular provision therefore,
yea almost for every crime that in time of peace, is imaginable a Soldier can
commit, all which is fully proved in the 11. page of the forementioned Plea of
A. B Citizen of London, and in my forementioned book called the Peoples
prerogative. page 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. but especially page 53,
54, and in the 55, 56. pages thereof, you may read my letter which I sent to
Windsor to the General, the 23. December. 1647. by way of challenge, to all the
Officers in his Army, to dispute that point with them before the General,
viz. that it now being time of peace he nor his Counsel of War cannot by
Marshall Law put any man whatsoever (Soldier or other) to death, but it is
absolute murder. And is so declared by your own authority in your premitive
purity and virginity, in the 3. part of the Lord Cooks institutes, chapter of
murder, fol. 52. Where he positively declares, it has in law been often so
resolved, and there gives strong and undeniable reasons for it, and I am sure
the Earl of Strafford paid for it to the purpose. And therefore Mr. Speaker I
do absolutely conclude Mr. Oliver Cromwell to be a murderer, with which I now
charge him, and require you as you will hereafter answer it, to a quaint your
house that J do hereby require him at their hands as a murderer of a Soldier
of Co. To. Lilburnes Reg. near Waire, this last Winter, 15. No. 1647. called
Rich. Arnell, And that they forthwith commit him as a murderer, to prison,
without Bail or Mainp^ise according to the law of the land, and I John
Lilburne am ready to enter into security according to Law, to prosecute him,
and to make good the charge upon my life against him, by way of indictment
according to the known law of the land, either at the Kings bench bar in
Westminster Hall, or else at Hartford Assizes.

Sir you may please to remember, that at your open bar the 19. of Ian. last, I
delivered a formal impeachment against him, and his son in Law the pretended
Comissary Genesis Ireton, being the very same things but in a far transcendent
nature, that they positively accused Mr. Hall is etc. of reason for; And I
offered before you all (as you very well know) upon my life to make it good,
and am still ready and willing to do it, but the justice you did the kingdom
was to commit me to prison for my f^ithfulnesse and therefore truly Sir, J must
in good earnest tell you, that my urgent oppressing necessity, and your, and
Sir Henry Vain, and Cromwels unparraleld cruelties toward me are so great and
transcendent, that unless I speedily enjoy, and really possess some
effectual justice from you, J must be compeld to throw all care and fear
aside, and pluck up the same resolution in reference unto you, that I did
toward the Bishops after they had caused to give me upon the 18. of April
1638. with knotted cords 500. stripes in less then 2. hours time, and set me
upon the pillorie imediatly after, and there put a gag in my mouth for an hour
and a half, to the almost renting my jaws in sunder, and imediatly after
this, in the common Jail of the Fleet laid me in Irons upon both my arms and
legs, night and day, all wihch was done unto me by the bloody and wicked decree
of merciless and barbarous Sir Henry Vain Senior, and the Earl of Salsbury,
Lord Chief Justice Bramston, etc. at which time J sent Canterbury and the rest
of h^s bloody brethren word, that for all that, they had caused to be done unto
me, or could farther do unto me, I was not in the least afraid of them, for J
neither feared an Axe at Tower Hill, nor a Stake in Smithfield, nor a Halter at
Tyburnt, nor whipping at a Carts arsse, nor a Pillorie in the Palace yard, nor
gagging, nor cutting of ears and nose, nor burning in the forehead and
cheeks, nor yet banishment with John to P^thmos. For I verily believe if you
should send me thither I shall there find Christ, which by his spirit will
unfold the revelation unto me, and then I would write it and send it abroad
into the world, which would vex you as il as Sampson did the Philistims, and
prove as fatal to your decaying, tottering, spiritual, Babilonian,
Antichristian Kingdom, as his Foxes with fire brands at their tails, were to
the Philistims Corn. And therefore as you love your almost ruinated Kingdom,
look to it, and know that the faster you kick, the harder J will sp^r you, and
the more you fling the closer I will stick and cleave fast unto you, for you
are plants (which I groundedly know) the Lord never planted, and therefore
undoubtedly he will pluck you (...), Mat. 15.13. And therefore by the might
power and strength of my God. Psalm. 118.14 Esaias 12.2. who is the worker of all
my works in me, and for me, Esaias 26 12. I am resolved come life ^^e death,
seeing you by force have called me to it, to show my self valiant for the truth
of God, Jer. 9.3. which message Mr. Speaker you may read in the 34. page of my
book called, Come out of at my people, printed at Amsterdam, 1639.

And truly Mr. Speaker, if you compel and force me to such a course, J shall
deal ingeniously with you, and acquaint you before hand, with my epistle J
writ to the Apprentices of London upon the 10 of May, 1639. the copy of which I
shall hereunto annex, the effects of which was like to have saved Derick the
Hang man a labor, in reference to the Bishop of Canterbury, the like of which
in reference to you and Cromwell, etc. I shall not fear to write again, and
set my credit upon the tenter hooks, if it be possible to get money to print
enough to send all over England, let the issue be what it will, I can but dye,
and say I, better any way, then to be murdered and fami^^ed by you in a bole
and a corner in silence. But I am confident I shall fix such a charge upon
Cromwell, etc. as shall clearly make them apparent to be the arrantest Iuglers,
Dissemblers, Hypocrites, Apostates, and Liars, that ever breathed in the world,
that professed honesty, Which is already prittie well done in those two books
called Putney Proiects, and Westminster proiects.
and sincerity, yea to be tyrannical monsters in comparison of Strafford, and
Canterbury, who were esteemed bail enough in their generation.

For though the Earl of Strafford caused to be condemned the Lord Mount
Norris, a Member of the Irish Army, by Marshall Law, over which Army the Earl
was General by lawful Commission, which act of his notwithstanding, was
objected against by your house as an act of treason in subverting the law,
which act was strongly pressed upon him as a most heinous crime, by Mr. Glyn,
Recorder of London, and a member of your house, being assigned so to do by
you, to which he made a more notable defense for himself by a thousand degrees,
then J am confident Cromwell is able to make to justify his Martial Law
actions, whose defense you may partly read in a printed relation thereof,
printed 1647 page 11, 12, 13.

Yet though he were esteemed very bad in his generation, he never had so much
impudence, to ^ed^le with, or endeavor to condemn to death a mere Commoner,
as Mr. Cromwell has done in the case of William Thompson a mere Commoner, as
he has fully proved himself to be, in his ^^^e and impartial printed
relation, dated from White Hall the 12. March, 1647. whom upon the 16 Fol.
1647. he took from the House of Commons door, and most illegally by word of
mouth, and force of Arms committed prisoner to his Mercinary Iunisaries at
Whitehall, where to the ut^er levelling and subverting of Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right, etc. he has passed upon him a sentence by Marshall Law, to
be shot to death, and your House (who should be the preservators and
conservators of the laws and liberties of England) take no notice of the poor
man's dying condition, to redeeem him as you ought in duty and conscience to
do, out of the clutches of that grand Usurper and Tyrant Cromwell, and to
punish him, etc. severely therefore, but by your silence, you rather seem to
justify that murdering and tyrannical action, yea and so carry you ^^^ves in
it, as though you were resolved without check or comptroule, to give him leave
to murder and destroy all the honest men in England at his will and pleasure,
that he bears a malic^ to: the full discovery of the evil consequence of
which single president of Thompson, will be worth the Kingdom, knowledge,
which in due time to your eternal shame amongst men, it may be the may enjoy,
which is may be may in time bring Cromwell for all his arbitrarie proceedings
again and subvertion of the fundamental law of the land, to the punishment of
Empson and Dudley Privy Consellours to Henry 7. who yet had an Act of
Parliament to authorize their proceedings of whom and their arraignments and
ends, you may read in the 2 part institutes fo. 51. and 3 part. fo. 208. and 4
part fo. 41 196, 197, 198. and in John Speeds Cronicles. fol* 978, 983.

But Sir, before J totally conclude, I cannot but acquaint you, what a lving,
desperate, and malicious design, Cromwell some months ago had to destroy me,
and take away my life, who by his mercenary Emisaries, Paul Heison, and Lievt.
Col. H. L. groundlesly raised a repor^ all over the Army, that I had told the
foresaid Lievt. Col. that some of the late Agents had a design or intention to
murder and kill the King, which was and is the most notoriousest and fals^lye
in the world, for I do protest before men and Angels, I never said any such
thing in all (...) life to any man breathing, nor never was so told from any of
the Agents or any of their friends and I will justify what I now say with my
life, against any man breathing that shall have so much baseness and impudency
to affirm the contrary against me, viz. that ever be heard me say such words,
yet upon this complotted and contrived lie of Cromwell, and his pencionary
creature^ (for no other can I judge it) he writ his Letter to Col. Whaty, the
Kings Jailer at Hampto^ Court, that he had certain intilligence of the Agents
intent to murder and kill the King, which letter Whaley showed to the King,
upon which false suggestion and lie of Cromwell and his confederates own
framing, the King fled (no doubt with Cromwells privitie, knowledge, and good
l^king) into Cromwells mouse trap in the Isle of Whight, and after his
departure it was bruited by Cromwells instruments, all up and down the Army,
City, and Country, that J was the origina^ reporter of it, from whence to the
hazard of my life they drew this inference, viz. That John Li^burne in the
Tower, who pretendedly stood so much for law and justice, was one of the
Conspirator to kill or murder the King, without all shadow of law, and further
said, that he that without a^^ color of law would not stick to have a hand in
murdering the King, would not stick without the color of law, if he had power
in his hands, to destroy all those that stood in his war, (thereby measuring me
by their own practices, and by their own principles, laid down by their darling
Solicitor St. John, in his plea, of Law against the Earl of Strafford) and
therefore it is necessari^ (said they) to keep him fast in the Tower, and this,
or the substance of it with much confidence wa^ reported by men of quality to
diverse desperate Cavilier on And yet at the same time Cromwels agents and
instruments amongst honest men in London, reported me to be an absolute
Cavilier, and stuck not with confidence to declare J was commonly drunk with
Judge Ienkins, etc. in the Tower, hoping thereby to destroy my reputation
amongst honest men for ever.
purpose (as I cannot but conceive) to set them upon me to stab me or cut my
throat, some of whom told me of again, protesting they could not believe that
report of me but I wondered and stood amazed from whence it should arise,
having for my self protested again and again upon many discourses with my
friends, etc that J could never see an^ law in being in England to enable the
two Houses of Parliament it self, to draw up a charge or impeachment against
the King, to enable them formally and judicially to try him for his life,
either for wilful murder or misgovernment, etc and to take away his life by a
law made expost fa^^o, I then declared, and for my part still do^ think is not
just, And an impeachment by the Parliament, which they judged legal was the
highest that ever I knew any man to attempt But yet in reason and equity J
cannot apprehend a reason, why a King (who is but a mere creature as well as
any other man, and at most is but a Magistrate of trust) for murder, (...)
should not be as liable to punishment amongst men, as any other man, (though I
confess I ^^ver could see any thing by the Law of England to declare the King
of England so) for this I (...) sure of, God the Supreme King, never created
any man whatsoever lawless, which he must (...) be, that is free and above the
punishment of all law, and I am sure nature and reason rea^^eth me to hold or
tie my Fathers hands, (at least) if with them he should do so unnatural (...)
thing as to go about to destroy me, and therefore seeing in my apprehension
there is a defect in ^^is particular in the Law of England, I shall for the
future wish, desire, and endeavor by all befall and just ways and means,
that all whatsoever may be bounded by law, and subject to the punishment of the
Law, professing before all the world, that J know nothing that makes a ^an a
Magistrate over me but law, and while he walks by the rules of that Law which
make him a Magistrate, I shall own him as a Magistrate, but when he tramples it
under his feet, and walks by the law of his own will, I for my part in such a
condition cannot own him for a Magistrate.
or desire) which I could never learn perfectly till I lately spoke to him of
^^e Agents that were in prison at Windsor, and see and read their petition to
their General, earnestly to press and desire him to search into the bottom
of that false and groundless ^ p^rt, which its believed usurping, tyrannising,
Cromwell, would never suffer him to do, be being his Lord and Master, a copy
of which petition you may read at large in the 52. page of my forementioned
book, called the Peoples prerogative, but I must take a fit time of purpose to
discover ^^lly this desperate plot of Cromwell, and his associates against my
life, and the reputation, and ^^ves of the gallant and honest Agents, and their
Noun Substantive Associates, who by him and his fellow Tyrants, are nicknamed
and baptized Levellers, which title (as I have in my last printed book fully
proved) is only proper for himself, and his fellow grandees, who have already
actually Levelled all our liberties, laws, properties, and lives, to their
tyrannical, lawless wills and pleasures, so that really the quandom free men
of England, cannot say they can enjoy any of them, l^^ger than the Grandees
will and please, yet to that hight of tyranny are they grown in the very ^^my,
that even in the Generals Regiment of Horse, some of their weather cock
Mercinary Officers, have already commanded the Soldiers, not to go or ride a
mile out of their quarters without have at their perils, nor to talk nor
discourse of news, or of state affairs, with any Country men or Soldier, so
that if they do a little longer proceed as they have already begun, verily,
verily, Englishmen shall not differ from bruit beast but in shape, and shall be
worse then ever our ^ncestors were in that tyrannical age of William the
Conqueror, whose tyranny, is lively set forth in the beginning of that notable
book called Regal Tyranny, a true parallel of which, if I have ^o more
employment then I find in a prison, may shortly be the work of my pen, but at
present I shall take my leave of you, desiring now at last for you if it be
possible you may turn honest and do me some justice, before fear, vengeance,
and judgment sweep you from off the land land of the living. to the place of
recompense of all Tyrants and oppressors, and so I rest.

Yours to serve you (if you would but faithfully serve your native Country)
till death, John Lilburne, that neither fears a Tyrant nor loves an Oppressor.
from my most illegal, and murdering imprisonment it the Tower of London, this
4. April, 1648. going in the eight year of my fruitless expecting justice
from the House of Commons, who now make it their principal study and work, to
cheat and deceive the poor people of the Kingdom of their money, in raising
it for other pretenses, and then share and devide it by thousands and ten
thousands amongst themselves, and suffer the poor Widows and Orphants, that
have lost their husbands and fathers in the wars, (and have long waited at
their doors for their dear bought wages, without pity, relief or
compassion) to dye and starve for hunger and cold, whose blood cries loud in
the are^ of the Lord of hosts for wrath and vengeance upon them.
The forementioned Letter to the Apprentices of London thus follows:

To all the brave, courageous, and valiant Apprentizes of the honorable City
of London, but esp^cially those that appertain to the worsh^pfull Company of
Cloth workers, (of which company, if J l^ve I hope to be a Free man.)
THe kind and hearty salutation, together with the g^^evous deplorable
complaint of me John Lilburne, a most miserable, distressed, and cruel,
oppressed, exceeding close prisoner in the Common G^o^ of the Fleet, against
all law, equity, justice and conscience, in which condition I am like t^ he
murdered and devoured, in my innocence, and for my courage and boldness for
my Prince an^ Country, against the Capital and open enemies thereof, the
traitorous Prelates and their most wicke^ confederate, and for my love to the
welfare, and prosperity of all my faithful fellow-Subiects an^ Apprentizes.

WOrthy fellow Prentizes it is a Maxim in mortality, that the glory o^ the
great and Sovereign Creator, and the Common good of (...) Kingdom or City,
ought to be preferred before a man's own particula^ liberty or welfare.

The knowledge and consciousnesse of which, has made me for the glory of my
God, the good of my Country, and the future good o^ you my fellow Prentizes, to
abdicate all, and hazard and jeopard my estate, hopes, and fortunes in his
world (which in outward liklihood would have been no smal^ portion) yea my
sweet life and liberty. For being banished from my Masters service (who lives
near Londonstone) in June or July next will be two years; for no offense nor
trespass in the world but only because the Prelates knew that I was a familiar
acquaintance and Visiter of that Noble and renowned D. Bastwick, who stood out
valiantly, bravely and courageously against them, for the honor of his God,
the good of his Prince and Country, and the prosperity of you^ my fellow
Prentizes.

My exilement was into Holland, where I spent my time, not like a drone, but
for the welfare of England, and all true hearted English men, I both with my
purse and person labored both night and day, for the accomplishment of which,
I both early and late without weariness, traveled without the assistance of
any man's purse but my own, and my industry, by boat, and shiping by water, and
on my fee^ by land, of which the enemies here to the King and State being
informed by their Scouts in Holland they out of malice, and envy at me for my
good service to this land, at my coming over again ^ast me in the Gate house
prison in December. last was 12. Months, but as the Lord ordered it by his
overruling providence, it was for a thing I was clear of (as I truly declared
unto the Nobles, and Peer, of the land when I was before them) see my
examinations and defense at the Star Chamber bar etc. called the Christian
man's trial reprinted by William Larnar at the black boy in Bishops gate street.
yet they kept me wrongfully in Prison ever since; against all law justice
equity, and conscience, exercising such bloody tyranny, murdering cruelty,
devouring oppression (in laying me in Irons, keeping me 15. months together
closs Prisoner, keeping my victuals and friends from me, and beating threatening
and most shamfully abusing those that came to seem and relieve me, threatening
and exercising cruelty upon the poor Prisoners, that but seem to favor and
p^^ty me) that the like example of cruelty I dare maintain it, is not to be
found among the Heathens, and pagans, Turks and Infidels, (as I have truly in
my late grievous lamentaced and just complaint to the right honorable the Lord
Major of the City of London entitled A Cry for Justice and the right
worshipful Aldermen his brethren, and all the rest of the grave and worthy
Citizens published and which I have more largely in 3. several books in
print, being forced by unheard cruelty thereunto) declared and published unto
the view of England, Scotland, Ireland and Holland, which if you be pleased to
inquire after, you may meet with in the City.

But now to come to the thing, I desire of you my fellow Apprentizes, it is but
thus much, that ^^ag I am in the hands and custody of corrupt cruel,
oppressing, murdering, poisoning, starving (...) a thirsty Hangmen jaylors (as
I have truly declared in my last weeks complaint before named ^^at Copy of
which I have sent you) and seeing all hopes of lively hood is taken away from
me (...) that I now live and subsist by the miraculous power and providence of
the great omnipotent ^ed of Heaven and earth. And I having had a grievous and
dangerous sickness well nigh these 11. months ^y reason of my cruel whiping,
to the number of at least 500. strips; Which with much (...) was punctually
^^ed before the ^^ds upon oath the (...) Feb. 1645. as ^n^^e printed relation
^^ereof, you may (...) page. 3. 4.
and long lying in Irons upon both hands, and legs night and day, with other
barbarous tyranny and cruelty: and seeing that now my friends are not suffered
to come at me, to look to me in my weakness nor bring me victuals, and I
daring not to eat any for fear of being poisoned (as I truly told the Warden
not many days ago) but what my own friends deliver into my own hand, in
regard several Prisoners have here been poisoned and other murdered, for one
of which Murry my upper keeper was arraigned as Newgate, and my under keeper
has been a Hangman, being fittest for that employment, being of such a doged
churlish and cruel disposition that he seems to be a man without humanity. In
consideration of all the premises, (most worthy fellow Apprentizes) with
multitudes of ^^re deplorable grievances, which time will not suffer me to let
down, I being now out of all ^^ward hopes, if you get not speedy redress for
me, but that shortly my life and blood in cruel (...) imprisonment will be
shed and taken away.

Threfore my earnest and importunate request and desire unto you, (my loving
fellow Apprenti^^) is but this, that you would be pleased to take my aforesaid,
just and miserable complaints which I have sent you, and by hundred or
thousands go in a faite and peaceable way in my be^^lfe to the honorable Lord
Mayor of this City, and desire him that it may be read to him in (...) hea^ing,
and importune him without rest, that J may be forthwith removed out of this
mur^^^ing Prison, to any other prison in the City for the safty of my l^fe,
where if I may have but ^^e liberty of a faithful subject which my supported
innocence does challenge for me, and which ^^e Laws of my Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES does afford unto me, I will p^t in sufficient ^^^^erity without
exception for my safe imprisonment, to answer at all ^imes, whatsoever shall be
^ected against me, by the mightiest and potentest of my enemies.

But take notice of this, that for my own part (God is my witness) I do not
send unto you to (...) a tumult, or uproare, that so, for fear of the Law, and
the rigor of justice for my offense, J ^^^y escape by flight, and so save my
life, no, J scorn now to fl^^, for I was never borne to be a s^^ ^sser for to
fly, and my unspotted and untainted innocence is such that I dare with inward
peace (...) boldness abide the touchstone, and the extremity of the Law, and
a public trial before the ^ea^est potentate in England, for I desire no
mercy nor favor at any of my adversaries hands, (...) only the benefit of my
Sovereigns Laws, and in the maintaining of my innocence. I do here ^^^claime
it, that if I had absolute liberty to go whether I please, J would come to
fly, for I (...) resolved by the might and strength of my God, for the honor
of my King and Country, and ^e good of future generations, to fight it out so
long as I have a leg to stand on, and to wage ^^^ofessed war so long as I
have drop of blood in my billie; with the domestic and home bred^^ ne^^s of
the King and State, for I have a Soldier, heart within my innocent breast. And
with my ^^^itall adversaries, the chief of which is the devil, that devouring
Lion, and the Prelate of Canterbury, that guilty Traitor, (as upon the loss of
my life I will maintain) and with the Lord kee^er Coventry, that unjust and
unrighteous Judge (that passed a wicked and unl^wfull censure upon me) and My
Gaolers, those murdering, poisoning starving, and grand opp^^ssors: against
all ^f which by the strength of God, (if I live) I will prosecute the Law for
all my wrongs sustained (...) them.

Oh! therefore my fellow Apprentizes, I cry out unto you, to provoke you to
zeal for God, and his glory, and to courage and bol^nes to stand for liberties
and privileges, which are granted to us by the Parliament laws of this Land,
against the wicked Prelates supported with the power assistance of the unjust
Lord keeper.

My ^ope is I shall not need to press you with ^ultiplicity of arguments (oh
my fellow Pre^zes) to fulfill my forced desire in regard it was so just and
equal, and in regard I am like to be m^^thered for innocence, and eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, skin for skin, and all that a man ^^ will he gave for his
life, for the saf^y of which I am pressingly forced to send in this man^ unto
you.

The fulfiling of what I desire you, cannot in the least, lay ye open to the
punishment or s^^tence of Justice, in regard my just complaint does arise from
lawless oppression, and wrong, for ^^liverance from which J have already used
exceeding much fair, peaceable and lawful mean^ from time to time, without
intermission, with multitudes of humble petitions both to the K^^^ and the
Nobles jointly, and severally, yea and with mornfull petitions supplicated the
Illus^^^ous Queen of Bohemia to solicit the King her Brother about me, which I
caused to be sent to (...) friends, and acquaintance at the Hage, to be
delivered to her; but by reason of the greatness the Prelate of Canterbury,
and the Lord Keeper, and the Warden of the Fleet (from all of which have
suffered the height of misery and wrong, I can have no redress or answer to
any of them (...) they daily load me with more and more cruelty, for my
complaining of purpose to take away (...) life for my unspoted innocence,

Wherefore unto all you stout and valiant Prentizes, J cry out murder,
murder, murder (...) murder, wherefore as you pity the most miserable and
deplorable codition of me who am y^^ stout and coragious (though sore)
afflicted fellow Prentize, give the Lord Major no rest, till (...) by the
assistance of the noble Lord protector, fulfill my just and equal desire,
that so my in^^cent blood may be preserved, that I may live in future time, to
do my King and Country a this honorable and noble City, of which I am most
oppressed member, faithful and true ^^^vice; which if I were delivered from my
cruel condition, and were well of my weakness (...) sickness which I have
had for many months together, were able to do, if need did require, ^^ther
with sword or Pen. For if I have a good cause to ground my quarrel upon I
durst venture to combat with any man whatsoever, that steps upon the ground
though perished in the battle, for my Mother did not bear me to be a Coward,
or a Son of base (...) slavish fear.

Now if you should inquire what I am, I truly answer in the expression of the
world, I am (...) second Son of a Gentleman in the North parts of England, 200.
miles from hence, descend^^ of an ancient and worshipful Family (according to
the estimation of the world) and about (...) and two years of age: whose
predecessors have been men of valor, and did with their Swo^^^ good service to
that noble Prince Henry the 8. at the conquest of Bulloign in France, and (...)
Father in his youthful days in his service at the Court, ware a gold Chain as
the badge and (...) very of an Illustrious and Noble Earl of this land.

And for my Mother she was a Courtier borne, bred, and brought up, where she
ended her da^^ whose Father wa^ ^^ Household Officer to that famous Queen
Elizabeth, and afterward to Roy^^ King James. But alas, alas my kindred,
though some of them be rich and great in the no^^^ have all long since left me,
in regard of the greatness of my adversaries whose power they (...) afraid of,
and I have not one of them to stand by me: wherefore if my fellow Apprentizes
(...) not now at a pinch lend me some spedie help, now my life lies at the
stake, and is like every ha^^ to be taken away by bloody Gaolers in the Fleet,
I am like in a few days to perish in my ^^^stressed condition, for verily
there is but a step betwixt me and death.

So remembering my kindest love unto you all, desiring speedily to hear from
you, and w^^^ good success you have, I commit you to God and rest. Your
faithful, stout and courageous fellow Apprentize (though now in the depth of
mis^^^ and distress) John Lilburne.
From the murdering prison called the Fleet, the cruellest Geole J think this
day under the s^^^^ the 10, day of this 5. month of May, in the year of
remembrances 1639.

