TRUTHS VICTORY Over TYRANTS AND TYRANNY.

Being the TRIAL of that Worthy Assertor of his Countries Freedoms, Lieftenant
Colonel JOHN LILBURNE, Defender of the Ancient and known Laws of England,
against Men and Devils, whether in King, Parliament, Army, or Council of
State.

Guild Hall London, October. 26.

Freed in open Court, from his unjust and Illegal Charge of High Treason, and
cruel Imprisonment in the Tower, by the unbyassed and just Verdict of this
Jewry, whose Names are here inserted;

Miles Pettit, Holburn-Condu. Stephen Isles, Friday-street. Abraham Smith,
Smithfield. John King Smithfield. Nicholas Murrin, Gosling-str. Thomas Dainty,
Cheapside. Edmund Keysar, Holb-bridge Edward Perkins Smithfield. Ralph Packman,
Smithfield. William Cummins, Cheap. Simon Weeden, Bredstr. Henry Tooley,
Bredstreet.
All Good Men and true.

Printed in the fall of Tyranny. 1649.

TRUTHS VICTORY Over TYRANTS AND TYRANNY.
I Should before this have given you the Trial of honest John Lilburne in
Print, by Order of the House, but that it was so rediculous on their part, that
they cannot endure so much as to hear of it; so far as I can gather from Mr.
Hind, and others who took his Trial in Short-writing, (besides my self) being
both eye and ear witnesses of their Proceedings against him in that Court.

His Charge was not one Jot less then High Treason (with a new found-diddle)
for which that honest Liev. Colonel John Lilburn, was a week before he came to
Guild Hall condemned by their Tyrannical Counsel of State, only they would
venture at a legal Trial, thinking with their big looks, and Guards of
Soldiers to make honest John and the Iewrie fay after them; but it proved
otherwise; The most material things that the forsworn Judges did accuse him
of, was.

THat he the said John Lilburne did at or about Easter last, 1648. and diverse
times before and since, against the Peace of the Commonwealth of England, and
the Testimony of his own Conscience (not setting God before his eyes) most
perfideously, wickedly, perniciously, and Treasonably write, and cause to be
Printed, Published and Divulged diverse Papers and dangerous Books of very evil
Consequence, to the derogatition of diverse Members of Parliament, and the
subvertion of the Parliament and present Government by Slanders, Lies, and
false Suggestions cunningly by him insinuated and spread amongst the People, to
take off, and divide the People, and alienate their Affections from that just
Authority which is set over them for their good and safety, and to bring a low
and mean esteem upon the Persons, and a suspicion and hatred upon the courses
and intentions of the most faithful Members of the Peoples Representative in
Parliament, and of other Ministers of State, that are most conscientious in
discharging their trust, and are therefore become the utmost object of his
wretched spleen and malice.

Here they began to read over his Books, which pleased the People as well, as
if they had acted before them one of Ben Iohnsons Plays, for their excellency,
I shall give you the names of them, desiring all well affected People to buy
them; because they are filled with Law and Truth.

1. His two Pictures of the Counsel of State, in which Books you may see them,
as in a glass, sitting together to cheat the Commonwealth, like a pack of
Juggling Knaves. 2. His DISCOURSE with Mr. Peter's, in which Peter's told him,
That there was no Law; whereupon honest Lilburn, replied, That he and his
masters were then a company of Roagues, or Fools, to fight for the Laws, when
there were none. 3. His INPEACHMENT of High Treason against CROMWELL and IRETON,
in which there is an excellent Epistle directed to William Lenthall Speaker, to
those Knights Gentlemen and Burgesses left by Colonel Thomas Pride Esquire (late
Dray-man in Smithfield) in his purge to the House of Commons, who with the
Assistance of the Army (says JOHN) are setting up their own Ambition and
Tyrannical Wills. 4. A HUE and CRY after Sir Arthur Haslerigge Governor of
New Castle, and Tyrant of the North. 5. His DISCOURSE with Prideaux some few
days before his Trial, in which he plainly made it appear, That this
Parliament was Null and VOID; First by the death of the KING, which was by them
Illegally acted; Secondly by their own Arguments.
For at that time when the House was Affronted by some disorderly Apprentices
for one afternoon, the next day (like a company of Cowards,) some Thirty or
thereabouts, (being but a small part of the House,) fled to the Army about
Vxbridge, and would not own them at Westminster as a House, as they Sat,
though Free and without any Force; but wrote to them by the Title of Knights
and Gentlemen Sitting at Westminster: And when the Speaker with his Crew was
again put into the House, he said, Those which had Acted in their absence was
no Parliament; and that all their Acts and Orders were Null and Void: then
surely says he, this is none; for that the Major Part was by Force pulled out
of the House, and a Guard set to keep them out, and to awe them who sat to Act
according to the Humor of the Grandees; which Prideaux could not deny: The
Particulers out of these Papers, with malicious agravations of jeering Iarman,
sneaking Keeble, and the puppit Prideaux; they drew up their Indictment, which
lasted a whole day the Reading; which when they had ended, they Required honest
JOHN to Answer them presently: He said unto them,

Gentlemen,
I Desire time; for have you been this Six Months knocking your heads about
this; and must I who am here upon my Life, give you an Answer at this instant;
I pray you hold, and make not too much haste to hang True Folks, you know not
how soon it may be your own Turns,

Then Ieering Iarman bawled out, and said, with vehemence of Malice,

Master Lilburn, either Answer now, or for ever hold your tongue. But then that
Innocent Gentleman, Liev. Colonel JOHN LILBURNE desired, That if he might not
be allowed two days time to answer their tedious CHARGE, that they would grant
him but two hours.

But the States three Beagles yelped out with full mouth, No, no, no, not an
inch of Time.

So soon as they had said this, a Scaffold in the Hall fell down, some (being
hurt) crying out, which so amazed, and terrifyed the unjust Judges, that for
almost the space of an hour, they did nothing but stare one upon another, in
which time Mr. Lilburne did so prepare himself for them that when he came to
speak, he did confute them with good Law, and honest Reason (telling them,
that they had prated like Fools, and knew no more LAW then so many Geese)
whereupon the Lubbers of the Keepers of ENGLANDS LIBERTIES had not a single
Syllable to utter in the defense of themselves or MASTERS, but left it to the
Iewry, with as many Items and Nodds as they durst give them, to follow their
Wills.

But the honest-hearted JEWRY-MEN [being all unbyased men, and such as had no
dependency on them by OFFICE or the like] did as justly as honestly and
gallantly discharge their Consciences; not fearing their great looks, nor new
invented ACTS; but in their Verdict did unanimously declare,

THAT THE PRISONER WAS NOT GUILTY OF HIGH TREASON. At which time the People
(for Joy) gave a great shout, that made Guild Hall to ring again, which made
his unjust Judges to pull in their horns, slip off their Gowns, and betake
themselves to run, as if they had been so many Gadarines, for fear the PEOPLE
should pull them off their seats of JUSTICE by the ears; and in their Passage
home, were scoffed mocked and derided by Men, Women and Children.

Then was that worthy Champion, and Patriot of his COUNTRY, Lieutenant Colonel
JOHN LILBURNE attended back to the TOWER, not only with the Joy and
acclamation of his friends, but of all sorts of PEOPLE; for his unexpected
delivery from the cruel paws of his merciless and fell Enemies, who made no
other account but to sacrifice to their unlimmited, Tyrannical, lawless and
unbounded Wills that worthy and gallant Suffere for his Countries FREEDOMS, who
had been so long, and so cruelly handled by them, and illegally kept their
Prisoner without any just Cause, and had so remained all his Life time, had it
not been as the common Proverb says; FOR SHAME OF THE WORLD, AND SPEECH OF
PEOPLE.

There was at night Ringing of Bells, and Bonfires in many places of the City
of LONDON, and a gennerall joy in his very Enemies, so odious are the now
present Juncto sitting at Westminster, that all the Tyrants that ever exerciz'd
Power here were not half so hateful to the PEOPLE, or half so burdensome to
their shoulders, as these perjnr'd Hypocritical Changlings are to the
over-ridden People of England, as appears by their love to those that oppose
them.

And that the sordid baseness of both them and their Creatures, may more
evidently appear (next the Names and abodes of the Ieury that stood so firmly
to the Law, and their fellow-Commoner) I will give you the Copy of his
Discharge, signed by Bradshaws own hand.

The Names of the Jurymen.
Miles Pettit, Holburn-Condu. Stephen Isles, Friday-street. Abraham Smith,
Smithfield. John King Smithfield. Nicholas Murrin, Gosling-str. Thomas Dainty,
Cheapside. Edmund Keysar, Holb-bridge Edward Perkins Smithfield. Ralph Packman,
Smithfield. William Cummins, Cheap. Simon Weeden, Bredstr. Henry Tooley,
Bredstreet.
All Good Men and true.

A Copy of a Warrant, sent from the Council of State, for the Releasement of
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne from his Imprisonment in the TOWER.
WHereas Leivtenant Colonel John Lilburne has been Committed Prisoner to the
Tower upon Suspicion of High Treason in Order to his Trial at Law; which Trial
he has received, and is thereby acquitted.

These are therefore to will and require you, upon sight hereof, to Discharg^
and set at Liberty the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne from his
Imprisonment, for which this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given at the Council of State at White Hall this Eight of November. 1649. To
the Lieutenant of the Tower, or his Deputy. Signed in the Name, and by the
Order of the Council of State, appointed by Authority of Parliament. John
Bradshaw, President.

FINIS.
Mr Walwyn, Mr Prince, and Mr Overton, must either lie in Prison till they were
starved, or take the new Engagement; and of two Evils they choose the less; and
have set their Hands to the new Engagement, which they promise to keep as
faithfully as Bradshaw, Vain, or Prideaux have done the Covenant.


