AN UNHAPPY GAME AT SCOTCH AND ENGLJSH. OR A Full Answer from England to the
Papers of Scotland.

Wherein their Scotch Mists and their Fogs; their sayings and gaine-sayings;
their Juglings, their windings and turnings; hither and thither, backwards and
forwards, and forwards, and forwards and backwards again; Their breach of
Covenant, Articles, and Treaty, their King-craft present design, against the
two houses of Parliament, and People of England, their plots and intents for
Usurpation and Government over us and our children detected, discovered, and
presented to the view of the World, as a dreadful Omen, All-arme, and Warning
to the Kingdom of England.

Ier. 5.4. And although they say, the Lord lives, surely they swear falsely.

Hosea 10.3. They have spoken Words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant:
thus judgment springs up as Hemlocke in the furrows of the field.

EDINBVRGH, Printed (as truly, as the Scotch papers were at London) by Evan
Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and are to besold at the
most Solemn Sign of the Blew-Bonnet, right opposite to the two Houses of
Parliament. 1646.

An UNHAPPY GAME AT SCOTCH AND ENGLISH.
Scotch Papers. Page 2.

THe Parliament of England, has no more power to dispose of the person of the
King of Scotland, being in England, Scotland.
then the Parliament of Scotland has to dispose of the person of the King of
England, if he were in Scotland.

Ans. Brethren, you say very well: But the question is, England.
whether such a disposing may be either by the one or by the other? Whether the
Armies of Scotland being in England, may dispose of the King of England being
in England or no, And so on the contrary? But indeed it needs not much to be
disputed, for in words you deny your selves of that power, when you tell us,
(page ibid.) that the Armies of Scotland have nothing to do in the dispose of
the King of England, yet for all this, in deeds you do assume as much as that
comes to, to your selves; for though you plead your Scottish interest in the
King of Sotland to countenance the fact, yet behind the shadow of that Curtain
(thus drawn before our eyes) you keep the King of England from England, and so
consequently King it over England behind; which we are confident would by your
selves be condemned in us, in case you should be so dealt withal by the Armies
of England, for we cannot judge that the Armies of Scotland would count i^
lawful for the armies of England, if they were in Scotland, for their
assistance, to deny them the delivery of the King of Scotland: Because being in
England they refuse to deliver him to England, according to the votes and
desires of the two Houses of England. Therefore we judge, that Scotland would
much more claim that privilege in him, being in Scotland; for if they will
claim it out of their bounds where they have no right of authority, they will
much more claim it within the bounds of their dominions, where their power is
entire to themselves.

Therefore is is not well done of our dear brethren of Scotland, thus to cast
a Scotch mist before the eyes of their Brethren of England: For though (as
before) verbally they disclaim all power in their armies, for his disposal
without the joint consent of the two Kingdoms, yet (as dear Brethren) their
armies have received, entertained and kept him even in his person, and that
before the joint consent of the two Kingdoms, and absolutely against the will
and desires of ours. So that the King of England, and the King of Scotland is
disposed of by the armies of Scotland, without the consent or advice of either
Kingdom. We hope our dear Brethren will not say, their armies received advice
and direction for his entertainment from the Kingdom of Scotland; for that were
a capitulation with him, without the privity and conjuncture of England, which
by them page 6. is disavowed.

But in case our brethren might receive him without the mutual consent of both
Kingdoms, then why do they stand for a mutual consent for his delivery, for
by the Lord Loudou's own argument (pa. 25.) contrariorum contraria sunt
consequentia, contraries have contrary consequents.

Therefore if they may not part with him, without the consent and advice of the
two Kingdoms, then ought they not to have received him without that consent.
If our dear brethren should urge, that parting with him were a disposing of
him, and that they may not do without breach of Covenant and Treaty: the like
we retort by their own rule of contraries, concerning their receiving of him:
for receiving is by the said rule as much a disposing as parting with him, so
that if our dear brethren be men that are true to their own rules and
principles, we may conclude, that if they will not part with him without the
consent of the Kingdom of Scotland, that then they had the consent of the
Kingdom of Scotland to receive him, before they did receive him, but our dear
brethren do affirm the one, page 8. therefore from the truth and fidelity of
our brethren, we may well conclude the other.

Oh! what shall we say or think now of our brethren? are they not of divine
Covenanters, become cheating Juglers. For let any man judge, whether the
keeping the Kings person at New Castle without our consent, be not as absolute
a disposal, as afterward the sending of his person to White Hall,
Richmond-House, Hampton Court, or else where, by the joint advice and consent
of the two Kingdoms. They would differ in manner indeed, but not in the nature
of the thing, and the nature of the thing, is the matter in hand: The
difference would be but in an Accident, na^uely the addition of our consent; it
is now without it, it could then be but with it, and both's a disposal: Yea,
though it should be without this consent either of yours of ours: For an
accident may be wanting and the subject remain.

But to color this disposal from the censure of their act, our brethren do
tell us, that

He came voluntarily, Scotland.
and continues voluntarily Ans. It seems, from hence you would infer that
the Act of that disposing of his person is by himself, England.
and not by you. But for answer thereto, consider your own grounds: By the
Covenant and Treaty you urge, that his person is solely and entirely to be
disposed of by the parliament of both Kingdoms, and not singly, or by a third,
but by the joint advice and consent of both: Therefore from this grant of
yours, your Army neither had nor has any power individually to make or meddle
with his person, or in the least wise to dispos^ of it, no, not for a minute,
in this place or that place, for this or for that, or till things should be so
or so, therefore your Act of entertainment of his coming, was (by the just
sequel of your own ground) an actual disposing of his person, pro tempore,
even as well, and as really, as if you should dispose of it for ever, for the
difference would only be in the protract of time, not in the nature of the
thing.

Further, the thing betwixt the two Kingdoms by the Conant and Treaty, is not
what he might do, but what the two Kingdoms thereby are mutually bound to
do, for the Covenant and Treaty was not made with him, but betwixt the two
Kingdoms: So that his voluntary Act was nothing to your national duty and
obligation, for his personal will was no wise included in the condition
thereof: Then was neither his personal assent nor dissent required to the
making either of the one or the other.

So that his voluntary coming or staying, is neither here not there to your
act: for this receiving and retaining (though voluntary by him) is as well an
actual disposing of yours (though not in that aggravation) as if you had fet
him, and continued him by force, or constraint as you call it: And therefore
the act of your receiving and keeping his person without our consent, is that
against which we except: It is not about the manner how, whether by his will,
or by your force, that our difference is stated, but about the definitive
matter of disposition it self; although with your manner how and the like, you
would delude us, and divert us from the state of the question, reasoning from
the manner, and so concluding against us in the matter, when indeed you should
reason from the matter, and then it would be otherwise. Therefore your
receiving and continuing, is an absolute possession and disposing thereof, and
so it is your act.

Besides, he could neither enter nor continue, without your consent. For can a
well fortifyed City be entered by a single man, without force, or there be
continued, except the Citizens please, and is not your army equivolent
thereto? Therefore it is the act of your pleasure, though his be added thereto
the addition whereof nothing diminishing therefrom for by how much the more
his pleasure and your pleasure agrees without ours, by so much the more is it
dangerous and suspicious; but the concord and conjunction thereof is to such an
high measure aspired, that you are not ashamed to tell us, that you will not
have him delivered or disposed of contrary to his will, which must needs be his
personal will, for were it his leagall will, he then would be assenting to the
Orders and determinations of his great Counsel, the two Houses of Parliament,
his legal will, we are sure it cannot be, except from the Parliament he
carried with him the Sovereign power of the land, and it has journeyed with
him ever since; and now with him he has brought it to our dear Brethren of
Scotland: If it be so, then truly our Brethren have (all this while of their
concurrance with us against him) been Traitors and Rebels thereto as well as
our selves; yet sure our dear Brethren (if it be but for their credits) will
not say so; and if they do not, then what are our brethren now? It must needs
be granted and concluded at first or at last: So that how to award our dear
Brethren from Treason and Rebellion against the Sovereign Power of this Land
we do not see; therefore our dear Brethren might do well with their next
papers to send us a pair of Scotish-spectacles that are fit for our eyes, and
their caractar, for by our English reading (printed by Evan Tyler at London)
we can read them no other as yet: Therefore in the mean time in our answer to
the Will of the King, we must consider that Will, as the Will of Charles
Steuart, contrary to whose Will, you will not have him disposed; so that in
deed and in truth, you place the whole power of the disposal of Charles
Steuart, in the Will of Charles Steuart, and make that his personal Will, the
Essence of that Disposal; for the Will of Charles Steuart (if he must not be
delivered without it) may contradict null, and make void whatever gainesaies:
So that the advice and consent of the two Houses, etc. (which you so often talk
of in your papers) is but a shadow without a substance cast before our eyes; a
Nut without a kernel, that you have given us to crack; a Bore without marrow,
that you have thrown in amongst us So that we can judge little better of our
brethren in this, then of such as carry water in one hand, and fire in another.

Scotch Papers page 4.

Our Armies are not tied to be subject to the resolutions and directions of
either Kingdom, Scotland.
but of both jointly.

Answer.

If your Armies be so tied and obliged, England.
then how came they loose and obsolved thereof in this your reception, and
continuance of his person without their resolutions? For as yet there has been
no joint resolve of both Kingdoms about it: and thus to put tricks upon us,
you play fast and loose at your pleasure.

When you plead for your selves, page. 2.
you say, it is a fundamental right and liberty etc. that none can without
consent, impede or restrain your King from coming amongst you to perform the
duties of a King, and with this you would cover over the act of your admission
and reception of his person.

And when you reason against the two Houses, in opposition to their Votes, you
tell us it is one thing what the Parliament of England might have done in
another cause, and war before their engagements by Covenant, it is another
thing what ought to be done after such conditions and ties imposed etc. whereby
you would deprive the two Houses of that which before you urge for your selves;
namely, fundamental Rights etc. and utterly debar them in this difference from
all retrogradation beyond the Covenant; yet your selves will run in infinitum
beyond it* you can urge your fundamental Rights and liberties for you your
selves, in your reception of the King of Scotland, but will not permit them
upon any terms (because of the Covenant) from their fundamental rights and
liberties of the Kingdom of England, to Vote the disposing of the King of
England in England.

Therefore by your favor (dear Brethren of Scotland) since thus you play at
boe-peepe with your Brethen of England, we will answer your first reason with
your second: It is one thing what you might have done before the Covenant, and
another thing what you may do after; but by the Covenant (even as your selves
say) His person must be absolutely, and wholly disposed of by the joint advice
ctconsent of both Parliaments, so that by your Covenant you are bound not to
meddle at all singly in his disposal; eitherof so much as receiving or
entertaining him.

But let us a little expostulate with our dear brethen of Scotland: is this
your dealing with us as becomes brethen? Is this your brotherly conference, to
condemn that in us which you will allow in your selves, first to plead your
fundamental rights and freedoms etc. And then in the next page to tell us,
we do not meddle with any of our single rights privileges or Laws of our
Nation, etc. and a little after, unless we lay aside the Covenant, Theaties,
Declarations of both Kingdoms; and three years conjunction in this war,
neither the one Kingdom nor the other; must now look back what they might have
done singly before such a strict union.

What shall we think, or what shall we esteem of our dear brethren for
this? We know not how to excuse them of lying; but however this will we
boldly affirm to our Brethren of Scotland, that this latter argument utterly
cuts off our Brethren from the refuge of what ever our Brethren might have
pleaded before the Covenant, and strictly testraines all their arguments,
concerning the interest of the Kingdom of Scotland in the King of Scotland,
and about their fundament all rights and liberties etc. for they all were
before the Covenant, and so in this matter are quite out of date, and comes not
into the compass or nature of the dispute, even by your own bounds and limits
by your selves thereto affixed: which considerations, may serve as an answer to
one great part of the papers: and therefore we may well wonder at this your
manner of reasoning and cannot otherwise reasonably judge, but it is to cast a
Scotishmist before the eyes of the free men of England, on purpose to delude
them.

Scottish Pap. page 4.

Scotland. The ends of the Covenant are not to be prosecuted by the two
Kingdoms, as they are two distinct bodies acting singly: but they were united
by solemn Covenant made to Almighty God, and by league each to other, as one
entire body, to prosecute the cause.

Answer. As by this argument, you were not to meddle at all in the least kind
about the disposing of his Person, not so much as to give him entertainment
(that being an actual disposing pro tempore as aforesaid) without the mutual
consent and Order of both Kingdoms proceeding: So by this argument also a
second is absolutely excluded from this (Covenanted) disposal: for hereby
there is an union of two Kingdoms in one for one end; and an unite admits not
of a second or third, for then it is no more one, but two or three: So that it
is as clear as the Sun, that this unity of consent betwixt the two Kingdoms
admits of no addition or division whatsoever; for so the property of that
Bi-unity were lost: If another were added to that unity, then were it a
Tri-unity, and not a Bi-unity: and if that unity should be divided, then were
it no unity, for pura unitas est indivisibilis: Why therefore you should bring
in the Kings consent betwixt the two Kingdoms, we see not; except you mean
to play fast and loose, and set open a door to all foreign Nations, to have
a title to this consent: for as well may you say, that France, Spain, etc.
must have their consent in this business as well as Charles Steuart himself;
for the Question is not, what Mr. Steuart would do with his person, or what
France or Spain etc. would do with it, but what the two Kingdoms by this
Covenant are bound to do; therefore the bringing in the Kings consent and will
into the bargain, is a mere nullity (as concerning this matter) to the
Covenant; So that your repairing to his Will and consent, is an absolute
departure from the joint interest of the two Kingdoms, and from the Covenant
obliging there to: for you will not deliver him, or do any thing with him
without his consent: Therefore why do you at all talk of the Covenant, or the
interest of the two Kingdoms? Tell us no more of such blew shadows and
Sculcaps; but tell us of the Will of Charles Steuart: And if we must needs
dispute, let that be the question, whether the will of Charles Steuart be the
Law of all Laws, whereto Parliaments Covenants and Treates, Kingdoms must be
subject? If you will deal with us upon that point, we shall not doubt but to
make a reasonable return.

Scottish Papers, page 6.

Scotland: If the Scotch Army should deliver up his Majesty's Person without
his own consent etc. this act of the Army were not agreeable to the Oath of
Allegiance, (obleiging them to defend his Majesty's Person from all harms and
prejudices) nor to the solemn League and Covenant, which was not intended to
weaken but to stregthen our Allegiance etc.

-- Whom therefore our Armies cannot deliver, to be disposed of by any others
at pleasure:

Answer.

England: By this it seems, that the Scotch Army, are obsolutely devoted to
the will of his Person; for except he will, you say, that your Armies cannot
(you might as well have said will not) deliver him up to be disposed of by any
others; which saying excludes the whole world, except his Will: So that in
effect by this you have as well excluded the pleasure of your own Parliament,
as the pleasure of ours or any others.

Sure our dear Brethren of Scotland are not themselves, to speak thus they
cannot tell what; one while to urge the consent of their Parliament, and then
by and by to deny themselves of it again.

Well, but you say it is against the Oath of Allegiance, and the Covenant, for
the Armies to deliver him up against his WILL. And why so (dear Brethren we
beseech you) is the Oath of Allegiance and the Covenant confined to the
dictates of his Personal Will? that what is contrary to his Will, is contrary
thereto? For here you make his Will the very Axeltree upon which your argument
turns; and therefore by this your reasoning, both Kingdoms are by the Oath of
Allegiance and by the Covenant, obleiged and irrevocably bound (it being made
to Almighty God) to be subjected to his Will; yea, and as much as in you lies,
you have thereby concluded and conformed a title upon him, even from Almighty
God, to Rule by his Arbitrary pleasure; and made both Kingdoms Vassales to his
Will. Is this the affection and duty which becomes Brethren that (...) 5.) you
tell us, you were put in mind of; That after you had espoused your Brethrens
quarrel (page ibid.) by that espousall to contract your brethren to his
Arbitrary pleasure? But as you in another case, so say we in this we cannot
but expect better things from our Brethren (page ibid) Sure it is not our dear
Brethren of Scotland that thus write: h^w shall such a thing (as becomes
Brethren) enter into the hearts o^^^r Brethren of Scotland? except since his
Majesty's arrival our dear Brethren are run quite besides themselves* as
aforesaid,

Some indeed have strange thoughts of our Brethren, and conclude them m^^^
knaves then sooles, and that little better ever wa^ to be expected from them,
seeing now they are not ashamed only to tell us ( page 7.) that the Scottish Army
came not into this Kingdom in the nature of Auxiliaries (or helpers) and
indeed they have proved as good as their words for what Auxiliaries or helpers
have they been unto us, except to carry away our gudes, and to drive away our
cattle etc) but also in plain terms (to make all the blood that has been
shead but as water spilt upon the ground) to capitulate with us, about the
Kings personal Will, whether his Will must rule the roast or no? By our
consent he shall first turn the spit, before his will shall rule the roast;
our Laws Lives and Liberlies are more precious, then to be prostitute to the
exhorbitant boundless will of any mortal Steuart under the Sun: And therefore
both He and your revolted Armies may be content, for we will spend a little
more of our blood before that come to pass; you may as well twerle up your
Blew caps, and hurl them up at the Moon, as to expect Englands assent unto
that: no, no, Dear Brethren, we are neither such fool^ not such cowards, or
yet such Traitors to our selves or to our posterities, to our Laws or to our
Liberties, as after we by the blood of us and our children have gained a
conquest over that Arbitrary faction so basely to return like Sowes to the
mire, or Dogs to the vomit again; no sure dear Brethren we have not been
thromming of Caps all this while; and therefore that is not to be expected: we
are content that our Brethren of Scotland should be our Brethren, but notonr
Lords and our Kings, to snatch the Scepter of England out of our hands, and to
make us their slaves and Uassailes: what care we for Charles Steuarts assurance
thereof under his Hand and Seal: we will mainetaine our just Rights and
Freedoms, in despite of Scot, King, or Key^^r, though we welter for it in our
bloods; and be it known unto you, O ye men of Scotland, that the freemen of
England scorn to be your slaves; and they have yet a reserve of gallant blood
in their veine^, which they will freely spend for their freedom. But to return
to the Game in hand.

Further. From the words of the forementioned clause of your papers, this you
import, that you are by the Oath of Allegiance bound to keep^ his person from
all harm, and therefore your Armies will not deliver up his person to be
disposed of, as* the two Houses shall think fit: As if the two Houses by that
their vote, had intended mischief to his person, or else why should you urge
that in competition with their vote, if thereby you did not plainly conclude
that their vote was an absolute intent of harm unto his person: But (good
brethren) let us tell you, that though the two Houses of England have voted the
disposal of the King of England as they shall think fit, it does not therefore
follow, that there is absolute harm to his person thereby intended in their
vote, but you make a surmise, then take it for granted, and forthwith thereon
build the structure of your defense: But we hope it does not therefore follow,
because our brethren surmise it, except the sense of our Votes, our Orders and
Ordinances of Parliament must follow the surmise of our brethren, that what
ever their surmise is, that must be their Sense and Intent and no other. And if
as you say; you will not enforce any sense or construction upon their Votes,
then why will not your armies deliver him upon their Votes for fear of harm
to his person, as if they had plainly intended with Salomons sword, by that
their voted disposal to have divided the King of England from the King of
Scotland, and so give each kingdom their just portion in his person.

But why should our dear brethren reason thus sophistically and deceitfully
with us, and conclude thus inconsequently against us? Sure they have better
Covenant Logic then this, for the antecedent of that Argument does nothing at
all prove the consequent thereof: Therefore if our dear brethren please (for
the better discovery of their falcity) we shall cast that their kind of
Argument into a form after its own nature and kind, which is thus.

A Scotch Argument. The two Houses of Parliament have voted the disposal of
the Kings person as they shall think fit.

Ergo. The Scotch Armies may not deliver up his person to the said two Houses,
for fear of harm to his person.

Truly dear brethren, this Gear hangs together like an old broken Pot Sheard:
And we deem, that you would be much displeased with your dear brethren of
England, should they return the like reasoning to their brethren of Scotland.
But least our dear brethren of Scotland should judge us their brethren of
England ungrateful, their brethren here send them a congratulatory pair of
reasons formed after the same or the like kind desiring in their next papers,
to be resolved, whether such reasoning with them, be fair dealing or no? to
wit.

1. Argument. My good Lord Lesley, came to Montrevill (Ambassador for France)
residing at Southwell, there to commune with the King

Ergo. My good Lord Lesley fell down on his knees, resigned up his sword, and
laid it at the feet of the King, and then received it again of the King.

2. Argument. My Lord of Northumberland, and Sebrant the French Agent looked
through an hedge, and the one saw the other.

Ergo. They two are both nigh of a kindred.

Now having sent you a pair of brave Scotified arguments, we will throw an
English bone after them, for your armies to gnaw upon.

A scandalous person may chance to prove a good man.

But some of your army, are full of Back-biters.

Ergo, your whole army are scandalous persons.

But now dear brethren, we cannot think that this will be judged fair
reasoning in us; but if you condemn it, then why do you use it? until you
revoke, and renounce your error therein: this our like reasoning must not be
condemned by you.

But by this we may plainly see, that you have some mischievious design
against the two Houses of Parliament, that you would insinuate such an opinion
into the people of England, against their two Houses of Parliament. And that
upon such high terms of contestation, to wit, that for that reason (to wit,
harm) you will not deliver them their King upon their Vote, what may we judge
by this, but that you intend destruction to them, thus to set the hearts of
their people against them by your scandalous and seditious surmises and
iealousies sown amongst the people of England, for absolute truths: for if you
give it not forth as a truth, why will you urge an argument from thence? Sure
our Holy Brethren of Scotland, are not so void of Conscience and grace, as to
make a Lie a foundation of their practice.

We do assert, that the King coming voluntarily to the Scottish Army, they
cannot in duty deliver him against his will, to the two Houses of Parliament,
without consent of the Kingdom of Scotland.

Ans. Then it seems if he had come against his will, you had been bound in
duty to have delivered him against the same, to the two houses of Parliament,
without the consent of the Kingdom of Scotland, for if his voluntary coming
be the reason of the one, then his unvoluntary coming must needs be the reason
of the other, for as your own paper Champion says, contrariorum contraria sunt
consequentia, therefore hereby you have brought the consent of your own
Parliament to be inferior and subject to his will, the which notwithstanding
the said Champion told him, they should be forced to settle things without, in
case he should not assent. page 19. The which reasonings, if they be not pro
and con, be you your selves Judges: and let the world judge, whether it be fair
dealing so to reason in a matter so nearly concerning, the weal of the two
Kingdoms, the lives and states of thousands and ten thousands.

Scotch Papers. Ibid

The place of the Kings vesidence is at his own Election in either of the
Kingdoms, as the exigency of affairs shall require, and he shall think fit,
or else must be determined by the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms.

Ans. What, more fast and loose still? Sometimes with your consent, and
sometimes without your consent, sometimes with the joint advice of both
Kingdoms, and sometimes without it, sometimes with his personal will, and
sometimes without his personal will, and now to make all indifferent! What is
the meaning of our brethren in this? are they not in their wits, thus to
jumble and jump forward and backward, and backward and forward again, and then
to lie all along betwixt both? For by this clause it seems, that the disposal
of his person is indifferent, either at his will, or at the joint advice of the
two Kingdoms. Vtrum horum mavis accipe, one of the twain, choose you whether,
so that if his person be either wise disposed, yet by this clause it is
justified, the one as well as the other being asserted in that clause: (...)
then again to add to the number of those juggling Husteron-Proteron tricks,
by the position of their order, they make the will of the King predominant to
the consent of the two Kingdoms; for if by local position, we may judge of
pre-eminence, according to our national custom, the greater to take the wall
of the less, then the will of the King is thereby preferred before the consent
of the two Kingdoms, for it has the precedence therein: How ever by that
clause they are made of equallity, for they are not urged by the way of
disparity, but by the way of equallity therein. Therefore by that clause there
is not a pin to choose betwixt them: So that which is first gone forth, whether
his will, or the two Kingdoms consent, that must stand irrevocable, and not to
be moved by the other, for could it, then were it as nothing, a mere shadow
without substance, for then the absolute disposing were only in one, because if
one may depose what the other disposes, then that which disposes is all in
all; and the other has no will, vote; choice or consent in the thing, but is
wholly dependant, and must be subject to the power of the other, which may
conclude, order, revoake, and reverse at its pleasure. Therefore from this
reasoning of our dear brethren, it follows thus.

1. That this present disposal of his person (being as your selves say
voluntary) is irrevocable by either or both Kingdoms, because his will for
that disposal was first past forth; which for that matter (as is already
proved) by this present ground of yours, is as unalterable as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians: So that it is in vain for the two Houses of England to
expect a delivery of the King of England from the Scottish Armies,; for by this
(to make sure work of his person) they have put themselves out of a capacity
of his delivery upon any terms whatsoever: And therefore we may bid our good
King, good morrow my Liege for all the day, and for ever, Amen. Farewell frost,
if he never come more, nothing is lost.

2. If by the sentence and judgment of our dear brethren of Scotland, the
Kings personal disposal be at his own Election and Will, and so inherent
therein, then by the sentence and judgment of our dear brethren of Scotland,
the dislocation of the Kings person by his personal will all this while from
the two Houses of Parliament of England, is justified, and our dear Brethren
of Scotland thereby made confederate with him, in that act, and so consequently
guilty of all the rebellion made by his personal will against the two Houses
of Parliament and the People of England.

3. If by the Argument of our dear brethren of Scotland, the King according to
the exegencie of affairs may dispose of his person at his pleasure, then by
the Argument of our dear brethren of Scotland according to the exegencie of
affairs, the King may depart from our dear brethren of Scotland at his
pleasure, when, or whether he pleases, although his pleasure should be never
so pernicious or perilous to our dear brethren of Scotland: for his pleasure
may only be known to himself, and not at all to our dear brethren of
Scotland, no more then it was foreknown (as our dear brethren would make us
believe) at his coming to them. Therefore if our dear brethren of Scotland
will have him according to the exigency of affairs to be disposed of at his
pleasure, then according to the exigency of affairs, our dear brethren of
Scotland must run the hazard of his pleasure.

But for be better deciding of the matter about his will, it is to be
questioned, 1. Whether since the Covenant and Treaties, either England or
Scotland may assert that the place of the Kings residence is at his own
Election; the which as the case since has stood, may in no wise be honorably
granted, for thereby in all reason it must be concluded, that the two Kingdoms
took upon them, the sole disposal of his person, without the least relation
or respect to his personal will: For should that not be concluded, then his
arbitrary disposal of his person, so many times in open and actual hostility
against the Parliament and people of England were justifiable.

2. It is to be considered, that though before this his hostility against the
Parliament and people, he might dispose of his person from White Hall, to
Hampton Court or the like, without the joint advice of the two Kingdoms,
whether now the case be nor altered or no?

3. In regard he has most properly leavied and made war against the
Parliament and People of England, and in regard the Scotch engagement was but
in assistance of their brethren of England, Whether his person thereupon, is
not most properly due to the two Houses of Parliament* and thereupon they might
properly vote the disposal thereof, notwithstanding his King-ship of Scotland;
by reason the Offense was properly against them, and a maine end of the war,
was to reduce and recover his person unto the Custody and power of the two
Houses?

But now whereas you urge his voluntary coming, as if it were only voluntary
in him, and not like voluntary in you (which by Covenant compact and treaty,
was not upon any terms or in any wise without our consent to have been by
you.) It is a plain case, that there was a voluntary concurrance betwixt you,
even of the Kingdom of Scotland with the King of England, before he had laid
down Arms taken up in Rebellion against the Sovereign power of his Throne,
the two Houses of Parliament, and against the Free-People of England, and that
absolutely by you, without the joint advice and consent of the said Houses and
Kingdom; for you foreknew of his intent, and were fore acquainted with his
coming, before his arrival at your Army, and this is not only to be proved
from the secret and trayto^rous Treaty betwixt you and the King, from the
latter end of March last, 1646. Managed by the intervention of Montrevill the
French Ambassador, and designed in France, but also by what was-open, manifest
and undeniable. For to omit his footsteps from Oxford, he came publicly into
Southwell, four miles distant from your Army, and there was entertained by
the said Montrevill, who was deputed and provided to receive him, and forthwith
he sent unto your Army, to inform you that he was come thither, then Lesley
your General ( Metrapolitan over all the Blew-Caps of Scotland) repaired unto
him and with him entertained a Treaty; and so he came voluntary to your army,
and there voluntarily ever since does continue, as you your selves do
confess. Now let any reasonable man judge, whether here were not a mutual
concurrence of voluntary consent, before his entrance into your Army without
all advice and consent of ours. And whether it is reasonable to imagine, that
the King should cast his person voluntarily into the hands of those which were
the first commoters and raiser of troubles and wars, entering his dominions of
England with open Hostillity, for which he proclaimed them Traitors and
Rebels, and now again^stand Traitors and Rebels by his Proclamations and
Declarations, and which are still in Arms against him; and by solemn League
and Covenant contracted and aspoused to the two Houses of England, in their
war-fare against him; without the fore knowledge consent, compact and assurance
of your army and Kingdom; truly for our parts, considering all his politic,
subtle, and crasty plots and proceedings, in all his Millitary designs, we
cannot imagine him so inconsiderate and mad^ as to run his person without all
assurance, on such a perilous hazard, or play such a card as that at a vensure
amongst you, without a full fore surety from you, and a compact betwixt you
under hand and seal, for his entertainment and success with you, and if we
may judge the tree by its fruits, we are sure it can be no other.

Besides, had you not been concurrent in will with him (contrary to our
privitie and consent) he could not have entered, much less continued in your
army, without your consent and whether you would or no. So that indeed and in
truth as the matter now stands, betwixt you and us, his coming must needs be
reputed and concluded your single act, and neither may we, nor can we esteem it
otherwise, for his will or his Action is nothing to the state of the question
or difference betwixt England and Scotland in this matter; for you your selves
say, ( page 9.) that, it is clear from the third Article of the Treaty, that
the Scottish army is to receive the directions of both Kingdoms, or of their
Committees in ALL THINGS, which may concern the pursuance of the ends of the
Covenant and Treaty, whether in relation to PEACE or WAR. In the eight
Article, no cessation, pacification, or agreement for peace WHATSOEVER is to be
made by either Kingdom or the army of either Kingdom, without the advice and
consent of both Kingdoms. Now dear brethren, by these very words of the
Treaty thus cited by your selves, you are by your selves exempted and denied of
all power of intermedling about any thing whatsoever concerning peace or war,
without the advice and consent of the two Kingdoms: If so, then why have you
attempted this act of reception and detaining of his person without the mutual
concurrent advice and consent of the two Kingdoms, which so mightily
concerns our weal or our woe, our peace or our war, for this your seasure
of his person in this manner, is of as high and great concernment about the
matter of war, as can be imagined, for it openly and apparently threatens
division and war betwixt the two Kingdoms; and thereby you your selves are
the deviders and threatners, contrary to your old and present asseverations and
abjurations: in your book of former Intentions, thus you assert of your
selves, we could judge our selves the unworthiest of all men, See intentions of
the Army of Scotland, page 3.
and could looks for no less then vengeance from the Righteous God, if we
should move hand or foot against that Nation, so comfortably represented to us,
in that honorable meeting And page 10. Let them be accursed, that shall not
seek the preservatition of their neighbor Nation: and in your former
Informations, Declarations and Remonstrances, you have cursed all National
Invasions, and Treachery: And now in the Papers you cry, God forbid, that the
ways of separating interests of the Kingdoms, should now be studied, page 5.
And in the Lord Loudouns speech in the Painted Chamber. page 21. That no man
has conscience and honor, who will not remember our Solemn League and
Covenant, as the strongest bond under Heaven, between God and man, and between
Nation and Nation, etc. Yet these asseverations and execrations, are now made
as nothing, and these your strongest bonds between God and man as you call
them, are but as Sampsons cords to be burst asunder at your pleasure, but God
will deliver up your strength, if by your timely repencance you do not prevent
the vengeance of Heaven which hangs over your head. For why will you thus
fairly profess with your tongnes unto us, and deal so treacherously with us
in your hearts, why should you receive and entertain the King and yet protest
against all sole disposal of his person? and why should you tell us, that his
Majesty's coming to your army, is a more probable and hopeful way to
preserve the union of the two Kingdoms; when as your selves see, that it is
the most unluckiest means of division, and of fomenting a war betwixt the two
Nations, as Hell could broach: and though the Lord Londoun breath out your
menaces about that disposal, and openly thre^tneth us with forces from
Scotland and Ireland, and with the assiistance of foreign Princes, yet all
this you would make us believe, (were we but as the Horse and the Mule, which
have no understanding) is for the stricter and firmer union betwixt the two
Kingdoms; but dear brethren we are not so undiscerning and sottish, so to be
possessed and deluded. But further in the said page you say, because you came
into England, for prosecuting of the ends of the Covenant, whereof one is to
defend. His Majesty's person, you think it a strange thing, that your being in
England should be urged as an argument, why you should deliver up the person of
the King, to be disposed of, as the two Houses should think fit.

Ans. For the matter of your being in England, we shall for the present refer
you to Mr. Chalenros speech: and only consider the reason of this clause, which
we conceive to be on this wise, that because you are by the Covenant bound to
defend His Majesty's person, that therefore you will not deliver up his person,
to be disposed of, as the two Houses shall think fit: which is as much as to
say, because you are to defend his person, that therefore the two Houses of
Parliament are his enemies: which manner of reasoning is as if we should say,
because there were daily seecret whisperings and wishings at our Queens Court in
France, that the King might but get safe to the Scotts, and because the day of
his setting forth out of Oxford toward them was fore-known at her Court; That
therefore Sehrant the French agent ran up into the Earl of Northumberlands
Bedchamber, in the morning before he was up, and surreptitiously surprised in
his Chamber window; a packet of Letters, (enclosed in a blanke paper
superscribed (forsooth for their better conveyance to the Earl) and break the
same open, and said they were his, and so the one peeped at the other, and saw
one another and away hied Sebrant as fast as he could, and carried with him the
whole plat-forme of your -- you know what!

Now Brethren, how like you your own kind of reasoning? Is not this a prittie,
kind of Argument think you, neatly formed after that most hallowed pattern
received from the Angel at Le font bl^u?

And therefore seeing our Brethren have so far discharged their trust, as
(after all their Protestations, Covenants and Oaths to Almighty God, their
Solemn League, and Treaty with their Neighbor Nation of England) thus in the
field to meet us in this free and brotherly conference with such Solemn
Covenant-Logick, we may have doubtless great boldness and confidence, with our
dear brethren of Scotland, to pay them in their own coin, for current and
good Silver, especially considering whose Image and superscription it be^reth:
So that upon the point (we wish it be not of the sword) we are agreed with our
good Lord Loudoun, to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc page 26.

But now since our brethren take upon them in their armies to defend his
person, we desire of our dear brethren to tell u^, against whom is this their
defense? If against us and our armies, then we^e^ly, that if your Covenant now
bind you thereto, then why did you not by this Covenant join armies with them
before, in all his. H^^^i^ity against the two Houses, for by our s^^^tility his
person was endangered and subject to the ca^u^^ity and execution of war,
himself in person and in arms appearing against ^u^^?

Scotch Papers Page 9

And whereas it is affirmed by the Treaty* the Scotch Army ought to do
nothing without a joint resolution of both Kingmdomes or their Committees;
there is no such clause in the Treaty, but they are to be subject to such
resolutions as are and shall be agreed upon, and concluded mutually between the
Kingdoms and their Committees.

Ans. By thit we may see how willing our brethren are to get a creep hole, and
how they shufle and cut to strugle themselves out of the Btyers: But good
brother Jockie be content to stick here a while, for if to their Resolutions
(as you say) you must be subject, then you must not be subject to that which is
contrary to their resolutions: But your armies retaining of his person is
contrary to the joint advice and consent of both Kingdoms, for as yet both
parties are not agreed. Therefore this is a manifest breach of the Treaty; so
that (if you would have done as becomes brethren) you should have stayed
first to have heard the joint advice or consent of both Kingdoms, before you
had given him entertainment. For indeed, had there not been mischief designed
in the thing and intended against this Kingdom, the King (knowing the mutual
obligation, and solemn Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, and the mutual
relation he had to them both, and each mutually to him) would (if he had
intended to lay down arms against this Kingdom) rather (in this emergency of
War) have dsiposed of his person (honored by both Kingdoms with the title of
the King of both Kingdoms) to the Committee of both Kingdoms, wherein the
joint military interest of both Kingdoms is represented, conferd and united,
and both thereby incorporated into one deputative body, and as it were both
made flesh of each others flesh, and bone of each others bone, that so in that,
one act and at one time both Kingdoms equaliy and respectively would have
received their King of each Kingdom, though presented in one person, even
England and Scotland have received and kept the King of England, and the King
of Scotland in that their entertainment of his person for the better disposal
thereof by the Parliaments and Estates of both Kingdoms (being conquered by the
mutual force and conjunction of their armies) for then neither Parliament,
Kingdom nor Army had acted singly or divided, but it would been absolutely an
act of both Kingdoms: This we say, he rather would have done, then in this
factions divided neture to have thrown himself upon one Kingdom unknown to
the other, and without the others advice and consent, had it not been on set
purpose to have cast a bone of division betwixt them; that both He and your
selves by joint occasioned fair opportunity might compass your designs to
subjugate the necks of the Freemen of England to your Scotch Monarchical
Yoke of Bondage (in gendering strife.) And you your selves, had your
intentions to wards us been upright; should rather have referred him to the
said Committee of both Kingdoms, then thus to have attempted the receivall of
him by your own millitary power, which was a desperate thing; however in case
unawares he were received, yet you might ere this, knowing the mutual and
joint interest of the two Kingdoms so well as you do, and seeing it
raiseth-such jealousies, and is likely to occasion such a desperate and bloody
division betwixt us, you might ere this have delivered, or at least proposed
the resignment of His person, if not to the two Houses, yet to the custody of
the said Committee; to whom indeed naturally and properly (as the case now
stands betwixt the two Kingdoms, he belongs) (no joint power of the two
Kingdoms but that being extant) to be by them retained till the joint consent
and determination of both Kingdoms.

You tell us that at the hearing of the martch of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army
marching Northward, you removed yours into Yorkshire, for preventing mistakes
or new troubles between the Kingdoms (page 9.) but were you so cautious
thereof ^s you pretend, you would not have thus highly erred in the maine, and
then face us with trifles: brethren, we have been a little to much acquainted
and cheated with such gilded pretenses as to rest content with a flap in the
mouth with a Fox-tayle: It is not you^ candor freedom and plainness as
becomes brethren which you tell us of ( page 1.) in words what will satisfy
us, if in deeds you deny us; We know you tell us he came valuntarily and
continues vluntarily, and you a^e not hinder him from coming to do the duty
of a King amongst you: which words indeed deed bear a spetious show; but
Brethren we are not so undecerning and ignorant as to conclude all is gold that
glisters; but these your serpentine delusions, puts us in mind of the trick you
put upon us about Mr* Ashburnhams escape; for in a paper from the Commissianers
dated 25, of May 1645 the Lords of the Committee of New Castle tell us, that
directly, nor indirectly they had no hand in Mr. Ashburnhames escape; which by
interpretation is as much as to say, that directly you had no hand in it, but
indirectly you had; for after our English Ottography two negatives make an
affirmative, and Nor and No are two negatives cupled to one verb, and therefore
must needs make it affirmative: but we will return from this quirke to the
matter in hand.

Now though you say, there was not any such resolution between the Kingdoms or
their Committees, as, that the Scottish Army should not receive the King if he
came unto them: Our answer is, that it does not therefore follow, that therein
you may do singly as you list; for you were obleiged in all things, whether in
relation unto peace, or to war, not to make any cessation, pacification, or
agreement for peace whatsoever, without the advice and consent of both
Kingdoms: And you your selves say, your Armies are to be subject to such
resolutions, as ARE and SHALL BE agreed and concluded upon mutually between the
two Kingdoms and their Committees. So that although neither present or future
resolutions concerning unknown matters to come be expressed (as indeed are
impossible) yet therefore you have not the liberty to do what you list, or to
anticipate their resolutions with yours, for then Agreement, compact, and
Treaty, were to no purpose at all; but you were strictly bound upon penalty of
breach of Articles, first, to have known the joint advice and consent of the
two Kingdoms, or their Committees in all things whatsoever, whether for peoce
or for war; especially in a thing of so great and so high concernment, as to
Treat with, Receive, and entertain the Kings Person, though notwithstanding
he should come voluntarily to you, for the matter is all one in the nature
thereof, whether he come to you, or you go to him: treating with, recieving
and entertaining, without a joint advice and consent (let it by what other
means soever it be) is the maine thing which those Articles respect: for
indeed that is, as absolute treating, cessation, and pacification with the King
on your behalf as can possible be: and therefore whereas you say, that you
were not to impede, or restrain the person of the King from coming and doing
the duty of a King amongst you, and thereupon have answerably received him;
thereby you hold forth, and confess a compact and conclusion of peace with
him: for if you receive him to do the duties of a King amongst you, and that
without the joint advice and consent of the two Kingdoms or their Committees;
what is this other then to pacificate with him without their joint advice and
consent? but more of this by and by.

Besides if you will make an exception, because it is un-expressed in the
Treaty [that you should not receive the Kings Person if he should come
voluntarily to you] then may you as well except against all the resolves and
results of the two Kingdoms and of their Committees, that therein are not
expressed; and so confine all to the very letter of the Treaty, and utterly
take away all liberty and power from the two Kingdoms and their Committees, of
further advising, consenting, o^ resolving.

Scotch papers page 10.

Scotland: The Scotch Army neither has nor will take upon them to dispose of
the King, he came unto them without capitulation or Treaty: his residence with
them is voluntary and free, and they do nothing which may hinder him to come
to the two Houses of Parliament.

Answer.

England: Whither now Jockie? Hoyt -- Hoe -- Haufe -- Ree -- Gee -- Hoe --
Jockie: What? neither backwards nor forwards, one s^ide nor the other! Riddle
me, Riddle me, what is this? You Will nether have him, nor be without him; neither
keep him, nor deliver him: a pretty paredox! for you will not take upon you to
dispose of him, and yet you will keep him nor will hinder his coming to the
two houses of Parliament, and yet will not deliver Him: for his will in this
matter of keeping and delivery is not at all respected in the Treaty and
compact betwixt the two Kingdoms, but only the Act or Acts of the two
Ringdomes, Therefore, what is this else but to say, you will, and you will not?
you will neither receive him, nor will refuse him; you will not deliver him,
nor will you keep him.

Now whereas (as you say) you are so willing that he should come of his own
accord to the two Houses, and you would not hinder him: We pray you tell us
whether you would suffer him, provided his intent were unknown unto you? Or
whether you would judge it suitable to the interest of Scotland, that the two
Houses or their Army should receive him upon such terms? Doubtless you would
hinder the one and condemn the other; for no reasonable man can judge
otherwise by your present practice and papers, you have received him without
the consent of the two Houses and (as you would make's believe) without any
fore knowledge of his intent at his coming, therefore are not your selves
condemned by your selves? even justifyers of that in your selves, which you
would condemn in others?

But you say, he came to you without capitulation: If so dear Brethren, then
why did Montrevill go before hand to Lesley's Army to take order for his
reception there? And how came the King to have the faith and honor of the
Scots engaged to him in the business of the Militia? How came the information
of Thomas Hanmer, June 12. 1646. (at the Committee for the Army, and after
reported to the House of Commons) since by experience to have been confirmed in
the most perticulers thereof? we could be much more inquisitive with our
Brethren about this matter, but it may be they have learned of Lieutenant Col.
John Lilburne and Mr. Overton the two prerogative Archers of England, and of
some others, not to answer to interrogatories concerning themselves, and
therefore we shall forbear at this time further to question the faith and
sincerity of our Brethren in this particular, only we shall desire (because
our Brethren in their papers are verbally so tender over the Harrased,
oppressed, plundered North) wherefore besides the extraordinary losses and
charges thereof, their ordinary cessements where the forces are quartered are
levied and paid after the rate of about 140000 pounds a month upon the whole
County, which is twenty times so much as they ought to leary by the Ordinance
of Parliament, as appears by a Letter June 26. 1646. from sundry of the
Committee of York to the Commicee of the Lords and Commons? We will assure
you Brethren, that this dealing together with your several rapes, murders,
oppressions and abuses which has bin and are daily acted upon the wel^aff^cted
in those parts, are far from the first professed intentions of the Scots Army
at their first coming into England 1640. Where page 11. you do declare that
you would not take from jour friends and Brethren of England from a thread even
to a shooe-latchet, so that our Brethren are not the same, or else they are
much changed, for from the beginning it was not so; however, this will we say
of our Brethern, that as (they tell (...) page 6) that the Oath communicated to
them for the disposal of the Kings Person by the two Houses may suffer a
benign interpretation, and be understood of the disposing of the Kings person
favorably and Honorably; yet as the words stands, they are comprehensive and
capatious of more then is fit to be expressed; so answer we our Brethren, that
though their unreasonable cessements, their daily rapes and murders,
robberies, oppressions and insufferable abuses upon their dear Brethren and
sisters in the North may out of a Brotherly construction receive a benign
interpretation, and be understood but as escapes of their Armis, yet as the
deeds so stand, they are comprehensive and capatious of more then is fit to be
done.

And therefore dear Brethren, we cannot but justly wonder why you should be so
unbrotherly and unkind to your Brethren of England, notwithstanding thes^^
great oppressions of yours upon them, now to capitulate with them for such vast
sommes of money, and that upon such high terms as not to surrender their
Garrisons and quit their Kingdom of your Armies, without, 200000. pound down
in your hands: Indeed Brethren let us tell you, we can judge it as yet, little
beter then invasion upon our Land, to capitulate with us upon terms, before
you will resign us possession of our own Garrisons, Forts, Castles Countries
etc. for upon no terms whatsoever have you any right or property unto any of
the Forts, Castles, Garrisons, or Countries of the Kingdom of England, or in
any wise to attempt possession thereof, or upon any terms to refuse there
fignment thereof: for so long and so much are you invadors of our Land; for not
an hare breadth of England nor a minute possession thereof is yours by any
legal, equal, or National Right, except you will say, that you our Brethren
of Scotland are now become Kings of England; and indeed your actions and
usurpations are equivolent thereto, for as well, as to do what you do, you
may possess it for ever, and make invasion upon the rest of our Land, for
protraction of time and increase of quantity cannot alter the equity of your
title, it being as much to the whole Kingdom as to a part, and as well for
ever as for a minute: But indeed and in truth it is neither in the one or yet
in the other.

But you tell us, page 16. Reasonable satisfaction must be first given to your
Armies for their pains and charges, before you will surrender: Why, brethren,
must you therefore take possession of our Garrisons, Castles, etc. Because in
equity we are bound to give reasonable satisfaction to you, for your mercenary
assistance? Our Garrisons, Castles, Forts, Countries, etc. were not put into
the bargain, neither were they ever as yet set over to you, as a pledge for
your payment, but notwithstanding Covenant, Treaty, or any other obligation
whatsoever betwixt us, they are still the absolute interest and property of
England, which by this your refusal, to quit them, is absolutely invaded and
usurped: and your continuance of their possession upon those tearm^^, is a
continuance of be^^tile invasion and incursion upon England. And is as much as
if you had entered by force, (for Dolus an virtus qu^ts in host requirit?) it
is all one to the nature of the thing, whether by force or by politic dece^pt,
for both can be but possession, so that this your possession of our Countries,
Castles, etc. under the color of expectation of pay before you depart, is in
the nature of the thing as absolute invasion and incursion, as if you had
entered and over run those places by force of Arms. For though we be bound to
give you reasonable satisfaction, yet by that obligation, we are not bound to
forfeit our Garrisons, Castles, Countries, etc. into your hands, till it be
given: We will grant you that reasonable satisfaction is due; but what is that?
whether a certain sum of money, or else our Garrisons, Castles, Countries,
etc? Your selves only make claim to the first, and therefore, and in respect
of our own incerest, we will be so bold as not to disclaim and yield up our
right in the second upon any pretense whasoever. And in case reasonable
satisfaction should be denied, it could be but a falsitie and breach of faith,
it would not therefore follow, that our Garrisons, Castles, Countries, etc were
become forfeit into the hand of our brethren the Scotts: Or because we should
do evil, it does not therefore follow that they should do evil for evil
again: for that were contrary to sound doctrine and the power of Godliness, a
clause of the second Article in the Covenane from which our brethren tell us,
that no persuasion, terror, plot, sugi^stion nor combination, shall never
directly nor indirectly with draw them: and in this Covenant there is no such
clause expressed, intended or employed, that in case we should not give them
satisfaction according to agreement, that then our Garrisons, Castles and
Countries should be forfeit to our brethren of Scotland. Therefore if you would
but deal friendly and as becomes brethren (whereof you make such profession)
with us, you would not take advantage at your brethrens necessitys, to deal
thus unkindly and unbrotherly with them (as if they had entertained so many
Turks, Pagans and Infidells into their bosoms in stead of brethren) as to
sease upon their possessions, their Garrisons, Forts, Castles, Countries, etc.
because this reasonable satisfaction cannot be provided as soon as you would
have it, and as they desire and endeavor it. This is not a doing as you would
be done to, this is no brotherly bearing of one another infirmities, or of one
another burdens; but in stead of a brotherly easing, this is a ^unfriendly
oppressing, besides the great standell it casts upon your brother Nation of
England, as it the Parliament and People thereof, were so unfaithful,
unnatural and false hearted, not to be trusted upon their faith and honor
with their brethren of Scotland (with whom there is such obligations of unity
and brotherhood) for the palment of the said sum of money, with their utmost
expedition, doubtless we should never have been so ungrateful and unfaithful
with our brethren as to have dealt unjustly with them therein.

But ^e are afraid, that this money demand, was but a foreign invention to
catch us upon the lurch, supposing by reason of the unreasonablenesse of the
matter, and the invasive manner thereof, the two Houses would not assent
thereunto and so by such meanacing provoking rearmes, as the detaining of our
Garrisons under the pretense of acquiring reasonable satisfaction, to pick a
quarrel with us, or else you would not the^s have demanded the same upon such
high provokating terms nor detaining of our Garrisons, Castles, Countries,
etc. for to deliver them unto us, you will not till you have money.

Yea, you tell us, that if the 5000. l. at Nottingham already accounted unto
you with some other competent portion of money be not sent unto your Army, you
(...) be forced (forsooth) to enlarge your Quarters for the ease of the
country, so that we plainly see by this liberty of enlargement which you usurp
unto your selves, (...) you intend that your enlargement of your Quarters shall
be as large as our Bo^^^ in the case of procrastination, and all under the
colout (for sooth) of easing the Country: Indeed brethren by that means you
would ease us of all. But if in your heart you be intended to ease us, then why
do you not rather tell us that you will enlarge homewards, to your own native
Country, for that were indeed an easement, this (...) but a further enlargement
of our burden, but we know your meaning by your g^p^^^ Good brethren do not
thus take advantage at your brethrens necessities; as (...) brethren we tell
you, it does not become you to deal thus unkindly with you brethren: for it is
an unnatural, unbrotherly part, to make a prey of their extremi^^^ Yet here is
not all they say of this matter, for they menacingly tell us, that in case,
(...) Thomas Fairfaxs Army shall march Northwards, that their Scottish Army
shall en^^^ their Quarters Southward, whereby (they say) it is easily to be
seen, that those Kingdoms may unhappily be again embroyled in new ^^^d
greater troubles then yet (...) have been. Now how can we judge this otherwise,
but as a shaking of the sword (...) our heads? a dare, a threat even as much as
to say to our Armies, come Norwa^^^^ you dare. And if you do, we will advance
Southward, and then you may ex^^^^ greater broils and troubles then ever: but
brethren, for the love of God, and (...) peace of the Kingdoms, forbear such
threatening language for the future, that (...) may live together as brethren in
love, peace and tranquillity: For brethren we (...) assure you, that evil
words corrupts good manners, tread on a worm and it will (...) again, and
surely Englishm^n have as much courage ^s worms.

And now that you see that the two Houses have conditioned to your demands you
enter into dispute with us about the disposal of the person of the King, in
such a manner as is not possibe in honor and justice for this Kingdom to
accept off, and you propose ways and means of delays and protraction of
time, as (...) commissioners again unto the King in the name of both
Kingdoms, with power to (...) his desires and the like, when as indeed the
matter belongs to them joy^dy to ^^vise determine and conclude how they will
dispose of him, and what they will compel him to do, being conquered and
fallen into their hands, therefore sending (...), or treating with him now, is
beside the matter in hand, so that those various devi^^ of yours, give us great
cause of suspicion and jealousies of you, that these, are but ways to bear us
in hand for the better facilitation of your design. But we should be glad to
hear of your innocence of those things, and should be willing (...) judge
better of our brethren, but they must excuse us if we judge the tree by its
(...) and may rather blame themselves for bringing forth such fruit, then us,
for (...) judging, when it is brought forth. Therefore to remove all scruple
end different from betwixt us, we desire them to let their good works so shine
before men that we may justly say that God is in them indeed, and that they are
our faithful (...) and friends who are resolved to live and dye with us in the
better sense, th^^gh^^^ are now justly afraid of the Worst.

FINIS.
Errata, page 6. for you your selves, read your selves, p. 7. l 8. for (...)
consents r. and ousent. p. 8. l. 10. for proceeding r. preceding, p. 9. for
and treaties r. treaties and p. 6^2. for my Lord of Northumber land, r. Genney
with the wis^, p. 6. in some (...), for some of your army, r some Regiments in
your army, Of these and mo^y other (...) (...) the Author desires the Readers
favorable correction and construction*


