A REMONSTRANCE Of Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBURN: Concerning The Laws, Liberties,
Privileges, Birthrights, Freedom, and Inheritances, of the freeborn People
of England; in relation to the Sentence denounced against him for Banishment.

Together with his Resolution, to adhere and stand firm to the fundamental
Laws of this Nation; and inviolably to endeavor the preservation thereof; to
the end, that Justice and Right may not be sold, denied, or deferred to any man.

Published by a Well-wisher to that faithful-Lover of his Country, and
constant Sufferer for the Liberties thereof, Lieut. Colonel JOHN LILBURN.

Imprinted at London, for G. HORTON, 1652.

THE REMONSTRANCE OF Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, to the Freeborn people of
England; and a Narrative and Abstract of his late proceedings, trial, and
sufferings.
IT is the saying of the God of Truth, That he that walks righteously, and
speaks uprightly; he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakeeth
his hands from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood,
and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil; He shall dwell on high; etc. But on
the contrary he says; VVoe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees; and that
write grievousnesse which they have prescribed; to turn aside the needy from
judgment; and to take away the right from the poor of my people; that widows
may be their prey; and that they may rob the Fatherless, Isa. 32.15, 16. Chap.
10.1, 2.

As for my own part I am a freeman; yea, a free Denizen of England; and I have
been in the field with my sword in my hand, to adventure my life and my blood
(against Tyrants) for the preservation of my just-freedom; and I do not know
that ever I did an act in all my life, that disfranchised me of my freedom; and
by virtue of my being a freeman (I conceive) I have as true a right to all the
privileges that do belong to a freeman as the greatest man in England
whatsoever he be; and the ground and foundation of my freedom I build upon the
grand Charter of England, which is published and expressed in the 9 of HEN. 3.
Chap. 29. which I humbly crave leave to illustrate as follows, viz. That no
freeman shall be taken or imprisoned; or be diseised of his freehold or
liberties; or free Customs; or be outlawed or exiled; or any wise destroyed:
Nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him; but by lawful Judgment of his
Peers; or by the Law of the Land; we will sell to no man; we will not deny; or
defer to any man either Justice or Right. And the privileges contained herein
are my birthright and inheritance; which privileges have been ratified and
confirmed to the free people of England by the Parliament assembled at
Westmidster; and many Declarations put out against the late King for violating
of them.

And truly, I cannot choose but remind you, That the Law of England is the
birthright and inheritance of the people of England; yea of the meanest as
well as of the richest: And although the Law of England be not so good in every
particular, especially in the administrative part of it, as I could wish it
were; yet till I can see a better, I (for my part) will make much of that which
we have, as the principal Earthly preserver and safeguard of my life, liberty
and property for it, viz. Magna Charta Chap. 29. says, No freeman shall be
taken or imprisoned, or be disseifed of his freehold or ftee Customs, or be
outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor past upon, nor condemned,
but by lawful Judgment of his Peers; or by the Law of the Land; and that
Justice and Right shall not be sold denied, or deferred to any man. See Sir
Edw. Cook's excellent Exposition upon this in his 2. par. Instit. fol. 46, 47.
etc. Printed by the late forcibly dissolved Parliament for good Law. And
positively declared, To preserve unto the people inviolably their fundamental
Laws and Liberties, in refere^ce to their Lives, Estates, and all things
appertaining thereunto.

The Remonstrance.
IT was the lot and portion of our only Lord and Master Jesus Christ, to be
persecuted, reviled, reproached, and counted a Troubler of the World, and one
not sit to breath therein: And this even by his own Contrymen and friends;
And if we his servants meet with the same measure, he has commanded Us not to
be dismayed or troubled, and the reason is, because the servant is not above
the master: And withal, that we might go on cheerfully in bearing the yoke of
our master, he has engaged himself to bear part of it with us, and takes all
that is done to us for adhering to him, as done unto himself, Act. 9.4. And
therefore, says the spirit of God, in all their afflict^ons, he was afflicted,
and the Angel of his presence saved him, Esaias 63.9. Paul, Peter, and John,
sound these sayings of their Master true, and had their portions in afflictions
in an extraordinaay manner, but yet tasted largely of the faithfulness of
their Masters promise, which was to be with them, and in them; which made Paul
glory in his tribulations, and to say, That as his afflictions did abound, so
much more his consolations; and Paul's portion in these expressions and
enjoyments, I my self have been made partaker of, in my great and pressing
tribulations, which I under-went in the Bishops days, and have had a large
portion of sorrows all along both before and since, throughout my pilgrimage
in this present Vail of tears. And having had my spirit mightily refreshed and
carried above the world, and the lash of my bitter adversaries, by calling to
mind my bypast experience and refreshings, that I have enjoyed from that
Fountain of fullness, that has for many years together been my sensible
enjoyed portion: And amongst all the Writings and Declarations of Gods Love and
Kindness manifested to me in my sorrows, this has most affected, and ^^ken
my spirit with greatest content, That it is the work of the Saints, to
encounter with difficulties in the Cause and Quarrel of their Lord and Master,
and not to be afraid of bonds nor imprisonments. A good Conscience had rather
run the hazard of cruelty, then to abate an hairs breadth of contestation
against illegality. This was the saying of Mr. Overton, in his late Case,
depending in the Honse of Peers; for, says he, As their Lordships in their
arbytrary capacity found Warrants, so should they find Legs to obey them; for I
was resolved mine should not be inslaved to that their Usurpation to do their
Arbytrary Drudgery; I would rather lose my life, then in that kind to do them
that vassalage: My Legs were born as free as the rest of my Body, and therefore
I scorn that Legs, or arms, or hands, should do them any service; for as I am a
freeman by Birth, so am I resolved to live and die, both in heart, word and
deed, in substance and in show.

Many thousand Citizens are petitioning the Parl. for the recalling of the
heavy sentence upon him; by reason that if in relation to his person, his
affection to the Parliament, and zeal to public freedom, renders all foreign
Nations so unsafe to him, as that (in effect) he is banished into a Wilderness,
and exposed naked to the fury of Bears and Lions.

FINIS.

