TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of Thousands well-affected persons inhabiting the City of
London, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, Hamlets, and places adjacent.
Shows,
THat although we are as earnestly desirous of a safe and well-grounded Peace,
and that a final end were put to all the troubles and miseries of the
Commonwealth, as any sort of men whatsoever: Yet considering upon what grounds
we engaged on your Part in the late and present Wars, and how far (by our so
doing) we apprehend our selves concerned, Give us leave (before you conclude us
by the Treaty in hand) to acquaint you first with the ground and reason which
induced us to aid you against the King and his Adherents. Secondly, What our
Apprehensions are of this Treaty. Thirdly, what we expected from you, and do
still most earnestly desire.

Be pleased therefore to understand, that we had not engaged on your part, but
that we judged this honorable House to be the supreme Authority of England, as
chosen by, and representing the People; and entrusted with absolute power for
redress of Grievances, and provision for Safety: and that the King was but at
the most the chief public Officer of this Kingdom, and accomptable to this
House (the Representative of the People, from whom all just Authority is, or
ought to be derived) for discharge of his Office: And if we had not bin
confident hereof, we had not bin desperately mad to have taken up Arms, or to
have bin aiding and assisting in maintaining a War against Him; the Laws of the
Land making it expressly a crime no less than Treason for any to raise War
against the King.

But when we considered the manifold oppressions brought upon the Nation, by
the King, his Lords and Bishops; and that this Honorable House declared their
deep sense thereof; and that (for continuance of that power which had so
oppressed us) it was evident the King intended to raise Forces, and to make War;
and that if he did set up his Standard, it tended to the dissolution of the
Government: upon this, knowing the safety of the People to be above Law, and
that to judge thereof appertained to the supreme Authority, and not to the
supreme Magistrate, and being satisfied in our Consciences, that the public
safety and freedom was in imminent danger, we concluded we had not only a just
cause to maintain; but the supreme Authority of the Nation, to justify, defend
and indempnifie us in time to come, in what we should perform by direction
thereof; though the highest.

And as this our understanding was begotten in us by principles of right
reason, so were we confirmed therein by your own proceedings, as by your
condemning those Judges who in the case of Ship Money had declared the King to
be Judge of Safety; and by your denying him to have a Negative voice in the
making of Laws; where you wholly exclude the King from having any share in the
supreme Authority: Then by your casting the Bishops out of the House of Lords,
who by tradition also, had bin accounted an essential part of the supreme
Authority; and by your declaring to the Lords, That if they would not join with
you in settling the Militia, (which they long refused) you would settle it
without them, which you could not justly have done, had they had any real
share in the supreme Authority.

These things we took for real Demonstrations, that you undoubtedly knew your
selves to be the supreme Authority; ever weighing down in us all other your
indulgent Expressions concerning the King or Lords; it being indeed impossible
for us to believe, that it can consist either with the safety or freedom of the
Nation, to be governed either by three or two Supremes, especially where
experience has proved them so apt to differ in their Judgments concerning
freedom or safety, that the one has bin known to punish what the other has
judged worthy of reward; when not only the freedom of the people is directly
opposite to the Prerogatives of the King and Lords, but the open enemies of the
one have bin declared friends by the other, as the Scots were by the House of
Lords.

And when as most of the oppressions of the Commonwealth have in all times bin
brought upon the people by the King and Lords, who nevertheless would be so
equal in the supreme Authority, as that there could be no redress of
Grievances, no provision for safety, but at their pleasure. For our parts, we
profess our selves to be so far from judging this to be consistent with freedom
or safety, that we know no greater cause wherefore we assisted you in the late
Wars, but in hope to be delivered by you from so intolerable, so destructive a
bondage, so soon as you should (through Gods blessing upon the Armies raised by
you) be enabled.

But to our exceeding grief, we have observed that no sooner God vouchsafes
you victory, and blesses you with success, and thereby inableth you to put us
and the whole Nation into an absolute condition of Freedom and Safety: but
according as ye have been accustomed, passing by the ruin of the Nation, and
all the blood that has been spilt by the King and his Party, ye betake your
selves to a Treaty with him, thereby putting him that is but one single person,
and a public Officer of the Commonwealth, in competition with the whole Body
of the People, whom ye represent; not considering that it is impossible for you
to erect any Authority equal to your selves; and declared to all the world
that you will not alter the ancient Government, from that of King, Lords, and
Commons: not once mentioning (in case of difference) which of them is supreme,
but leaving that point (which was the chiefest cause of all our public
differences, disturbances, wars, and miseries,) as uncertain as ever.

In so much as we who upon these grounds have laid out our selves every way to
the uttermost of our abilities: and all others throughout the Land, Soldiers
and others who have done the like in defense of your supreme Authority, and in
opposition to the King, cannot but deem our selves in the most dangerous
condition of all others, left without all plea of indemnity for what we have
done; as already many have found by loss of their lives and liberties, either
for things done or said against the King; the law of the land frequently taking
place, and precedence against and before your Authority, which we esteemed
supreme, and against which no law ought to be pleaded. Nor can we possibly
conceive how any that have any ways assisted you can be exempt from the guilt
of murderers and robbers, by the present laws in force, if you persist to
disclaim the supreme authority, though their own consciences do acquit them,
as having opposed none but manifest Tyrants, Oppressors, and their adherents.

And whereas a Personal Treaty, or any Treaty with the King, has been long
time held forth as the only means of a safe and wel-grounded Peace; it is well
known to have been cried up principally by such as have been always
disaffected unto you; and though you have not contradicted it, yet it is
believed that you much fear the issue thereof; as you have cause sufficient,
except you see greater alteration in the King and his party then is generally
observed, there having never yet been any Treaty with him, but was accompanied
with some underhand-dealing; and whilst the present force upon him (though
seeming liberty) will in time to come be certainly pleaded, against all that
shall or can be agreed upon: Nay, what can you confide in if you consider how
he has been provoked; and what former Kings upon less provocations have done,
after Oaths, Laws, Charters, Bonds, Excommunications, and all ties of
Reconciliations, to the destruction of all those that had provoked and opposed
them: yea, when your selves so soon as he had signed those Bills, in the
beginning of this Parliament saw cause to tell him, That even in or about the
time of passing those Bills, some design or other was on foot, which if it had
taken effect, would not only have rendered those Bills fruitless, but have
reduced you to a worse condition of confusion, than that wherein the Parliament
found you. And if you consider, what new Wars, Risings, Rovolting invasions,
and plottings have been since this last cry for a Personal Treaty, you will
not blame us if we wonder at your hasty proceedings thereunto: especially
considering the wonderful Victories which God has blessed the Armies withal.

We profess we cannot choose but stand amazed to consider the inevitable danger
we shall be in, though all things in the Propositions were agreed unto; the
resolutions of the King and his party have been so perpetually violently and
implacably prosecuted and manifested against us; and that with such scorn and
indignation, that it must be more than such ordinary Bonds that must hold them.
And it is no less a wonder to us that you can place your own security therein,
or that you can ever imagine to see a free Parliament any more in England.

The truth is (and we see we must either now speak it, or for ever be silent,)
We have long expected things of an other nature from you, and such as we are
confident would have given satisfaction to all serious people of all Parties.

As,

1. That you would have made the supreme authority of the people, in this
Honorable House, from all pretenses of Negative Voices, either in the King or
Lords.

2. That you would have made laws for election of representatives yearly and of
course without writ or summons.

3. That you would have set express times for their meeting Continuance and
Dissolution: as not to exceed 40. or 50. days at the most, and to have fixed
an express time for the ending of this present Parliament.

4. That you would have exempted matters of Religion and Gods worship, from the
compulsive or restirictive power of any Authority upon earth, and reserved to
the supreme authority an un-compulsive power only of appointing a way for the
public, whereby abundance of misery, persecution, and heart-burning would for
ever be avoided.

5. That you would have disclaimed in your selves and all future
Representatives, a power of Pressing and forcing any sort of men to serve in
wars, there being nothing more opposite to freedom, nor more unreasonable in
an authority empowered for raising moneys in all occasions, for which, and a
just cause, assistants need not be doubted: the other way serving rather to
maintain injustice and corrupt parties.

6. That you would have made both Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords,
and all Persons, alike liable to every Law of the Land, made or to be made;
that so all persons even the Highest might fear and stand in aw, and neither
violate the public peace, nor private right of person or estate, (as has been
frequent) without being liable to account as other men.

7. That you would have freed all Commoners from the Jurisdiction of the Lords
in all cases: and to have taken care that all trials should be only by twelve
sworn men, and no conviction but upon two or more sufficient known witnesses.

8. That you would have freed all men from being examined against themselves,
and from being questioned or punished for doing of that against which no Law
has bin provided.

9. That you would have abbreviated the proceedings in Law, mitigated and made
certain the charge thereof in all particulars.

10. That you would have freed all Trade and Merchandising from all
Monopolizing and Engrossing, by Companies or otherwise.

11. That you would have abolished Excise, and all kind of taxes, except
subsidies, the old and only just way of England.

12. That you would have laid open all late Enclosures of Fens, and other
Commons, or have enclosed them only or chiefly to the benefit of the poor.

13. That you would have considered the many thousands that are ruined by
perpetual imprisonment for debt and provided for their anlargement.

14. That you would have ordered some effectual course to keep people from
begging and beggary, in so fruitful a Nation as through Gods blessing this is.

15. That you would have proportioned punishments more equal to offenses; that
so men's Lives and Estates might not be forfeited upon trivial and slight
occasions.

16. That you would have removed the tedious burden of Tithes, satisfying all
Impropriators, and providing a more equal way of maintenance for the public
Ministers.

17. That you would have raised a stock of Money out of those many confiscated
Estates you have had, for payment of those who contributed voluntarily above
their abilities, before you had provided for those that disbursed out of their
superfluities.

18. that you would have bound your selves and all future Parliaments from
abolishing propriety, levelling men's Estates, or making all things common.

19. That you would have declared what the duty or business of the Kingly
office is, and what not; and ascertained the Revenue, past increase or
diminution, that so there might never be more quarrels about the same.

20. That you would have rectified the election of public Officers of the
City of London, and of every particular Company therein, restoring the
Comunalty thereof to their just Rights, most unjustly withheld from them, to
the producing and maintaining of corrupt interest, opposite to common Freedom,
and exceedingly prejudicial to the Trade and Manufactures of this Nation.

21. That you would have made full and ample reparations to all persons that
had bin oppressed by sentences in High Commission, Star Chamber, and Counsel
Board, or by any kind of Monopolizers or Projectors; and that out of the
Estates of those that were Authors, Actors, or Promoters of so intolerable
mischiefs: and that without much attendance or seeking.

22. That you would have abolished all Committees, and have convayed all
businesses into the true method of the usual Trials of the Commonwealth.

23. That you would not have followed the example of former tyrannous and
superstitious Parliaments, in making Orders, Ordinances, or Laws, or in
appointing punishments concerning opinions or things supernatural, stiling
some blasphemies, others heresies, when as you know your selves easily
mistaken, and that divine Truths need no humane helps to support them: such
proceedings having bin generally invented to devide the people amongst
themselves, and to affright men from that liberty of discourse by which
Corruption and tyranny would be soon discovered.

24. That you would have declared what the business of the Lords is, and
ascertain their condition, not derogating from the Liberties of other men, that
so there might be an end of striving about the same.

25. That you would have done Justice upon the Capital Authors and Promoters of
the former or late wars, many of them being under your power: Considering that
mercy to the wicked, is cruelty to the innocent: and that all your lenity does
but make them the more insolent and presumptuous.

26. That you would have provided constant pay for the Army, now under the
command of the Lord General Fairfax, and given rules to all Judges, and all
other public Officers throughout the Land, for their indemnity and for the
saving harmless all that have any ways assisted you, or that have said or
done any thing against the King, Queen, or any of his party since the beginning
of this Parliament, without which any of his party are in a better condition
then those that have served you; nothing being more frequent with them, then
their reviling of you and your friends.

The things and worthy Acts which have bin done and achieved by this Army and
their Adherents (however ingratefully suffered to be scandalized as Sectaries,
and men of corrupt judgments) in defense of the just authority of this
honorable House, and of the common liberties of the Nation, and in opposition
to all kind of tyranny and oppression, being so far from meriting an odious Act
of Oblivion, that they rather deserve a most honorable Act of perpetual
remembrance, to be as a pattern of public virtue, fidelity, and resolution to
all posterity.

27. That you would have laid to heart all the abundance of innocent blood that
has bin spilt, and the infinite spoil and havoc that has bin made of
peaceable harmless people, by express commissions from the King; and seriously
to have considered whether the justice of God be likely to be satisfied, or his
yet continuing wrath appeased, by an Act of Oblivion.

These and the like we have long time hoped you would have minded, and have
made such an establishment for the general peace and contentfull satisfaction
of all sorts of people, as should have bin to the happiness of all future
generations, and which we most earnestly desire you would set your selves
speedily to effect; whereby the almost dying honor of this most honorable
House, would be again revived, and the hearts of your Petitioners and all other
well-affected people, be afresh renewed unto you, the Freedom of the Nation
(now in perpetual hazard) would be firmly established, for which you would
once more be so strengthened with the love of the people, that you should not
need to cast your eyes any other ways (under God) for your security: but if
all this avails nothing, God be our Guide, for man shows us not a way for
our preservation.

Upon the eleventh of September, 1648. this Petition was delivered into the
House.
The House received this Petition, and returned answer thereunto, which was to
this effect, viz. That the House gave them thanks for their great pains and
care to the public good of the Kingdom, and would speedily take their humble
desires into considration.


