THE LORD KEEPERS SPEECH TO THE HOUSE OF Commons, at the passing of Two Bills.

TOGETER WITH THE Kings Majesty's Message to both Houses, concerning the
raising of men for Ireland, the taking away of the Bishops Votes out of the
House of Peers, the banishing of Popish Priests, and the settling of the
Government and Liturgy of the Church.

London, Printed for John Burroughes, and John Frank. 1641.

The Lord Keeper his Speech to the House of Commons.
I Am commanded by my Lords to acquaint you with a letter I have received from
his Majesty, authorizing the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Southampton
the Earl of Bath, and my self, or any three of us, by virtue of his Majesty's
Commission under the great Seal of England, to pass two Bills* the one, a
bill for the raising of men for the present expedition into Ireland, to relieve
the poor distressed protestants there, from the prevailing party of the blood
sucking Papists, A thing taken to heart by the King and all good men. In this
Bill is a clause that does much conduce to the security of the liberty of the
Subjects of England. That by the law noe man ought to be impressed, nor
compelled to go out of his Country to serve as a Soldier, unless by his
own consent, or the common consent in Parliament, or upon the necessity of
some sudden Invasion of foreign forces into the Realm.

The second Bill that is to pass, is to take away the Bishops Votes out of the
house of Peers, and to exempt them from all secular affairs: That so, being
reduced to what indeed they were first instituted, they may solely attend the
gaineing of souls to heaven. The whole man being too little for so glorious and
great a work. Who is sufficient for these things says the Apo. And to avoid
all delays, his Majesty, having not the convenience to be here in person,
has authorized us by his commission to give his Roy all assent to both these
Bills.

Le. Roy Le noet.
Then the Lord Keeper commanded his Majesty's message to be read in the
presence of both houses as follows.




