AN ELEGY On the Death of the most Illustrious PRINCE, HENRY Duke of Gloucester.

BY Martin LLuelyn Dr in Ph. Sworn Phy: to His Majesty: Principal of S. M.
Hall OXON. and Fellow of the Coll. of Phy. LAND.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPIENTIA FELICITATIS



OXFORD, Printed by Hen. Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric. Davis 1660.

AN ELEGY On the Death of the most Illustrious PRINCE, HENRY DVKE of GLOUCESTER.
SOme Princes Lives, such cold affections bred,
That we do scarce repent their being Dead,
And such indifferent greifes attend their Rights,
As they were not their Funerals, but our Sights.
Hearse, Scutchins, Darkness, the pale tapers blaze;
All that invites our first, or after gaze;
The Nobles, Heralds, Mourners sable-clad;
These make a solemn pomp, but not a sad.
But to Your Obsequies Dear Prince! we come,
As they that would beg Tenements in your Tomb.
And by our genuine sorrows seek to prove,
Those Indians wise that die with those they love.
And no less penance can these Nations shrive,
Which make Thee dead so long, while yet alive.
And by as cruel method, as unjust.
Bury Thee first in Exile, then in Dust.
Thy sufferings Inventary rose so high,
There scarce was other left Thee, but to die.
And this was that in all his rage and storm,
Though Cromwell wished, he trembled to perform.
When pawzing here after Thy slaughtered Sire,
He seemed to fear this was to murder High'r.
And bathing his black soul in the sacred flood,
He durst gorge Royal, but not tender blood.
Where then shall Innocence in safety sit?
When a disease it self does Cromwell it.
If a distemper our complaints may bear,
And we may fix a reverent quarrel there:
Nere to be reconciled, pursue we still
Thy fate, that did with more then slaughter kill.
The sharp disquiets of an aching brain,
A heart in sunder torn, yet whole to pain.
Eyes darting forth dim fires, instead of sight;
At once made see, and injured by the Light;
Faint pulse; and tongue to thirsty cinders dried:
When the relief of thirst must be denied.
The Bowels parcht, limbs in tormenting throws
To cool their heat, while heat from cooling grows.
Slumbers which wandering phansies keep awake,
And sense not lead by objects, but mistake;
Most fevers Limbecks though with these they burn,
They leave the featured carcass to the Vrne,
But thine was borne of that offensive race,
Armed to destroy, she first strove to deface.
And then to close her cruel tragic part,
She slew against the augury of Art.
No adversary could worse spite display.
Since it is less to Kill, then to betray.
It Was savage beyond fate: for others lie,
Dead of Disease, you of Recovery,
All shipwracks horrid are; but yet none more,
Then that, which for its witness takes the shore.
Affronts, plots, scandals, false friends, cold Allies,
Exiles, wants, tempests, battails, rebels, spies,
Restraints, temptations, strange aires; in all these
Was there no Fever, no malign Disease?
The Royal Line ( England this brand must wear.)
Suffer abroad, but perish only here.
So to the sun the Phoenix does repair,
Through each distempered Region of the Air.
Through swarms of Deaths she there victorious flies,
But in her cruel Nest she burns, and dies.
Had You resigned your late afflicted breath,
When life it self less lovely was then death;
When the kind graves did but receive our Care,
And the survivers only wretched were:
Our greedy Interests might tempted be,
To call Thy virtues back, but hardly Thee.
But now when Vines drop wine from every trunk,
To cheer their owners, not make Rapine drunk:
Our goods find out our unfrequented hands:
And Crimes make persons guilty, and not Lands.
When widows houses are no more a meal,
And Churches spoils are sacriledg, not zeal.
When our beloved yet Dread Sovereign Head,
Is Crown and Guard to all, but to the Dead.
What Niobe can wail your mournful fate?
Snatched from the best of Kings, and happiest State.
The Public peace, and Your own large content,
In you just Brothers equal Government;
Had raised so rich an odor to Your sense,
That growing time had taken You sated hence.
But to depart under four Months Return,
To land in England, to prevent your Vrne;
Seems their disaster, who a bliss might shape,
But loose their dear enjoyments, by a Rape.
And now, most wretched we! who state our woe,
By Thy afflictions, and Thy virtues too.
Thy Infancy our cruelty forbore,
Made thee an early Captive, and no more:
Kisses that had from Princely Parents fell,
From servile lips seemed then supplied as well.
Nor could Thy sufferings then excite Thy moan,
Since sufferings are no sufferings when unknown.
Thy Childhood, that their nobler cares protect.
Who strive to show, but are forbid respect.
While rude ones seek by a misbred Resort
To raze out all thy lines of Birth or Court.
That tutored out of Prince, You might be sent
Into a common people Banishment.
But thrift reclames that project, eyes the heap
Of Thy expense, and bids thee perish cheap.
Posts Thee, ere least debasement could appear
A Gemme to foreign states, a burden here.
So the rude Waves, fraught with a costly piece
Of rich, but Sea-neglected Ambergris:
Do, rolling, drive that fragrant billow thence:
A perfume to the ravished finders sense.
Abroad the wide Improvement of Thy parts,
Drew in so fast the dewes of Tongues and Arts;
That both in Thy accomplishments were spent:
Arts were Thy fortress, Tongues Thy ornament.
Learned Latin, graceful speech and high of Spain,
The courtly French, the clean Italian vain,
'The Uncouth Duth, these Languages were known
Indenizon'd as Natives with thy own.
Those Arts where least advantages are found,
Even those You did Descry, but would not Sound.
Historians who record the life of Fame,
And regester each good or vicious Name,
You from their sacred Annals did resume
Great past examples, for your life to come.
Wise Navigators that disclose each creek,
And in the more known world, the unknown seek,
In their discoveries You imbark Your oars;
Because the Seas do most concern these shores.
By Your severer choice selecting thus,
What was most Useful, not most Curious.
Amid'st Your bright Imbellishments beside;
If Truth or Education were Your guide,
Became a sifting Quaere: a dispute
That will Afflict the world, but never confute.
Some to their climes belief, their faith do owe:
Which is to be Persuaded; but not Know.
You (at fifteen) this evidence did advance,
Religion was Your Judgment, not Your Chance.
Ere eighteen, two Campagnes, Your Courage veiw,
And Dunkirks fight: so famed for York, and You.
'Bout one and twenty we arrived see
Others at Age, You at Aeternity.
FINIS.

