A TRUE EXPERIMENTAL AND EXACT RELATION UPON That famous and renowned Siege
OF NEW CASTLE, The diverse conflicts and occurrances fell out there during the
time of ten weeks and odd days: And of that mighty and marveilous storming
thereof, with Power, Policy, and prudent plots of War.

Together with a succinct commentary upon the Battle of Bowdon Hill, and that
victorious battle of York or Marston Moore, never to be forgotten.

By him who was an eye witness to the siege of NEWCASTLE, WILLIAM LITHGOVV.

EDINBURGH, Printed by ROBERT BRYSON. 1645.

Cum Privilegio.

A just and exact discourse, upon the Siege and Storming of NEWCASTLE, with a
succinct commentary upon the two Battles of BOVVDON Hill and MARSTON Moore.
IN these turbulent times, when opinions grow variable, and the diversity of
doubtful reports more voluble than the rushing wind; yet have I adventured
(like to an old practicioner, in Prose, Poesy, and unparalelled peregrination)
to cast in my Myte of known Experience, upon the Brazen faces of ignorant
understanders, that with the knowledge of my quotidian inspection, I may either
enlighten their blindesse, or give truth the glory of a just deserving. And
why? because now too too many calumnious Critics, being more prone to censure
other men's labors, then to do any thing themselves worthy of censure, yet
dare to upbraid that which hardly their sinistruous judgment can rightly
construct. The world being turned to such a crabbed and crooked condition, that
either they will approve what they conceive, though never so erroneous, or
otherwise disprove that which they affect not, though never so illustrious.
Wherefore damnifying the one, and villifying the other I come to court my
present purpose; and thus I begin*

This long crossed labor, now it comes to light,
And I, and my discourse set in my* right,
Which reason craved; for where can truth prevail,
But where sound judgment may it countervaile.
For what seek I? in what these times afford,
But of my Countries praise, a just record,
Which God allows; and what can contraires bring,
But man for men, the light of truth may sing,
Else after ages would be borne as blind,
As though our time, had come their time behind:
For curious Penmen, and the Paper Scroule,
They are of memory, the life and soul.
After our first Army (levied in the hollow time of Winter, 1644 and led by the
Earl of Leven Lord General) had with certain oppositions recoursed over Tyne,
and thence falling down to Sunderland, situate upon the River Weir (Durhams
dallying and circulating consort) after, I say, they had been provoked by the
Lord Newcastle, and Lieutenant General King, upon the Sabbath day, to give
them Battle; it was skirmished and fought two days together at Bowdon Hill,
March 20, 21. 1644. whereby the great mercy of the divine Providence, that
laudable* Victory fell to our Army, and the enemy in a retyring way flying
for Durham, fled shortly thereafter in a confused march unto York. To which
place (their refuge) his Excellence with our Army mainly advancing, beleagured
the greater half of the Town; the Earl Manchester, and Lord Fairfax
envyroning the rest.

Where diverse weeks and days being spent, in advancing their Works, their
achievements, and other approaches, there fell out ( interim) certain
accidental Skirmishes and countermatching assaults. In one of which, that
mirror of Mars and manhood, Lieutenant Co^lonell Ballantine was deadly
wounded, whereof he dyed: A large subject have I here to handle, if time might
suffer me, but true it is, he was a Cavalier of such extraordinary fortune
(being only 28 years of age at his last vale) that in Germany, Ireland, and
twice in England, he became exceeding auspicuous in Martial affairs, though
indeed he was best understood under the name of Major Ballantine. All which
discourse, and this epitomizd memorial, I purposely abandon till a fitter
time; and so I return to my former Commentary, and thus:

This Siege of York continuing still with many fortunate and misfortunate
adventures, at last our several Armies were enforced to incorporate themselves
in one maine body, and that on Long- Marston Moore. Where the day following
Prince Rupert embracing their left field: our Army upon advertisement thereof,
were engaged to make a speedy return, for rancountring the enemy, and to
recover that ground which formerly they had freely forsaken: Which in the end,
amongst many difficulties and mighty oppositions, they both adventerously and
advantagiously obtained, to the enemies absolute overthrow, and their own
victorious safety. The summarie whereof, I now involue in these following
lines, as unwilling to imbarke my self within the lists of intricated
passages, or too peremptory and punctual particulars; and why? because I was
not there an occular Testator, and so to build upon the wings of flying report
were merely erroneous, (the diversities whereof being already innumerable and
incredible) but only done by way of introduction, to bring me the more facily
upon the face of Newcastle, or otherwise more properly, to enlighten memory
for present and future times. And thus,

In July last, the second day and more,
One thousand, six hundred, forty and four;
On Marston Moore, two awful Armies met,
Opposed then stood, one against another set,
To quarrel for Religion, and that light,
Which far excels all humane power and might.
(And yet the darkness of these dangrous times,
Would feign ecclypse Gods glory, and Men's crimes,
But here I stay, lest that in straying much,
I gall the mighty, and the lofty touch:)
Then cease sad Muse, return and let me show
This sequel stroke, for now begins the blow:
To work they go, well ordered on both sides,
In stately posture; experience divides
In Regiments and Brigads, Horse, and Foot,
Two mighty Armies; then began to shoot,
The roaring Cannon, and their eccheing worce!
Made Hills and Dales rebound their violent force,
That fell on fatal breasts; the Musket shoures
Went off like thunder; pride and strife devoures
The saiklesse standers; the naked sword and Pyke,
Commanded cruelty, to push and strike;
Which been obeyed, the Drum and Trumpet sounded,
Some here some there fell down, some deadly wounded,
On all hands there was slaughter. And what worse,
Some of our foot were troad by our own Horse,
And Fairfax too. But true it is that course,
Brought fame to some, to others sad remorse,
Which sorrow felt; And yet our Staile stood fast,
And wrought a passage on their foes at last,
That made Opposers quake: Wings and Reserves,
By hard pursuit, on their part shortly swerves:
For Truth enragd, these Romish Butchers fled,
Gorged with Atheism; their Bastard blood they shed
Like Jezabels on ground; and there was left
For Dogs to glut on, so their lives were rest,
With admiration, that the world might see
The Heavens and Scots, gaynd both, one victory.
Which in them was engrossd, and wondrous too,
For what could valor more for valor do
Than they that mannd this battle: It is true,
That valiant men would have a grateful due
To cherish fame: so they our Northren hearts
(As stout as steel) dischargd their manly parts.
Where Noble Lindesay, Earl of Crawfurd now,
Stood bravely to it, made his foes to bow:
And left no ground, nor did his foot remove
Such was his courage, graft in Jesus love:
Then here his badge, which well his worth may yield
A Lamb at home, a Lion in the field
And so he proved: where then all happy he!
Sealed up his name in Times eternity.
So forward Eglintoun, he actd his part,
And fiercely road, with a courageous heart
To front his foes: Where in that conflict he
Installd his name, amongst Peers of Chivalrie:
Where his brave son, behaved himself so well,
Some may come near, but none his worth excel:
Which if we had, as Romans wont to have
A twofold triumph, might their merit crave.
What should I speak of Baillie, but admire.
How the heavens his mind, with Noble gifts inspyre,
For manners, manhood, wisdom, skill, and wit,
Both Mars and Pallas, in his bosom sit;
Their Throne, his heart, their honor, his desert
Where judgment reigns, there knowledge bears a part*
And understanding too: for now these three
Crown all his gifts, with love and modesty.
For laureat Lumsdale, fixed in Bellones camp
Procurd what he deserves; became that lamp
Which crowns a Chiftayne: and his fame to blaze,
Still as he acts, the world may sing his praise:
There, there, he stayed, and stood so strongly to it
Among mortal men, no Champion, more could do it.
Then Gallant Leslie, leader of our Trowpes*
Traversd alwhere: mad spytete valor stoupes;
Where he! adventrous he! spurrd up and down
And cleard the field; regaynd that Delphian crown
Which courage fought for: And what worth allows,
A laurel Garland, may decore his brows*
Last here and there, the ground with slaughterd Corpse
Was cled from York, to five adjacent Dorps:
The blood lay on the grass, like shoures of rain
That fill the furs: the heaps of them were slain
Like Dunghills were; that on the weary fields
Some fought, some fled, some stood, and many yields:
That even me thought, the groans of Rome, and Spain,
Were heard the coast about, on shore and Maine:
And father falsehood, swore their Jesuit plots
Could not prevail, gaynst our triumphant Scots:
The enemy thus quelld, and scatterd round
Alwhere about, nay; some in every ground*
In came the Lord of Hosts, and he proclaimd
The field was his, or what more could be named
For person, place, or time; for he alone!
Beat down that Dagon, Babells Idol Throne.
And buried superstition, and blind rites:
Within the gulf, of ever gnashing sprits:
For which be praise, to whom all thanks and power,
From this time forth, and so for evermore*
Within a few days thereafter, upon considerable conditions, the city of York
yielding, and the Lord Fairfax made governor thereof, our most victorious
General and his redoubted army with great expedition, returned through
Yorkshyre, and Bishopric for Newcastle, to assist that Noble and judicious
Chiftayne, of whom now (as it is my main purpose) I begin to discourse of his,
and their proceedings; and as impartially, as an honest heart may do, without
either flattery or favor.

In this last springtydes second expedition. 1644. for England; our Parliament
then sitting, James Earl of Calendar, Lord Almond, was selected and appointed
by them, to be Lord Lieutennant General of all our Scottish forces in Scotland
and in England. Whereupon a considerable Army being leuyed, consisting of six
thousand foot, and eight hundred horse, he advanced for Northumberland, and
courting Tweed, crossd the Tyne at Newburne. Where his Army reposing all
night, made me call to mind, these following lines, I wrote upon that former
conflict fought there four years ago. 1640.

Let Conway brag of Arms, and his great horses,
Let Papists boast of men, and their fled Coarses,
Let Newburne rail on Tweed, and curse their Tyne.
Let Prelates swear, the fault was thine and mine:
I Will tell you news, their Popish drifts and plots
Were curbd and crushd, by our victorious Scots.
The day following our aforesaid army accoasted Lumley Castle, where
sojourning certain days, the Lord Calendar, with a number of horse and foot
(in this time) set face for Hatlepoole and Stocktoun. Where, when come, and
after a promiscuous parleye, seazing upon both towns, he left garrisons there,
and governors to overrule them. Whence returning to the residue of his army,
lying at Lumleye, he set forward to Osworth. From which place my Lord Calendar,
sending some horse and foot to clear the way for the Gatesyde, they were
rancountred with the enemy, at the tope of the wynd mill hill, where being
prevented by night, and theenemye stronger than they, they were constrained to
turn back. Whereupon the next day the Lieutennant General himself, came up
with the residue of his army, and fiercely facing the enemy, beat them from
the hill, chased them down the Gatesyde, and hushing them along the bridge,
closed them within the town. Hereupon he forthwith commanded the Gatesyde, and
then the next day he begun to dispute for the enjoying of the bridge, with
the fiery service of Cannon and Musket, which indeed was manfully invaded, and
as courageously defended. Yet at last, in despite of the enemy he gained the
better half of the Bridge, and with much ado fortified the same with earthen
Rampires, and Artilerie, which still so defensively continued, until the Town
was taken in by Storm. This being regardfully done, he caused to erect five
Batteries, along the Bankhead, and just opposite to the Town, from whence the
Cannon did continually extreme good service, not only against the walls and
batteries, but also against particular places, and particular persons: Besides
the frequent shooting of Potpieces, and other fireworkes of great importance,
which daily annoyed the Inhabitants within Town: At the most of which fiery
employments the Lord Calendar himself was ever personally directing them, to
the which dexterity of charge, I was often both an eye witness and observer.

By this time, or there about, his Excellence arryving here from York, and
accoasting the Tyne, he caused immediately build a Bridge over the River of
Keill boats, over the which his Army having safely and peaceably past, he
caused lay down their several quarters with great promptitude and expedition:
And so beleaguring the West and Northwest parts of the Town, they enclosed all
that circuit, till they joined with the Lord Sinclairs Regiment; Sheeffield
Fort (belonging to the Town) only dividing them: And so this rebellious Town
was mainly blocked up on all quarters. Now, and at this time also, the Earl
Calendar recrossing Tyne, took presently in Sandgate, the one end whereof
standing contiguat with the Town walls. Where setting sundry Regiments there,
and about that place, he forthwith caused to construct a strong Bridge of Keill
boats over Tyne (and within his quarters) for the passing and repassing of his
forces to both sides, and fixed the same a pretty way below the Glasse-house.
This advantageous passage became very steedable, not only for the Soldiers,
but also for the Country people, that brought in daily provision for the
Army. The Bridge it self (being daily guarded with my Lord Kenmoores Regiment
at both ends, and a strong Centrie set at each of them within two Redoubts) had
also three watrie guards of Keill boats, tied with cable ropes, from bank to
bank, to secure it from any sudden surprise.

Now as for the manner of the common Soldiers lying here in their several
Leagures, and in all parts about the Town, their Mansions or Domiciles, I
mean their Houts are composed, of Turff, Clay, Straw, and Watles. Where their
Halls, Chambers, Kitchines and Cellars are all one: And yet the better sort (I
mean their Officers) are overshadowed with circulating Pavillions, more ready
to receive the blustering wind than the sinking rain. Then at last, all things
being orderly done, and their batteries at sundry advantages erected; then (I
say) begun they to play with Cannon and Musket at others faces, and often also
tempering their naked swords in others bloody bodies: where courage cassieting
despair, and valor desirous of Honor, they exposed themselves unto all
hazards and dangerous attempts: Neither did they fear death (I mean our own)
more then an auspicuous fortune, for being clad with consorts, each provoked
another to the uttermost of extremities; and some of them esteeming of the good
Cause, more than of their own lives, reserved the one, and lost the other. So
also the inveterate enemy, making now and then diverse sallies from Town
(issuing at Posterne gates) upon our flanking trenches, engadged themselves
into great jeopardies, and our Soldiers to as desperata defense. Where indeed
they both often tasted of mutual fatalitie; till in end, the Lord Sinclairs
Regiment, desygned these debording hyrelings a narrower precinct; which was, to
keep their falling bodies more safely within their sheltring walls, which
indeed they constrainedly observed. For the enemy within, were more affrayed of
the Lord Sinclairs Soldiers without, then of any one Regiment of the Army
lying about, and they had just reason, recogitating seriously their sanguine
blows and fatal rancounters, which they disdainfully felt.

And now before I go any further, I think it best to show the unacquainted
Reader how the Town is situate, from whence such mortality proceeded; and
thus, it stands mainly upon the devalling face of a continuing hill, falling
down steep to the bordering River, where one narrow street runs along from
Sandgate to Clossegate. The Sandhill (from which the Bridge bends over to
Gateside) being the pryme market place, whence the two ascending passages,
court distinctly High street, and Pilgrim street, the two chiefest streets of
the Town; to the bowels of which, there be other three market places annexed.
Now besides these there are other two back streets, with five or six Contrades,
and a number of narrow devalling lanes. The walls about the Town are both high
and strong, built both within and without with saxo quadrato; and maynely
fenced with dungeon Towers, interlarded also with Turrets, and along with
them a large and defensive battlement, having eight sundry ports, and four
parochial Churches: The which walls, the defendants within, had marveilously
fortifyed, rampiering them about, at most eminent parts, with interlynings and
mountains of earth. The streets that were answerable to their barrocaded
Ports, and in frequent passages, were also casten up with defensive
breastworks, and planted with Demi-culverines of irone: And above all other
works, the town Castle it self, was seriously enlarged, with diverse curious
fortifications, besides breastworks, Redoubts, and terrenniat Demilunes; and
withal three distinctive Horne-workes, two of which exteriourly are strongly
pallosaded, and of great bounds. Nay, the very Capstone of the battlements
round about the Town, were surged and underpropd with little stones; that in
case of scalleting, they might have tumbled them over upon the Assailants:
Which indeed for the facility of the action, School boys might have
performed. Yea, and all the gapes of the battlements, were shut up with lime
and stone, having a narrow slit in each of them, through which they might
murder our Soldiers; and secure themselves from a just revenge. The graffe
about and without, was dug deeper, and the exterior root of the walls, were
steeply lyned with clay-mixt earth, to intercept any footing for Leddars, or
climbing thereon: All the Ports about were closed with lyme and stone, and
strongly barrocaded within, having no passage save at little posterne doors,
where they had their quotidian intercourses.

The Towns maine constructure rising upwards, divides it self in two corners,
the one North at Weavers Tower, the other South west at Hatmakers Tower,
decyphering two Horns, like unto Calabrian Females with their bogling busks;
but indeed more like unto the Novacastrians themselves, that retrogradingly
adorn their Cuckolds frontespices, with the large dimension of Acteons
monsterous-made horns. Upon the Towns Northeast side, and a little without,
there was a fortress erected, called Sheiffield Fort, standing on a moderate
height, and Champion-like commanding the fields; the model thus: It stands
squarely quadrangled, with a four cornerd Bastion at every angle, and all of
them thus quadrat, they are composed of earth and watles; having the Northeast
side of one bulwark pallosaded, the rest not, save along the top of the work
about, they had laid Masts of Ships to beat down the assailants with their
tumbling force. At the entry whereof there is a wooden drawbridge, and within
it two Courts du guard, the graffe without is dry and of small importance, save
only that repugnancie of the Defendants within, which commonly consisted of
three hundred men.

And now to close this Topographicall description, the invention, policy, nor
wit of man, could have done more, than they did within and without for their
own safetye, either for military discipline, or manly prouesses, in their own
desperate defense. Of whom our own Contrymen, were the cheeffest actors,
both for the one and for the other; and the only cause of so much bloodshed,
and loss of lives as we sustained; which makes me recall this Italian
proverb; Iddio miguarda dall' odio di mei amigi, perci^ches^ been ^guardar
mistesto dall'* ^di^ di mei inimigi. The Lord Keep me from the hurt of my
Friends, for I know well how to keep me from mine enemies: A thing now adays
so frequent, that where all should stand for amoris patriae, there many stand
now for doloris* patriae; and declyning from that ancient and native duty
Pugne propatria, they involue themselves (without either honesty or honor) to
extermine the lyves and liberty of their Patria; where struggling with their
own strife, they often deservingly fall in the extreme madness of
desperation, where now leaving them to their left selves, I revert to my
purpose. The walls here of Newcastle, are a great deal stronger than these of
York, and not unlyke to the walls of Avineon, but especialy of Jerusalem.
Being all three decored about the battlements, with little quadrangled Turrets;
the advantage resting only upon Newcastle, in regard of seventeen dungeon
Towers, fixed about the walls (and they also wonderful strong) which the other
two have not. Yet what avails either Towers, walls, or Turrets, where the
force of Armies command; Nay, just nothing: for indeed these walls with their
pendicles, were first erected to resist the Scottish invasions, and yet in
vain, for now we have shaken their foundations, and by the same strength they
relied upon, we have by the self same mean overthrown them, all glory be to
the God of glory therefore.

As for the Inhabitants resyding within, the richest or better sort of them as
seven or eight Common Knights, Aldermen, Coal Merchants, Pudlers, and the like
creatures are altogether Malignants, most of them being Papists, and the
greater part of all I say, irreligious Atheists. The vulgar condition being a
Mass of silly Ignorants, live rather like to the Berdoans in Lybia (wanting
knowledge, conscience, and honesty) than like to well disposed Christians,
Pliable to Religion, civil order, or Church discipline, And why? because their
bruttish desires being only for libertinous ends; Avarice, and
Voluptuousness; they have a greater sensualitye, in a pretended formalitye,
than the savage Sabuneks with whom I leave them here engrossed: And now
forsaking this present introduction, I come back to my continewing discourse.
The siege growing daily more and more hotter and hotter, at all quarters, and
in all places, as well in the one side, as in the other; then, and at which
time (I must ingenuously confess) that these indefatigable pains my Lord
Calendar took, were more than praise worthy, for late and early, and at all
times, he was extraordinary careful, paynefull, and diligent, in overseeing
here and there his Mines, in directing his batteryes, in managing private and
prudent ends for a public good, in dispatching of messingers and messages, and
in ordering of his soldiers achievements, by night or by day as they were
employed; insomuch that his industrious, and vigilant actions, became a
merveilous amazement; to all these that were acquainted with his pains, and
for my part, to shun ingratitude, worthy of deserved memory.

The chief Cannoneirs, that were upon his five batteryes in the Gatesyde, were
William Hunter Captain of the train of Artillery, James Scot, Robert Spense,
and William Wallace, men of singular skill* and many more, which I purposely (to
avoid prolixitie) omit: And now from here and hence, the Lievtennant General
traversing hourly the river to his other batteryes, and works at Sandgate
being only two, he was ever in a fastidious action; One of which batteries,
beat down the top, face, and upmost parts of Carpenters Tower unto the dust.
The other battery had been newly erected for repulsing the enemy from
intercepting our Mines. Yet notwithstanding whereof the Nullifidians within,
discovered the lowest Mine next to the river side: The which my Lord Calendar
perceaving, and thrusting a pyke with his own hand, through the renting
division, and to prevent the drowning thereof, gave presently order that the
next morning it should be sprung: Which accordingly done, it tumbled over the
demi-hornewark, dissapointed the enemy, and became a shelterage to our
encroaching soldiers. The other three adjacent Mines, were not as yet reddy,
neither now to be employed as after you shall hear.

About this same time. September. 29. the Lord Lieutennant general Baillie
upon the Towns north side, and near to St. Andrews Church, gave order (for
their his battery lay) to brash down a part of the Town wall, which in three
hours space was fortunatly accomplished; where the wall fell down, within half
a yard of the root, and so large that ten men might have marched through it in
a front. This trial gave indeed a great encouragement to our Army; and why*
because then our Commanders, were assured, that if their Mines should be
dissapointed, the brashing of the walls should be their last advantage. And yet
this breach was never pursued, in regard the enemy under the shadow of a
blind of Canvesse, reenforced, or barrocaded it with trash and timber. Upon
Weddinsday following at morn. Octo. 3. the enemy discovered and drowned two of
our Mines with watter, and the next day ensuing another also. Whereat the
enemy growing insolent, gave order for ringing of bells all night, to
consolate (as it were) the distressed minds of the starving communaltie, who
rather fed upon violent necessity, than any other kind of cherishing or
comfortable relief: Being whiles flattered with impossibilities, and other
whiles tyrannized over, by the malicious malignitie of the merciless, and now
miserable Mayor.

For true it is, that this Sir John* Marley their Governor, an oeconomick
Politician, more wilful than skillfull, did so inveigle, and blindfold the
common multitude, that these letters which he sent to our Lord General, were
all read by him in public to them, being too peremptory and impertinent: but
for the answer of his Excellence that came to him, he concealed them all,
making them to believe* that he would admit of no condition, nor grant any
safety longer than the revenging sword, might overreach their necks.

All which being falsely and perfidiously spoken, was only to irritate their
doubtful dispositions, and to incense their desperate condition, with the
deceit of a treacherous despair, to make them bolder for their dreadful
defense: for indeed there was an order condescended upon, by the Committee,
some five weeks before their ruin approached, which was, that if they should
render in time, and prevent the greater effusion of blood, they should have
fair and free quarters, and all these liberal conditions, that people in the
like case, could either look for, or require. But all these profers or offers,
were by the Mayor vilified, and by him concealed from the people, till their
day of desolation was declared. And now the coppies of these intercoursing
letters being lately published to the vulgar world, and striving to relinquish
unnecessary particulars, or any obvious rancounter of small consequence, I come
to the maine point: and thus,

After ten weeks siege and odd days, with many disastruous affronts,
following on all hands, there was a parley appointed being Friday October 18.
where in the forenoone our three Commissioners, the Lord Humbie, the Lord of
Wedderburne, and John Rutherfurd Provest of Iedbrugh, went in (the three
Hostages from the Town being formerly come forth) ours, I say, accoasting the
Majors presence, there were diverse propositions and answers by both parties
delivered, but to no purpose nor effect. The Mayor ever dallying with drifts
and delays to procrastinate time, till they had discovered our two chief
Mines, which indeed were very near the point: yet nevertheless (in a jeering
way) our Commissioners being dismissed after five hours conference, and their
Pledges returned; the next morning early the untimely preventing Mayor, sent
forth a Drummer, to the Lord Sinclair with two Letters; the contents of one was
thus, My Lord, I have received diverse Letters and warrants subscribed by the
name of Leven, but of late can hear of none that have seen such a man;
besides, there is a strong report he is dead: Therefore to remove all
scruples* I desire our Drummer, may deliver one Letter to himself; Thus
wishing you could think on some other course to compose the differences of
these sad distracted Kingdoms, than by battering Newcastle, and annoying us
who never wronged any of you, for if you seriously consider, you will find
that these courses will agravate, and not moderate distempers: But I will refer
all to your own consciences, and rest, Your friend. John Marlay. Newcastle 19.
October.

Now let the judicious Reader observe, how detestable a thing it was to see
this improvident man brought to such extremity, (that he could neither pity
himself nor yet a populous Town) when he was just upon the point of life or
death to write thus: for indeed long before night (for all his base derision)
he knew his Excellence to be alive, and found deservingly the smart of it: And
now not to forget any maine circumstance, the Mayor, the former night, recalled
the Soldiers from Sheeffield Fort, to strengthen the Defendants within Town;
but ere they left the fortress, they despightfully burned their two Courts du
guard to the ground, and so retired: Now the sequel day come, being Saturday,
October 19. (and that day which from age to age Newcastle should never forget)
there were certain commanded men, from every Regiment drawn up, The Officers,
I say, having first in their own quarters thrown the dyce, who should go in
the adventure (fewest blacks destinated thereto) they marched away to all their
several stands about the walls, again ten of the clock in the forenoone.
Meanewhile the night before was the Earl of Calendars Cannon carried about, to
supply and strengthen the four batteries that were to brash the walls, where
with the rest they did exceeding good service.

Now the Mines being ready to spring, and the batteries brought to their
greatest perfection, about three a clock in the afternoon, the two most
available Mines were sprung, one at the Whytefriers Tower Westward, and the
other, near Carres Fort, or Sandgate Eastward; (notwithstanding there were
other two sprung here, one of which miscarried) so also, I say, the breaches of
the walls by the batteries being made open and passable, and leddars set to at
diverse parts for scalleting: Then entered mainely and manfully all the
Regiments of our commanded men at all quarters, but more facily and less
dangerous where the Mines sprung: The greatest difficulty, and mightiest
opposition, nay, and the forest slaughter we received, was at the climbing up
of these steep and stay breaches, where truly, and too truly, the enemy did
more harm with hand garnads, then either with Musket, Pyke, or Herculean
clubs: This Club has a long iron-banded staff, with a round falling head
(like to a Pomegranate) and that is set with sharp iron pikes, to slay or
strike with; the forehead whereof being set with a long poynted pyke of iron;
it grimely looks like to the pale face of murder. The first of the four
breaches, was near to Weavers Tower, where Lieutenant Colonel Henderson a
Reformeir, and Major Mophet were killed, with many others of special and
common note. The second battery was conjoined with black Bessies Tower, where
Major Hepburne, Captain Corbet, Captain John Home an Edinburgensen, and that
renowned Officer Lieutenant Colonel Home were slain. The memory of whom last
now mentioned, I here in this Epitaph involue:

Woe to that breach, beside black Bessies Tower,
Woe to it self that bloody butchering Bower!
Where valiant Home, that stern Bellonaes blade,
And brave Commander fell: for there he stayed
Arraigned by death: Where now that heart of Mars
Deserves a Tomb, on it, a sable Hearse:
Yet here is the end of valor (fortunes thrall)
The most adventrous, nearest to his fall:
And so was he! though well might he have done,
For worth and valor, worn the Laurel crown:
But this crowns all, he dyed for Christ, and more,
Christ now shall crown him, with a crown of glore.
The third battery was contiguat with that dungeon of Westgate; where these
two Captains John, and Thomas Hammiltons were slain, with sundry other of
our Cliddisdale Regiment. The fourth and last was low by Clossegate, where the
Earl Buckcleughs and Lowdons Regiments entered, both at their batteries and
with scalleting leddars; whereupon their fell a fierce conflict and the falling
enemy repulsed, both with the courage and resolution of our soldiers: And yet
we received there but small loss either of Officers or others, albeit one had
been too many, the divyne pleasure and providence excepted.

Now our men being enterd, and fighting for enterye at all quarters round
about, Let me pause a while and consider! How grievous? And how dreadful hot,
that cruel conflict was for a long hours space: That truly it was more than
admirable! to behold the desperate courage both of the Assailants and
Defendants: The thundering Cannon roaring from our batteries without, and
theirs rebounding from the Castle within; the thousands of Musket balls flyeing
at others faces, Like to the droving haylestones from septentrion blasts; the
clangour and carving Of naked and unsheathed swords; the pushing of brangling
Pykes, crying for blood; and the pittyfull clamor, of heart-fainting women,
imploring for mercy to their husbands, themselves, and their children. That me
thought (when now seriously pondered) their reverberating echoes piercing the
clouds; that terrible noise of fyrie incensed Martialists, and that loathsome
inspection upon the brazen faces of desperation; had conjured (I say) the
Heavens to confound and dissolve the earth; the earth to overwhelme the
infernal Pit, the Carkases of men to lie like dead dogs upon the groaning
streets: and man against man to become the object of homicidious and barbarous
cruelty; O! loathsome sight of despair. Neither was this all, for our people
in this self time set a house on fire at Clossegate, whereon there fell a
meritorious destruction. So had the whole Town been served (and a small
revenge although it had been so) if it had not been speedily prevented by the
relenting pity of the Earl Calendar. So was there likewise at this present
combustion, a Ballenger Boat set floting on the flood, full of flaming fire,
(by Captain Andrew Abirnethie) to have burned the keye-lockt ships lay there.

Insomuch that there was no policy left undone, for the destroyer to destroy
destruction, nor for a speedy revenge, to bring the ruins of ruin to nothing:
Yet now returning to observe my methodicall order; in this most dreadful
conflict, when the commanded Brigade of that renowned Commander the Lord
Calendar, had breasted and overpassed, that blowneup Mine, connexed with Carres
fort (where Captain Sinclair and other two of lesser note lost their lives)
then I say, they marched celeriously along to the Sandhill, with flyeing
colors and roaring Drums: Mean while and at this instant, the Lieutennant
general Calendar entering the Town, dispatched and directed, the Lord
Levingston, and Killhead, the earl of Quensberryes brother, with their two
Regiments to possess the walls and to beat the enemy off, all along, betwixt
and their passages unto the next breaches northwestward, which was accordingly
done: So, and at this time, the aforesaid Brigade having attained to the
Sandhill, where rancountering the exasperate enemy with a bloody salutation,
the rest of our western and northern Brigads, pursuing hotely these shrinking
fugitives from the walls, to the choking Market place* where being distressed
(as it were) between Scylla and Charibdis, they presently called for
quarters, and laying down their Arms without assurance, some were taken, some
were shaken, some stood still, and some fled away to hyde their bleeding bodies
in some secret shelter, yea; some sat down by their fathers fire side, as
though they had carried no arms.

Upon this surrender (the Major being formerly fled to the Castle, with some
others of greater and lesser note) they caused quickly pull down the red flag
on the Castle tope, and set up the white flag of peace, signifying subjection.
This done, the earl Calendar, having formerly entered the Town; with great
expedition, gave presently order for quiescing of tumults, and managing
disorders, after a considerable way, returned that same night to the Gatesyde.
So, as he was the first lay down before the Town, so he was duly the first
that entered it; and that to the great comfort of the Inhabitants, because of
that unspeakable favor, and undeserved mercy, they then suddenly received, far
beyond their merit and our expectation.

Then begun the whole Army, commanded, and uncommanded* (observing King David's
ancient rule, that they who stayed with the Baggage, and they that fought in the
field, should share the booties alike) to plunder, I say, for twenty four
hours time, being an act, of permission, although to no great purpose. And
why? because the common soldiers being only able to plunder the common people
(although they might have justly stretched their hands further) had for the
greatest part of them but small benefit, excepting only household stuff, as
bed-cloaths, linnings, Tanned leather, calve skins, men and women's apparel,
pans, pots* and plates, and such like common things. But our prime Officers, I
say, and others of that nature, by infringing the common soldiers, infringd
themselves, and spoiled both their fortunes: for they investing themselves in
the richest Malignants and papisted houses, by way of safeguard, had but small
compositions for all their protection, and compelled Centries; where otherwise
they might have justly and lawfully seized upon all their enjoyments: But this
ancient Proverb holds good here, That Scottishmen are aye wise behind the
hand, and so were they: And as they abused their Victory in storming the
Town, with too much undeserved mercy, so they as unwisely and imprudently
overreached themselves in plundering the town, with an ignorant negligence,
and careless ommission. And as they thus defrauded themselves, with a whistle
in their mouths, so they pitifully prejudged, by this their inveigled course,
the common soldiers of their just due, and dear bought advantages.

For by your leave, if a soldiers industry be not quickened and animated with
bountiful rewards, he has less will to perform any part of martial
service, than a dead coarse has power to arise out of the grave: For what can
be more precious to man, than his blood? being the fountain and nurse of his
vital spirits, and the ground of his bodily substance, which no free nor
ingenious nature will loose for nothing. And whosoever shall argument or
discourse upon sound reason, and infallible experience, may easily* prove and
perceive, that these Commanders have ever best prospered, which have most
liberally maintained and had in singular regard military Arts and Soldiers.
Otherwise the honorable mind would account it a great deal better to have
death without life, than life without reward: Yea, and the noble Commander,
desiring rather to want, than to suffer true worth unrecompensed.

I could instance here many examples of ingratitude in great persons, that by
their too much wretchedness to Soldiers, have first lost themselves, and then
their Kingdoms, and Principalities; but I desist, only lamenting what I saw
here, the recitation of which ( amoris patriae) I forbear to touch. And as the
Spaniard says well, Nella bocca serrada non ci entra las muscas; that is, When
the mouth is shut, the flees cannot enter in the throat; so says the Italian
to this same purpose, Assaisa, che nosa, chi sia, he knows enough that can
misknow, the thing he knows: And the Poetic Proverb is thus,

Dic pauca, multa vide, disce quam plurima pati,
Nam multum juvant, h^c triasaepe viros.
Speak little, see much, learn to suffer more,
For these three often, help men, the world all over.
And now closing these comparisons, I proceed to my methodicall discourse. As
for the number of our soldiers, that were lost at the storming of this
obstinate and unhappie Town (not reckoning the fatalitie of other times) they
extended to three hundred lacking one, of whom there were thirty eight
Officers of six distinctive kinds, besides seven or eight hundred, that were
diverse ways ill hurt, of which wounds, some have lately dyed since that time*
And now I recall, that these three sieges of Breda, York, and now Newcastle,
were all of one diet, though not at one time, and did each of them so nearly
sympathize one with another, in the computation of ten weeks and odd days,
that they may all three rest now contented, to live under the substant shadow
of an honest and honorable subjection. Yet when I consider here the malicious
obstinacy of Newcastle, and thereupon the storming of it, I am ravished with
admiration to behold, how in the heat of blood, and goaring slaughter, they got
so soon mercy and quarters; that me thinks there was not the like mercy
shown in such a case, since the deluge of the World. Nay, and (alas) shown
unto an impenitent and pernicious people: When contrariwise, the lives and
goods of man, wife and child, within that refractarie Town, (for their railing
^^d blasphemy daily abounded) were in the power and pleasure of our
victorious Army. The which favor I dare avouch, may be a pattern to all
succeeding ages enduring time, for pity, pardon, and piety.

And to instance here the contrary example, you shall see, and that within
these twenty years past, how the populous and once famous City of Madenburg in
Germany, (being all Protestants) was beleagured with the imperial forces.
Whereafter diverse parleyes, and subtle drifts, the enemy on a sudden stormed
the Town, where forthwith they slew eleven thousands, of men, women, and
children: and the next morning, their divelish despite, growing weary of that
murdering slaughter, unnaturally, and unmercifully, threw headlong eighteen
thousands of them in the River: So that none escaped in the whole City of young
or old, save only four hundred that fled into a Church. And striping these
stark naked, sent them away, and plundering all the goods of the Town, at
last razed it to the ground,

By which cruelty this famous Universitie, as it was first sacked, and then
burned with fire, so the people were both slain with the sword, and drowned
with the watter; O pitiful destruction. And that river which formerly had
brought them profit and pleasure, was then suddenly become their death and
sepulture.

This fragrant flood! that wont to serve and please,
Their trade with gain, their pains with pleasant ease;
Yea; filld their hearts with pleasure, beauteous strayes,
To see a River, passing free always.
The banks along adornd, with stately trees
That daily paid, kind tribute to their eyes;
Where flourie Meeds, round hills, salubrious fields,
Enclosd this closure, and their Custom yields
With swelling brooks to help it. This rare Piece!
Became more sweet, than Tempian streams in Greece;
And gracd their Schools and science, lib'rall Arts,
Where learning floorishd, Virtue light imparts.
Yet fatal Elue, was now thy glutting womb
That fed their lust with fish, become their Tomb,
And swallowing grave? Art thou sad dismal bounds
That plunging sepulcher; ingulfd with wounds
Hatchd from thine Euripus; gaynst Natures tract
As death had summond thee, to do this fact.
No, no, I grant (this loss) their detriment,
Sprung not from thee, dumb sensles element;
But from these cruel hands, that straind thy strength
To murder natures glory, Where at lenth
They sunk within thy bosom; then! thou roard
And all thy brinks about, their fall deplord;
And sought the Heavens, as Judges to revenge
This Parracide, and that slain Cities change.
Now miserable Newcastle! what can thou say? that was not dealt at all with
such tyranicall cruelty, when thou had deserved a worser destruction than
they, who stood out only for Religion, you having little or none at all. Then
what shall I say, but that your desolation may come yet on a sudden, unless
you a mend your wicked lives, and with Ninivie turn to the Lord with prayer
and fasting. Ever acknowledging the great goodness and clemencye of Scots-men,
so undeservingly exposed upon you a headstrong and sedicious people. Yet
notwithstanding whereof, thy sides are shaken and torn, thine edges broken
down, and the burden of thy misery, lying sore upon thy shrinking shoulders.
Which makes me now call to mind, the miserable effects of war (howsoever
deservinglie fallen upon thee) the nature of which, I here involve in these
lines.

O woeful war! that lessens wealth and strength,
And brings the ruins of ruin at lenth:
It does dishonor honor, and degrade
The mightieman from what his greatness had:
Then quells the poor, and spoils the pleasant lands
Where peace and pleasure, joynd with other hands:
Which weight let Tyrus, sometimes stately plumd,
With Troy and Thebes, both alike consumd:
Swelld Ninivie, whose fragments naught imparts,
And learned Athens, once the source of Arts:
With sightlesse Carthage, Lacedemon rent,
Jebus, and Bagdat, in a manner shent;
Sardis, Syracuse, Adrianople lost!
Nay? now stressd Almaine, with such sorrows crossed;
(And Britanes I Will, the Irish bounds, and Spain
Where thousands fall, and many thousands slain:)
Denote and show, what time and wars have wrought
That crushd their might, from flattring pride to naught:
Nay; Monarchies, great Kingdoms, the Universe
Are pressed to change, erectd, thrown down by Mars:
Like to the rage of the impetuous flood,
Debording from his banks; leaves slyme and mood
To choke the fertile playnes; supplants the roots,
Of herbs and Trees; defaceth quyte the fruits
Of grapes and grayn; and often breaks the walls
Of strongest Towns, whereon destruction falls.
Even so the furye, of the bloody war
In breaking down the bonds of peace: debar,
The links of love and alliance: quite defaceth
The liberty of Nature; and disgraceth:
The ornaments of time; And cuts the throat,
Of martial Darlings; then casts up the lot
Of desolation; which destroys all
That can to mean* or mighty men befall:
So, so, Newcastle, to it self became,
A treachrous foe, when friends besiegd the same.
And I may not forget here, how a despightfull jest, was suddenly revolved in
sad earnest, that even when, the Town was a storming, there was a child
baptized, and a number of thirty persons at the baptism feast; I mean in
Newcastle: And making merry with the best cheer they had, they begun to
drink a health about the Table; and that was, to the confusion of the Scots
rebels, and knew of no danger, till a dosson of our soldiers came in upon
them (to digest their confused health) with drawn swords and Pistolls. At
which, the railing and jeering Tablers, falling down beneath the board (as it
were) distracted of their wits: our adventurers fell a plundering their
pockets, leaving the greatest part of them stripped of their apparel, and the
house utterlie spoiled of domestic furniture, and with this salve, they
solmnized their frolic feast: Being (I say) a just reward, for such a
malicious misregard.

Now the Town being ours, upon Sunday morning, October. 20. 1644. his ever
happy and anspicuous excellence, entered the Town, a triumphant Victor, and
repairing to S. Nicholas Church accompanied with the Earl of Calendar,
Lieutennant general Baillie, and the general of Artillery, with a few others
(for it was not a day for men of fortune to dalleye with time) there was
thanks given to God (by that reverend Pastor Master Robert Douglas) for that
our famous, and renowned Victory. And now to seal up all, the clouds fell
impetuously a weeping three days together, for that great fatalitye (as I may
say) of so many brave Cavaliers as we lost. And with this same deluge, the two
Keill bridges, above, and below, were broke down, and dissenabled for passage,
with the violent rapt of Tynes debording stream: But happy it was that the
greatest part of our army got then shelterage within the Town, otherwise they
had found by this dissoluing rain sommersed quarters.

Upon the fourth day after the town was stormed, there issued from the Castle,
three score twelve Officers, Ingeniers, and prime Soldiers, under the custody
of our Perforce; and were incarcerat within the Town, as many of their kind
were served so before. The Mayor, and some of our noble Countrymen, were also
then dismissed from the Castle, but not enlarged, and the day following (being
Wednesday) the Mayor was returned from his house, unto a Dungeon trance within
the Castle: Where now that presumptuous Governor remains, till the Hangman
salute his neck with a blow of Straffords courtesy; where now I leave him till
he enjoy his merit.

As for the number of the enemy, either soldiers or Townsmen, that carried
arms during the siege, indeed it is no part of my intention to meddle with
them, although they meddled too much with us, neither with their hungry
Troupers, and far worse their hungered Horses. Yet nevertheless (as I was
informed) they were but eight hundred of the Traind Band, and some nine hundred
besides, of Volunteers, prest-men, Coliers, Keill-men, and poor tradesmen;
with some few experimented Officers to overtop them, which were at last
overtopped themselves.

And now meanewhile we found great penury and scarcity of victuals,
ammunition, and other necessaries within this dejected Town; so that they could
not have holden out ten days longer, unless the one half had devoured the
other. And now the encroaching Winter, commanding expedition, our Army was
sent to their Garrisons abroad (reserving only a proper Garrison for
Newcastle) some to Darnton, Haulkland, Durham, Chester, Morpet, Exome, and
other near adjacent places. Yet nevertheless the plague was raging in
Gatesyde, Sandgate, Sunderland, and many country Villages about. Upon the
eight day after the taking in of Newcastle, the Lord General rode down to
Tinmouth Castle; where after a short parley, young Sir Thomas Riddell Governor
thereof, surrendered it upon easy conditions. The occasion why? was thus, the
Pestilence having been five weeks amongst them with a great mortality, they
were glad to yield, and to scatter themselves abroad; but to the great undoing
and infecting of the Country about, as it has contagiously begun.

And now before I draw to Finis. I must water my muse a little in the Poeneian
springs, and gargarizing her throat with Newcastle, I will bath her old
inventions in Permessis stream, fixed under that Heliconean forked hill; where
Soron breasting Parnassus, saluteth with the pleasures of Pindus, all aged
Poets, as I am now in my Climaterick year.

Now in this Treatise, thou have seen the Map
Of revolution, and that sudden clappe
Of ever changing Time, and how the fates
And sterne-facd destiny, ramverse the Mates
Of stubbornnes and pride: and how the wind,
Bre^ks down the talest Cedar, that we find
On Libans flowrie banks; and how the Oak
Though fensd with boughs, must yield unto the stroke
Of a septentrion blast; Heavens Constellations
Concurrd in one, to judge these execrations
Flew forth from steep-bankd Tyne; what filthy railing,
Brust from her gutts? even when we were assailing
Her girded sides with walls: That even methought,
Stern Radamanthus, had their forgings wrought:
Then in came Judgment, in this cracking thunder
And faced with terror, did produce a wonder,
That vomits spyte and blood: Next headlong comes
(Backd with shrill Trumpets, and loud roaring Drums,)
Base stinking pride quite stripped: where being naked
The shryne of fortune blushd, and blindness quaked.
But now to wheel about! behold, and see,
The divyne Justice, with an awful eye
Declaring sentence, punishment, and yoke,
To thrall their necks, with a correcting stroke.
How long did pity knock, at their shut gate?
And offered mercy, to their desprat state
Yet would they not receave't; nor could they pity
Themselves, brought under, a judicial dittie:
But sufferd death to stand, where justice stood
And they Delinquents, to a general good:
Yet in came Mercy, from their friendly foes
And pleaded for their pardon: Mercy goes
Along with us to them: which, when they see,
They grew ashamd, to find such clemency.
For what sought we, but their desired good?
And to prevent, the effusion of blood
Proposd them courteous proffers, all to won,
Their Hearts and Souls, to seek salvation:
And to profess that word (Religions Lamp)
Where light and Truth, have both one heavenly stamp:
Yet this they would not, and as hardly will,
Consent, unforcd, to leave their froward ill:
Now vanquishd they, and from their duty swervd
May swear, our Scots, show mercy undeservd
To hardened hearts like flint: and what rests more,
But practice must the fall of pride deplore
Which cankerd Natures keeps: But they are so blinded,
As if disdain, had all their malice winded
With stiffnesse and contempt: yet for their words
Sometimes they are fair, and sometimes sharp like swords:
But what is that, we have them under feet,
And needs not weigh their breath, be it sour or sweet.
For where the victors rule, the vanquished stand,
Like Bajazet, to Tamberlanes strong hand,
And freedom thrald, by just disdain, then pride
Stoupes like a slave, the sword must things decyde.
Yet mercy keeps some measure, curbing reason,
With generous lenity, actd out of season.
Yea, sometimes its more honest, for to save,
Than to expide, the vanquished to the grave:
What though they bark like to Hircanian Dogs,
Or bleeting stand, like winter-beaten Hogs.
Yet there is compunction, and revenge to use
(Accordingly) as times may time excuse:
And sealing mercy, with a sworded hand,
Makes foes, more loath to fly, than forcd to stand.
And now to close the summary of this tragical discourse, I heartily beseech
Almighty God, to preserve and prosper our Army; and to be their guard, guide,
and Governor, whithersoever they go, and to imprint the fear of his holy Name
in their hearts. And now most good and gracious Lord, bless so and sanctify
the hearts of their chief Commanders and Leaders, with wisdom, courage, and
magnanimity of mind; that they never decline, neither to the right nor to the
left hand; but keeping a straight course, in Honor, honesty, and holiness;
they may ever in all their proceedings, have the glory of thy great and
glorious Name before their eyes, that the life and light of Peace and Truth may
in all true believers abound. Amen.

FINIS.

