THE KINGDOMS DIVISIONS ANATOMJZED, Together with a VINDICATION OF THE ARMIES
PROCEEDINGS.

By Franciscus Leinsula.

Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it.

Amos. 3.6. Hear O our God, for we are despised, and turn their Reproach upon
their own head: They which builded on the wall, and they that hear burdens;
every one, with one of his hands wrought in the work, And with the other hand
held a weapon; for the builders every one, had his sword guirded by his side,
etc.

Nehe. 4.4.17.18. LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, for Hannah Allen, at the
Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1649.

To the Right Honorable, John Bradshaw, Lord President of the High Court of
Justice.
My Lord,
HAving heard an Honorable Report of you, bearing an Honorable Respect to
you, And decerning your readiness to embrace and accept, and not slight; or much
less despise the day of small things, Zach. 4.10. has moved me though
unworthy to assume the boldness to present your Honor with these few and rude
lines; especially, considering your Honors readiness, with others of Gods
Worthies in Parliament, Army, and high Court of Justice, to prosecute Gods
work; And that with a spirit of freedom and courage, notwithstanding the
multitude of Renums and Shinishais, Tatnais, and Shether-boznais, Sanballats,
and Tobiahs, with their Companions, who face in opposition, Ezra 4.9. 5.3. Neh.
4.1.3. and truly, my Lord, but face; for I really believe, if of themselves,
they make not an honorable Retreat, they will first or last be driven back
with shame and disgrace; Let the haters of the Lord fly before him, And let
the Angels of the Lord pursue and chase them. Let the enemies of God and his
people perish: But let Christ and his Saints live and Reign for ever, which is
the desires of him, who my Lord, desires your happiness and preservation with
the rest of his Saints, and desires to be

Your Honors much obliged And most Humble Servant F. L.

THE KINGDOMS DIVISIONS ANATOMYZED.
IN Admiring, I cannot but Admire, at the divine Providence of the Almighty,
which has caused such strange and wonderful Mutations and Alterations in this
afflicted State and Kingdom; but surely, it is his good pleasure hereby, to
declare his Works, his strange Works; and bring to pass his Acts. That so his
glorious footsteps might appear, both in ways of judgment and mercy to his
People. Psalm. 101.1 and 65.5.

SIR, In the Spring of the year, considering of the strange and violent
Commotions and Insurrections that were in the North and South, in the East and
Western parts of this Kingdom; I conceived, that a deluge of misery would
attend the Saints; apprehending that the Powers of Earth and Hell, would
certainly be mustered up against them; But the Lord of Hosts has appeared for
us, and the God of Armies has been our refuge, Selah. And blessed for ever be
Jehovah, who has broken in pieces the horn of their strength; for wherein his
enemies have dealt proudly, himself has been above them; It is he that
subdues the enemies of his people, and overturneth the Horse and his Rider: And
reproves Princes, (And why not Parliaments, if need be, or evil Members
therein) for the sakes of his Saints. I remember, though diverse years since, An
expression of that exceeding Learned, Reverend, Holy, and Faithful Teacher,
Mr. John Cotton of Boston, in New England, which was to this effect, viz. That
God would pour his wrath upon the Court of England. As also, That Seats of
Judicature would not throw down Babylon. And I believe, much less would they
alone exalt Christ, and his Churches. But it must be done with violence, Revel.
18.21. And this day is his saying, and this Scripture fulfilled in our ears:
It is Prophesied concerning Christ in his conquest, That he shall stricke
through Kings, in the day of his wrath. And I believe it is not Englands
Sovereign, whose Head shall alone be taken off and wounded; but the Heads of
many Countries, Psalm. 110.5.6. And truly, this honor have all the Saints, To
bind their Kings in chains, and their Noblos in fetters of Iron. And not only
to pass Sentence, but to execute upon them the Judgment written, Psalm. 149.
from the 6. verse. to the last. And though, through the power and grace of the
most High, These Scriptures have had their accomplishments in precedent Ages,
yet in our days more eminently; and doubtless will more and more in
succeeding generations.

The great Question at present amongst Gods People, is, whether the Prophecy
concerning the slaying of the Witnesses be already fully accomplished,
according to the 11. of the Revel. 7.8,9, and 10. or whether it remain still
to be fulfilled; which, I confess, is at present dubious; though, I believe, a
few years more, will put it out of doubt; and yet it looks, at present, as if
it were the time of the Saints prevailing, and so of the Churches deliverance,
according to the 11. v. of the same Chapter; its true, for this three or four
years last past, I found that all sorts of men, had, as it were, prepared
Appetites to swallow up the Saints. And, doubtless, had their power been
according to their spirit, they would certainly have devoured, and eaten them
up like bread; But now there is an appearance, as if a Spirit of life from God
were entered into men. And great fear fallen upon them that see it, and a great
Earthquake in our civil State, and earthly Powers; as also in the hearts of
earthly men; and equivalent to the words of the Text. There seems to be a
tenth, if not ten parts of this great City fallen, I mean, in their spirits;
how many shall be slain, the Lord only knows; doubtless, there is a remnant
affrighted, and I wish they would give glory to God.

Again, I find this to be very true, that the Nations, and people, both
Popish, and Presbyterian, are exceeding angry, they fume, foame, and snuff for
anger. Some fretting their hearts, and gnawing their tongues, for pain, and as
if Hell were let loose, blaspheming the God of Heaven, being scorched with
great heat, and filled with pains and sores, but repent not of their deeds.
Revel. 11.18. the 16.10. and 11.

Moreover, I find the spirits of the best Saints much refreshed, and as it
were, in some measure, through grace prepared, to sing Halleiujah, saying,
Blessed be the Name of our God, for the Kingdoms of this world, are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; the which I cordially desire, though
my blood, with others, should be sacrificed for it.

Sir, Taking a view of this perplexed and afflictted Kingdom, I find in it as
it were a threefold division, or three kinds of men passing under a threefold
denomination, viz. Independent, Presbyterian, Malignant. Though I doubt not but
in Gods due time the purer sort of Presbyterians will turn Independent, as the
rotten and corrupt, if they durst would turn Malignant, And indeed, I have as
much hope, if not more, of diverse Malignants then of them.

The first are Independants so called; the which if I mistake not, is a word of
derision cast upon the purest sort of professors in the Kingdom. A people
though small and despised; yet sundry of them through grace highly and divinely
principled, acting to high and divine ends, fighting under Christ's Banner, and
maugre men and Devils; do zealously and eminently appear for Christ and his
Church: amongst whom I humbly conceive it were but requisite to distinguish,
viz. betwixt such as are truly godly, and tenderly conscientious; though
differing from other godly and sound men, in such opinions as do neither
prejudice faith nor a sanctified course, and betwixt such as are grossly
opinionated, whose opinions do necessarily lead them into gross practices; who
according to the apprehensions of sundry learned and godly men, are by no
means to be tolerated, as having in them too much of the seed of the Serpent,
and a serpentine desgine, to undermine and overturn both the faith of a
Christian, and the foundation of true constituted Churches.

The second are Presbyterians, so nominated, many of whom I easily believe to
be very precious in Gods sight, and such whom I dare not but both love and
honor, howbeit I much fear there be too many which pass under this
denomination, who are too much inclined to malignancy or a connivance at it, as
appears by their extreme unseemly, and unchristianly expressions. Some saying,
they had rather be slaves under the Turks; others, they had rather the King,
with his Army had prevailed, choosing rather to be under the power of Popery and
Prelacy, then Independency, as they call it: as if they should say, they had
rather be under the power of the Devil and Antichrist, then under the power of
Christ and his Saints; These, and the like, have my self heard expressed, and
that by some who are deemed godly. Besides the extreme uncivil, and not to be
expressed Language: they breath forth against his Excellency the Lord Genesis
Fairfax, Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, Commissary Genesis Ireton, with others of the
gallant and godly Commanders of the Army amongst the dogs, of whose flocks
they are scarcely to be accounted. Now these things, under favor, to me argue
high Malignancy; and such things, which I dare say, some Malignants, through
their Morality and Civility, would abhor to express. Yet set me modestly
express my self concerning these men; I conceive them to be such, as desire
some a kind of Government also; though they choose not their Magistrates to be
of the purest, nor their Government the strictest; and therefore they stand at
large for a King and Parliament.

But before I pass this kind, let me crave liberty to insert a few words
concerning them; I should, under favor, conceive it but meet, That these men
should be as little tolerated, as gross Opinionists. Sir, my conscience
bears me witness, that I intend not in the least, any godly and innocent man,
though a Presbyterian; and I believe, which I hope, without offense, I may
speak; viz. That neither your self, the Army, High Court of Justice, or
Parliament; would, or durst touch any of Gods Anointed in this kind; or lay
the least of your fingers upon the least of the Saints as Saints.

Nevertheless, if any Presbyterian, or other, though possibly, otherwise
godly; whether any Member impeached, or such as have preached; together with
others amongst them, who in their Prayers, preaings, Printings, Practices,
private Discourses, and consultations, shall behave themselves, more like
railing Rabshachas, cursing Shemeis, schoffing Ishmaels, then sweet and meek
Christians. I humbly conceive in this case, they may be looked at, as
obstructors and interruptors of the Kingdoms peace, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; and may so be proceeded against, notwithstanding their
Devotion and Profession. The devout Jews persecuted and stirred up the
Raskallity of the people against Paul, as some now would gladly do against
Peeters, setting all the City upon an uproare, Acts 17.5. And it is very well
known, the Scribes and Pharisees, notwithstanding their devotion and
professions, were Christ's and his Disciples chiefest and greatest enemies.

There was a Book lately Printed, subscribed as I remember with about 47.
Presbyterians hands; I seeing a godly and discret Gentleman reading therein,
desired to know how he approved of it? He answered, it was a Bull. Now I well
remember, that many years since I had heard of a popish Bull, but to live to
see a Presbyterian Bull, it could not but seem exceeding strange to me, as
being such a Beast as I think the world it self never heard of until now; And
truly to me, it administers matter of sadness and lamentation, that learned and
godly Presbyterians, should act the parts of ungodly and popish Prelates.

Object. 1. But they say, in so doing they discharge their consciences, and
think they do God and their Countrymen good service.

Answ. So did Paul, whilst being Saul was little better then stark staring
mad, in persecuting the Saints; and yet did nothing but what in conscience, he
then verily thought he ought to have done. Acts 26.9.10.11. And I cordially
wish, they would be pleased seriously to consider of it; for truly it seems to
me, as if there were a vial of contempt from heaven powered upon the spirit,
that too frequently breaths from these men, though themselves may otherwise in
the root, be sincere and godly.

Alas their very Religion, I mean, of the Presbyterianisme, being a poor
Scottish and humane institution, received but a humane grant for about three
years; never prospered from the first and I doubt not, but it will be blasted
at the last, and no marvel; for it is to be feared their Alpha and Omega, was
not Jehovah, but themselves; and that which had not its rise and foundation,
before all time, must needs in time perish.

But take a true constituted Presbyter, and the God of all grace forbid, that
either my self, or any Professing the fear of God, should have the least rising
of heart against it.

I could with all my heart desire that all the true Congregational Churches,
both in City and Kingdom were not so defective in this respect; but that they
were more and more studious and diligent, to obtain and establish a full and
complete Presbytery, in all their several Churches; that so all the
Ordinances of Christ, might be dispensed with more Majesty and authority, and
the members of Christ that come from forragn parts the more refreshed, whilst
they behold the Churches of the Saints walking in the complete Order of the
Gospel.

Object. 2. But further, some say, that the Army, and I believe they mean this
Parliament also be none of their parents, nor themselves their children?

Answ. Then both Parliament and Army has less to care for, and if they were
not the more merciful should cast them out, both of their provision and
protection; and proceed against them as Rebels. The God of Israel respects,
neither accepts any man: as he is Scotch or English; but in his son, as he is
a man fearing God, and working righteousness. Acts 10.34.35. Nor does he reject
any man, because he is Spanish, Portugal, Grecian or Ethiopian, but as he is an
enemy to the life of God and goodness. Romans 2.8. Now if English men be such as
their speech bewrays them, and agrees thereto, why then the fathers and
Judges of Israel and England, are to be like God.

But what if it appear, that those that are denied, be proved to be the parents
of the Kingdom, and they their children, as I believe it will; For first, it
has been often prayed for, many times fought for, and twice procured by
conquest; and blessed be God for such parents. And plain it is, though diverse
Presbyterians will not acknowledge it, that it has pleased God, to be-trust
the sole power of the Kingdom in their hands; and in whose hands, of such
gracious spirits, I desire it might for ever be preserved; And if these
children will not be warned, then may the parents, both by the Law of God and
nature, give them severe chastisement and correction.

Object. 3. But say they, the Army have broken down the hedge, taken away godly
Magistrates and left only such men, as are of their own minds and opinions?

Answ. I answer, they have not broaken down the hedge, but plucked up the
crooked and rotten stakes that so the hedge might stand more even and firm.

And if it should be granted, that some of the impeached members were godly,
yet were they not impeached for their godlynes in the least; but wherein they
were both ungodly and unrighteous. It Is true, Magistrates are called Gods,
being ordained of God to act according to God; And in so doing, are to be
honored and obeyed of all men. Romans 13. from tee 1. to the 6. the 1 Pet. 13
and 14. But wherein they act like devils, they cease to be Gods, and therein
are not to be regarded.

And wherein they say, the Army have only passed by such (...) of their own
opinions, is as gross a mistake as the other; For there are as sound and godly
remaining in the house, and that Presbyterians also if not far better then
any that were impeached; Nor did they in the least intend, either Presbyterian
or Independent, as such; but as they were men acting against the glory of God,
and the good of the Kingdom; wherein it plainly appears, the Presbyterian
party were most to blame, being like the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin,
mentioned in the 4 of Ezra. the 15. who in pretending to build, intended to
undermine the very foundation.

Object. 4. But say they again, The Army acted out of their Sphere?

Answ. I answer, that also is a mistake. Their Commissions run full to subdue
the Common enemy; and if I may speak it without offense, in case the whole
Parliament had proved such: as blessed be God they have not, and I hope never
will; but if they had, why a Parliament should be suffered to ruin a Kingdom
more then a Prince, I know no reason at all, especially when God has given a
Kingdom, power to prevent it.

Moreover, this Army has not only been barely permitted, but in an especial
manner blessed by God; And whatsoever men's ends were in raising of them,
doubtless Gods ends were, as to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant and
subdue his enemies: so to redeem his own glory, and his peoples liberties, and
privileges, out of the hands of their oppressors. And that's the work that this
Parliament and Army are to attend, maugre men and devils in the prosecution
thereof.

Object. 5. But they again say, that this Army uses violence, but violence and
the sword will never rule this Kingdom?

Answ. I answer, when God comes to overturn Babylon, and to turn Nations
topsie turvie, and upside down; then violence is used, not only by Gods bare
permission; but by his special ordination and institution. Rev. 18.21. And how
these great works of God should be done without violence, no man can imagine.

And as for the sword, it has been of ancient and singular use, both in
Civills and Spiritualls, and that amongst the best of Saints, witness Abraham,
Genesis 14.14.15.16. and Nehemiah, Neh. the 4. from the 13. to the end. And the
truth is, there is an absolute necessity of a sword; for Nations would never
yet be ruled without it: And there are two swords especially which has
governed the world, viz. The sword of Satan and Antichrist: and the sword of
Christ and his Saints. Now under the power of the first sword the nations have
lain a long time; But under the power of the second the Nations cannot endure,
though they must neither will nor choose* Rev. 11.7. the 12.7. the 17.14. the
19. from the 13. to the end. Christ now has put the sword into the hands of
his Saints, and there he will preserve and maintain it, till it be sheathed in
the bowels of Antichrist; I mean the harlot of Rome, that Beast together with
the false prophet the Pope, Rev. 19.20. And after him the Turk also. And if it
should so fall out, that another storm should fall upon Gods people, which the
Lord prevent; yet these clouds would suddenly be dispersed, and then the sword
will certainly rest in the hands of Christ and his Saints, until all their
enemies be subdued; And to this sword the Nations, will they, nill they, must
both buckle and bow.

The Lord Jesus will rule till his enemies be made his footstool, and for the
Saints, let them rejoice in him that made them; Let the children of Sion be
joyful in their King. Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a
two edged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen: and
punishments upon the people. To bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles
with fetters of Iron. To execute upon them the judgment written, Psa. 149. This
honor have all his Saints. And the sword of the Saints, is put together with
the sword of the Lord; as the wars of the Saints is called the Lords wars.
Number. 21.14.

Object. 6. The Army did well whilst they opposed Lions, Tigers, Wolves, etc.
but now they strike, and catch at sheep also?

Answ. It Is true, they did before oppose Wolves; but they do not now strike at
sheep: but at Wolves in Sheeps clothing; a black Devil is more ugley to look
upon, but a white Devil is as destructive; when Satan transformed himself into
an Angel of light he prejudiced the soul as much as as if he appeared in his
own colors. Luke 16.27. to the end.

Object. 7. There are a godly and wise people both in new England, and sometimes
come hither; but they approve not of these proceedings but are enemies
thereunto?

Answ. I answer, the first part is true, but not the latter, It Is true there is
here and there a Raven come over, who finding garbish here to feed upon, though
they have been thither called have not returned; and it may well be, that those
have rather strengthened the hands of profane Malignants and formal
Presbyterians, then of the people of God; But blessed be God there have been
sundry Doves come over, some of whom have returned with Olive branches in their
mouths: And others remaining in Parliament, Army, City, and else where; who
have Dove like behaved themselves, and have been of special use since hither
they came, viz. Sir Henry Vain, Mr. Phoenix, Col. Humphrey, Mr. Wi^, Mr.
Peter's, Mr. Richard Huchinson, Janice. etc. Whom I hope will excuse me for
mentioning of them; And I doubt not, but by Gods grace and assistance, will
prove blessings to the Kingdom whiles here they remain.

And as for New England it self, though too many Legalists amongst them, yet to
my knowledge there are diverse, who blessed be God are exceeding wise and
spiritual; and some of these diverse years since, have often prophesied of
these times, frequently and fervently prayed for them, and I doubt not but will
bless God also when they hear of the succesfull victories God has given to
his people; all which plainly argues their harmony and congruity, and not their
disapprovement and enmity.

Nor will I affirm least I should mistake, what I have heard that eminently
learned and pious teacher Mr. John Cotton express; But this I remember, though
diverse years since, that as he said God would bring a sword upon England, and
certainly power his wrath upon the Court of England, which things are eminently
come to pass: So he likewise has prophesied of a sword that would fall upon
Scotland, I pray God the ministers of that Kingdom would be no cause of it; And
though I judge not Mr. Cotton to be infallable, yet in my observation things
have generally succeeded according to the Counsel of God declared by him. And
its much desired, did the honorable Parliament see it so good, he might be
sent for, it would be looked at, both by Presbyterian and Independent, as an
extraordinary advantage and blessing to the Kingdom. But what if all
New England wanted light, to see into the equity and necessity of their
proceedings, does that upon necessity argue the illegality thereof? they are
not only to walk up to the light of New England, (though that light does as
far exceed the Presbyterian light in Scotland, as theirs does the Popish) but
to the light of the new Jerusalem, which is according to the word of God, and
the first Article of the Covenant.

Object. 8. The great and grand objection is, That this Parliament and Army, is
for a Tolleration and Liberty of Conscience, and that will undo all.

Answ. I answer, first by the way, there be three things which sundry eminent
Christians, could never to this day well digest, viz. First, that reproachful
word Independent, cast upon the purest Saints, The truth is they are dependant,
depending upon the Lord Jesus for all their Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, and
Institutions. And whilst they walk according to God therein, they are a
Non-such in the world; and the Scotch enemies, or any other in this case, had
better eat fire (...)

The Second is the Covenant, which was ever feared, would proves share to the
Saints and Kingdom.

The third is a tolleration, and Liberty of Conscience, which I (...), because
of their affinity.

Now for to desire a Tolleration of any thing that is corrupt, whether in
opinion, or practice: seems under favor, to be but a corrupt desire; And to
desire a Tolleration of the Truth, or of Gods pure Worship* seems to reflect
dishonor upon Christ; For the Truth should be practiced, and God purely
worshipped, in despite of all gainsayers and opposers, whether men or Devils.
I hope I need not desire my boldness to be excused, it is for Christ.

And as for Liberty of Conscience, the term it self seems not to be according
to the pattern of wholesome words; but if it may pass, then may it admit of a
double construction. viz.

First, Liberty of Conscience to sin, which implies rather a captivity then
Liberty, for men to profess and practice what they list. If this be desired,
and granted: it is that which God, and all that are born of him, abhort, and
this indeed would undo all. But their is a Liberty of Conscience in pure
worshipping of God, and keeping close to his Laws and Truth; and the more
strictly the conscience is bound in this case, the more by far is it is liberty
and inlargment, James 1.25. And this is the Liberty that I hope, and am
confident the Parliament and diverse of the Army stands for, that so the godly
and unimbittered Presbyterian, with the sincere and sound hearted Independent,
might purely Worship and w^ with their God, without persecution or molestation;
and this Liberty will not undo and destroy, but restore and preserve all. Ah
when will these days be! Hasten the time O God, wherein the holy people of God
howsoever called or distinguished, may unanimously meet together, sweetly and
harmoniously to embrace each other.

Object. 9. Their be sundry other Objections which scarce deserve the
mentioning, viz. That the Army has many wicked men, sundry Jesuits, and (...)
their astions aim at themselves?

Answ. That there are too many wicked men in the Army I fear is too true, and
were it possible, I could wish there were none; but that the^ is said to be so
many Jesuits, I believe it not; but if both be true, it does no more argue the
Armies dishonesty and illegallity, then the being of stone in a Christian man's
heart, argues his non-sincerity; and are as (...) tolerated by the godly Pa^y
in the Army; as Drunkards and Adulterers are in Presbyterian Congregations; and
as for their aiming at themselves in their Actions, I Answer, First, their
Actions face toward a general good, and we are not to become Judgers of evil
thoughts; nor to receive evil Jealousies where there is contrary appearances;
but it rather argues too much self, and iniquity in our selves, that we would
not have these who are Instruments of a common and general good, so much as to
have any share therein, who indeed deserve the best; and whose particular good,
must upon necessity be involved in the general.

Now then, I do by no means believe its lawful to raise a new War; or rise
in Rebellion against this Parliament and Army, Though some Presbyterians
Prayers, Preachings, Printings, practices, tend thereto.

Answ. The sword has already divided betwixt the Independent and Malignant,
and if I know my heart could freely sacrifice my life, it might proceed no
further: But if it must likewise divide betwixt the Presbyterian and
Independent, the good will of God be done. As I have but one life, had I ten
times ten thousand, and as many souls, by the help of Christ I should freely
adventure them all in the Cause; as being confident the Independent in his
Cause, will first or last prevail, (and never fall more;) for I find in the
sounding of the seventh Angel, that there were great voices in Heaven, saying,
the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. which is likely to
have part of its accomplishment in the next prevailing Independent Battle, if
not before: which I look at, as the battles which were fought in Heaven, by
Michael and his Angels, with the Dragon and his; but the latter prevailed not,
neither was their place found any more. Rev. 12.7,8. But this War ends not
till the Church of Room, the beast, with the false Prophet, the Pope:
together, with their Confederates, be taken and slain. Revel. 19. from 13. to
the end.

Nevertheles, Sir, for as much as it is not improbable, but that fresh Tumults
and Insurrections may again break forth. Let me humbly and earnestly request
you to stir up both Parl. and Army to use all good means to prevent, a
Serpent is with more facility crushed in the shell, then after breaking forth;
witness Kent, Colchester, and the Scots; together with which furious Malignant,
was subtilty and secretly involved; A most dangerous and fiery Presbyterian
Serpent; And Serpents in May will begin to look forth. Sir, I question not
your wisdoms in^g with these, I neither do, nor dare prescribe a way
themselves (...) concerning Independants or Opinionists, as they call them,
would gladly have had the Parliament to have writ after New Englands Copy;
which if they should, then would these men be banished the Kingdom, for there
was Mr. Wheelewright, A man approved for piety, integrity, innocence, and
humulity, and yet banished New England, being far less guilty then these
men, if at all; which in conscience, I neither (...), nor would have mentioned,
save that it is so well known; and I hope, they would not do the like again:
And though I have many things to commend New England for, as apprehending them
to be the best governed people, and to have the best government both of Civil
and Church State, that to my knowledge is extant in the world; yet in this I
commend them not, for truth should not suffer with error and falsehood, nor the
innocent with the guilty: which things I humbly refer to the honorable
Magistrates wisdom, and discretion.

The third, and last sort, are Malignants, so called, diverse of whom, I doubt
not, have been Civilly and Morrally educated; and sundry of whom it is to be
hoped, may pertain to the election of grace.

Yet if without offense, I may express my self concerning some of this kind;
which I desire to do with compassion, as also with a desire of their
Conversion, if God so please* Then I much fear that too many of this kind may
be strongly suspected, to be the very sons of Beliall, and of Abaddonitish
and destructive Spirits, directly opposite to both the other; especially, to
the first mentioned, that instead of being divinely, are diabolically
principled: acting to their own ends, and lights; And instead of fighting under
Christ's banner, and appearing for Christ, and his Church, do directly fight
under the Banner of Satan, and plainly stand up for the Devil and Antichrist.

There are three things which disturb the Earth, yea four, why it cannot be
quiet; viz. The superstitious and Idolatrous Bapist, The gross and profane
Malignant, The carnal and formal Presbyterian, And the blasphemious
Heretic. SIR, its not improbable, but that I shall pass under many Censures,
for what I have here expressed, but I bless God, I weigh not man's day; as having
borne witness to the truth, and against the contrary; and that without
prejudice or partiality to any as in Gods sight.

Now from the Generation of superstitious Papists, and profane Malignants, of
fiery Presbyterians, and blasphemous Heretics. The Lord deliver Zion, as I
believe he will; and will also dash in pieces all earthly Monarchs and powers,
that do oppose himself and Saints; And in his due time, will doubtless reign
throughout the Kingdoms of the world. I mean not personally, for I by no means
apprehend that, though I highly honor some that are thought so to conceive;
but powerfully and spiritually in the hearts and lives of his Saints, from one
Generation to another, Rev. 20.4.6. Against whom, if your self, the Army, or
Parliament should act, against whom you would implicitly act; if you should not
as much as in you lies, go through with that good and glorious work which the
Lord has now betrusted you with; yea, doubtless, though it be against
national Laws, having a word of God to bear you out, Esther 4.16. 2 of Kings
14.19. yea though you carry it all along by violence, Ezra 4.3. 5.2. Nehe.
4.13.14. against whom I say, if you should act, then doubtless would the God
of Izrael blast you, and your proceedings; But on the contrary, notwithstanding
the uncharitable thoughts, jealousies, and apprehensions; which others have of
you, in case you act: As verily, I hope, through grace many of you do. viz.

For the glory of Christ, the prosperity of Zion, and public Interests, in
which doing, you express your faithfulness to God, to the Saints, to the
Kingdoms, and also to the Covenant. And cause the City of Shushan to rejoice
and be glad, Ester 8.15. In which doing, you will assuredly find a blessing
from the father of blessings; and give the Generations to come cause also to
call you blessed; which is the desire of him, who with Saints in sincerity,
blesses God for yours, the Armies, and Parliaments present activitie; And
desires to be in reallity, a Servant to the Lord, and his People.

F. L.
February 21. 1648-49
Imprimatur,

Theodore Jennings.


