THE ANSWER Of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, (in behalf of the whole
Army) TO THE VOTES and DESIRES of Both Houses OF PARLIAMENT, Concerning the
resigning up of His Majesty's Royal Person.

Wherein he Declares, I. The Reasons of His advance nearer to the City of
London. II. The Armies Resolution to secure the Kings Person. III. Their
charging of a party within the City, for raising a new Army (against them, as
they suppose) which should rendevous near the City of Worcester. IV. And
lastly, The Armies Protestation toward the Citizens of London; With their
Propositions, concerning the bringing of His Royal Majesty to Whitehall.


Sent from the Army by the Commissioners, June 23.

London, Printed for Robert Williamson. 1647.

SEVERAL HEADS OF THE DECLARATION, Sent from the Army by the Commissioners, on
Wednesday the 23. of June, 1647.
Kind Sir,
HAving by your last Letter, dated the 22. of this instant, received several
papers enclosed therein, touching your present proceedings at London; all which
I have seriously perused, and do render you many thanks for the same. And
because I am loath to show my self too much ungrateful, and leave you
unsatisfied in your present expectation, I shall here, as briefly as possibly I
can, represent unto you some small collections, which I have lately drawn up,
proceeding from the great and grand Declaration of the Army, assented to by the
Officers and soldiers under command of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
sent up to London by the Commissioners, June 23 to be communicated to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster, and the Lord Major
and Court of Aldermen of the City of London.

Wherein is declared,

First, the gallant expressions of the General in the said Declaration,
showing the Reasons of their nearer approach toward the City of London, and
that the Army has voted (with one unanimous consent) to have the Kings Majesty
conducted with honor and safety to Richmond, together with the Commissioners,
and the rest of the Attendants about the King; but has declared against those
persons, expressed in the Votes of both houses of Parliament, for guarding of
his Majesty's person.

Secondly, that having been lately informed of a malignant party within the
City, whose endeavors tended only for the fomenting of discord, casting false
suggestions and aspersions upon the Army, and endeavoring to make them odious
to the people, etc.

Thirdly, that being sensible of the subtilty of the aforesaid party, and
having perfectly discovered their private actions for contriving of a new war
against this Army, who (by the Power of Heaven) has been the chief and
isntrumental means of delivering the people of England from perpetual
flavery; therefore, for the preventing of all conspiracies and dangers that may
arise, tending to the prejudice of the Peace of this Kingdom, it is declared
in the name of the whole army, that they cannot condescend or yield to the
votes of both Houses of Parliament, touching the Guard expressed therein, but
shall with all faithfulness and diligence endeavor to preserve his Majesty's
Royal person from danger, and to that end has appointed a competent number of
faithful, zealous, and religious men, chose out of several Regiments in the
army, to guard and secure his Majesty's person at his Court at Richmond.

Fourthly, that the army is sensible of the great malice and inveteracy of
diverse persons against them, who endeavor to involve and embroyle this Nation
in a new war, by which means, if once effected, would prove prejudicial and
destructive to the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and the liberty and
propriety of the Subject.

Fifthly, that they have bin very active in several parts of the Kingdom, to
raise forces and to that end has endeavored to repossesse themselves of
diverse strong Holds, throughout this Realm; as also their endeavors, to raise
a division in the army, and to withdraw the hearts of the soldiers from the
Officers, which indeed is a thing impossible for thousands to do, their hearts
being so firmly knit and united together.

Sixthly, that so soon as they could have accomplished their wicked design, for
setting of an Army on foot, their intents were to randezvouz near the City of
Worcester.

Seventhly, they further desire that the Kings Majesty may be restored to his
former Rights, and tryumphantly brought to his Royal Palace at White Hall.

Lastly, they profess and declare to the Citizens of London, that they have no
evil intent against them, neither will they injure any, either by stopping of
provision, or hindering of traffic, unless ehey be forced and constrained
thereunto.

All which fore going Reasons are declared to be the chief cause of the Armies
near approach toward the City of London

Dizers other particulars were propounded, viz.

1. That they have not received a satisfactory answer, touching their former
Papers and Representations, humbly proposed to the honorable Pouses of
Parliament.

2. That Justice may be executed, and a legal trial appointed for the Eleven
Members, which now stands charged by the army,

And thirdly, touching some soldiers belonging to Sir Robert Pyes Regiment.

Diverse Regiments of the army are upon their march toward Uxbridge, and so
either to Kingston or Windsor for a Head-quarter. God grant a happy conclusion
of Englands distractions, and a good correspondency betwixt the Parliament,
City, and army, that so Peace and truth may flourish within his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, which is the earnest desire of him, who remains

Yours, to serve you, E. LINFIELD
St. Albanes June 23. 1647.
FINIS.

