A LIST of some of the Grand Blasphemers and Blasphemies, Which was given in to
The Committee for RELIGION.
Very fit to be taken notice of, Upon the occafion of the day of Public
Fasting and Humiliation.
I. JOhn Robins said, That he was God Almighty; he was committed to New-Prison
at Clerkenwel, 1651. II. Thomas Tidford said, That John Robins was God the
Father, and the Father of oar Lord Jesus Christ; he was committed to the
Gate House, 1651. III. Richard King said, His Wife was with child of him that
should be the Savior of all those that shall be saved, was committed to
New-Prison, 1651. IV. Thomas Kerby said, That Cain (who murdered his Brother
Abel) was the third Person in the Trinity; he was committed to the Gate House,
1651. V. Elizabeth Sorrel said, That those of her Society had power to raise
the dead; she was committed to the Gate House, 1651. VI. Joshua Garment,
clapping with his hands, and fillipping with his fingers, said, That was
Preaching of the Gospel. Committed to New-Prison, 1651. VII. Elizabeth Haygood,
being uncivil, and playing the fool, said, That that was Preaching the Gospel,
which was foolishness; she was committed to New-Prison, 1651. VIII. Joan Robins
said, She was with child, and the child in her Womb was the Lord Jesus
Christ; she was committed to New-Prison, 1651. IX. Joan Garment said, He that
she followed was God, her great Deliverer. Committed to New-Prison, 1651. X.
Margaret Hollis, singing antiquely, and in rude postures, said, That that was
Religion. Committed to New-Prison, 1651. XI. Anne Burrel, being with the
Ranters, said, That was the right way of Preaching the Gospel. Committed to the
Gate House, 1651. XII. Mary Vanlop said, She had served a false God, and had
now found the true god to serve, who was a man whom she followed. Committed to
the Gate House, 1651. XIII. Thomas Kerby said, That he must be damned in Hell,
for serving the God we serve, so long as he done; but it should be but for a
time, for he now served the true god, which is a man; who after he has been
tormented for a time, will deliver him. Committed to the Gate House, 1651. XIV.
John Rogers, a Carpenter in Listethiel, being at work on the Lord's Day, and
reproved for it, said, That if he was ordained to be saved, he should be saved,
how wickedly soever he led his life; and if he was ordained to be damned, he
should be damned, though he lived never so godly a life. And on that very day,
as he was hewing a piece of Timber, his Ax glanced and cut his Leg, and then
stabbed himself with his Knife, and died on the place, 1652. XV. Robert Clerk,
living about Rippon in Yorkshire, ejecting one of his Tenants, said, That he
had rather make a Den for Devils of his house, then they should dwell in it.
And the same day his Horse threw him, and so bruised him, that he bled at his
mouth, and died, crying out, That his sins were greater then could be forgiven.
XVI. Mary Adams, living about Tillingham in Essex, said about 1652. That she
was conceived with child by the Holy Ghost, and that all the Gospel that had
been taught heretofore, was false; and that which was within her, was the true
Messiah: Was imprisoned and delivered (after sore travail, eight days together)
of an ugly dead Monster; and her self after she had lain some time rotting and
stinking, with filthy Botches and Boyls, took a Knife when she was alone, and
ripped up her own Bowels, and so died, 1652. XVII. Mr. Jinkens of Grayes-Inn,
holding it enough to be at hearing a Sermon; neglecting private duties,
afterward on a Lord's Day, so soon as he had been at a Sermon, hanged himself in
his own Chamber, 1652. XVIII. Alice Turner of St. Katherines Parish, near the
Tower, said, Drink was that must comfort her: And whilst one was going for
some drink for her, she hanged her self. XIX. A Goldsmith that did live in the
Strand, and after in the City, and then at Eltham; who called his name Theau^au
John Tany, the High Priest, etc. Published in Print, That all Religion is a
lie, a deceit, and a cheat, 1651. XX. One came in to the Parliament House,
about 1651. and sat down among the Members; but when he was asked by the
Speaker, who he was, he said, He was Joshua the High Priest; King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. XXI Nicholas Smith Shoemaker, living at Tillington in Sussex,
says in a book printed 1652. That the manner of the coming of the Spirit of
the Lord Jesus upon him, was by touching lightly the hair of his head, so
soaking down into his head, it made all his neck and shoulders to rise, after
two hours it entered into his soul. And that we show God, that we would have him
make Horses without Tails, and some without Ears, our own To^s all of a
length, just strait, and square, some Feet a little forked, our Heads and Knees
bigger, our Arms as big at the hands, as they are at the shoulders. XXII
Richard Faulkner at Petersfield in Sussex, kneeling down upon his knees in the
middle of the Town, Drunk a health to the Devil, and at another time he said,
That our Savior Christ was a Bastard, and that his Father was a poor
Carpenter, and that he carried his Fathers Tools after him in a Basket, and
swear to a man, God dam him, be would bugger his soul into hell. For which he
was committed Prisoner. XXIII Mr. Smalbone said in the Vestry at White Hall
Chapel, That all things, good and bad, are in God, and that Devils and Hell
are in the Essence and being of God. XXIV An Officer to a Rebaptized Church
said, That salvation by Jesus Christ is no miracle, and that it was nothing but
what was comprehended in nature, that he dyed, and became the Savior of his
people. XXV Paul Best affirmed That Jesus Christ is not God, equal with God the
Father. Committed by the Parliament. XXVI An Officer dismissed the Army, said,
That the Scripture is no more to be believed but as the Turks Alchoron, or
other books of other men's writings, so far as it is truth, and that there are
many things in it contradictory one place to another. XXVII Mrs. Gay at
Knightsbridge said, That she could serve God as well in her bed, or at work in
her Garden on the Lords days, as at any Ordinances at any meeting place. About
1651. she was grievously afflicted without the use of her limbs, bed-ridden
about a year, under a sad despair, and horrible torment of Devils, and so
dyed. XXVIII Mrs. Clerk the Butchers wife affirmed, That she has her Tribe as
well as Christ, and is the Savior of those of her Tribe as Christ is of his.
And that there are ten Tribes more. XXIX One pretended to be a Jew in
Northumberland, was Rebaptized, proved a great Blasphemer, and an Imposter. XXX
Ranters, Quakers, Seekers, and Blasphemers do daily broach sad and fearful
Blasphemies.
LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson, 1654.


