A short ANSWER OF JOHN LING, To the 16. Quaeres of Joseph Heming, about
CHRISTMAS.

Wherein all the care that can be is taken to avoid expense of paper, so much
having been spoiled already. For

Were not for Christmas which is nigh,
When fruit, spice, eaten and digested Pie
Calls for more paper, no man could make shift
How to employ JOS. HEMING to his thrift.
Printed in the Year 1648.

A short Answer of John Ling to the 16. Quaeres of Joseph Heming about
Christmas.
IT is perceived that one Joseph Heming, not long before Christmas, 1648. (as
by his printed Paper does appear) from his Study in Vttoxeter, otherwise and
vulgarly Vxter, in the said year does challenge all those who can write and
read, to answer his 16. Quaeries concerning the observation of the Feast of
Christmas, or the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to which I
John Ling having been a Grammar Scholar, and having seen somewhat in the
world both in this Church, and the Reformed beyond Sea, do make this Answer.

The first Quaere.
Whether such religious customs as are binding to all the Churches of Jesus
Christ, ought not to have sure footing upon the Word of God, or Apostolical
practice?

Resp. Because I will not make Paper dear by long Answers or Recitalls, I say
such Religious Customs as are binding to all the Churches of Jesus Christ,
ought to have footing upon the word of God, or Apostolical practice.

The second Quaere.
Whether you can substantially prove that Christ was borne on the 25 of
December? And what your proofs are?

Resp. It is not material, I, or no, whether I can prove that Christ was borne
on the 25 of December, as it now stands in the English Calendar.

The third Quaere.
Whether the celebration of that day (grant he was borne on it) can be clearly
warranted by you from Scripture? And what your Scriptures are?

Resp. It imports no more then what is answered in the first and second.

The fourth Quaere.
Whether you can clear it by sound consequence from the New Testament, though
not set down there in totidem verbis?

Resp. It is cleared by sound consequence, both from the Old and New Testament,
that the day of the Birth of our Savior, God and man, should be kept with
Festivity: I will now first give you instance in the Angels song to the
Shepherds, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men, see
the 118 Psalm, 22.23. and 24. verses, The stone which the builders refused is
the head of the corner, which is interpreted in the New Testament to be meant
of Christ. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and
be glad in it, which all good Interpreters say to be meant by the day of the
Birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Many places there are in Isaiah,
and other of the Prophets: So that now you have better proofs from Scripture
for keeping holy an Anniversary day for the celebration of the Birth of our
Lord, then for changing the Sabbath to the Lords day; the proofs whereof are
chiefly grounded upon Apostolical Custom, Isaiah, 28.16. Math. 21.42. Acts,
4.11. Romans 9.33. 1. Peter, 2.6. and 7.

The fifth Quaere.
Whether you can do it by universal tradition?

Resp. Its done by Universal Tradition, and in that I will bring it to the
Customary Practice of the Reformed Churches of Dutch* French, and Geneva.

The sixth Quaere.
Whether (in case it can be evidenced by none of these, viz. plain Text,
sollid Inference, universal Tradition) it be not a mere humane invention, and
so Will worship? And how you will one day acquit your selves before God, for
placing, and crying up men's Inventions, instead of the institutions of Jesus
Christ? And whether it were not faithful dealing with poor simple people to
tell them that you have neither of these to warrant it?

Resp. I answer, it were false dealing to tell Christian People that which were
untrue.

The seventh Quaere.
(Since days and times commanded by God himself to be observed under the Law,
were, and are unlawful under the Gospel) Whether days and times commanded by
men, and not by God, under the Gospel, are not less lawful?

Resp. If this day and time were only commanded by men, it were unlawful, so
far as to command it as a mere Religious duty.

The eighth Quaere.
Whether the true and genuine Interpretation of Christmas be Christ man? And
whether to persuade people it is so, be not to abuse and delude them? And
whether we may not as well interpret Candlemas Candleman, Michaelmas
Michaelman, as Christmas Christman?

Resp. (Because you make sport, and have brought in a Gamboll) That I have a
conjecture that Joseph Heming is some School Master, or some great School
Boy, that can interpret the Latin Mas for a man, and then Christmas is
Christman; and certainly it is to abuse people to persuade them so and so of
the rest: But I have heard what was answered Dr. Lamb by a good fellow, to
whom he objected to have said Christyde, and why not as well Tom tide? The
Answer was he could say Christmas, or Thomas, or Lamb, ass, and so he left
him, and so do I you with your Gamboll.

The ninth Quaere.
Whether the Saints are bound to rejoice in the Birth of Christ on that day men
superstitiously call Christmas, more then at other times? And whether the Lords
day be not [the] day appointed for them to rejoice on?

Resp. You beg the Question of Superstition, and so until you frame the
Argument out of the Question in Mood and Figure, I shall answer you no more
upon that point.

The tenth Quaere.
Whether Christmas day ought in any respect to be esteemed above another of the
Week days? And whether people may not without offense to God follow their
lawful vocations on that day?

Resp. That by the established Laws of this Kingdom, in the times of the
first Reformation (and still continued) this is commanded to be kept as a holy
day.

The eleaventh Quaere.
Whether you think the Parliament and Assembly have erred and played the
fools in condemning and rasing out Holy days not warranted in the Word? And
whether to observe them, be not highly to dislike, and flatly to contradict (in
point of practice at least) their proceedings in order to a Reformation?

Resp. I say it is a Proposition of ill language, and therefore I say no more,
but demand of you whether you think the first Reformers that suffered
Martyrdom were Fools and Knaves?

The twelfth Quaere.
Whether (since most men and women in England do blindely and superstitiously
believe Christ was borne that day) preaching on it, does not nourish and
strengthen them in that belief?

Resp. At first you beg the Question, but to the second part of it; I say
since preaching is lawful upon any day; so is it expedient, if not necessary
upon a day commanded.

The thirteenth Quaere.
Whether this Feast had not its rise and growth from Christians conformity to
the mad Feasts Saturnalia ( kept in December to Saturn the Father of Gods) in
which there was a Sheafe offered to Ceres Goddess of Corn, a hymn in her
praise called (...)? And whether those Christians by name, to cloak it, did
not afterward call it Yule; and Christmas (as though it were for Christ's
honor?) And whether it be not yet by some (more ancient then truly or
knowingly religious) called Yule, and the mad plays (wherewith it is celebrated
like those Saturnalia) Yule games? And whether from the offering of that Sheafe
to Ceres; from that song in her praise: from those gifts the Heathens gave
their friends in the Calends of January, ominis gratia; did not arise or spring
our blazes; Christmas Kariles, and New years gifts?

Resp. Whether this Feast had not its Rice from Christians conformity to the
mad Feast Saturnalia, I answer, I think it a very mad Question: But I confess
in some Nations they call that Feast Yule, and amongst your brethren the Scots,
they call it Zule, as I have found it in their Callenders; but until you can
prove that those Nations speak Greek, you will be far to seek for your
Argument: Therefore good Mr. Schoolmaster, or Schooleboy, leave off your
Etymologies; for you will find it hard to prove that Christians used to
celebrate this Feast in any relation to the Saturnalia or Ceres Songs.

The fourteenth Quaere.
Whether conformity to, and retention of Heathenish Customs be commendable in
Christians, suitable or agreeable with Gospel Principles, though under pretext
of Christ's Honor and Worship?

Resp. In the Negative it is not lawful; but how will you apply it, John
Ellis, I cry you mercy Joseph Heming?

The fifteenth Quaere.
Whether you are not bound to prove your practice for the conviction and
satisfaction of your Brethren, whose duty it is to walk with you in things
agreeable to the mind of Christ? And in case you cannot; Whether you ought not
to acknowledge your error, lay down your practice (as others have done
theirs) no longer befooling and misleading the people committed to your charge?

I answer, this reproof would serve for a Preacher if he had misled his
people, of which number I am not, but if this charge be unjust, see how you
disobey the Laws of God and man.

The sixteenth Quaere.
Whether in case you return no Answer to these Quaeries, I have not ground
sufficient to conclude you utterly unable to give any rational account of your
practice, now put upon it?

Resp. Whether I have answered your Quaeries or no; Let me know it by your
confession or Reply.

From no great Study, this 23 of Dec. 1648.
FINIS.

