A List of the Ships taken by the Fleet of the Commonwealth of England, since
the late Engagement of the Admiral Trump, near Dover (contrary to the Law of
Nature, and custom of Nations) at the same time that three of their Ambassadors
were here Treating of Peace, with the Parliaments Answer to the Paper of the
Lord Paw, wherein he desired them to propound what they thought reasonable and
just to compose the present differences between them and the States General of
the United Provinces.
The Effigies of both the Admirals of HOLLAND.
Martin Tromp. Admiral of Holland and West-friesland.

Wit Corneliz the With Vice Admiral of Holl: and W: F:



The Parliaments Answer to the Paper of the Lord Paw, wherein he desires them
to propound what they think is reasonable and just to compose the present
differences between this Commonwealth, and the States General of the United
Provinces.
1 THat the Lords the States General of the United Provinces, do pay and
satisfy unto this Commonwealth, the charges and damages this State has
sustained, and been put unto by the preparations of the States General, and
their attempts this Summer; the particulars whereof shall be in due time
produced.

2 That upon the payment of the Sum to be agreed upon, as aforesaid, for
charges and damages, or securing the same to the satisfaction of the
Parliament, there shall follow thereupon a cessation of all acts of Hostility,
and the Ships and goods taken since the late differences shall be released.

3 The two former Propositions being assented unto, and put in execution, the
security for time to come, which the Parliament does expect, is by both States
contracting a firm Alliance, and Constancy of interest for the good of both,
which the Parliament of England is willing on their part by all just means and
ways to endeavor.

The Lord Paw having received these Propositions, soon after returned this
Answer, that he had received Orders from his Superiors, That he should with
all speed return back again, and could advance no further in the said
negotiation, and therefore desired to be admitted to take his leave of the
Honorable Council to go over.

Sir George Ascue had advice of thirty or forty Dutchmen, homewards bound, with
four men of war for their Convoy, hearing they were very near the narrow, he
presently weighed Anchor with nine Sail, and stood over the coast of France;
some of his headmost Ships came up with the Dutch Fleet, twenty six of them ran
directly ashore upon Callis-sands, five we took two more we got off from the
sands, and burnt three: This Fleet of the Dutch came from Tartadoes in
Portugal, most of them Laden with Salt and Oil.

The Names of the Dutch men of war, taken by General Blake in the North,
being a Guard of the Fishing Busses.
Guns Ball of Rotterdam, -- 24 Water hound Vice Admiral, -- 29 Sampson of
Anchinsens, -- 28 Arms of Holland, -- 30 Noah's arc, -- 24 Swan of Amsterdam,
-- 28 Adam and Eve, -- 24 John Baptist, -- 22 Land of Promise, -- 24 Sampson,
-- 24
Two of which were Sunk.

Antonia of Venice. Armas Medenblicke. An of Amsterdam. Arms of Slaca. Andrew
of Gotenburgh. Bareland of Middleborough. Black bury bunch. Be swarm. Bishop
Flushing. Cock and Rosecrance. Chestnuttree of Amsterdam. King David
Middleborough. Drink all. Daniel Flushing. Increasing Moon. Emans Amsterdam.
Eve of Flushing. Faith of Swadan. Fortune. Idem at Plymouth. Idem. Fortune
Dolphane. Fortune Flushing. Fortune Middleborough. Hollands Dostruit. Hope
Flushing. Hope Amsterdam. Hollands time of Eden. Horse golden. Hope
Middleborough. Jacob Amsterdam. John Baptist. Jacob of Harding. Love. Love at
Plymouth. Lamb of Camphire. Love of Surdam. Love Amsterdam. Lion golden
Harling. Maid of Encusian. Mark. Matthew Rotterdam. Ox. Oringe tree. Peter
Roterdam. Paul Amsterdam. Paul Rotterdam. Peter Housden. Peter of Amsterdam.
Prince little. Pincke. Pelican Flushing. Rose. Swan Amsterdam. Golden Star.
Swan Rotterdam. Small boat at Gowes. Town Country. Young Tobians Kucusion.
Tongues. Prince William. Young Prince Flushing. David Rotterdam. The Great St.
Mark. Abraham Offering. Alkmore of Almore. Abraham and Isaac. Arms Flushing.
Andrew Dover. Blacklove Flushing. Brown Fish and Fortune. Brown Fish of Adam.
Baker at Dover. Black ox of Stock holn. Black horse Rotterdam. Clump old of
Edom. Clump young. Charity of Amsterdam. Cook of Encusion. Charity of Flushing.
Coney dicto. Charity Herring Busse. Castle of Huntstood. Childrens plea.
Chestnuttree of Bull. Duck of Amsterdam. Dove of Encusion. Elephant Amsterdam.
Endraught alias unity. Earl, Amsterdam. Fortune Herring busse. Flying heart.
Flower deluce. Fortune Rotterdam hering busse Fortune Rotterdam Plymouth.
Fortune of Encusion. Golden Fortune. Gentleman of Holland. George of Harling.
Greyhound. George of Middleborough. Gift of God. Huntsman of Brook. Hunter, a
Busse. Hopewell a Busse. Hollands town of Encusion. Hope of Middleborough. John
of Amsterdam. Jacob of Amsterdam. John Evangelist. King David, Rotterdam. King
David of Edom. Linnin-Draper, Amsterdam. St. Laurence, Dover. Love Amsterdam.
Man Flushing. May flower. Middleborough. St. Maria. Oldman Horn. Prince
Hendrick, Flushing. Peace Rotterdam. Peter Encusion. Prince, Amsterdam. Paul
Amsterdam. Pilgroom. Princess royal. Red Mill, Amsterdam. Rob. alias
Black-fish. Red Fortune. Star Rotterdam. Star Wickle. Spotted Dog. Sampson
Encusion. Stock-helme. Turk Dover. Water dog of Encusion. Christiana. The
North Cooper. Asuerus.
Taken by Captain Pen upon the coast of France, near Boleigne, having been
five years in the Duke of Venice his service, and were bound home for Holland,
laden with Rice, Oil, Piece Goods, Brimstone, Anniseeds, and other rich
commodities, which with those taken by Gen Blake, are esteemed no less worth
then eleven hundred thousand pounds.

Also taken by General Blake, 26. August, 1652. Several Dutch Ships, one of
twenty six guns that came from Almat in the bay of Allicant, laden with wools,
strong waters and salt; likewise one of twenty guns that came from the
West Indies, laden with ginger, sugar, tobacco; another of eighteen guns that
came from Capode verde, bound for America, laden with hides and Elephant teeth,
another of fifteen guns that came from Farnam Buck, laden with Sugar, Brazill
wood, another small vessel with the like commodity, as also three prizes of
wine and salt.

Seven men of war and six fire ships taken by General Blake, going to
relieve Dunkirk.

17. Sept. General Blake took sixteen prizes laden with salt, wine, aquavitae,
five of them from Lisbon, one of them worth 100000 l.

21. Sept. 1652. Two Ships from Ginne, their lading was Gold and Elephants
teeth, by foul weather were beaten off from their General, and forced into
Plymouth.

25. Sept. 1652. The Holland fleet appeared on the backside of the Goodwin, but
were that night driven back by a storm; the twenty six day they appeared and
were forced away by another storm, twenty seven were forced away the third time
the General Blake got under sail, and discovered the Dutch, they had two
Admiralls De Wit and Ruiler, with about fifty four sail of men of war, and
some small vessels; our number was pretty equal with them. The event of the
fight.

Rear Admiral of the Dutch thirty six guns sank, a great Vessel of thirty
guns taken, their Reer-Admirall himself taken Prisoner, and one Captain more,
three hundred prisoners taken, one great Frigot of the Hollanders seen to sink;
two Dutch Vessels sunk in the night after the fight. One hundred and odd of
the Dutch slain and drowned in the Reer-Admirall; all the Dutch Fleet
generally much torn and shattered, one of the Masts, and three of their Ships
being shot off by the Great Ship called the Commonwealth.

A Guinne Merchant belonging to Amsterdam, very richly laden with gold, to the
value of 60000l. being boarded by our men, sunk immediately, and about six or
seven of our men sunk with her.

20. October, 1652. the Falmouth Frigot took a man of war, and a Merchant Ship
laden with a hundred eighty eight Chest of Sugar between 30 and 40000 weight of
Brazill 1000d. the man of war taken with her, was of more value then the prize
her self.

12 October, Our Fleet took fifteen sail of the Hollanders; by their colors
they seemed to be Sweeds, Hamburgs and Lubecks; but they were found to be
Hollanders, most of them came from Fishing.

18. October. A Fleet of our Ships coming from Denmark, fell among the Dutch
Fishermen; took fifteen or sixteen Sail, and besides a Dutch man of war of
twenty guns, about thirteen prizes more, in all about thirty prizes.

20. October, Capt. Day, who commands the Warwick has taken a Hollander of about
100. Tun laden with Stumm wines.

22 October. 1652. Marmaduke Frigot brought into the Downs 6 Dutch Ships, laden
with wines strong water and also some Dollars.

London Printed by M S. 1652.


