THE LIVELY CHARACTER OF THE MALIGNANT PARTY: WHEREIN Their Persons, who they
are; their Actions, what they have already done, and do daily further attempt;
with their Intentions, at what ends they aim, are sufficiently set forth,
fully described, and plainly evidenced to the indifferent Judgment of any
ordinary man, who has had but a reasonable view of the strange Passages of
these later times.

By one who cordially affects his Sovereign, and really respects the
Parliament: Which illustrious and renowned SENATE, has (for the safety of the
King, and preservation of the Kingdom) Resolved upon the Question, That in
this Malignant Party, they may not, must not, will not, cannot confide.

Published and Printed in the year of Fears and Jealousies, plots, projects,
and policies, designs, dangers, and discoveries. 1642.

THE MALIGNANT PARTY.
THat there is a Malignant Party, is confessed of all; but who this Malignant
Party is, that has generated and somented all the present distempers and
distractions of this now languishing Kingdom, His labor, hoc opus est. In the
first place, I will demonstrate who these are. According to their common
appellation, they are a company of malevolent, or ill-affected persons to the
peace of this Church and State: And these are so many for their multitude, that
(like the Devil himself) they may be termed Legion, as properly as the wicked
man. These Egyptian Locusts swarm in every corner of the Kingdom; the Hydra
of this Malignant Party does daily multiply and is now become such an
Epidemicall disease, that like a Leprosy, it has overspread the whole body
of this Nation. I shall only nominate the chief of them. who have been (and
are still designed) maine Actors in the fearful Tragedy of this lamentable
Age.

In the first Scene, ye may behold if ye please) Papists, persons popishly
inclined, their Accomplices and Adherents, all the members of the Antichristian
Hierarchy, as Jesuits (the incendiaries of all Christendom) and others of
that Romish faction; They are always christie after blood, affecting rapine,
torture, oppression, and cruelty; Their machinations have been mischievous,
and their designs are still destructive. They have ever plotted the promoting
of hortid war, as the only means to advance the Catholic cause, whose end
and mark they aim at, is to recover and re-establish the Romish Religion here
within this Kingdom. Was not the war with Scotland, and the insurrection
there two years ago, incited and fomented by them? Was not the Rebellion in
Ireland the last year, begun, framed, and contrived by them? And is not this
unnatural, civil war, now in England, occasioned and maintained by them?
But they who have instigated his Majesty to such a barbarous and bloody war
against his Parliament and people, (which is of a confounding nature to the
three Kingdoms at once) what are they but most desperate Traitors to their
King and Country, most execrable Vipers to God and his Church? they hatch
Cockairioe eggs, and weave the Spiders web; their works are works of
iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands; their feet run to evil,
and they have to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity;
wasting and destruction is in their paths; the way of peace they know not; and
there is no judgment in their goings. They have made them crooked paths;
whosoever goes therein, shall not know peace, Isa. 59. 5. Their throat is an
open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of Aspes
is under their lips; their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; their feet
are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way
of peace they have not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes, Romans
3. 13. They have for many years together had an impious design, to alter
Religion, to defile the purity thereof, and to introduce Popery, superstition,
ignorance, the only way to an arbitrary and tyrannical Government, and to
change the frame and constitution of this Government both in Church and State:
The Masterpiece of all their Stratagems (a new engine which they have invented
to heighten the destruction of this Kingdom) was to prevail with his Majesty
by that Proclamation to leavie forces against the Parliament, and the Kings
loyal Subjects, by that means to put this Land into a certain combustion,
inevitable confusion by civil war, and perpetual slavery upon the surviving
part of a then miserable Kingdom; For if the power of the sword should come
once into their hands (which God forbid) nothing can be then expected, but the
most wretched ruin and desolation of this Kingdom, and the savage massacre of
the Protestants.

In the next Scean, enters upon the Stage, to be presented to your view, the
Prelaticall Party, who have acted a great part in this Tragical Story of the
Malignant Party. These Popish Prelates have corrupted the pure fountain
rather then they would be depressed in power; They have brought various
innovations into our Church, sundry alterations into our Liturgy and Rubric,
(contrary to the Act of Parliament, whereby the Book of Common Prayer is
established) vain Ceremonies, Altars, and many strange (never before heard of)
doctrines into our Church, to make us more consonant to the Church of Rome.
Amongst these ye may (if ye please) take notice of Laudles Will of Canterbury,
and wretched Wren of Norwich, both fellow prisoners in the Tower. To these may
be added (as a Malignant Party) all Arminians, an ambitious, dissolute, and
male contented Clergy, corrupt and scandalous Ministers, (their creatures)
Delinquents obnoxious to the Justice of Parliament; who are so far from being
Pastores, that they are altogether Impostores; not Pastors, but Impostors: Some
of them are superstitiously corrupt in their judgments, holding and teaching
strange Doctrines; others of them ambitious of preferment; many of them
conscious and guilty of gross and foul crimes; all of them male contented
with the Parliament, and their proceedings, and so vitiated with idleness,
ease, and plenty, with the cursed love of lucre and covetousness, that they
would be glad with all their hearts, to see the Parliament dissolved, hoping
thereby to recover what they have lost, or at least to hold fast what they have
got. They make no conscience to starve the souls of their flock, so they may
pamper their own bodies.

The third Scene, contains great Personages, part of the Nobility and Gentry,
that either fear reformation, or else seek to lay the foundation of their
own honor and preferment, in the very ruin of the Kingdom. They have a long
time lived in a dissolute way of liberty, without restraint of their sensual
pleasures, and therefore are now unwilling to admit of such Reformation, the
Parliament in discharge of their duty and conscience, think expedient should
be imposed upon them. These being temerarious, rash, and unvised in their
attempts and actions, (though Protestants, if of any Religion) have endeavored
to bury the happiness of this Kingdom in the downfall and overthrow of the
great Counsel thereof. Their precedent intentions (to destroy the Parliament,
and with it the whole Kingdom) are manifested and clearly evidenced by their
subsequent actions, in overrunning several Counties, compelling the Trained
Bands, executing the illegal Commission of Array, enforcing them to come in
and join with them, or disarming them, and putting their Arms into the hands
of lewd and desperate persons, thereby turning the Arms of the Kingdom
against the Kingdom: So that by this means all we have, all that is near and
dear unto us, our Estates, Laws, Liberties, and lives, are in danger; nay,
that which is the life of our lives, our Religion is in danger; the Kings
sacred person, his royal progeny, and his whole Kingdom by this means is in
danger: For who knows not, that his Majesty is at this time circled and
surrounded, environed as it were by those, who carry him upon his own ruin,
and the destruction of his Kingdom, by fomenting and cherishing this
unnatural and illegal war against his own people. This Malignant Party of
the Nobility, gather unto them the decayed Gentry of several Countries, who
have by prodigality, riot, excess, and horse-races, run their progenitors
estates out of breath, and think hereby to recuperate them, for they conceive
civil war to be the best way suddenly to raise their fortunes equal to
their discents; and therefore what care they (being many of them necessitous
Courtiers, and giddy brained as they are) to satisfy the appetite of their
desire, and the insatiate thirst of their ambition, though they sacrifice a
whole Kingdom, delighting to behold their native Country suffer in the
martyrdom of a civil war. The end that this Malignant Party does tend to,
is the destruction of the present Parliament, in it all future Parliaments, and
together with them, the alteration of Religion, the subversion of the Laws of
this Kingdom, with the utter abolition of the just liberties of the Subjects,
and the final extirpation of the rightful privileges of Parliament. They
would have all subject to will and power, and betray their Country to serve
the Court. It Is evident by their love (or rather indeed inveterate hatred) they
bear to this present Parliament, that they have combined to destroy it, and
with it the whole Kingdom. The masterpiece of their machinations they aim
at, is to be Masters of our Religion and Liberties, to make us slaves, in
altering the government of this Kingdom, and reducing it to the sad condition
of some other Countries, which are nor governed by Parliaments, and so
consequently not by Laws, but by the will of the Prince, or rather of those who
are about him, who of late have studied to possess the world of an absolute
and unlimited power in Princes, so that Voluntas Regis, is Lex populi.

The fourth Scene in this Tragedy of the Malignant Party, consists of
Delinquents to the Parliament, and Fugitives from the Parliament. These for the
most part have had their dependence, countenance and encouragement from the
Court, where they have flattered and seduced the King, calumniated and traduced
his Council, abused and injured his people. They have endeavored to undermine
the Peace of the Kingdom; and their constant practice has been to set at
variance not only the Princes of several Nations, but each Kingdom against it
self, dividing betwixt Prince and people, and incensing subject against
subject, that so they might with more facility accomplish their impious
intentions in our divisions. They have invited and encouraged the enemies of
our Religion, and the State in foreign parts, to the attempting and acting of
their evil designs and determinations toward us. These persons are guilty,
not Parliament-proof but such as fear the Justice of that high and Honorable
Assembly in the due execution of Laws against them, for the evils and mischiefs
the Commonwealth has sustained and suffered by them; therefore to secure
themselves from condign punishment, they are willing to put themselves under
the Kings protection, and under the specious (but unjust) pretense of defending
the Kings Right and Prerogative, to engage themselves, their lives and fortunes
in a bloody war; thereby to set the whole Kingdom in a general combustion.
These are the Enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and justly to be suspected
to favor the Rebellion in Ireland. They have often attempted to fetch in
fotrain forces to invade us, and provided great supplies of Ammunition beyond
Seas to destroy us. Their complying, contriving and plotting with Papists,
Atheists, Run-awayes, and other notorious Delinquents, are not only evidences
of their designs, but do firmly testify that they have been visible Actors in
them. Such a one was the Lord Digby, who at first persuaded the King to retire
himself into some strong place, and in the mean time promised to do his
Majesty service abroad, having procured store of Arms, with which he came in
the ship called, The Providence. I could nominate more of that party, but I now
will not; for there is none so great a peregrine in our Israel, as is ignorant
who they are.

The fifth contains evil Counselors, accompanied with corrupted Judges, and
ambitious Lawyers, whose fears and jealousies do arise out of a guilt of their
own vile actions, and just fears of their deserved punishment. These are the
only bones of our unhappy divisions. They have endeavored to beget and
increase distrust and disaffection between the King, and his Parliament, and
his people. These wicked spirits of division, and mischievous instruments of
dissension, have advised the King to suffer diverse unjust scandals and
imputations upon his Parliament; And (which aggravates their impiety) these
evil Counselors have fixed their dishonor upon the King, by making his
Majesty the author of those wicked actions, which are the effects of their own
impious counsels. They have advised the King to absent himself from his
Parliament, whose malicious designs and practices are maskt and disguised with
the false color of their earnest zeal to vindicate his Majesty's Prerogative
from the supposed oppression of the Parliament. These unfaithful Ministers
have often plotted to break the neck of this honorable Assembly; for which
purpose they have made such an unpleasant breach as now is between the King and
his great Council. They have most injuriously taken all occasions to multiply
gross calumnies upon the Houses of Parliament, to defame, and indeed to
arraign the proceedings of both Houses. Through their deceitful suggestions
and fraudulent insinuations, they have engaged the King in desperate designs,
and pernicious practices: Their private counsel has incensed, misinformed,
and misled his Majesty against his general Counsel, conspiring unanimously
to ruin the very being of Parliament, (which is the fountain of the Law)
making it contemptible and of less esteem then the meanest Court, to which all
other Courts are inferior. Hence it is that they have dared to cast upon this
Parliament such a charge as is inconsistent with the nature of that great
Council: They have caused a great interruption in, and obstruction to the
proceedings of Parliament: They have struck at the very being both of the Head
and Body, depriving his Majesty in his own apprehension of their fidelity, and
them of his protection, which are the two mutual bands of Government and
subjection. By secret plots, and open force, they have bred all the late
uprores, mutinies and disturbances in most of the Counties of this Kingdom,
especially in the Northern parts: The besieging of Hull not long since was an
egg likewise of their hatching. Their plots failing, they have attempted (what
no age will ever believe, unless it be as impious as this) to render odious
and suspected to the people, the Parliament, which is the only sanctuary of
their Religion, Laws Liberties, and properties. They have betrayed Church and
State, by corrupting the Doctrine and Discipline in the one, and subverting the
Laws and form of Government in the other. Their greatest influence is upon the
Kings Councels; And such is the malignitie of these lewd Counselors, (being
arrived at the very height of impudence) that they are not ashamed to engrosse
and monopolize his Majesty to themselves altogether from his Parliament, by
whose mischievous counsels he is wholly diaffected from his Parliaments
faithful advices and counsels, which by the constitution of this Realm is his
greatest and best Council. Thus as Christ our Lord and Savior was led aside
into the wilderness to be tempted; so Charles our Lord and Sovereign is
misled from his great Council, (in which there is strength, prudence and
safety) into a wilderness of weakness, errors, and dangers.

In the sixth Scene ye may behold with the eye of your Intellect, the Hotspurres
of the Times, who are called the Cavaliers; a name of hatred in the present age
by their practices, and fit to be made a terror to future ages by their
punishment. Their practices in themselves are as high and as insolent, as any
Subjects ever ventured on. They would (if they could) by arms and violence
overruled the judgment and advice of the Parliament, and by force determine
the Questions there depending concerning the government of the Kingdom. They
have been the chief Actors in the Kingdoms Tragedy, and have presumed to put
that dishonor and affront upon both Houses of Parliament, to make them the
countenancers of Treason; enough to have dissolved all the bands and sinews of
confidence between his Majesty and his Parliament. They would (if they durst
come near it) besiege London, as they lately did Hull; and long ago have they
swallowed up in their thoughts our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; the former by
alteration, and the latter by subversion. Amongst these, Captain Leg a
Delinquent to the Parliament, now a captive fast enough in the Gatehouse,
endeavored manibus pedibusque, in that treasonable practice to bring up the
Army against the Parliament. Many of these incendiaries and firebrarnds of
combustion are the same now that were formerly between us and our neighbor
Nation, and their designs of confusion of both Nations are the same, altring
only the method, beginning in England now with hope to end in Scotland:
whereas formerly they began there, with purpose to end here. Most of them are
such mercinarie swordmen, as no Nation nor Age ever expected faith or piety
from; whose continual assertious are wounds and blood (horresco referens) I
tremble to relate it, God damme me, sink me, or Heavens refuse 'em, if they be
not revenged upon these rescally Roundheads. Thus they have God of tentimes in
their mouths. but their hearts are far from him. As they are criminous in
their lives, so they are penurious in their estates; whose good husbandry is to
put all upon their backs, and shift for their bellies, their lands, houses and
revenues being above in the air. Though it be true, that many of them are
Gentlemen well descended, valiant, of good natural parts, literature, and
education, yet for the most part men of mean estates, odious lives, and
desperate fortunes: whose end is to plunder and pillage wheresoever they come,
and enrich themselves upon the spoils of any. This covetous desire of rapine,
to make a prey of people, has been the great offense committed by our common
Soldiers of late, as well as by the Cavaliers, who as they first began to
practice it, so they are (I suppose) more expert at it; for they have neither
fear of God, nor respect of men before their eyes; but would swim through a Sea
of blood to their hoped haven; and that they have violently and illegally taken
away from his Majesty's subjects their goods before their faces, it is
irrefragably evident. To draw all these lines to their center; from these
premises the Inference is this, These grand Apostates to the Commonwealth must
not expect to be pardoned in this world, till they be dispatched to the other.
I could nominate many more of the malignant party, as Projectors, Pattentees,
and other prerogative parasites. Humanarum calamitatum mercatores, as one
ingeniously styles them, who care not to undo a whole Kingdom, so they may get
benefit to themselves. As also a giddy-headed multitude in the Land, who are
only Time-servers, and (like weather-cocks) will turn at any time to serve
their own turn; in the mean time by reason of ignorance and inability to
discern what may be the issue and success of those beginnings are led on
simply to their own ruin. But because I will not trench too far upon the
Readers patience, I here desist.

Thus as in a Map ye may plainly see the Malignant Party, who they are, what
they have done, and at what they aim. For the close of all, let us all shun
their persons, abstain from their actions, and hate their intentions. Though
they be malignant to the whole Kingdom, yet let not us be malevolent to our
selves; and let us not be so uncharitable to them as not to pray for them, that
either God would be pleased to convert or confound them. Pray we therefore to
the King of kings, that he would take away those wicked ones from before the
King, that his Throne may be established in righteousness. To draw this Tract
to a period, May they, who have endeavored to divide the Head and the Body,
(the King and his great Council, the Parliament) like Strafford, have their
heads divided from their shoulders; or like Achitophel, be hanged up by the
neck. This is the wish of one, who is neither Papist, Brownist, Anabaptist, nor
Atheist, but a Protestant, and son of his Mother the Church of England.

FINIS.

