A PROCLAMATION PUBLISHED Through every Regiment of Horse and Foot, and all the
Garrisons of the North OF ENGLAND (Upon Orders received from his Excellency Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.)

By Major General LAMBERT.

ALSO The sentence of the Council of War, for inflicting of exemplary
punishment upon diverse Soldiers, that mutinyed at Halifax, with others. And a
Copy of Major General Lamberts speech, made at a Council of War, concerning
disbanding.

With Instructions to the Colonells and other Officers. Subscribed, JO. LAMBERT:

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1647.

BY Major General LAMBERT, A PROCLAMATION TO All Colonels, Lieutenant
Colonels Majors, and Captains, of Horse and Foot, and to all Governors of
Garrisons under his Command.
WHereas the Parliament has ordained that a certain number of Horse and Foot
shall be continued, modelled, and formed (accordingly as his Excellency shall
appoint) out of all the standing Forces of the Kingdom, for the safety and
defense thereof, and that all other Forces which shall exceed or be above that
Number, shall have their Accounts audited, from the time they have been in
Service for the Parliament, (except those entertained since the sixth of August
last) and shall have Deb^nters from the Commissioners Signed and Registered, as
a due debt from the State, (according to the Ordinance of Parliament) to be
paid out of such Moneys or Securities as the Parliament have, or shall Ordain
for that purpose, and shall receive two Months Pay in part of their Arrears,
and be disbanded and dismissed from their Services. And whereas I have also (in
prosecution thereof) received Orders and Directions from his Excellency for the
continuing a certain Number of Horse and Foot to be appointed and formed by
me, out of the standing Forces belonging to the several Counties of the
Northern Association, and for disbanding those which shall exceed the said
Number, as is before expressed. These are therefore (by virtue and authority of
his Excellencies Order directed unto me) to require you forthwith to Disband
and Dismiss (or cause to be Disbanded and Dismissed) all those who have been
entertained since the sixth of August last, without money; and to choose out and
appoint such Officers and Soldiers under your command (which are to be such as
are comprised within the ensuing Instructions) to make ready their Accounts to
be audited, stated, and registered as aforesaid, with all possible speed; Which
being done, and two Months Arreares paid unto them, you are to Disband and
Dismiss the said Number or cause them to be Disbanded and Dismissed accordingly,
as is before expressed. And for so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant.
Given under my Hand and Seal at YORK the twenty ninth of January, 1647.

To Captain. etc. Jo. LAMBERT

A Copy of what the Commander in Chief spoke at a Council of War, to the
Officers there, concerning disbanding.
Gentlemen,
I Make no question but you are acquainted with the Parliaments last
resolution, for the modelling and continuing of a certain number of Horse and
Foot for the safety and defense of the Kingdom, and that all above that
Number are to be disbanded, the work is very necessary; and I hope we shall
appear to be of such public spirits, as not only to comply with what the
Parliament has ordered, but ready, now our work is done, to return to our
places and that not without honor, and some satisfaction for our Arreares. It
may be thought by some that two Months Pay is but a small sum: but if you
consider the poverty of the Kingdom and great Assessements on it, reason will
tell you it is as much as can be done at this time, and more, if ye weigh the
care taken by the Parliament for Arreares which I think is as much as they can
do, and the Kingdom give: So that nothing remains but to consider of some
sweet and amiable way for the affecting thereof, which will be expected from us,
Many Officers must be laid aside, and some stand, here are of both sorts, and I
desire we may go about the business so, as may be of most advantage to both,
and that the one may assist the other in the new modelling, and so order it as
we may have respect to the Parliament and the General, that none may be
abstracters but assisters in this work.

THE Copy of a Letter from Major General Lamberts Quarters at York.
Right Honorable,
WE are proceeding here to the work of disbanding as fast as we can, Accounts
are going to be audited, some persons are appointed for expedition sake to
audite the same, and present them to the Commons. Orders are gone out of each
Troop and Company (according to the enclosed Orders) which will both prevent
discontent, and take away the worst Members, Till the business of Disbanding
the Forces lie as they did.

Major Smithsons Regiament are upon their march out of Straford-shire into
Yorkshire upon the payment of six Months Assesments, and are now in
Darbyshire.

The Souldery here are now for the present in a very ill condition, the Country
complaining of them for lying on them still, and they on the Country for
resisting to give them Quarters, but it is hoped a sudden Disbanding and
Payment, will prevent both.

Thursday last and Yesterday Counsels of War sat in this City for the trial
of some Offenders, particularly five Soldiers of Captain Byards Troop for
committing several disorders and misdemeanors at Hallifax, were adjudged to
suffer an exemplary punishment. And also four Soldiers of Major Rookbies
Troop, for misdemeaning themselves at their Quarters at Melton, I am Sir in
great have.

York 29 Jan. 1647, Your Humble Servant.

Instructions For the Officers of each Regiament for the choosing and
appointing of Officers and Soldiers of every Company of Foot, and Troop of
Horse, who are to be Disbanded.
1. THose who shall be willing or desire to be Disbanded.

2. Those who have been in Arms against the Parliament since the Battle at
Naseby, being the 14 of June, 1645.

3. Those who are of deboyst or dishonest conversation, and demeanor, as in
Drinking, Swearing, abusing their Quarters or Country, or other demeanours
contrary to the Laws and Ordinances of War.

4. That in case the foregoing Instructions comprehend not the full Number
appointed hereby to be Disbanded, you are to make it up of those that have been
latest entertained, or have continued least in the Service.

York the 29 of Jan. 1647. Jo. LAMBERT

Jan. 31. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot

FINIS.

