LAMBETH FAIR, Wherein you have all the Bishops Trinkets set to Sale.

a bishop laments from his episcopal throne Heu quanta de spe decidi.

O tempora! O Mores!

I sit thus grovelling in S. Peter's Chair,
'Ore-prest with grief to think on Lambeth Fair.
Death close mine eyes with thy eternal doom,
Before this Fair be thus proclaimed at Rome:
O mihi praeteritos referet si Jupiter annos
Qualis eram --


Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

To the Reader.
THe rare Poeticke wits of these our Times,
Are daily chanting curious Hymns and Rymes.
Whose lines pe fumed, smell sweet as any Rope,
For English Bishops, or the Romish Pope.
But mine smell not so strong, for I am sorry,
Our Bishops should change Caps with Doctor Story.
Then Reader now, if thou would understand,
Why this same matter thus I take in hand:
Because I love my brain to exercise,
Though Zoylous, hap, may think it is otherwise,
Because I love to keep my mind from folly,
Or humor which is called Melancholy.
But some will say, perhaps, if this be true,
You might have kept it from the vulgar view:
I answer no, for who could then repair,
To buy new fashion Robes at Lambeth Fair.
The Parliament has pulled them down, and I
Have set their trinkets out for men to buy,
Lawne-sleeves, Hoods, Surplisses, with rest o'th rabble,
Thus ends the Prologue, Here begins the Fable.
LAMBETH FAIR, Wherein is sold, Ceremonies all Both new and old.

NO sooner was the sable darkness past,
And Sol his Eye on our Horizon cast
By whose bright becames those clouds dispersed were,
Which did benight the Land with horrid fear;
But presently the people heard strange Fables,
The Bishops went to Lambeth with their Bables,
Where a new Fair was lately consecrate
For Popish Garments, that were out of date:
And when their shops and stalls, and boothes were made
With all things sitting for that holy Trade:
O'th tops o'th standings all, for fear of evil,
Were Crosses set, to scare away the Devil:
With might and maine, the people 'gan to flock,
And all were present there, by nine a clock,
The Clearke of the Fair was presently bespoken,
To give them liberty, their stalls to open,
To keep out thieves the Keepers p'ace he deemes;
But Keeper he was run away it seems:
Well let him go, the Bishops cried, what then?
We have a nimble, and quicksighted Wren,
Who when he comes, can soar and fly about,
To spy, and keep the knavish Rabble out.
The Master of the Fair was called upon,
But answer's made, he to the Tower is gone;
That he was absent, it was taken ill,
But sure he went toth' Tower against his will:
Proclaym the Fair, the Bishops all, they cried,
For we dare hardly, longer here abide;
The Cleark gave leave, the Crier on a hill
Standing, began to cry with voice so shrill. O-yes, O-yes, I do cry,
The Bishops Trinkets who will buy?

This being done of Bishops, all the Crew,
Began with speed, their wearing Robes to show,
And with extended voice, they all did cry,
Come Customers, see what you lack and buy;
Here Is Vestments Consecrate, all sorts and sizes,
You may have here, if you will come to the prises:
Buy Fayrings for your Children, here are toys,
Fit for your purpose, be they Gerls, or Boys;
Caps for your Boys to hurl into the air,
And Beads for Gerles, are here in Lambeth Fair:
What though these Robes were first devised in Hell,
Tush that's no matter, we'll good-pen worths sell:
Here look upon them, they are very good and strong,
They Are neat and handsome, and will last you long,
They Are very full and large. you nere saw stronger;
I would not sell them durst I keep them longer.
Buy a Crucifix, another loud does call,
'Twill scare the Devil, and will preserve your soul;
Lay out your money, hang up worldly pelf,
I will sel't cheaper, then I had't my self:
It Is strange to see how men their money keep,
What come you all to Lambeth Fair to sleep,
Come buy lawn sleeves. I have no money took,
Here, try them on, you will like a Bishop look.
And may get honor, both of great and small,
And Lord it ore your fellow Brethren all:
If that the times should chance once more to turn,
Then might you Lord it, like as we have done,
Come hither friend, and buy this silken Gown,
I Am sure you cannot matched in Lambeth Town:
In this same Gown, did Canterburies Grace,
At High Commission show his graceless face;
Many a storm, and shower it will abide,
Yea, and a world of knavery 't will hide;
Sir, look upon it, and view it at your leisure,
Go to the price, for you I feign would pleasure,
Come buy his Graces Gown, the price is small,
And if you will I Will sell you grace and all.
Though he have worn't, it is near the worse for wearing,
Girt it but close, and never fear the tearing.
Come buy my Crosier staff, another he begins,
It Is excellent to keep Dogs from your shins:
Pray Sir let me some of your money take,
And keep this staff for its old masters sake.
Another comes, as if his back would break,
Burdened with Vestures, and began thus to speak,
Trinkets I have good store, within my pack,
I pray you view them, and see what you lack;
See for your love, and for your Money buy,
Name what you want, I Will fit you presently,
My pack it is a Wardrobe, large and fair,
Wherein are Miters, Caps rotund, and square,
The Rar^st Episcopalls, that ere you see,
Are in my pack, come pray you buy of me;
Hear's rich Embroydred wear, choose where you please,
I have a thousand such like knackes as these:
Buy this brave Rochet, buy this curious Cope,
The Tippet, Scarf, they all came from the Pope;
I Will sell them at rate you cannot loose,
Or else exchange them for a pair of shoose;
I must to Rome, I can no longer stay,
I pray you buy them, I must hence away.
Then after that unto this Jolly Fair,
A little Wren, came flying through the air,
And on his back betwixt his wings he bore,
A Minster stuffed with Crosses, Altars store,
With Sacred Fonts, and rare guilt Cherubims,
And bellowing Organs, chanting curious Hymmes,
The Hallowed Host, dum Priests, and singing boys,
With Antic Cringers, and a thousand toys:
Thus then this mighty WREN, unto the Fair,
Brought his Cathedral pack, thus stuffed with Ware,
The door's wide-op't, there thousands came to see,
The Romish Relics of the Hierarchy;
Where all were set to sale, and at low rate,
Because they began to wax quite out of date,
Buy my high Altars, he lifts up his voice,
All sorts of Mass books, here you may have choice,
Here Is Bells baptized will make a dainty sound,
Pray if you please step in and ring them round:
Then after that were seen a Regiment,
Of Hell-borne Locusts from Cocitus sent,
To draw a mighty Cart wherein were brought,
Plurality of Churches to be bought.
Then cried an other, Sir, what will you buy?
I pray step in Sir, do not so pass by.
Here Is a Cathedra, once Saint Peter's Chair,
The rarest thing to buy in Lambeth Fair.
The candid Surplesse, and the Wedding Ringes:
Pictures for Bibles, and such pretty things:
Here Is the late Canons, and the New found Oath:
To sell Et caetera I am very loath:
You formerly have heard by true Relation:
These are the toys we made in the Convocation:
Oath ex Officio, here if you will buy:
Or High Commission, take it presently.
Here Is Ember Weeks with thin-chapt Jack-a-Lent,
To help you at a pinch when all is spent:
Here Is Holy Days to sport the time away:
Or Book of Pastimes for the Sabbath Day:
Here Is Deanes and Prebends, and the filthy Nest
Of Pursevants, Promoters and the rest,
Chancelours, Officialls, Surrogates, and all
The lofty Courtiers of Commission Hall:
Come Clergy Chapmen, to your Hierarchy,
Heers exc'lent Ware, as good as ere you see;
Jure Divino, that is become our Doom,
We Will sel't for Wharfage to the Coast of Room.
Burialls, and Churchings, we have wondrous store,
Upon my word, they all came from the Whore;
Then next to him, a fiery fat guts fell,
Brought six and twenty Bishoprics to sell;
With gages and whips, and Prisons for all those,
That should their cursed Hierarchy oppose,
With catch him Pursevant, take him to the Iaile,
There let him lie without Mainprise or Bail,
'Ere he get from us, we will make him see
Experimentally, we Bishops be:
Our Courts and Iurisdiction's are at sale:
Come buy them quickly, 'ere they be too stale.
An other Bishop, with a Box did ride,
And with extended voice he loudly cried,
To Scholars all that Ministers would be,
Come hither, buy the Holy Ghost of me;
But Simon Magus he was in the ground,
And none to buy the Holy Ghost was found.
An other Bishop he a Pack brought in,
The which was stuffed with Licenses toth' brim,
And presently he cries out with fury,
Here Is Licenses to Preach, to Church and Bury:
If wedding's out and you are disposed to wed,
Come buy a License, and away to Bed.
What all pass by? it is strange Time turns her wheell,
And bends her brow upon us, that we feell
No handsaile yet, our ware's becharmed sure,
And (like our selves) there is none will it endure,
It Is doomed to dismal fate, despised and scorned,
Though never so costly, or so much adorned:
Here Is omne venale, yet no money flies,
Our ware's dog-cheape, and thus credit dies:
For such a Fair I never did behold,
We bring our ware but nothing can be sold:
I wonder said one, what was our intent,
To make our Fair thus at the Parliament.
For we are mocked here by saucy Jacks,
They bid the Pedlers, to put up their Packes.
Another Bishop lifting up his voice,
Cried out amain, of Livings I have choice,
I Will sell you two or three, if that you please,
So you will have money coming in with ease,
If that to Preach, your self you cannot endure,
Get some poor Iourney-man to serve your Cure;
You Will quickly light on such a one I trow,
We have made more, then how to live do know.
Wax Candles, Tapors, another cries and calls,
These brought I with me from Cathedral Paul's,
They Will scare the Devil, and put him unto flight,
When he perceives a consecrated light;
When we at Mattens, and at Even-song were,
We had them by us then, devoyd of fear;
They Will bring delight unto your eyes and nose,
They burn so clear and smell so like a Rose,
And when you think that it has burnt enough,
Then blow it out, you shall not smell the snuff,
Or else you may on whom you will bestow it,
They Will joy to think a Bishop once did owe it.
Come hither Friend another loud does call
I Will sell you here my Common-Prayer-Bookes all,
Sir view this same, and take it in your hand,
This Book but lately no man durst withstand,
For if he did, and we thereof did hear,
We sure did make him a Commissioner,
And if he chanced apearance for to miss,
To Limbo Patrum, he was sent for this;
And if he did not us some money give,
In that Abyss we doomed him still to live.
Money my hearts another loud does call,
I see I am not now in Lambeth Hall,
No sooner I from Dinner then was risen,
Men brought me chinke to free them out of Prison,
I Am broke, I Am broke; another then did say,
Come buy my Hoods I can no longer stay,
What mean ye Sirs? the day is almost spent,
Come buy my Trinckets all incontinent;
Come hither friend, the price is very small,
^^e sell my Coat, it is Canonical,
Come buy this Miter Sir, if you be able,
The virtue of it is inestimable,
Buy't Sir, and wear it, and then soon I hope,
You will rise higher and become a Pope,
I tell you truly had not fortune left me,
I would have kept it until Death bereft me.
It now beginning to grow toward night,
Comes a grave Doctor running in with might,
His courage stout was something now abated,
He brings his golden Slippers, consecrated,
And cries, come buy these Slippers here of mine,
They are embossed with Holiness Divine,
They will in all your ways preserve you sound,
And with them you may tread on holy Ground,
If you will but wear them, this I Will tell you more,
You Will leave the Earth, and to the Heavens may soar
They Are filled with Holiness within, and round about,
Here look upon them, see how't breaks out.
If not my Slippers, then my great Bumbo,
I Will sel't you now; what answer? No no no,
We thought our ware would sell at such a price,
And of our hands been vented in a trice:
That this last Act upon the English Stage,
Would forded money, for our pilgrimmage
To Babylon the Great; how'ere we dreamed no less,
Then Ransom for his prisoned Holiness;
But he, nor we, must by this Lambeth Fair,
Get help I see, by this our Popish ware.
Whilst thus the Bishops there, their guts and they,
Called to their Customers to come away,
A Messenger came running through the crowd,
And to the Bishops thus he spoke aloud,
Away to Rome or Tiburne choose you whether,
I know your shoes are made of running leather:
For all the Laws oth' Land, you have out run,
And I come here to tell you what is done,
The Parliament has pulled your pride toth' ground,
And by the House three times you are voted down,
Your war's not worth a --, for all your cogging,
See where the Hangman comes, away, be jogging,
Alas cried they, is all our labor loss?
Others get money, we have but the Cross!
For we are crossed in our expedition,
And fly we must, for all Oxfords Petition,
Yet notwithstanding herein lies our hope,
We shall be entertained by the Pope.
With that like men of Senses quite bereft,
They ran away and all their trinckets left,
A friend of mine to me did then repair,
Desireing me, to pen this famous Fair,
Which I have done, and have it here to sell;
Come buy the Fair of me, and so farewell.
FINIS.

