A List of the Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, Generals, Mayor
Generals, etc. and Colonells, of the Scots Kings party slain and taken
Prisoners, Duke Hamilton: Lieu. Genesis Leshly. E. Derby beheaded. Lieu. G.
Middleton. Maj. Genesis White. Maj. G. Montgomery. Maj. G Roe Oneal. Maj. Genesis
Graves. Maj. Genesis Massey Bishop of Clogher Genesis


By his Majesty DEATH the Hieroglyphix.

A PROCLAMATION:
WHEREAS the Crown and Scepter of England, Scotland, and Ireland have so often
been taken from me, notwithstanding all my Re-inthronizations, and I have been
still laid by, yet now my Victorious Sword has placed me in Triumph, where I
sit clothed with the Royal Robes, and wear the Crown without disturbance,
where Worms are my Companions, and the Bones of all the dead my Subjects.

If therefore any of the Generation of CHARLES STVART, or other English, Irish,
or Scots whatsoever, presume to josle me, or be my Competitor, he shall soon be
my Captive; If the first step be in the Throne the second shall be in the
Grave; I have long given warning, but will be at Courtesy no longer; And now I
have begun to set so good footing on this part of the Earthen Globe, that I
shall attempt to Conquer all the Emperors, Kings and Monarchs in the World.

Given at the Rout at Worcester, the remarkable third day of September, 1651.
before my Regal Picture. DEATH.

THE WOEFVLL MIRROVR of MONARCHY



REVELATION 13. 18.
HEre is wisdom, Let him that has understanding count the number of the
Beast, for it is the number of a Man, and his number is six hundred threescore
and six.

Let him that has but so much Wisdom as by Arithmaticke to add so small a
Sum, count, and here he shall find it (punctual) to an Unite.

1 It must be subtracted out of the Number which is comprehended in a Man, and
that as he is the Beast.

2 This Number must amount to the just Sum of 666.

3 The Scots King coming into England with his Irish Papists, and Presbiterian
Kirk, upon the account of the National League and Covenant, And by them
Proclaimed King of Britain; Exactly bears this number of the Beast.

the British King. -- 003 hIs IrIsh papIsts -- 004 National LeagVe, -- 156
anD -- 500 presbIterIan Kirk. -- 003 666
A List of the Family from which CHARLES the second King of Scotland descended,
that sat in the fatal Throne of Scotland, and came to untimely ends.
THe late King Charles (his own father) beheaded at White Hall gate. King James
(his Grandfather) poisoned. Queen Mary before him beheaded at Foddring by
Castle. King James the fifth murdered. King James the fourth slain at Denfield.
King James the third slain at Baneksborn. King James the second at R^xborough.
King James the first put to death by his Subjects. King Alexander the third
killed with a fall from his horse King Donald the seventh twice deposed, and at
last cast into Prison, and his eyes put out. King Duncan the second slain. King
Malcolme the third slain at Alnwick. King Mackheth slain. King Duncan the first
slain. King Malcolme the second put to death by his Subjects. King Grimus
slain. King Constantine the fourth slain. King Keneth the third murdered by a
Scotch woman. King Culenus murdered. King Duffus murdered in the County of
Murray. King Indulphus slain. King Malcolme the first murdered by his own
servants. King Constantine the third deposed. King Constantine the second
slain. King Donald the fifth killed himself. King Alpinus beheaded. King
Dougallus drowned in the river Spey. King Fergus the third poisoned by his
wife. King Eugenius the eighth murdered. King Ambirkeletus murdered. King
Eugenius the fifth slain. King Maldxin strangled by his wife. King Ferquerd
killed by a Woolfe. King Donald the fourth drowned in the River Tay. King
Ferquard killed himself in prison. King Constantine the first murdered. King
Edgenius the first slain. King Fethalmashus murdered by an Harper. King
Augustinus slain. King Romachus beheaded. King Donald the third murdered. King
Donald the second slain. King Findocus murdered as he was hunting King
Nathalocus murdered and cast into a Privy. King Athrico killed himself. King
Euthodius murdered by his servants. King Satrael murdered. King Ethodius
murdered by an Irish Harper King Conarus died in prison. King Mogallus
murdered. King Lugthacus murdered. King Dahdanas beheaded by his Subjects. King
Evenus died in Prison. King Gillus murdered. King Durstus slain. King Thereus
banished by his Subjects. King Routha deposed. King Nothalus murdered. King
Ferethatius murdered. King Fergus the first drowned at Carickefergus in
Ireland.
Besides what have befallen others, not mentioned in histories, and this
Charles Stuart is but the 110 King that ever was of Scotland, who is Proclaimed
Traitor, and Fugitive in England. His Uncle was poisoned, and his mother and
brother both fled, and proclaimed Traitors to England.

A List of the Earls, Lords, Knights, General Officers, and Colonells of the
Scots KINGS party, slain and taken Prisoners.
Lords taken Prisoners.
Earl Cleaveland Earl Rothes. Earl Lautherdale. Earl Kenmore Earl Leven
Earl Kelly Earl Corneway Earl Shrewsbury. Earl Marshall Earl Craford Earl
Cornworth. Lord Leith Lord Ogleby Lord Burginie Lord Humbee Lord Lee. Lord
Grandison Lord Montgomery Lord Molineux Lord Peasly Lord Cranston Lord
Sinclare. Lord Spany. Lord Kilmore Lord Talbot. Lord Hugh Montgomery,
Lords slain and dead of their wounds
Duke Hamilton Earl Derby. Lord Newton. Lord Eniskillen. Lord Liberton.
Knights took Prisoners.
Sir Timothy Fetherstonhough. Sir James Lumsden Sir Will. Douglas Sir John Gell.
Sir Tho. Trallop. Sir James Graham Sir George Keith. Sir Will. Keith. Sir Tho.
Tompson. Sir Tho. Terry Sir George Melvill Sir John Dalzell. Sir James Foul.
Sir James Lockier Sir John Packington Sir John Douglas Sir Tho. Urquart Sir
John Tompson Sir James Graham junior. Sir Alexander Forbs Sir Thomas Simkins
Sir Will. Heart. Sir John Brown. Sir David Oglesby. Sir Phillip Eustruther.
Knights slain and put to death.
Sir Robert Lumsdale. Sir Henry Hide.
General Officers taken Prisoners.
Lieutenant General Leshly Lieut. General Middeleton Lieu. General James Weymes
Major General Massey Major General Graves Major General Piscoty Major General
James White Major General Deel Major Genesis Montgomery Adjutant Gen: James
Bickerton Adjutant Gen: Waddel Adjut: Gen: James Doukin Adjut. General
Christopher Wormesly. Engineer General Fosset Commissary Genesis Moor Marshall
Gen: White Quarterm. Genesis Oliphant. Waggon-master Gen: Alex: Hariot
General Officers slain.
Major Gen: Hen. Roe Oneal Maj: Genesis Shane O Cane.
Colonells taken Prisoners.
Colonel Lumsden Col Hamilton Col: VVallip Col. Gourdoun Col. Ker Col.
Alexander mac Donell. Col. Coney Col. Thoral. Col. Booth Col. Ashurst Col.
Egerton Col. Holland Col. Bradshaw Col. Blake Col. Mateland Col. Straughan Col.
Barthlick Col. Sinkler Col. Rowse Col. Stuart Col. Hume Col. Drummond Col. John
Cashallum Col. Bullet Col. James Guardian Col. Will. Cunningham. Col. Kilhead
Col. Andrew Milves Col. Will. Hurry Col. Will. Keith. Col. Benbow Col. Spine.
Col. Lodowick Drummond Col Boza. Col. Turner Col. Fleskin Col. John Butler.
Col. John Hume Col. George Keeth. Col. James Turner Col. Lowther Col. Marlo
Col. Bewcanon.
Colonells slain.
Col: Rice mac Colleketagh Col Phil: mac Tool O Neale Col. Hugh Maguyre Col:
Oneal Col: Hugh mac Mughan Col: Straughan Col: Hamilton Col: Florence Fitz
Patrick
Bishops, Magistrates, and eminent Clergymen, Physicians, etc taken prisoners.
Bishop of Clogher Mr. Fanshaw Secretary Mr. Jackson Chamber-man. Mr. Freeman
Chamber-man Mr. Bray Chamber-man. Thomas Listour Mayor of Worcester. Mr. James
Bridges Sheriff Dr. Rob. Burnet Dr. Cuningham Dr. Chute Dr. Davis Dr. Darl^y
Dr. Forest Dr. Kendday Dr. Rosse. M. Rob. Douglas Kirk-man Mr. James Hambleton
Kirk-man M. Mungo Law Kirk-man M. George Puliston Kirk-man M. George Rutters
Kirk-man M. John Sharp Kirk-man M. Hugh Ramsey Kirk-man M. Andrew Ker Kirkman.
M. Rob. Mercer Kirk man M. James Merk Kirk-man. M. Andrew Merk Kirk-man M. John
Carter Kirk-man M. Rob. Bl^gboy Kirk-man M. David Liddal Kirk-man M. Will. Cloyd
Kirk man M. John Waller Kirk-man M. David Leech Kirk-man.
Slain and put to death
Bishop of Down Nicholas Love Minister Dr. Lewen Eusebius Andrews Consil.
etc.
LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, 1652.


