THE KING Found at Southvvell, and the Oxford Gigg played, and Sung at VVitney
VVakes: With the Masque showed before diverse Courtiers, and Cavaliers, that
went thither from Oxford, and several Ketches and Songs at the said VVakes.

Presented to the Duke of YORK.

By Mr, Loyd, Studient of Christ Church in Oxford, and a Captain of that
Garrison.

London printed for F. L. 1646:

To the most Illustrious JAMES Duke of YORK:
SIR,
PArt of these Papers being already destined to your Highnesses Recreation, the
rest (like divided Worms) by reuniting to their pieces, are linked again into
an entire-nothing. All I pretend to here exceeds not the Pedlers Ambition, who
in the strength of his Portable VVarehouse, swells into the title of a
Merchant, and yet instead of Silks and Tissues, receives them with nothing but
Tapes, and Filletings. The Vessel is here so unfraught and Empty, that it
aims at so Royal a Haven, not by design of Commerce, or Trading, but
shelter, and safety from tempestuous Censures, which is the greatest Ambiton of
your Highnesse's

Most humble servant M. LL.

VVJTNEY WAKE:
VVItney is a town near Oxford whither diverse Courtiers, and Officers of
Oxford Garrison went to the VVakes to be merry, where they sung and drank
themselves out of all their senses, on the Wake day early in the morning, they
went out of Oxford singing this song, taught them by Captain Loyd their Poet
as follows.

At the meeting of the Courtiers and Cavaliers that had appointed to be merry
at VVitney Wake, Captain LOYD sung thus.

I, and whether shall we go?
To the Wake I tro:
It Is the Village.
L. Majors show.
Oh! to meet I will not fail,
For my pallat is in have,
Till J sipp again and taste,
Of the Nu^thr^own-Lasse and Ale.
Feel how my Temples ache,
For the Lady of the Wake.
Her lips are as soft as a Medler,
With her Poses and her points,
And the Ribons on her joints.
The divise of the Fields
and the Peddler.
Then from Oxford singing this song, away they went over the Fields to VVitney
to the Wakes.

These Gallants being arived at VVitney; early in the morning, (with their
train from Oxford) where they had appointed certain Morris-Dancers to meet
them at the Wakes, as also several Musicians with various sorts of Music,
viz. the Country Fiders, a Taberer; a pair of bagge-Pipes, and an Harper, and
being come to their quarters where they were resolved to be merry, they first
began to drink hard, but the Morris-Dancers, and the Music being ready to
attend them, first of all began the Morris-Dancers to caper before them, with
one who gave the Lords favor to diverse Gentlemen that gave him some a
shilling, some 6. some more, some less, for the common stock of the company,
There were some 6. or 7. Country fellows with Napkins, and Scarfes, and Ribons
tied about them, and bells at their knees, according to the manner of that
sport, and with them a Mayd-Marian, and two fools, who fell a dansing and
capering before the Oxford blades, and made them sport a good while.

The Song at the entry of the Morris-Dancers before them.
With a noise and a din,
Comes the Morris-dancer in
With a fine linen shirt;
But a buckeram skin.
O! he treads out such a peale,
From his pair of logs of Veale
His quarters and Idols to him,
Nor do those knaves inviron
Their toes with so much Iron
Twill ruin a Smith to shoe him.
J and then he flings about,
His sweat, and his Clout,
The wesest think it too else:
While the Yeomen think it meet.
That be jangle at his feet,
The forherse right ear jewels.
Then the Fool with his bawble fell to several sports, and to tumbling, etc.

After that they had wearied both the Morris-Dancers, and themselves too with
this sport, by which time they had well druke, they discharged them, and called
for the Country Fiddlers, and accordingly there entered four Country fellows,
with a Tenor a Mean, a Treble, and a Base, who having played some time before
them, and they having danced a while with some Country Lasses, the Gallants
called for dinner, and then called in an old Fiddler and his boy to play to
them, and sing whilst they were at dinner, after with Mr. Loyd, he acted his
part as follows.

The song upon the Fiddler and his boy that played and sung to them at Dinner at
the VVakes.
But before all be don,
with a Christopher strung,
Comes Music none
Though Fiddler one,
With the Oule and his Granchild.
with a face like a Man-child,
Amazed in their nest,
A wake from their rest
And seek out an Oak to laugh in.
Such a dismal Chance
Makes the Church-yeard dance
When the Screechowles Guts string a Coffin.
when a Fiddlers Coarce
Catches could and grows hoarse
Oh the never heard a sadder
when a Roundheaded sinner
makes his Will before Dinner,
To the Tune of Nooze and the Ladder.
This Song pleased them all well, and made them very merry.

In the midst of their Cups, they fell to very deboysterous and profane
discourses, and in the Malignant oration of Heliconian liquer, they thought
themselves to be no small fools but after Dinner they being risen, some of
them took a nappe to recover a little of their senses; but in the afternoon
the rest of the Masque was shown.

And accordingly there came in a poor fellow with his Taber and Pipe, and he
fell to playing before them, and tells strange stories in Rime-doggery, which
made them to grinne a little one at another, for they were too much drunk to
laugh heartily, and then Mr. Lloyd he acted his part and he falls to singing for
he was still to be the Poet and act his part as Jester upon them all.

The Song upon the man that played upon the Taber and Pipe.
I, but all will not do,
without a Pass or two,
From him that pipes
and tabers the tatoo.
He Is a man that can tell'em
such a Jigg from his vellam
with his whisle, and his Club,
And his brac't half Tubbe
that I think
There never came before ye
though the Moths lodged in it
or in manuscript or print
such a pitiful Parchment story
He that hammers like a Tinker
Kettle Music is a stinker,
our taberer bids him hark it,
though he thrash till he sweats
and out the bottom beats
of his two
Dosser Drumes to the Market
But this sport they are soon weary of, and therefore discharge him to be gone.

Then they called in the man with the Bagg-Pipes, who had a pair three times
as big as those which they use at Palace Garden to play before the Bears
with, for he had gotten a pair of Bag-pipes as big at those that Arthur of
Bradley used to play with in the North Country, when the young Fellows and the
Lasses were wont to meet to dance to, under the green Trees, and then they
cried out oh brave Arthur of Bradley.

This man came in with his Bag-pipes, and there he went about his work, and
sitting him down upon a Stool, to play he went, and pleased the Cavaliers and
the Courtiers and the rest that were at the Wakes wondrous well, and Mr. Lloyd
sung to them as follows.

Mr. Loyds Song to the Bag-pipes.
Bag-piper good luck on you
thou art a man for my money
Him the Bears love
better then honey
How he tickles with his skill
with his bladder and his quil
How he swells till he blister
while he gives his mouth a Glister
Nor yet does his P^isick
greeve him.
His Chops they would not tarry
For a tried Apothecary.
But the Harp comes in
to releeve him.
They made sport a long while with the Bag-pipes

Then there was a tall shag head Ruffen came in with a harp to conclude the
Music who played many several lessons to them, both French, and Irish, as
well as English, he played also a hone, a hone, and to him the Oxford Poet sung
this Lesson.

The Harp took its fountain
From the Boggs of the mountain
For better was never aforded
Strings hop and rebound
Oh the very same sounded
May be strung from a Trucl-bed Coarded.
After which the Harper, as the rest were discharged, and the Masque being
ended, and the Oxford blades soundly fuddled, they fell to singing of Catches,
and M. Lloid taught them a new Catch as follows which they roared out to
purpose.

EPILOGVE.
The VVitney Catch; or conclusion of the Masque at Witney Wakes,
made by Mr. Lloyd the Poet.
Now God a bless King Charles
And send him to be merry.
And bring our noble Queen
A safe over the Ferry,
The Prince, marry save him
And the Duke his own brother
God a blessing light upon him,
He is eene such another.
I say the Dukes worship,
For an whose sweet sake
Was a Chiefly intended
We of VVitney, and the Wake
Some considerable addition all lines for conclusion.

The King went out of Oxford, in private, toward the North,
And with his Majesty, A Priest, and Ashburnham went forth,
To Southwell then they took their way, near Newarke siege,
But there the Scotts beset the Town, And Sovereign Liege,
And did the English then acquaint what they had done,
Both do consult how they may best the King send home.
FJNIS.

