A LIST OF THE Prisoners taken, and those that were slain by Collonell Horton
in South Wales. AND An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled.

For settling the Militia, and raising of Forces for suppressing all Rebellions
and Insurrections in the Counties of Gloucester, Monmouth, Brecon, and
Glamorgan. AND For the better securing, and safety of the Parliament, and the
said Counties.

Die Veneris 12. May. 1648.

REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That Wednesday next
be appointed for a day of public thankesgiving to Almighty God, for h^^ great
mercy and blessing in giving so great and seasonable a Victory to the
Parliaments Forces; under the Command of Colonel Horton, over all the Forces
of the Enemy in South Wales, on Monday the 8 of this instant May 1648* To be
observed within the City of London and Liberties thereof* late lines of
Communication, and weekly Bills of, Mortality; And that the Lord Mayor be
desired to give timely notice hereof, to all the Ministers within the places
aforesaid.

Joh Brown Cler. Parliamentorum

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

Die Veneris 12 May 1648.
BE it Ordained, and it is ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, That these persons following, ( viz) For the County of Gloucester,
William Lord Viscount Say and Seal, James Fienes Esquire, Sir John Seymor
Knight, Nathaniell Stephens, Edward Stephens, John Stephens, Thomas Hodges,
Thomas Pury Esquires; Sir Giles Overbury Knight, William Leigh, Richard
Aylworth, Job Deighton, John Barnard Esquires, Robert Waterworth Gent. Silvanus
Wood, John Fettiplace, Robert Oldesworth Esquires, Richard Stephens, Stephen
Fowler Gent. Thomas Escourt, William Shephard, John Codrington, Samuel
Codrington, Thomas Stephens, William Stafford, Matthew Huntley, Anthony
Kingscote, Richard Yate* William Cook, Thomas James Esquires; James Hawkins
Gent. William Brown Esquire Col. John Barrow, Col. Robert Kyrle, Lieutenant
Collonell Daniel Dobbins, and George Ken, Esquire, For the City and County of
the City of Gloucester, the Major, Recorder and Sheriffs of the City of
Gloucester, for the time being, John Brewster, William Singleton, William
Capell, Thomas Hill, Thomas Pury, Dennis Wife, Luke Nurse, John Maddox, Henry
Cugley, James Stephens, Aldermen; John Lenthall, John Dorney, Robert Kirle,
John Hanbury, Silvanus VVood, William Sheppard, Evan Soize Esquires, and
Thomas Pury jun: Gent: For the County of Monmouth, Philip Earl of Pembrooke
and Mountgomery, John Herbert Esquire, Sir Trevor Williams Barronet, Thomas
Morgan, Collonell William Herbert, Henry Herbert, William Morgan, Edward
Morgan, Collonell Thomas Herbert, Collonell Thomas Hughes, Thomas Pury jun.
William Jones, William Baker, Henry Baker, John Parry, John Walter, Christopher
Katchmey, William Blething, John Hanbury, Roger Williams, William Packer, and
Rice Williams Esquires: For the County of Brecon, Howel Guin of Lanbraine, John
Walbief, Edward Ramsey, Edmond Ganies, Thomas Jews, Thomas Williams, Thomas
Price, William Watkins, and Lewis Jones Esquires: For the County of Glamorgan,
Philip Earl of Pentbrook and Mountgomery, Philip Lord Herbert, Algernon Sidney,
Walter Stoickland, Bussey Mansel, Edward Brichard; Michael Oldesworth, Evan
Soyse, Humphrey Windham, Thomas Carne, Collonell William Herbert, Edward
Stradling, Collonell Philip Jones, John Herbert, Thomas Spencer, Richard Jones,
John Price, and Rowland Dawkins Esquires shall be Committees for the Militia
respectively in the several and respective Counties o^ Gloucester and
Monmouth, The City, and County of the City of Gloucester Brecon and Glamorgan,
for the better securing, and safety of the Parliament, and the said Counties.

And shall have power and authority, and are hereby authorized by themselves,
or any three of them in the said several Counties, and places respectively to
put the said Counties and places, into a posture of defense, and to raise
Forces, Horse and Foot, and them to list, arm and exercise, and to form them
into Regiaments, Troops and Companies, and them to muster, array and weapon
from time to time in places fit for that purpose, and to appoint over them
Colonels, Captains and other Officers from time to time, by Commissions under
the Hands and Seals of the said several and respective Committees, or any
seven of them, in the respective Counties aforesaid, as often as there shall be
occasion in that behalf, And shall have power, and are hereby authorized by
themselves, or their said Commanders, and Officers to lead, conduct, and employ
the said Persons arrayed, and weaponed for the suppression of all Rebellions
and Insurrections that shall or may happen within the Counties and Places
aforesaid, according as the said Committees respectively shall from time to
time give directions, or shall be otherwise directed from time to time by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, Or the Committee sitting at Darby
house, Any former Order, Declaration, or other matter to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding, And for all, and every their doing herein, the said
respective Committees, and all and every the said Person and Persons shall be
saved harmless, and indempnified by the authority of Parliament. Provided
that this Ordinance, and every thing therein contained shall continue for the
space of six Months, and no longer.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Par. Dom. Com.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro tempore.
My Lord,
GOd has this day rewarded our wearisome Marches with a full and glorious
Victory over and Enemy who had used much subtilty and diligence to engage the
Kingdom in a new War; they had increased to a great number by the addition of
diverse disbanded men from England, and a general conjunction of most of able
bodied Inhabitants of the Counties of Pembrook, Cvrmarthen, and Cardigan, and
many of Glamorgan. This day about nine of the Clock it pleased God that we
engaged with them at a place called Saint Fagons, three miles distant from
Cardiffe, and for near two hours had a very hot dispute, but at length by Gods
mercy they were put to a total rout, many slain upon the place, and about
three thousand Prisoners, great store of Arms and Ammunition, and many
Colors; The Enemy accounted themselves eight thousand Horse and Foot, which
makes the mercy more remarkable.

My Lord, The Almighty was pleased greatly to strengthen both our Officers and
Soldiers, in the discharge of their duties with much resolution and
cheerfulness, but with one heart they desire, that the honor of this work
may be wholly given to God. This account I held my self bound to present your
Lordships with, to be communicated to the Right Honorable the House of
Peers, being

My Lord: Your most humble and faithful Servant Tho. Horton.
In the Field near S. Fagons 8 May, 1648.
Taken Prisoners by Colonel Horton.
Major Genesis John Stradling. Laughorns Quartermaster genesis Laughorns Commissary
genesis 12 Gentlemen that were to have had Commissions to attend at the
Headquarters. Collonell Harris, Col. Phillip Sammage, of Newcastle. Col. Rith.
Grime. Col. Howel Gamis. Several other Colonels, that had not received their
Commissions. Lieut. Col. Wogan of Pembrook. Lieut. Col. Lewis of Redla. Lieu
Col Hodskin of the Forest Major Phillips, Major Dawkins, Major Stedman, Major
Christopher Matthews of St. Anall. Capt. Matthew. Capt. Will: Batton, Capt.
Rich: Cradack.
Besides diverse others, whose names are not yet brought in. (viz.)

80 Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, Captains, and Lieutenants. 70
Inseriour Officers. Doctor Lloyd, Several other Malignant Min. Mr. Marmaduke
Lloyd, Sir Marmaduke Lloyds Son. Mr. Hugh Lloyd, Mr. James Walcot, Mr. Walter
Lloyd. Mr. George Anderson, Mr. Roger Gamis, Mr. Walter Powel, Mr. Edward
Gamis, Mr. Roger Williams, Mr. Deavoreux Grafton. 250 Gentlemen and Reformado
Officers. 2600 Common Soldiers, 4000 Clubmen dispersed to their several
habitations. 350 Arms broken and whole. 50 Coullours, and standards. 360
Horse, All their Ammunition, bag and baggage.
Slain of the Welsh.
Lieut. Col. Thomas Laughorne, Lieut. Col. Howel. Major Bussey. Major Evan
Thomas, Major Smith. Captain Turburvill a Papist. Capt. Powel of Lantrade, 40
Officers more, 150 Common Soldiers, Genesis Laughorn wounded and fled Col* Powel
fled with 100 horse Col. Poyer keeps Pembrook castle with 100 men.
Die Veneris May 12. 1648.
REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That Wednesday next
be appointed for a day of public thanksgiving to Almighty God, for his great
mercy and blessing, in giving so great and seasonable a Victory to the
Parliaments Forces under the Command of Colonel Horton, over all the Forces of
the Enemy in South Wales on Monday the 8 of this instant May 1648 to be
observed within the City of London and Liberties, thereof, late Lines of
Communication and weekly Bills of Mortality. And that the Lord Mayor be desired
to give timely notice hereof to all the Ministers within the places af^resaid.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum*

FINIS.

