MAYOR LINDESY'S LEGACY. April 25. 1645.
Bequeathed to his Countrymen, the Scottish-Commanders, and his
Fellow Soldiers and Sufferers in this Terrestrial Warrfare.
It being found in his Tronke after his Death, in the form of a Letter; With
this SUPERSCRIPTION following:

For his noble worthy Friends and Countrymen, the Scottish-Commanders in the
Parliament service.

Deliver not this Letter till J be in my Grave, and then J pray You conveene
these Gentlemen together, and deliver it unto them as my last WILL: And
here-with present my LOVE unto them ALL.

MArs never met upon Pernassus hill
At Randevouse; nor did he dip his quill
In Helicon, thence to extract that Art
Which Poets need, his Offpring to impart.
Expect not then, expressions from my pen
To please the Critic, nor those curiousmen
Who love to Carpe; I only leave to thee
That all I have by way of Legacy,
It is not Gold, nor treasure evil got.
My just designs, such Shadows followed not,
But it is experience fetched from a far,
Bought with my life and blood in foreign War.
I spent the prime time of my age abroad
In serving Kings, hut still observing God
I spared no pains, but spent my dearest blood
To learn knowledge, for my Countries good,
Nor did I loose the labor I bestowed,
Such as imploid me paid me what they owde:
Rewarding me with what I could desire,
The Workman being worthy of his hire.
Thus being fraught with knowledge and reward;
Returned here in couscience and regard
Into this Kingdom joining heart and hand
To do them service by my best command:
Which I performed; unchalleng'd for offense,
Not wronging any on the least pretense.
Remembering still, the duty of that Oath,
Wherein the Kingdoms are united both;
To save our Sovereign, and maintain the Laws,
The Subjects freedom, and the public cause,
For this I fought, enduring to the death,
Am hated therefore with a world of wrath,
Would fast a Week, have neither meat nor drink,
But all was for the cause then you must think.
Dear Country Men in this, let me advise you,
Let neither wrongs, nor want of Pay entice you
But suffer still though ye be scourgd and scant
Your neighbors have enough, though ye may want;
Yet you must not envy, that were a sin
We suffer for the cause we did begine:
Go on, endure, have patience, Fast and Pray,
And be not wearied doing well I say,
The cause is Gods, good brethren be not sorry,
Ye know this life's but vain and transetory,
What then, although you have not meat, nor drink?
Nor Money, What? you must not always think
To have those things, ye know the Poor and Lame
Shall have reward, God only thinks on them.
Forsake your countries, Household, Wives, and friends
And be not always for your Private ends,
And though they chide you; they are not angtie ever
It Is but to try if you will still persever,
They correct them whom they love and chasten too
Their dearest child Indulgent friends so do;
Yet dare I not condemn you for your fear
To see me lie and starve for hunger here
For I protest, I thought my sufferings good,
Till I had Paunde my very Clothes for food;
But being Naked, Hungry, sick, and Poor,
I could not then for shame go to the door.
Do not therefore as I did, lie not still
Until ye starve, but labor to fulfill
The Scripture, saying pray; they bid you too
To use the means, as well as prayer allow:
The Scripture bids you, Knock, and Seek, and Ask,
And you shall have, this is an easy task,
I know ye ask but then you ask amiss.
Ye ask not all in faith you fail in this
Are not your Judges just? why do ye then
Not speak in time; they are Gods as well as men,
Then God forbid that men should be debat'd,
The Just will ever give the Just reward,
But tell them this, the will of him that is dead,
That what they mind to give, they give with speed:
And that they send you not to seek Debenters.
The Auditors, are tedious Male-Contenters.
My fatal hour prevented my desire
If I had lived, I had had all my hire:
But as I do assign you to those things,
Which woeful time, and my experience brings.
Even so I bid you be not slack to send
And seek your due; they swore for to defend
Each one the other suffering for the cause,
They will not break their Covenant, and their Laws,
But if you wait, and wait as I did do,
Ye cannot tell what may befall you too,
Thus have I run my race, and writ my will
I pray you then be careful to fulfill,
Those things you came for Brethren; So I end,
And humbly do my Spirit recommend
Unto it is Maker, and pray's you if you can
To bury me, Even like an honest man.
And so farewell, remember what I said,
Ye'ill live and dye the better, that ye'er paid
Lindesy's last farewell.
Printed by T. Pain, 1645.


