A List of all the Victories, and successful Achievements of the Parliaments
Fleet, under the Command of Col. Popham (lately deceased) Col. Blake, and Col.
Deane, Admiralls and Generals of the Fleet, from the time they were empowered,
which was 28 Feb. 1650. to this present.


1 THe Sancta Maria, a Sugar Prize 2 The Crown a fly-boat of Haverdegrace in
France, burden 400. Tuns, 22 Guns, part laden with Corn. 3 A Galiot of
Amsterdam laden with Corn at the Terceras. 4 The Saltheap burden 400 Tons
richly laden from Genoa bound in for Lisbone. 5 The Arms of Amsterdam laden by
a French man whom we took in her, coming out of Lisbone. 6 The Caesar of
Rotterdam bound for Lisbone, and coming from Villa Rosin laden with corn. 7
The Christopher of Rotterdam. 8 A Iersey Vessel of some 50 Tuns, having about
50000. of Poor John in her. 9 The King David of Rotterdam, and two other small
pinks. 10 A small Carval with some decayed Pilchers in her. 11 The Fortune
Frigot of Anchuysen taken before Cales, with French goods in her. 12 The Peter
of Amsterdam, with 33 bailes of linen cloth, and other goods. 13 On the
beginning of March, 1650. Richard Thurstons with the John Adventure, beat off a
Jersie Man of War, and defended three rich Ships richly laden. 14 A Ship laden
with goods, and 3300 and odd pieces of eight taken by Captain Pen, near
Cales. 15 A Vessel called the Golden Wagon, re-taken on the western coasts by
Captain Hall. 16 A French Ship with goods taken by Captain Hall. 17 A ship
taken from the Scots King on the North coast of Scotland, with some Gentlemen,
and diverse Commissions from their King, and two Cloakes with stars, and other
baggage. 18 Diverse Commissions, and Letters, and Papers of discovery taken at
Boston, that came in a vessel from Rotterdam. 19 On 17 March, Mr. Michael
Kerry, James Se^ly and others, brought away the Hope-well from Scilly to
Mine-head. 20 The 29 March, 1651. Captain Brown-bushel the great sea Admiral,
enemy to the Parliament of England was beheaded. 21 April 1. 1651. A ship taken
near Haymouth four miles from Barwick, whither she was chased, with Provisions
and Arms for the Scots King from Holland. 22 A fleet of Ships seized on going
to Fortugall, from some in Holland. 23 Captain Fenne beat a French man of War
with 32 Guns, on the Coasts of Spain, and forced her a ground. 24 A French Man
of War with 20 Guns taken by Captain Pen: 25 Two rich ships belonging to
Merchants in St. Mallows taken, with Merchandise of great value. 26 A ship
taken near Leeth in Scotland by the President Friggot, laden with Wines, Salt,
Tobacco, strong Waters, and other lading; some considerable persons of the
Scots Kings party were in her. 27 A Sea Pirate belonging to the Isle of Man
taken, and brought in to Liverpoole. 28 A rich Prize coming from Rotterdam
toward Scotland, wherein were 20 Officers English and Dutch, taken the 11th.
of April on the borders of Scotland, by the President Friggot. 29 A French
Vessel taken with ten guns: 30 A Vessel of the Earl of Derbies taken by
Captain Seemar near Do^glow by the Isle of Man, and brought to Bewmorris. 31
A French ship of ten Guns, and five Murderers taken on the Northern coasts by
Captain Coleman, and Capt. Cheaney. 32 The Scots Alarmed on Fife side, April
17. by a small fleet manned, under command of Captain Reynols from Leeth, by
Orders from General Deane. 33 Cunie Islannds near Scilly taken by General
Blague. 34 Brice Island taken by him also. 35 Tresco Island with the Fort taken
by storm, and 25 piece of Ordnance, and 166 Prisoners, 20 flaine, and 40
drowned 36 Grimsly the Harbor at Scilly taken by Genesis Blague, with two ships
therein, and 9 Guns. 37 A London ship of 70 Tuns rescued from a Jersie man of
War, on the Western coasts, 38 A Vessel of Scilly coming from France: was
chased and taken by Capt. Pack, commander of the Amity Friggot, with 20 tun of
wine. 39 Captain Coleman took a French man with 15 Guns, 48 Prisoners, laden
with provisions, and 40 Tun of Cask with water going for Green-land, brought in
to New Castle. 40 A Vessel of 20 Tuns burden laden with Salt and Coals taken
by Capt. Seaman, who commands the Fox Friggot, trading between Scotland,
Ireland, and the Isle of Man. 41 Capt. Michael Peck with the Amity Frigot took
a vessel, and some prisoners of quality sailing from Scilly to fly to France.
42 A ship with 26 guns taken near Scilly. 43 A ship with 16 guns taken near
Scilly. 44 A vessel belonging to Scilly taken going to France, by Capt. Pack.
45 On the first of May, two tun of Beer, some quantity of Beef, two caskes of
Bread, and one barrel of Pease, taken in a vessel at Humber. 46 Twelve Packets,
qts. 20 Kers. 18 single dozens, 3 baggs of horns, 50 Ferkins of Butter, 25 duds
of Iron, 200l. of dressed Flax, three quarters of an hundred weight of Sugar, two
Hogs-heads of Sack, and three Pipes of red Wine taken in some vessels at
Humber: 47 Two packs of cloth, qts, 24 Kerdeyes, and ten Dozen, and one, also
20 pieces of Lead taken in a vessel of Hull. 48 On the third of May a Prize was
brought into Leeth in Scotland, with 100 tons of Wheat belonging to the Scots
King. 49 May 5. Capt. Anthony Young re-tooke near Barwick an Hoy of Rochester
from a Scots man of War of 12 Guns, in which was Mr. Theodore Jennings,
messenger to the Lords Ambassador then in Holland, and Col. Washburne. 50 The
Assistance Frigot brought in a Prize to Leeth, with 100 tuns of wheat, that the
Scots Kings ships had taken from the Dutch, and were sending it to Aberdeen. 51
Two Frigots belonging to Scilly were in pursuit cast away, and diverse of the
Seamen that got ashore came in to Genesis Blague. 52 Two Vessels taken near
Long-rode. 53 A Vessel with six notable Moss Troopers that had been in
Ireland, was brought into Liverpoole. 54 Capt. Bradshaw a notorious Pirate
taken by Capt. Sherwin near the Isle of Man, who with his men were brought
prisoners to Liverpoole. 55 Capt. Beck with the Merchant Adventure, with 54
men, beat two great ships, the one with 24 Guns, the other 34 Guns near the
Downs, with 500 men in them. 56 Capt. Reeves with the Elizabeth Frigot took a
French Vessel near the Isle of St. Nichelas Island. 57 A Vessel taken with 60
good Horse on the Western coasts going to Barbados, sent to Plimmoth by Genesis
Blake. 58 Two ships taken in the Straights, one laden with Silk, the other with
Sugar. 59 A French man of War taken with six piece of Ordnance belonging to
Deep. 60. Capt. Coleman commander of the Fortune, fought with three of the
Scots Kings Vessels, and took one of them, and brought it into New Castle. 61
An Irish Vessel called St. Patrick taken prize with 20 baggs of pockets, of
2900 l. weight, and Irish Wool, 6000 Hides, and other commodities, taken by
the Swift-sure. 62 Another Irish ship taken by the Swift-sure. 63 A French
Vessel taken by the Swift-sure also with 21 men, two small guns and some
Muskets aboard her, 64 Two ships taken with Horse and other supplies going for
Scotland brought into Yarmouth by Capt. Wadsworth the 23 May. 65 Mary Island,
and the Island of Agads: and all the remainders of Scilly Islands, and Forts
surrendered to Genesis Blake with 50 Barrels of Powder, Match proportionable,
abundance of great shot, and all their Ordnance. 66 A ship taken by Cap. Hall
of 300 Tuns and 22 guns, laden with Wheat and Ryce. 67 A ship taken by Cap.
Hall of 140 Tuns, with 16 Guns, laden with silk, Grogarums, Skins, Wool, and
other commodities. 68 Several ships preserved on the coasts of Spain. 69 A
French Vessel taken on the Northern coasts by Cap. Redgate. 70 June 1. the
vessel of a rich Prize retaken by Cap. Redgate, from an Irish man of War, who
hardly escaped, and the vessel taken was of 350 Tuns, laden with wheat,
Sturgion, Pitch, Tar, Bacon, Spanish-Wool, feathers, Canvasse, and other
commodities. 71 Cap. Reynolds, by ships fetched away some booty from the Scots
on Fife side, diverse sheep and some barrels of Butter. 72 The Yarmouth
Fishermen releived by Capt. King, and the Enemies man of War beaten off. 73 Cap.
Vacy took a Scots vessel passing toward Ireland, and brought it to Liverpoole.
74 A Vessel retaken, and brought into Bristol. Also a French vessel taken with
sheep, Porke, Biscuit, and money intending to have releived Scilly. 75 A Vessel
taken by Cap. Celeman, bound for France, 76 Two Prizes taken by Capt. Tackwell
on the coasts of France, laden with Sugar, Brazil, Tobacco, and other
merchandises. 77 A prize taken on the beginning of July on the coasts of
France, brought in by Cap. Green. 78 Three French Fisher-mens Vessels taken
near Jersey. 79 A vessel taken prize by Capt Hurly, and brought into
Portsmouth of 100 Tuns burden, laden with Rosin, Pitch, and other commodities,
80 A vessel taken by Cap. Hurley, brought into Portsmouth of 300 Tuns, laden
with Wool, Skins, and other commodities. 81 A vessel taken by Cap. Green,
laden with Rosin and other wares, taken on the Western coasts. 82 A vessel
taken by Cap. Green, laden with pots and other iron ware. 83 A ship of 400 Tun
laden with oil, and other Merchandises, taken and sent into Portsmouth. 84
Col. Overton transported over to Fife side in Scotland, with 1400 Foot, and
some Horse and Dragoons, took the North-Ferry. 85 Maj. Gen, Lambert transported
over to Fife side, defeated Sir John Brown, which was the foundation of all
those succeeding Victories, which utterly destroyed all the Scots Kings Forces
in both Nations. 86 In the beginning of August a Vessel taken on the coasts of
Ireland. 87 A Vessel taken on the Northern coasts by Cap. Coppin, brought
into Yarmouth. 88 A rich ship rescued from the enemy on the Northern coasts by
Cap, Coppin. 89 The Seamen of the Paradox Frigot got off from near Flamburgh
Head, after their Captain and Purser were both killed by the enemy. 90 In
September. 532 li. of Scots yarn etc. was taken with the Thomas Vessel at
Yarmouth. 91 A Vessel taken belonging to the Isle of Man by Cap. Young. 92 An
Irish vessel taken on the coasts of Ireland. 93 A French man of War beaten.
94 In October. 3 French ships beaten on the Western coasts. 95 A glorious Victory
obtained by Genesis Blake in surprizall of the Isle of Jersey. 96 The Fort at
Sentwon Bay taken 97 St. Owens Manor taken 98 Gronesse Castle taken 99 Castle
de Leke taken 100 The Fort at Bowley taken 101 St. Albans taken 102 St. Jermans
taken 103 St. Hillary being the chief Town, taken. 104 Brelades Bay taken.
A Letter from aboard the Entrance, riding off Mount Orgueil Castle in Jersey,
27 October. 1651.
THE Lord has been pleased to deliver into our hands, the Isle of Iersey on
the 22 instant between 11 and 12 of the clock in the night by ftorm.

Tuesday the 22 about two in the morning the Commission-Officers met aboard
this ship, riding in St. Brelades Bay, and having sought God for a blessing
upon theirundertakings, it was upon consultation agreed, that by their Boats
and strength an attempt should be made upon the Enemy in Sentwons Bay, as the
most convenient place to land in. Accordingly Gen: Blake ordered the open boats
and Vessels that carried the Foot and Horse to be manned out of our own
ships, those from England refusing to run their Vessels aground, The weather
admitting no delay, the Foot were embarked and forthwith stood for Sentwons,
but before we could hale close to shore, the Tide was so far spent, that it was
conceived not rational to fall on then, whereupon the boats lay by; and the
ships, viz. the Elizabeth, Phaenix, Battery ship, and Eagle, began to play upon
the Forts with great guns, and so continued near four hours, continually
pelting, insomuch that they did execution both on horse and foot, and prevented
their getting into bodies. The Evening proving fair, and the wind fresh from
off the Sea, all the Captains of the Fleet took their boats, we manned and
headed the Forlorn which was led by Cap. Dover, which gave them some
encouragement more than ordinary. A party of the Enemies horse charged to the
very heads of our boats, and for near an hour there was a fierce encounter on
both sides, till Col. Hayne and the rest could get in to their assistance, who
for to give them all possible and speedy relief leapt into the water up to the
waste, and some higher: Whereupon the Enemy began to retreat, our forces
thereby gaining ground, till after 3 or 4 volleys of shot the enemy ran,
insomuch that we became masters of their Forts, all along the Bay.

What the enemies loss might be, we are not certain, but there were wounded on
our side about 16. and 4 killed: The Lieutenant of the Forlorn, and one more, are
since dead of their wounds. Cap. Dover was struck down with a bullet, but
recovered himself again. One thing I forgot to acquaint you with, that when we
weighed from Brellades Bay, the General to amuse and distract the enemy, left
a part of the Fleet there, which by their Guns and shooting in their boats did
so alarm them, that the Pastor of a Village in that Bay with his flock and the
Forces ran away to Eliz^beth castle, where their Governor Carteret is. Some
prisoners report that Carteret was himself in the action, but fled as soon as
any. The next morning Col. Hayne summoned the Tower and Castle of St. Albans,
where were 20 Guns, much Ammunition, Provision, etc. and on a sudden it was
quitted unexpectedly, those in it betaking themselves to the main Castle, where
(it is reported) all the chief Islanders and goods are lodged; whereof we doubt
not in a short time to give a very satisfactory account. We are now before the
Castle called Mount Orgueil, and so soon as we have done, it is possible the
General will make a trip to Guernsey, and summon Corn^t-Castle, of which we
have the more hope, they having small hope of relief.

From aboard the Entrance, riding off Mount Orgueil Castle in Jersey 27 October.
1651.
FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1651.


