Colonel John Lambert's SPEECH At the COUNCIL of STATE, OR The Lord
President's Report unto the Parliment, of the Discourse of Colonel John
Lambert before the Council.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

Colonel John Lambert's Speech at the Council of State, the 5. of March 1659,
before his commitment to the Tower of London; Or the Lord President's Report
unto the Parliament, of the Discourse of Colonel John Lambert, before the
Council, made in Parliament 6 March 1659
Tuesday, 6. March.
THe Parliament does dispense with Colonel Lambert's not appearing upon the
Proclamation issued forth against him, and that it be referred to the Council
of State, that taking security of Col. Lambert for his peaceable demeanor, he
permitted to live quietly at his own house in the Country.

Mr. Ansley Reports from the Council of State that Monday March 5. 1959, Col.
John Lamber was called into the Council to give security accoding to the Order
of Parliament, of the 1 of March instant; which being accordingly propounded
unto him by the Lord President, he spoke to this effect.

That he did acknowledge he had the advantage of a sight of those Votes which
passed the House concerning him, and did look upon them as a very great favor
and Justice from the House, that they would please to take notice so far, as to
remove that inconvenience that was both upon his Person and his Estate; and
said he must needs deal freely and plainly; that he did cast himself upon the
Parliament, and now upon the Council, in hopes of a farther testimony of their
favor, then upon those Votes.

He said, that he did not at all think it amiss, that there should be care
taken to preserve the Peace of these Nations; for he had himself when he was in
that station, held it his duty to do so: That what ever may be suggested
against him, he has his own satisfaction within him: what ever reports may be
concerning him, he conceives they do not extend toward him for as to reports,
he cannot be safe either here or at his house, if all reports may be taken for
truth, he said, that for his own part, he can hardly say, that since he came
last to Town (and more especially within four days since) that he has not
said any thing, nor meddled in any thing that might tend to hinder settlement:
But on the contrary, as he had opportunity to converse with any, he contributed
in his discourse toward settlement, and no otherwise: He said he did exercise
plainness, and hoped not to fare the worse for it; that he had a long time
contended for a due and moderate Liberty for the People of these Nations; and
he must needs say, that he did not know how to put difference between himself
and the good People of these Nations; he desired his Case may be truly and
fully known, before such a distinction be made, to put a mark or Character
upon him: He said that Common Liberty had day after day been granted unto
others, but not unto him; howsoever he did freely cast himself upon the
ingenuity of the Parliament and Council.

Having ended his discourse, the Lord President desired his answer, as to what
security he would give.

To which he replied, It was not fit for him to argue, that he understood the
Council were under command from the Parliament, and he did not yet know whether
his case was well stated to the Parliament, but should clearly howsoever submit
to what should be done concerning him, That he knew not what kind of security
the Council did intend. That giving security in this kind, was very strange
unto him. Hereupon he withdrew. That the Council after consideration of what
Colonel Lambert had said, came to this Resolution, to propose unto him to
enter into a Bond of twenty thousand pound, with four good securities, upon
condition to live peaceably at his house at Wimbleton, and not to act any thing
to the prejudice of the Government or disturbance of the public peace, and not
to remove from Wimbleton without leave of the Parliament or Council of State,
and to render himself upon summons from the Parliament or Council of State, and
this Bond to continue in force till the Parliament or Council of State give
further Order to the contrary. Hereupon Colonel Lambert was called in again,
and the Resolution of the Council made known unto him by the Lord President,
and he desiring leave to speak a few words, spoke to this effect. That he
desired to take the freedom to say, that it was severe on his part, That he
had met to day with an Ordinance of Parliament of Indemnity to many persons
who have had their hands in several actions of higher nature then himself had,
he found them all indempnified and restored to the same condition, which
formerly they had been in, he said he would not say that that Ordinance did
reach as to his person, it is not clear whether it does so or on, he said he
was unwilling to give it under his hand, that he desired not to be put into the
condition with others, and though there has been among our selves difference
of judgments, ways and forms, yet as to the main point, he said, he could not
be taxed in the least kind. That he finds himself there equally with the
greatest offender: that he did cast himself upon the Council to dispose of him
as they thought fit, and then he withdrew. And the Council thereupon Resolved
to call in Colonel Lambert once more, and positively to demand of him whether
he would give security as was lately propounded unto him, whereupon he was
called in, and accordingly the Lord President acquainted him with the
Resolution of the Council, to which he Replied, That he did believe he could
not procure the security proposed, That he did not hear a fault assigned to
him, therefore he desired leave to petition to the House, adding, That if he be
found an offender, he will submit; if none, he beseeches he may be considered.
That he was not willing to give it under his hand that he is an offender,
though he freely submits to the Parliaments pleasure, but being unheard,
uncharged and untax't, to write it under his hand, that he is a guilty person,
not fit to be trusted in his own Country without a clog and tie upon him, he
knows not what to say to it, but he shall submit. Being pressed again whether
he would give that security propounded, he said, he believed he could not do
it, twenty thousand pound being a sum that he believes he cannot get sureties
for. Hereupon after he was withdrawn, it was Ordered, That Colonel John
Lambert be forthwith committed to the Tower till further Order, for refusing to
give security according to the Order of Parliament, but in stead of that,
standing to justify his Innocence, That a Warrant be prepared accordingly.

The Humble Petition of John Lambert Major General was read.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State has
done in committing of Colonel John Lambert to the Tower.

FINIS.

