The Lamentable and Tragical History of Titus Andronicus, with the fall of his
five and twenty sons in the wars of ^he Goaths, with the ravishment of his
daughter Lavinia by the Empress ^wo sons, through the means of a bloody Moor,
taken by the swor^ of Titus in the war, with his revenge upon them for their
cruel an in humane act.
To the tune of Fortune my Foe.




YOu noble minds and fomous martial wights
That in defense of Native Country fights:
Give ere to me that ten years fought for Rome,
Yet reapt disgrace at my returning home.
In Rome I lived in fame full three score years,
My name beloved was of all my Peers:
And five and twenty valiant sons I had,
Whose forward virtues maid their father glad.
For when Romes foes their warlike forces felt,
Against them still my sons and I were sent:
Against ^he Goaths full ten yoars weary war
We spent, receiving many a bloody scar.
Just two and twenty of my sons were slain,
Before I did return to Rome again:
Of five and twenty so is I brought but three,
Also the stately Towers of Rome to see.
when wars were done, I conquest home did bring
And did present my prisoners to the King:
The queen of Goths her sons and eke a More,
Who did such murders like was none before.
The Emperor did make the Queen his wife,
Which bred in Rome debate and deadly strife:
The Moor with her two sons did grow so proud,
That none like them in Rome was then allowd.
The Moor so pleased the now made Empress eye
That she consented with him secretly:
For to abuse her husbands marriage bed,
And so in time a Blackamore she bred.
when she whose thoughts to murder was inc^in'd
Consented with the Moor with bloody mind:
Against my self my kind and all my friends,
In cruel sort to bring them to their ends.
So when in age I thought to live in peace,
Both woe and grief began then to increase:
Amongst my Sons I had one daughter bright,
Which joy'd and pleased best my aged sight.
My Lavinia was betrothed then
To Cesars son, a young and noble man:
Who in a hunting by the Emperors wife,
And her two sons bereaved was of life,
He being slain was cast in cruel wise,
Into a darksome den from light of skies,
The cruel Moor did come that way as then,
With my three sons, who fell into that den.
The Moor then fetched the Emperor with speed,
For to accuse them of that murdrous deed:
And when my sons within the den were found,
In wrongful prison they were cast and bound.




But now behold that wounded most my mind
The Empre^^ two sons of Tigers kind:
My daughter ravished without remorce,
And took a way her honor quite perforce.
When they had tasted of so sweet a flower,
Fearing so sweet should quickly turn to sower:
They cut her tongue whereby sho could not tell,
How that dishonor unto her befell.
Then both her hands they basely cut off quite,
Whereby their wickness she could not write:
Nor with needle on her Sampler sow,
The bloody workers of her dismal woe.
My brother Marcus found her in the wood,
St^n^ing the grassy ground with purple blood:
That trickled from her stumps and handless arms,
No tongue at all she had to tell her harms.
But when I saw her in that woeful case,
With tears of blood I wet my aged face:
For my Lavinia I lamented more,
Then for my two and twenty sons before.
When as I saw she could not writ nor speak,
With grief my aged heart began to break:
We spread a heap of sand upon the ground,
Whereby these bloody tyrants we out found.
For with a staff without the help of hand,
She writ these words upon a plot of sand:
The lustful sons of the proud Emperesse,
Are doers of this hateful wickedness.
I tore the milk white hairs from off my head,
I cursed the hour wherein I first was bred:
I wished the hand that fought for Countries fame
In cradle rockt has first been stricken lame.
The Moor delighting still in villainy,
Did say to set my sons from prison free:
I should unto the King my right hand give,
And then my three imprisoned sons should live.
The Moor I caused to strike it off with speed,
Whereat I grieved not to see it bleed:
But for my sons would willingly impart,
And for their randsome send my bleeding heart.
But as my life did linger then in vain,
They sent to me my bootlesse hand again:
And there withal the heads of my three sons,
Which filled my dying heart with fresher groans.
Then past relief I up and down did go,
And with my tears writ in the dust my woe,
I shot my arrow toward heaven high,
And for revenge to hell did sometimes cry.
The Empress thinking then that I was mad,
Like Furies she and both her sons were glad:
So named revenge, and rape and murder they,
To undermine and know what I would say.
I fed their foolish veins a little space,
Until my friends and I did fired a space:
Where both her sons unto a post were bound,
Where just revenge in cruel sort was found.
I cut their throats my daughter held the pan
Betwixt her stumps, wherein the blood did ran:
And then I ground their bones to powder small,
And made a paste for Pies straight there withal.
Then with their flesh I made two mighty Pies,
And at a banquet served in stately wise:
Before the Empress set this loathsome meat,
So of her sons own flesh she well did eat.
My self bereaved my daughter then of life,
The Empress then I slew with bloody knife:
And stabbed the Emperor immediately,
And then my self, and so did Titus dye.
Then this revenge against the Moor was sound,
Alive they set him half into the ground:
Whereas he stood until such time he starved.
And so God find all murderers may be served.
Printed for F. Coals T Vece and VV Gilbertson,


