Enchiridion Judicum, OR, JEHOSAPHATS CHARGE TO HIS JUDGES, OPENED, In a Sermon
before the Right Honorable, the Judges, and the Right Worshipful, the Sheriff
of the County Palatine of Lancast.

Together with CATASTROPHE MAGNATUM, OR, King David's Lamentation, AT Prince
Abners Incineration. IN A Sermon meditated on the Fall, and preached at the
Funeral of the Right Worshipful John Atherton of Atherton Esquire High-Sheriffe of
the County Palatine of Lanc.

By John Livesey Minister of the Gospel at Atherton

London, Printed by R. I. for Tho. Parkhurst, to be sold at his shop at the
three Crowns in Cheapside over against the great Conduit. 1657.

Enchiridion Judicum: OR, JEHOSAPHATS CHARGE TO HIS JUDGES. OPENED, In a Sermon
preached before the Right Honorable, Richard Newdigate, and Robert Hatton,
Justices of Assize. And the Right Worshipful John Atherton of Atherton Esquire
High-Sheriffe of the County Palatine of Lancaster, at Lancaster, March 26. 1655.

By James Livesey, Minister of the Gospel at Atherton, alias Chow-bent.

Exodus 23.13. And in all things that I have said unto you, Be circumspect.

(...)

Theodoret. Orat. 7. de Provid. London, Printed by R. I. for Tho. Parkhurst, to
be sold at his shop at the three Crowns in Cheapside, over against the great
Conduit. 1657.

TO THE Right Honorable John Atherton of Atherton Esquire High-Sheriffe of the
County Palatine of Lancaster. And his eminently virtuous and Religious consort,
Mris. Mary Atherton. And also to my much honored Brother in Law, Mr. Humphrey
Chetham, son and heir apparent to the Right Worshipful George Chetham of
Turton, Clayton, etc. Esquire. Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied.
Right Worshipful,
AMongst Salomons pious Parables, sacred Aphorisms, divine Apophthegm's, and
golden Sentences, more excellent infinitely than those of Plutarch, Pithagoras,
and Hippocrates; it is noted, chap. 20.6. Tolerabile est semel in anno
insanite. Sen.
Most men will proclaim every one his goodness; but at your command I have
discovered my folly and weakness: which (^ght Rawleighs instruction to his Son
be observed) should, and would have been my greatest secret: it is an
observeable passage in Epictetus, Epict. Ench. cap. 69.
(...); yet, as I seldom grant, what in reason I ought to deny; Quod est
potentissiuum imperand: genus, rogabant, qui ju^ere poterant Auson. Nostra non
findimus aequor sponte sed audace^ cogimur esse metu. Ovid
so now I shall not deny what in reason I ought to grant, viz. The notes of
that Sermon upon the subject by you desired, and delivered in the place by you
appointed.

The subject of this Sermon is well worthy your eyes to peruse it, and your
hearts to embrace it; they are verba vivenda, words to be loved, yea, lived;
they are of vast extent, of catholic concernment: To Adam in innocence, yea,
to the Angels before their fall and Apostasy, it might have been given in
charge, TAKE HEED WHAT YE DO.

Therefore Lycurgus would not permit the Lacedaemonians to marry, if very young
or old. Zenoph.
Most Worthy, for weighty and momentous considerations, is this subject of your
cars; but too high for his tongue, who is so raw and young, not having seen so
many years, as a month has days: What the Philosopher says of marrying is
most true, of preaching, young: (...), and in another chapter, (...), Arist.
Polit. Lib. 7. cap. 16. and 9.
in young persons there is most strength and ability, in the ancient most
wisdom and solidity: Ast tempora certe virtutem non prima negant, non ultima
donant. Iscan. de bello Tro. lib. 1. Nam facilis cuivis rigidi censura
cachimni, and pueri nasum Rhinoce^ot^s habent. Juven. sat. 10. Martial. lib. 1.
Ep 3. Aug. Epist. 1. ad finem.
Such as the discourse is, it is entirely yours: I challenge no more in this
book, than Augustine did in that bastard boy, Adeodatus, of which you read in
lib. 1. confess. cap. 9. Ego nihil in illo puero praeter delictum habeo; may it
lie by you as an humble monitour of your duties, and hearty memorial of my
dutifulness, it is sufficiently honored, though both it and I shall be by
others censured, or stigmatized; you will find it at leisure to be read, when
you can have leisure to read it; nec onerosum sit praesens, quod cum voles
ponitur, cum voles sumitur, as Augustine speaks to his Volutian.

That it is so short and plain, your worships I hope will excuse: God and you
commanded the one, the weighty affairs required the other; they say, (...); not
that which is much is ever well; but that which is well, is ever much: what
could be said in an hour; to which I was confined, though I somewhat
transgressed without a check: Lessius tells us the Italians have a Proverb; he
that will eat much, must eat but little; it is true of, and applicable to
speaking. Of this second transcription, I may say as Physicians do of the
second concoction, it does not amend the first, except in what is extralineary
little, very little is superadded.

Nihil tam conveniena Deo quam beneficent^a; nihil autent tam alienum, quam ut
sit ingratus homo Lactan. de ira dei ad Donat. cap. 16. Senec. de Benef. lib.
4. cap. 10. Saepe and non rediturus gratus est, and ingratus qui reddidit.
I cannot but with much thankfulness to God and you, record your many noble
favors to me, and my family: Seneca would not do good to such, as he thought
would only do good again to him; but to such as would be thankful; for (as he
truly) such as can return again the like, are not ever grateful; but such as
are grateful, could they, they would ever return again the like; therefore
(says he) I will pass by the rich, and give unto the needy; erit enim in
summa inopia gratus, and cum omnia illi deerint, super erit animus: The Lord
show mercy to the ancient and eminent house of Atherton, and grant that you,
and yours may find favor with the Lord at the great day; how eminently
instrumental, and useful you have been in times of war and peace, both to
Church and state, each tongue can tell: I remember that excellent passage of
Erasmus to Alfonsus Fonseca, ut est modestiae non agnoscere* lauds hominum,
ita gratitudinis est non tacere viros, per quos numinis benignitas tanta
commoda humano largitur generi: But it is not my purpose now to praise; may I
not be your Herald to the World, yet I humbly crave leave to be your Orator
to God; and from him (having your noble souls, your heaven-born spirits
committed to my charge) give this word of advice, that something may be said,
which concerns you as Christians here, as well as something to your more
public employments, relating in the discourse following: It is humbly offered,
and ushered in with that of holy Augustine: Attend regis humilitatem, non
respuit David verba praecipientis, non dixit, Nathan, Audes mihi loqui Regi?
rex sublimis Prophetam. audit. Enatrat. in Psalm. 51. mihi p. 583.


1 Labor to improve the afflictions and weaknesses upon you, to the glory of
God the inflictor, and the eternal good of your selves the afflicted: endeavor
to see Gods hand, and end in them; corrections are not ever for one and the
same end, but they are ever from one and the same hand: Quid de panarum
acerbitate querimur? unusquisque nostrum ipse se punit. Salv. de Gub dei. lib.
3. p. 113.
there is no penal evil in Court, or Country, in C^t^, or Family, but God owns
it; on whomsoever, and whenever the ^od falls, it must be acknowledged. God
did it, man deserved it: it is from him providentially, from us procuringly:
There is in the least twig, (if sanctified) a double virtue: (...); a
preventive, preparative, preservative, and sanative virtue: his design in our
corrections is the subduing of our corruptions, to make us white; Daniel 11.15.
Heb. 12.10.
not for his pleasure, but our profit, to make us partakers of his holiness: It
is to cause us look more

Inwards, suffering times, are searching times; ^am 3.40. Amos 9 9.
O that the diseases upon us, and the distractions without us, might have this
influence on us, to make us search what is amiss in us, and also to mind who
and what is above us: Psalm. 1^0.1.
upwards, when we are at the lowest, we should look highest, and (...) last
are worst: Rev. 22.11. Genesis 6.3. Ambrose being in the house of one who boasted
that he never had any calamity in all his life; come says he, let us make
haste out of this house, lest some remarkable vengeance of God fall upon us.
This is the last of all we read of in his Word, which shall seize upon wicked
wretches in this world: Not to be corrected, is one of the greatest
corrections; such a permission is the most direful, doleful affliction: It
would be the saddest day that ever your eyes saw, the most dreadful voice that
ever your ears heard, should the Lord say; Let them alone, my Spirit shall no
more strive with you: Never did gracious heart say in cold blood; It Is ill for
me that I have been afflicted.

Secondly, Be frequent and fervent in those high and holy duties of Praise and
Prayer.

Of Praise: It is due to God from every creature in the World, and from every
corner of the World; it waits only for him in Sion: True Saints will as soon
cease to have a being, as a blessing from, and for their God: Sickness is Gods
servant; as the Centurion said to his soldiers; so does God to sicknesses:
Matthew. 8,9.
Go to such a family, or person of quality, and they go; return, and they
return; are your pressures in measure removed? Let the mercy of God in this be
remembered; and his name, which is alone excellent, be praised; excellent is
that observation of Chrysostom.

Job foiled Satan more when he praised God, than Satan did Job when he
plundered him. (...), etc.


Job was more illustrious* when he sat a upon the Dunghill, with the cross in
his hand, than when he sat upon the Throne with a Crown on his head. God has
dealt with you in much mercy; not in wrath and fury: I dare say his
dispensations are not, According to the fierceness of his wrath: Nor according
to the strictness of his Justice: Nor according to the greatness of his Power:
Nor according to the demerits of your sins: Nor according to the extensivenesse
of your fears: Nor according to the malicious desires of Satan:


What then remains, but that you love him, and land him as long as you live;
yea, though your days shall end, yet this duty shall never end: An endless
eternity will but serve the turn for you to praise him: when you was at the
neediest, was not he nearest? Cum duplicantur lateres venit Moses: Alsted. in
Exodus cap. 5. Ubi deficit humanum concilium, ibi incipit divinum auxilium.
Alsted in Exodus cap. 14.
When Moses came, the bricks were doubled; and when the bricks were doubled,
then Moses came: It Is observed by Alsted out of Philo; when the help of man
fails, then comes help from Heaven; in the Mount the Lord is seen: God can
comfort us by the same Rod where with he corrects us. Thy Rod, and thy staff,
they comfort me, says holy David. In the midst of his Judgments he has
remembered to be merciful: It is our duty and discretion at the remembrance of
his mercies, to be thankful; had God mercy on Paul, restoring Epaphroditus to
health? certainly he has showed no less mercy to us in restoring your worship
to health: Let us therefore unanimously manifest our thankfulness for this
mercy, by our dutifulness to his Majesty: The Persians so abhorred ingratitude,
that as Zenophon tells us; Zenoph. de Instit Cyri. page 4.
they had actions against unthankful persons, and would call them, for this
only, into the Court: (...), etc. Bless we him with our lips, and with our
lives; Aug. in Psalm. 145.
for thankful hearts, and thankful lives, they are the life of thankfulness:
it is excellent advice which the Father gives. Noli cantilenae bonae tuae
obstrep^re malis moribus, plus ille attendit, quid vivas quam quid sonas: you
might have suffered seven times more but he has punished you less than your
iniquities deserved: Deo gratias, be that your name, and work: Augustine writ
his 49. Ep. to one, called Deo gratias.
Thou art my praise, said weeping Jeremiah: Paul in sufferings more than any,
in doxologies above all, Christ under the cross and curse: Father I thank thee:
And comes not help from Heaven to draw our hearts toward Heaven? Prayer.
Prayer is a Christians great ornament, and muniment, his very aliment, and
element; his great advantage, top privilege, fealty and homage* Ephesians. 6.18,19
It Is ^matura armaturae Christiani: And has a special influence upon all the
other pieces of our spiritual Armor: it keeps the girdle of Truth upon the
loins; Vide Aquin. in Ephesians. 6. Deus bone, qualis est haec exhortation quam
plena terroris, quam vehemens, praesertim si quis ponderet illa; per omnem
orationem in omnium tempore, in omni instantia^ and tamen plerique nostrum ita
se gerunt. ac si neque orandum, etc. Bellarm. de Ae^. Faelic. lib. 5. p. 370.
it ties together the breast plate of Righteousness; it keeps on the shoes of
the preparation of the Gospel upon our feet; it keeps the shield of Faith from
breaking, it inlivens Hope, and acuates the Word, the sword of the Spirit:
Certainly man's invocation of God, will immediately follow Gods vocation of man:
Every child of God can speak as soon as he is new born; He can, and will ask
his heavenly Fathers blessing: Better we had never been born into the World,
than to go still-born out of the world: He that makes Religion his business,
will pray daily, as for daily bread, so for daily grace: A man of much prayer,
is a man of much grace, commonly: if you observe it, prayerlesse Families, are
graceless families: Sin will bring down duty, or duty will bring down sin: By
Prayer the course of Nature has been stopped, the waters of the Sea have been
divided; burning flames have been quenched: Devils have been ejected,
dispossessed. Luther, with others of Heavens Favorites being in prayer (as I
once heard from a judicious Doctor, Dr. Hill of Cambr.
and since have read the Story) recovered a young man out of Satan's Jaws, who
had given his soul to him, and sealed the indenture with his own blood: The
Indenture sealed, was thrown into the house at the window, as they were in
prayer: Luther.
vincit invincibilem, ligat omni potentem: By it journies have been shortened,
mountains have been levelled, temptations repulsed, diseases removed: Psalm.
50.15. 2 Chronicles. 26.5
The prayer of Faith shall save the sick; the sick person, or Nation; most
proper therefore for you, and you are like to be most prosperous: As long as
he, ( viz. Uzziah, a King, a man of quality) sought the Lord, God made him to
prosper: Solus est Deus qui nunquam frustra quaeri potest; nec cum invenire non
potest; melius est Deum non ^nvenisse, quam non quaesivisse. Bern de Consider.
ad Engen. lib. 5.
I have lately hinted, yea handled this more fully, from another Subject,
Ephesians. 6.18. In which, to say no more, was opened the Christians daily task, of
Praying always, why always? How in the Spirit, always; (but to hint) because
we are needing always; they who have tasted most, have had but some tastes at
most of the Lords graciousnesse in his Ordinances, Providence, Promises, etc.
The world is alluring always, Satan is tempting always, as the Lord waits
that he may be gracious, so the Devil watches to destroy, because he is
malicious; and we are sinning always; his people love him always, and it is
not a principle of pure need, but of pure love, that draws the Saints (in whose
hearts the Love of God is planted) to the Throne of grace, and which is the sum
of all: Our God is giving always, when we are not at leisure to ask; Compare
Genesis 18.32. with Jer. 5.1.
he is at leisure to give, he does not suspend, and cease bestowing, when we
cease begging: First, Abraham ceased to ask, then God ceased to grant: He that
came from fifty to ten, it is ten to one, would have come from ten to one; had
Abraham still continued, though some of the learned say otherwise.

Deus cohibuit mentem animumque Abrahae, ne pergeret ulterius deprecari pro
Sodomitis. Tostat. and Perer. in Genesis 18. page 603.

O pray! pray then; you have greater mercies than others, greater opportunities
than others, greater engagements upon you than others; all which are
obligatory: distresses are renewed from Heaven, to renew your humble addresses
to Heaven: In their afflictions they will seek me early, and earnestly: A
child of God would not for a world be a mere stranger to the power of, and
comfort in this great Ordinance: the most and best good is got upon the knee;
the Scholar studies well, that prays well: the Magistrate rules well, that
prays well: Been o^asse, est been studuisse. Luther.
Doctor Ames got his learning by praying, and Solomon his wisdom; Bonaventura
(that Doctor Seraphicus) being asked by Aquinas from what books and helps he
derived such holy and divine expressions and contemplations; he pointed to a
Crucifix, and said, Iste est liber, etc. prostrate in prayer at the feet of
this image, my soul receives greater light from Heaven, than from all study
and disputation: of this Monkish tradition and superstitious fiction, some use
may be made: The soldier fights well, that prays well, and therefore
Constantine commanded that his Effigies or Portraicture should be drawn, not
as other Emperors in their Armor, leaning; but as in a praying posture,
kneeling: O pray again: Christ must ask, if that he would have: Can we expect
to have, especially mercies in mercy, and yet not ask? He is good, but to the
soul that seeks him, Bonus quaerentibus, said the Father: He is good to all
that seek him; better to them that find him, best of all to them that have
full fruition of him: L^m. 3.25.
Take heed how, and for what you pray: you may ask and miss, if you ask amiss:
strive more for fervency, than for fluency: you may know if you pray in and by
the Spirit: if you have the Spirits assistance, you shall be sure of the
Fathers acceptance: The Spirit, if it help you to pray, it will help you to
practice; it will help you with working affections, as well as with winning
expressions; it will humble you in, by, and after duty, if it help in duty.

Thirdly, Do your endeavor to set on foot that precious Ordinance of the
Supper amongst us: Peter observes in his Epistles, that there are four things
very precious; they are the most precious things in the World: non patiuntur
hyperbolen: Precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. a dram or grain of this, is better than
a tun of gold. Precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. without which, were not the
Saints of all creatures most miserable? Precious Christ, 1 Pet. 2.4.7 and also
Precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1.19. O the virtue in it, the value of it: through this
Red Sea you must pass to Heaven: May, you have, and enjoy this Sacrament
sometimes abroad, why not at home in our solemn Assembly, who is contented,
though he find bread in his neighbors house, to be without in his own? who
can sit down at his own Table, and not think of Christ's? How can we expect
good by the Word of Christ, while we are without the blood of Christ:
The Albigenses despised Sacraments, defaced the Bible with their urine and
excrements; Aug. Ep. 5^
but the vengeance of God followed them; an hundred thousand of them were slain
at one time by the sword of men on earth, and by fire from the God of Heaven:
Julian was so met with. Calvin in Act. 20.7. Aug. in Joan. Tr. 26. 'Twas
anciently had every Seventh day, yea, every day of the seven; not now in many
places once in seven years: Who can forbear smiling at the School-mens seven
Sacraments; or weeping at our one alone: Woe (not) to it that is alone, but to
us that suffer it to go alone, is the necessity of them, and virtue in them.

Vide Aq. p. 3. qu. 60. and 62. de Numero.
Absque dubitatione tenendum est Sacramenta Novae Legis septem esse, nec plura,
nec pauciora. Est. lib. 4. Did. 1. Paragr. 13. Biel. lib. 4. Did. 2. Quest.
1. So great with them, and of none with us? Precious in the sight of the Lord
is the blood and death of his Saints: and truly precious in the sight of true
Saints is the blood and death of their Lord Jesus: Shall I transcribe the
passages of two learned men, an ancient, and a modern writer: Gabriel Albaspin.
Observat. lib. 1. Observatio. 17.20. p. 146.
Quanti debet esse hominibus sanguis and crux Domini nostri Jesus Christi, cum
Deus in hoc and altero saeculo tantam mercedem reponat iis martyribus, qui vel
unius sanguinis guttam profuderint, etc. -- Etsi gratia Dei non est alligata
Sacramentis, ea tamen cum offeruntur, non sunt respuenda, negligenda, sed
inquirenda, etc.

P. Martyr in Sam. p. 128.
By this, grace is increased, comforts are enlarged, experiences are acquired,
the Covenant is sealed, the infinite love and free grace of God is discovered;
the sufferings of Christ manifested, life eternal assured, etc. The damned
spirits in Hell, know now in great measure the preciousness of Christ whom they
contemned, the usefulness of this high and holy Ordinance, which they
slighted, and profaned, the nobleness and transcendent excellency of their
souls, which they have eternally damned; this they know, and the knowledge
hereof increases their anguish and horror: Let us now in this day of grace,
labor for this, and improve all means of grace: change but the word, and I may
say, THEN shall we not be ashamed, when we are fitted for, are partakers of,
have due respect unto, and make good improvement of all his Sacraments.
Alluditur ad Psalm. 119.6.


Estius in Sen. lib. 2. Distinct. 16. and 17.
Fourthly, Meditate frequently of the superlative excellency of your precious
souls, and diligently labor to secure and assure the salvation of them to your
selves: A rational soul is of more worth, than all the world; they are great
losers, who gain that with the loss of this: It were easy to demonstrate the
transcendent preciousness, of our souls: but to convince, or to persuade men to
walk up to this conviction, especially persons of quality; hic labor, hoc opus
est: I hope and know better things of you, though I thus speak: I crave your
consideration however; that

Heb. 12.9. Zach. 12.1. Vide Photii Epist. 133. Taras^o Patricio. Aug. Steuch.
Eugub. de perenni Philosophia lib. 9 cap. 10, and 11. Zenophon Memorab. lib. 4.
page 634. Plotin. Enne^ ad. 4. lib. 7. c. 10
The most high challenges a more peculiar relation to them, and interest in
them: Therefore he is styled the Father of Spirits, and he is the Physician
of Spirits, and he accounts it a special part of his glory to form the spirit
of man within him: the soul, it is the breath of God, the beauty of man, the
wonder of Angels, the envy of Devils: It is (...), as Plato calls it, a
celestial plant, and of a divine Offspring: (...), says Zenophon, speaking
of the nobility of the soul; I shall pass by what Plotinus has in his Enneads
all along: besides the soul of the world, at which he once and again hints;
how excellently does he pourtray the Origin, and discover the nature of man's
immortal spirit: It is a Deo, though not, de Deo, as the Gnostics thought and
taught: To this add, The soul is under the command of none but God alone: In
conscientiam dominari creaturae non est competibile: this speaks out the
excellency of it. The soul is in a capacity to enjoy communion with God, and to
receive the communications of those divine excellencies which he has to
communicate: Dan. Heins. Exercit. Sacr. in cap. 4. ad Ephesians.
It may be said of man, as Jerome does of Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians: It is
Epistola media, homo est creatura media: As Jesus Christ stands 'twixt God and
man, so man stands twixt God and the creatures: Fecisti nos Domine prote, etc.
Again, the soul cannot be satisfied with any thing, or saved by any thing, God
excepted; there is in every gracious soul a holy pride, most pleasing to the
God of Heaven, to scorn all the world in point of satisfaction or salvation; or
consider them in relation to the Angels, souls are of an Angellick nature, most
true is that of Comineus, In his Philosoph. repurg.
Ange lus est homo nudatus, homo Angelus vestitus: An Angel is a man stripped,
a man is an Angel, clothed with clay: Again, weigh well the (...), the
incomparable price which the Son of God paid for the redemption of the soul;
'twas not the spoil of richest Provinces, not the price of Cleopatra's draught,
not silver, or gold, but the precious blood of Jesus Christ: Vide Plot. ubi
supra; and Vossium de anima separata.
The immortality, and immateriality of it speaks forth the transcendent
excellency of it; as also the rich and rare endowments, and noble operations of
it: The excellency of the case, or cabinet, viz. the body, intimates a more
than ordinary excellency of this watch, or jewel: though in some respects the
body of man be called, a vile body, as being subject to vile diseases, to vile
abuses, in comparison of what it was in its primitive constitution, and of what
it shall be at the great day of the resurrection, yet is the body of all
materials the most excellent, as Pererius well observes: Perer. in Genesis 2.7.
page 128. Call. lib. 12. de usu partium. and lib. 9. de plac. Hip. and Plat.
When Galen saw the Anatomy of a body, he cried out, The God of Nature: Abdala
the Saracen, and Phavorinus, of whom we read in A. Gellius, admired at nothing
in the world, but man; at nothing in man, but only his soul: This is (said
Augustine) a greater miracle in man, than all the miracles wrought amongst men:
the body is comparatively vile; it is, Jumentum animae, sperma faetidum, saccus
stercorum, esca vermium, etc. but the soul is a demi-semi-God, dwelling in an
house of clay: Senec. Ep. 31. and 41.
Anima vero vicina est substantiae Dei, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 144.
as Augustine excellently asserts the nobility of it from its operations: But
once more, it is the measure of all other excellencies; as thus, every thing is
accounted so far forth excellent, as it is subservient to the soul, and
conduces to the felicitating of it: Now, who will cast Pearls and Jewels as
chips at his heels; who dare, consideratis considerandis, curare cutem, magis
quam animam: mind his bag, his back, his belly, his body, his house and horse,
neglecting his immortal soul, which is by nature incomparably more noble; of
our cares, fears, prayers, tears, means, and pains, the greater part should be
for, and about the better part. Merito poscit studia majora pars melior.


Excellently Epictetus a Stoic Philosopher; it is a sign of a sottish,
blockish man, to be long about any thing which concerns his body; to be long
in exercising, in eating, in drinking, etc. These are to be done by the by;
but all the care is to be employed about the soul.

Euchirid. c. 63. per totum.
(...)

Quis suror est, viles a vobis animas vestras haberi, quas etiam D^abolus putat
esse pret^osas? quis furor est, viles a vobis haberi, quas etiam^lle charas
vobis debere esse dicit? qui viles facere cona^ur, ac per hoc, quicunque animas
suas negligunt, etiam infra judicium Diaboli se amant. Vide Salvian. lib. 3. ad
Eccles. Cath p. 431.
In the eyes of God: Angels, Devils, and men, Christian, and Pagan, it is
precious: Let not us dishonor that by which we are so much ennobled, and
advanced; and which by the glorious Angels is so much admired; and by the
apostate spirits envyed: It Is dishonored in a word; when we think to satisfy
it with riches, honors, or terrene things, with any thing, God excepted: It is
as if we should entertain a King at our Tables with chafe, dung, or bare
bones to pick: when we contaminate and pollute it; it is worse than to cast
dung in the face of a Prince: when we suffer Satan to possess our souls; it is
to lodge Wolves or Bears in royal palaces: when we make more provision for our
bodies, than for our souls; it is as if a man should dandle his Dog, and bid,
out with the child; serve his Swine, and starve his Son; as if a man should
prize the Cabinet above the Jewels; or the Goldsmiths weigh his dross, but
throw away his gold; or as if the Husbandman should gather the stubble into the
Barn, but leave the corn to be devoured by the beasts of the field, and fowls
of the Air: and when we act not rationally, religiously, as if there were no
more in us than sensitive souls: when we endeavor not to understand the wants
of them; and to have thoss wants supplied. Si recte quidem carnem famulam,
animam vero dominam esse dixerint, non oportet posteriori loco nos dominam
ponere, ac famulam iniquo jure praeferre. Euch. ubi supra.
It was Eucherius his sad complaint in an Epistle to Valerianus: Multus
corporum curationi impenditur usus; multum huic op^rae in spem medelae datur;
nunquid medicinam anima non meretur? etc. and then do we dishonor it: When
we give no diligence to be sure of the salvation of it: Shall I present you
with some persuasive considerations, to close with that: to give all diligence
to secure, and be sure of the salvation of your souls?

It is a piece of choicest policy to secure that which is worth all the world:
Our souls are such things.

It is the greatest equity to do this for the soul, since all we do, we do
with the soul; the body is a livelesse lump: it is the soul in the eye, that
inables the eye to see; in the hand, that inables the hand to work, etc.
Nothing else can be made sure, but this may: Chrisost. (...).
Ergo, riches cannot, they are lying, and flying vanities: (...), etc. nothing
more unfaithful; they are as deceitful, as delightful, yea more: the world like
water, the more we graspe at it, the less we hold of it; like sands in our
hands, the faster we gripe, the faster it will go: Honors cannot: Psalm.
49.12.
The Courts of Princes are paved with Ice; a fall is soon caught, and proves
fatal: What are earthly honors and applauses but magnum nihil the lightest
plumes of worldly honors (said one) are tossed up and down, and down and up,
by the lighter puffes of popular humors: the very aspects of the Moon her self
are not so changeable, and variable, as the respects of most men: Relations
cannot: Ezekiel. 24.16. Hos. 9.11. Job 1.10.
Ezekiel may lose the delight of his eyes, Ephraim his glory: Never was any
surer of his posterity than holy Job; not a child, nor a chicken of his but was
hedged about on every side, yet he lost all on a day: Life it self cannot: In
Psalm. 29. Mihi page 189.
Non est diu (says Augustine) quod habet extremum, that cannot be counted
long, which shall have an end: we must all die, and be as water spilt upon
the ground.

Paulin.
Humanis opibus sperare salutem
Nulla salus, nec enim mortem mortalia pellunt.
But assurance of our salvation may be obtained: this may be made sure, and
it is worthy the most solemn consideration: There may be a controversy about
our souls: Others may question our interest in Christ, and that redemption
purchased by Christ: we our selves may draw sad conclusions, especially in the
hour of temptations, and day of desertion against our selves: Satan certainly
will challenge the greatest right to them: if he cannot cast our souls into
Hell, he will cast an hell into our souls: And at the last day there shall be
a final decision of the controversy to whom our souls belong; God will
determine it: I say no more, but that it is the very life of this present life,
to be assured after this, of a better life: The denial of the former Truth
(says Luther) were there no other error in their Doctrine, is cause sufficient
why we desert the Roman Church. Luth. in Gen, cap. 41.


Christus meus, and omnia.
Fifthly, Study Jesus Christ, his preciousnesse and usefulness more: precious
he is, in respect of what he is, in himself, or in relation, whether to God
the Father, or to the true Believers; in respect of what he does, as Prophet,
Priest, King, Head, Husband; in respect of what he has: and also in respect
of what he suffered: Nihil mihi sapit, in quo non sapit Jesus Christus.
By your apprehensions, and appretiations of him; your affections to him, your
desires and breathings after him; your undertakings for him, your
unsatisfiedness without him, your conversings with him, and your delighting in
him, you may understand if he be so to you.

None ever felt the burthensomeness, saw the dangerousness, or tasted the
bitterness of sin, but they acknowledged his preciousness. Cui Christus incipit
dulcescere, necessum est amarescere mundum, peccatum and omnia sublunaria.


He is useful to all ends and purposes; no redemption, no reconciliation, no
justification; no sanctification, no consolation, no salvation, no grace,
peace, glory, without him: Augustine excellently asserteth this saying,

See Predeaux praelect and Daven D^term. Acosta. lib. 5. de procuranda Judorum
salute. cap 3. Dr. Tuckney in Act. 4 12. Maldon in Mat. 11.21. Gentiles
po^etant, etc.
He who teaches that a man may be saved without Christ (as some of the
schoolmen do) I doubt whether that man can be saved by Christ. Qui dicit
hominem salvari posse sine Christo: dubito an ille per Christum salvari potest.


He is all in all to them, who see they are nothing; can do nothing, and have
nothing at all without him; but of this you have lately heard so much; now
therefore no more.

Sixthly* Commune with your own hearts; allow me the least skill in divinity,
and I will say, a great deal of true Christianity consists in this, and our
sincerity is much discovered by this: In Psalm. 49. Revel. 4.8.
It is the holy Counsel of Augustine, and the Saints daily practice; Ascend
tribunal mentis tuae, esto tibi judex, dic Deo tuo, etc.

Vide Marlora tum in locum.
In the Apocalypse you read of four living creatures, full of eyes, before, and
behind, and within: The first was like a Lion; The second like a Calf; The
third had the face of a man; The fourth like a flying Eagle: Various are the
glosses on that Text; some understand, and say, they betoken Christ, who was
born of the Virgin, as a man, suffered death as a Calf, rose again like a Lion,
mounted up as an Eagle: Others thus; the four Creatures hold forth the four
sorts of Officers in the Church: Mr. Cotton.
The Lion the ruling Elder; the Ox the Pastor; the Man the Deacon; and the
Eagle the Teacher: But they were Angels, and are said to be full of eyes,
because of the vastness and clearness of their knowledge: Tom. ad. Qu. 58.
Artic. 6, 7. p. 1. q. 106. Ar. 1.
Vasquez speaks much of their Matutin, and vespertin Knowledge; and Aquinas of
their light of Nature, Grace, and Glory; of their concreated, revealed, and
experimental knowledge: Gregory compares holy men on earth to those blessed
Angels in Heaven: The Saints are now Evangelical, anon they shall be
Angelical: they are full of eyes within, they look within, and without, above,
and about, but they fix chiefly on Christ, and their own consciences: It is sad
to see near and dear relations (as Husband and Wife) sit down together, rise up
together, walk out together; come in together, and yet never change word with
each other; but O how sad! to see a man and his heart such strangers one to
another: Hoc: Hoc nos pessimos facit, said Seneca; Epist. 83.
this is it that makes us so vile; and therefore prescribes in another Epistle,
Vide Senec. Ep. 28. and 80.
Quantum potes teipsum coargue, inquire in te, accusatoris primum partibus
fungere, deinde Judicis, etc. Franc. Suar. Nullum majus, nullum melius negotium
est, quam ire in interiora mentis, and Secretaria cordis. Aug. in Psalm. 33.
Conc. 2.
The little time which that acute and profound man spent every day in the search
and examination of his own heart, and conference with his own conscience, was
more dear to him (as I have read of him, and believe it would be found most
true, would we be persuaded to try) than all the rest of the day which he
spent in controversals: It was Constantines constant practice, as Eusebius
reports of him, to shut up himself in a secret place of his Palace, where he
had his Soliloquies: You are persons of quality; look upon him, and do
likewise: It was the practice of one better, and greater than he is, that
writes or reads this: Psalm. 77.6.
In the night I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit makes diligent
search: how suitable, savoury, seasonable, how sweet, advantageous, and
profitable this may be to you in your present condition: I cannot tell you
before, but do it, and you will tell me hereafter.

On this day read and ponder, Psalm. 143. ult. Psalm. 36 7,8. 87.2,5. 133.3 ^
Cor. 5.4. Ezekiel. 46.4.
Sixthly, Continue your constant attendance upon Gods Ordinances in our solemn
Assemblies on the Lords days, and exercise days: whilst others (of the
Gentry, as well as others) like Owls, not able to endure the light and power
of Gospel Truths, forsake the assembling of themselves together: Offer you unto
the Lord the Lambs, and the Rams without blemish: it is the Lords command: Vide
Calvinum in Psalm. 27.8.
Seek ye my face: (i.e.) seek ye God among his people in his Ordinances,
there is Gods face: Whilst others prize one day, elsewhere above a thousand in
the Courts of God: you give us demonstrations, that you prize one day in his
Courts, above thousands elsewhere: There he shows himself most beautiful, and
most bountiful: There he puts that upon his people, which makes them lovely,
and that into his people, which makes them lively.

Never did General so much delight to see his soldiers together marching
orderly, or fighting valiantly, as the Lord does to see his servants together,
praying fervently, and hearing attentively: Psalm. 50.5.
then his heart is enlarged, and hand opened toward them; yea ravished with
them; Cant. 4.9.
when the dead and dry bones lay in the field dispersed; they were not all that
while enlivened; Ezekiel. 37.
when they were congregated, breath and life came in: when on other days
persons are scattered, they are in great measure deaded: but on the Lords day,
and in the Lords way assembled: how are their drooping spirits revived? their
languishing souls refreshed: Excellent is that passage of Chrysostom: (...)
(...), etc. If you step into Courts of Judicature, as at the last Assizes,
what pleading, pocketting, swearing, etc. if into the Marketplace, nothing but
buying, selling, lying, couzening, cheating: plain dealing is a Jewel, and they
will tell us, he that uses it shall dye a Beggar; but may not we tell them,
they that do not use it, live fools, and dye knaves: (...). Step into private
families, nothing but cares, as the Epigrammatist well expesseth it. (...)


If into Princes Palaces, the discourse runs smoothly of honor and majesty,
(...), etc.
and terrene glory, (...), not a word of God, or Heaven: Enter now (says the
Father) into the house of God, and there you shall hear something of God, of
Heaven; the bliss and felicity of separate souls; of such things as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard: Here is the most comfortable meeting, and cordial
closing of Gods Spirit, and our spirits.

In the Turkish History I read of Hunia^es, a valiant Captain, now a dying man,
who said: It was fitter for the servant to go to the house of his Lord; than
for the Lord to come to the house of his servant: How few persons of quality,
especially under such weakness and maladies, are so observant of the Lords
day: a day separated from all other days, a day elevated above all other
days: Oration Dominica est omnibus aliis excellentior, in 16. Vide Tostatum in
Mat. 6. Q. 121. page 78.
As there is no prayer like the Lords Prayer; no supper, like the Lords Supper,
so no day like this day: this is the Queen of days, as Ignatius styled it in
his Epistle to the Magnesians: Go on, you and yours to keep it holy, and God
will make you happy: prevent future prophanations of it: a frown of yours may
do very much; very much: It is the Lords day, it is the Lords due; if he have
not his, can we expect ours?

Seventhly, Labor by all your afflictions, instructions, Ordinances, and
Providence to grow in grace; Let all your (...) be (...), your nocuments,
Vide Estium in Sent. lib 2. Did. 14. parag. 3.
your documents: In the close of every days work (the second excepted, for
which variety of conjectures are offered) this approbation is suffixed: God saw
that it was good: Aug. in Genesis 1.31.
but viewing them all together; then they were very good: It is Augustins
observation: even to every grace; yea, of the least degree of grace; he says,
it is good, Traxisti animum meum ad te; et Solomon. Rapuisti animum meum; juxta
Ab. Esram. Incordiasti me ^almud. Copulast cor meum cum ^u^ Baxt. ^x con. p.
384. in Cant. 4.9.
but when he beholds the graces of his Saints, fresh and flourishing, your
faith acted and strengthened; your repentance daily renowed, your humility
increased, etc. then, very good: If the Lord Jesus Christ be even ravished
with one of his Spouses eyes, with one chain of her neck, with the least grains
and drams of true Grace: O how is he taken with abundance of grace: I beseech
you therefore, that ye increase more and more; outstrip others not in Riches,
or honors, but in spiritual watchfulness, heavenly-mindedness,
heart-inlargedness: Compare your selves, with your selves, and strive to excel
your selves: Should not the Oxen in your stalls, Vide Salmeron, in 1 These. 4.10.
the Fish in your ponds, the Grass in your fields, grow in the Spring, you
would be much perplexed: It is a sadder affliction, Vide Seneca de vita. cap.
1.
when Grace grows not: whilst others are desiring to be happy, not
endeavoring to be holy: Be it your endeavor to be holy, you shall then
assuredly be happy: Excellent is that of the Ancient; Et Aug. in Psalm. 119.1.
Quis unquam vel potest, vel potuit, vel poterit inveniri, qui esse nolit
beatus, quid ergo nobiscum agitur, ut velimus, quod nolle non possumus, nisi
quia omnes beatitudinem concupiscunt, sed quomodo ad ^am perveniatur, plurimi
nesciunt: Satan is completing his skill and wrath; and therefore there is need
of much grace; it is subject otherwise to decrease: we are dying daily, in our
relations, in our qualifications, or in our graces: the exercise of grace is
always attended with new increase of grace; though both Arms grow, yet that
which a man most uses, is the stronger, and bigger: in Birds, the wings which
have been most used, because sweetest, are most desired: the Apostle urges this
adding of grace, to grace, and assuring our salvation, with notable Arguments;
it is preventive, and preparative; it will prevent a very great evil, 2 Pet. 1.
v. 5, 10, 11.
viz. Apostasy; it will prepare you for a very great good: The more Grace is
exercised, the more God is honored, and the Rod sweetened, and Judgment
prevented: Exercit. in Mark. 11.13. (...) non (...) Accentus spiritusque and
distinctiones negligebant veteres.
the reason why Christ cursed the Fig Tree, was, because it was barren in a
time and place of fruitfulness, as Heinsius observes, (...): Ubi enim erat,
tempus erat ficuum: It is a difficult work to recover the activity of grace
once lost, to revive a duty in disuse: besides, Satan's advantage is great, when
grace is weak, or not in exercise: Fateor me Catechismi Discipulum.
To this end, read much: Let not a day pass without a Bible, nor a week
without a Catechism in your hands: Luther himself was not ashamed to be found
with that in his fist.

Eighthly, And which concerns one of you especially: Honored Brother; improve
the present opportunity and place for your growth in Literature: you have the
advantage of many thousands; a Father able and willing to accommodate, and
furnish you with choicest helps: A Tutor, Mr. Sam. Birch. Oxon.
religious, ingenuous, and industrious, and in the University, where learning
grows, and flows: Another Athens; Diogenes reports of Thales, that he left the
affairs of State to become a Philosopher: Diog. in vita Thaletis.
Anacharsis rather desired to be a Disciple of wise Philosophers, than a Ruler
over irreligious Nations: Ep. ad Craesum. Ar. Rhet. l. 5.


Aristotle reports of Alexander, that he was very bookish: What shall I relate
of Julius Caesar, M. Censorius Cato. Justinian, Julian, Hannibal: Cornelius
Celsus; all great men, and great Scholars: Homines quo magis and ignari, and a
bonis literis alieni, eo propinquius ad belluinam vitam accedunt, si enim illas
animi potentias, quibus a belluis distinguimur, liberalibus scientiis non
excolamus, omnis earum virtus perit; and brutis animantibus similes, Vide Pits.
in proaemio relat. rerum Anglica^um p. 23.
immo in multis deteriores evadimus: Pitseus well: The more others in this
wretched age despise learning, and learned men: the more will ingenious spirits
prize and honor it, and them that have it; how unlike is this to former ages?

Dionisius the Tyrant sent for his Master Plato, in a royal Vessel, and rode to
the Sea side, to meet him in his tryumphant Chariot, brought him into the City,
not like a Philosopher, but like a conqueror: Alexander highly honored
Aristotle, Naturam non tollit, sed extollit non interficit, sed perficit
Philosophia. Vide Sen. Ep. 76. 90, 72. non cum vacaveris, Philosophandum est,
Omnia alia negligenda, ut huic assidi^mus, etc.
and Phochion: Trajanas his Plutarch; Nero his Master Seneca and Burrus for a
season: and Anthony de Guevara tells us, that Scipio Major dying, ordered by
will, that the Effigies of learned Ennius the Poet, should be put upon his
Tomb, as judging it more honuourable to have that monument and memorial of a
learned man, than the Trophy's and Epitaphs of conquered Africa: That check of
Socrates excellently intimates the virtue and influence of true Philosophy:
Zopirum ne ridete; hujusmodi ^nim naturae essem, Philosphia est partus rectae
rationis; res Dei ratio. Tertul.
nisi naturam Philoophia superassem: Plato, Pithagoras, Aristoxenus,
Democritus, and others, for the love of learning have wandered to the utmost
bounds of the Earth: Clitomachus, above forty years old, came to Athens to
learn of Carneades: I shall spare to transcribe what I have read of Ptolomy
Philadelphus, Quomodo repudiamus. saecularia studia, sine quibus divina esse
non possunt. Ter.
who had in his library five hundred thousand books; or Xenophon that great
scholar, how he conducted ten thousand Greeks over the Fords of fifty Rivers,
and through the midst of an hundred thousand enemies, from Persia into Greece:
Solon was used to say, (...)


Melchior Adams relates of D. Chytraeus, that as he lay upon his deathbed,
Jucundiorem sibi decessum sore, si moribundus etiam aliquid didicisset. page
694.
hearing some disputing by him (with a low voice, lest they should disturb him)
lifted up his head, and desired them to speak up; for he should die the more
cheerfully, if he died learning somewhat: Sigismund the Emperor, at the
Counsel of Constance, lamented this, that neither he, nor any of his great
Courtiers and Counselors were able to answer a foreign Ambassador in the
Latin Tongue; and told his Nobles that had no learning, that he preferred
before them some of obscure Parentage, merely for their polite learning,
saying, that he had good reason to honor scholars above all men, as those
that were singularly graced and gifted of God Knights and Lords I can make in a
day, as many as I please; but scholars God only can make: Vide Corn. Agr. de
vanit. Sci. and Calvin. in 1 Cor. 13.8,9.
It is not great estates and places, but great parts and graces that makes
truly noble: Augustine Bishop of little Hippo by his learning, became more
famous infinitely, than Cecilius Bishop of great Carthage: Yet I make bold to
mind you of a common saying of your grave Father it is better to be an honest
man without learning, than learned, without honesty: As Agrippa, the noble
Counselor, and Favorite of Octavian, told him; Virtue makes men equal to the
gods: (...)
Let us not for the tree of Knowledge lose the tree of Life: Surgun^ indocti
and rapiunt coelum, and nos cum doctrina nostra detrudimur in Gehennam.
I cannot but tremble to read that of Augustine: The unlearned arise, and take
Heaven by force, when we with all our learning are turned into Hell:
Accomplished and accoutred with learning and grace, you may serve your own
Generation by the will of God, before you fall asleep, be laid unto your
Fathers, and see corruption.

Non potest esse verus Christianus, nec recitare orationem dominicam.
Ninthly, Be fitting and preparing your selves every day for your dissolution:
Looking for, longing after, and hastening to the coming of the day of God: He
cannot (said Luther) be a sincere Christian, Ioh. Gerard. Vossius. de Extr.
Jud.
nor can he pray over the Lords Prayer, who with all his heart desires not
this days approach: It were very profitable, could we hear each hour what
they say Jerome did (though learned Vossius says, it is not found in his
works.) Arise ye dead, and come to judgment: Death is strong, it conquers
all, the grave is cruel, it spa^s none: Hannibal never slept in the camp
without his armor: we dwell in houses of clay, our foundation is in the dust:
thrice happy are we, if we be ready for the grave, Job 17.8.
by that time the grave is ready for us: I shall not praedict yet I humbly
conceive, if some of you live long, I shall not: My care shall be (as Seneca
said his was) now being young, how to live well: and if old age come, then how
to dye well.

Once more: Psalm. 31.19 Heb. 11.2 2 Cor. 4.17. 2 Timothy 4 8
Meditate frequently of the greatness of those good things, and the goodness of
those great things, reserved for such as fear and love God: Our Lord Jesus had
them in his eye, so had Moses, Paul, and others: This will help you to walk
more thankfully, work more cheerfully, suffer more patiently, fight more
valiantly, repulse temptations more strongly, lay out your selves more freely,
live with what providence has cut out more contentedly; An mercedis intuitu
Deo servire liceat. Vide Estium in Sent. lib. 1. Did. 1. parag. 3. lit. D. E.
F.
to leave the world more willingly, to embrace death joyfully: it is too large
to dispute that question, and weigh those school-distinctions: Set some part of
every day apart, to admire the Lords graciousness, not only in present
protections of us; but future provisions for us.

(...), etc. Epict. Enchir. cap. 65.
No more; That of Isocrates, shall be my Apology for this boldness, (...):
Freedom of discovery what be our thoughts, is the greatest sign of true
affection: Vide Plut. in Cat. Uti.
I shall not transcribe Cato's grave advice to his son; it may be worth
perusal; you have it in Plutarch, to whom I refer you.

When God bestowed on Abram a new name, he gave him a new blessing; be it so
with you: When the time of your Shrevalty is expired, and your health perfectly
restored; if you shall be reinvested with magisterial power and authority; I
humbly beseech you, and the God of Heaven for you; not to bear the sword in
vain; put on Righteousness, let it cloth you: Let judgment be your Robe,
and Diadem; be eyes unto the blind, legs unto the lame; the blessing of him
who is ready to perish shall come upon you: The Lord who brought you together,
bless you together, and fit you for Heaven in life, and admit you, and your
hopeful progeny after you, to Heaven at death. This shall be the prayer and
breathings of his soul, whose all is but to serve you in the Gospel of Christ,

J. Livesey.
August. 24. 1655.
Jehosaphats Charge TO HIS JUDGES: Opened in a Sermon preached ON 2 Chronicles
19. part of the 6. verse. Take heed what ye do.
Take up and read verse 5, 6. 7. And he set Judges in the Land, thorough the
fenced Cities, City by City. And said to the Judges, take heed what ye do; for
ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment:
Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed, and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts.


ZEnophon reports of Socrates; Memorab. lib. 4.
(...), etc. He was so pious, that he would do nothing, till he had asked
counsel of the gods, Zenoph. Hist. lib. 1. p. 19, 20
and so just, that he never did wrong to any person, no not in matters of
trivial concernment; the like he relates of Cyrus, (...): A. Gellius observes,
Zenoph. de Institutione Cyri.
that Publius Scipio Africanus was accustomed before he set himself about any
business of great consequence and importance; before the dawning of the day, to
enter the Capitol, and there to stay alone a season, A. Gel. N. Attic. lib. 7.
cap. 1. page 187. Plin. Paneg. Trajano. Augusto in principio.
consulting, as it were, with Jupiter, there he submitted his projects to the
judgments of the gods, and humbly implored their allowance of, and assistance
for the good success of his enter prizes; an hence it was that his expressions
and transactions were so admirable and heroical.

Right Honorable; the execution of Justice and Judgment, which you are now
going about, is a work of highest concernment, and choicest intendment; Magnum
est audire homines agrestes, pauperes, and tantum devorare taedium; audire
causas, juvare pios, punire scelerates, est munus Angelicum immo divinum: P. M.
in Sa^. p. 260.
It is Angels work, nay, it is work for God himself, as Peter Martyr has well
observed; it is the work of the Lord, and you have great need of the help of
the Lord, you are sure to meet with resistance from Hell, but assistance from
Heaven will so carry you thorough it, that you shall not notoriously miscarry
in it: royal and religious therefore is your practice, to enter first into the
house of God, here to seek direction from him, and the benediction of him.

It Is Augustines observation, Mihi page 158
in his book de vera religione: that Matthew. 6.19,20,21. v. Lay not up for your
selves treasures upon earth, etc. is the covetous man's Scripture, Gal. 6.8. He
that sows to the flesh, etc. that is the Luxurious man's Scripture, Luke
18.14. Every one that exalts himself shall be abased; that is the ambitious,
the proud man's Scripture, Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of God is within you; that is
the superstitious man's Scripture, 1 John 2.15,16. Love not the World, etc.
that is every man's Scripture; and well may I say the words of my Text are the
reverend Judges Scripture: And if this be the Scripture for Judges, as this
place is the proper place for Judges, and this time the stated, usual time for
judgment; then certainly it can in no place more properly, at no time more
seasonably be handled, than in this place, and at this time; it will be a
word upon the wheel, a Sermon in season: All that I shall say as to the Text,
the Teacher, and this honorable Auditory, is, The Lord make it as serviceable
to you, as it is seasonable for you: For my self in the words of Ludovicus
Crocius, Dissert. 2d. de peccat. Sorig.
Dirige tu mentem Christ, manumque meam.

To you Right Honorable, shall I speak in the words of holy Augustine;
Intendite in haec, Libro praedicto, de V. R.
quae sequuniur diligenter, and quantum potestis pie, tales enim adjuvat Deus.

To the Text:

And I shall crave leave to say something of it by way 1 Of Resolution. 2
Explication. 3 Application.


For the first By way of Resolution: True is that of Seneca to his Luc^ius;
Facilius per parts in cognitioxem totius adducimur: Ep. 89.
How the Angels know, or come to learn: I determine not, some say, Angeli
discurt Analisi; thus is a good way for men to learn. Vide Vasqu. Tom. 2.
Disput. 222. page 515.
Texts of Scripture (till methodically and logically resolved) are like frozen
pits, how refreshing soever the water be, it will not refresh, till the Ice
be broken: This Text is like those trees of which Moses speaks, Genesis 2.9.
pleasant to the sight, and good for food: A Text which should be writ in or
with letters of gold, and put in all those Halls; set on all the benches, in
all Courts of Justice, and places of Judicature, where Justice is executed, and
Judgment administered; Victor Strigel. in locum.
as a learned interpreter notes upon it: And although (says he) there be
many excellent notions hinted and handed to us by Plato, Aristotle, and learned
Jurisperit's concerning the excellency and necessity of Justice: and Judges
duties; yet, Si omnia humana dicta in unam massam conflata essent, hanc tamen
auream concionem aequare non possent, etc.

In it four general parts; you have 1 Officium Propositum, A duty propounded. 2
Modum Expositum, The manner Expounded. 3 Media Deposita, Helps Expressed. 4
Motiva Apposita, Motives annexed.
Concerning the first; The Duty is propounded three ways. Implicitly.
Explicitly. Ingeminatly.


First Implicitly, Ver. 6. Take heed what ye do: Aliquid praesupponitur
agendum; something is to be done; this is employed. Secondly, Explicitly, Verse.
7. Do it, (i.e.) Execute Justice and Judgment: Hic labor, hoc opus est.
Thirdly, Ingeminatly: Take heed what ye do: Again, Take heed, and do it; his
inculcating and duplicating the charge (as Phavorinus in another matter; of
whom in A. Gellius) admonitionem facit intentiorem, impressionem firmiorem; Et
memoriam retentiorem: Physicians say, memoria primum se nescit.


Concerning the second, viz. The Modification.

The manner expounded how Justice is, and ought to be executed, Verse. 6. Take
heed, etc.

From (...)
Summa cum diligentia, vigilantia, prudentia, etc. do it exactly, regularly,
deliberately, Praevidit. prospexit. circumspexit. Carthus. in locum.
actus vestros, verba, and sententias diligenter pensate, ne devietis in
aliquo; says Carthusian on it: See, or see to what ye do: so the Original,
and the Septuagint, (...); a faithful Minister is oculus Ecclesiae; Vide Calv.
in Isa. 3.2
a faithful Magistrate is oculus Reipublicae: here and there blindness, nec
excusatione est digna, nec venia: It is curious work which you are now about;
and you have need of open eyes, steady hands, and honest hearts, Officium
geritis magni momenti; multum potestis prodesse and obesse; causas itaque
accurate perpendite. Lavaret in locum.
Take heed, etc.

Concerning the third; the means or helps expressed, in number three. First,
Let the fear of God be upon you, verse. 7. Let it never be said of THIS Court,
as Abraham did of Abimelechs; Genesis 20.11
Surely the fear of God is not in this place: Remote repagulo and pessulo
Timoris Dei nullam non injustitiam exercebit Judex, a quo nihil boni and aequi,
etc. Rivet well observes; but such as fear God will take heed, Explicat.
Decalogi. page 421
if not of what others say, yet what they themselves do: of this more in the
progress of this discourse. Secondly, Respect not persons (or faces) in
judgment, partiality staineth justice, and cuts in pieces the very nerves and
ligaments of any state: There is no policy so great, as to be an honest,
Caussin.
impartial man. Thirdly, Take no gifts, for they blind the eyes of the wise
(of the Seer) and pervert the words of the Righteous: Ministers have lost their
gifts in this Tenacious hide-bound age. I mean not their parts, qualifications,
etc. it were well if you and others had so too.


Concerning the 4th.

The Motives annexed, whereby these Judges are encouraged, excited, and
animated to a careful, conscientious discharge of their duties, and they also
are in number three. 1 They Judge not for man, ((...)) but for the Lord; and
therefore it mainly concerns them to Take heed what they do, verse. 6. 2 God is
with them in the Judgment: Jehosaphat tells them no less, and I tell you no
more; and Ergo. 3 There is no iniquity in the Lord your God: no ((...))
injustice:
So the Seventy, therefore let there be none in you: and that there may be
none in you, or done by you: Do it, and take heed what ye do: I remember a
famous passage of holy Bernard: That man would have God to be no God, who
would have him to be impotent, Vult Deum non esse Deum, qui vult eum aut
impotentem, aut insipientem, aut injustum esse. Biel in 4. lib. Sentent. D^st.
15 Qu. 7. Artic. 1. Tertio sequitur.
unwise, or unjust: And Biel, one of the acutest Schoolmen, speaking of
accepting, and respecting persons, has this passage: Deus nullius est debtor,
nec potest aliquid injuste agere; quia eo ipso quod aliquid vult, and facit,
just vult, and facit; sua enim volunt as est regula omnis justitiae: It is his
will and pleasure that all his be as he is: Just.

Now if it please you to consider these words, as Jehosaphats Charge to his
Judges: Then two parts are principally observeable. 1 The Substance of the
Charge, of this before. 2 The Circumstances of, or in the Charge; and they are
chiefly two. 1 The Person by whom this Charge is exhibited. 2 The Persons to
whom this Charge is directed.



Concerning the former, viz. Jehosaphat.

Would time, and your affairs permit, I should give you a fair Character of
him, and of his noble acts.

He is described three ways.

By his Place, by his Case, by his Grace.

By his place.
First, By his Office, Employment, or Place, verse 1. He was King of Judah:
Nulli secundus; Rex in suo Regno solo Deo minor, was anciently the
determination of learned Pen's: King.

This intimates, 1 His Dignity. 2 His Duty.


1 His Dignity: Every man is born to a cross. Man is born to trouble, says
Eliphaz, Job 5.7. This is ours by a lineal right.

(...)
(...)
(...), etc.
But Jehosaphat was born to a Crown: In Judah there was none comparable to him
for Greatness, and Goodness.

2 His Duty: As they say in Law: Haereditas transit cum onere: So may I here,
Dignitas transit cum onere: great Honors, and great Labors may not be
severed; the higher men are advanced, the more from them is expected: you were
not born Judges, nor were you ushered into the world with that pomp and
Majesty, as to this place this morning: Has God done great things for you?
then do you great things for, God: for his despised Truths, Worship People,
day: It is sad to see men that owe most, pay least: you are not for sight, but
service: God has done more for you, than he has done for others; and a day
is drawing on, in which he will know of you; Mat. 5.47.
what you have done more for him, than others have done: such as have but a
little, must but account for little: such are exempted from the burden of great
dangers, and the discharge of great duties; but it is not so with you: My Lords
and Gentlemen, therefore as you outstrip others in the receipt of mercies, so
ought you to outstrip others in the performance of duties.


By his Case.
Secondly, By his State, Condition, and Case: He returned to his house in
peace, verse the first: Jehosaphat going to see Ahab King of Israel, (i.e.) of
the ten Tribes, which revolted from Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, and adhered
to Jeroboam, the son of Nebat; going, I say, to see Ahab by way of courtly
visitation, was cunningly caught, and cast into the confederation and society
of an unhappy war, whereby he plunged himself both into spiritual miseries,
and temporal mischiefs: both harmed his conscience, stained his royal
reputation, and hazarded his life: he was exposed to the fury of the whole
Syrian army: Yet to Jerusalem he returned, not slain, nor wounded, as
hollow-hearted Ahab was: Jehosaphat prayed, and the Lord heard, and helped;
diverted them, delivered him, Hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit, as he
said of Luther: it was a miracle of mercy for him to return in safety, Vatabl.
in verse, 1.
obiter innuit miraculum quo evasit incolumis, says Vatablus on it: This was
his Case.

By his Gra^.
Thirdly, By his Grace, as he was a man of quality, and so also of piety:
Erasm. Encnir. Canon. 6. Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juvenal.
This is it, my Lords, that makes honors, honorable; nobility, noble: and
such persons truly illustrious, and their posterity famous: Nobilitas suprema
est filium and haeredem esse Dei, etc. nothing does so adorn, and nobilitate,
as grace: Angels in respect of their nature, are all alike; and Philosophers
say of rational souls: that they are equal, in ratione specifica, quam omnes ex
aequo participant: Souls have no sexes, but grace puts a notable difference:
Jehosaphat was a man of sincerity, though not without his (...), and humane
frailties.

Mention is made of his infirmity, verse. 2. He helped Ahab whom the Lord
abhorred: of twenty Kings of Israel you shall not find above one (if one) good
one: of all the twenty, Jehu.
none comparable to this King Ahab for vileness: He did evil in the sight of
the Lord, above all that were before him, 2 King. 16.30. and in the following
verses, Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger, than all the
Kings of Israel, that were before him: There was none like unto Ahab, who did
set, yea sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: Ut in
pessimis aliquid boni, ita and inoptimis non nihil pessimi. Tert.
This was the man that Jehosaphat helped, and this he did, not only before he
knew Gods pleasure in the matter, but after that the Prophet had acquainted him
with the will of God: To this add further: Jehosaphat rose not up in defense
of the Lords Prophet, Micajah against Zedechiah's insolency, and Ahabs tyranny,
Bersabe erat mulier, Uxor aliena, cum dolor dicimus and tremore, sed Deus
noluit taceri quod voluit scribi; dicam ergo, non quod v^lo, sed quod cogor,
non exhortans ad imitationem, sed instruens ad timorem. Aug. Ennar. in Psa. 51.
Titul.
who committed him for speaking the truth: All great and foul infirmities, cum
dolor dicimus and tremore, sed Deus noluit taceri, quod voluit scribi, as
Augustine speaks of David, and Bathsheba.

It is good to help the Lord against the mighty, but not so, to help the mighty
against the Lord, nor to join hand in hand with them, whom the Lord abhorres.

Jehosaphat was but a man at the best; if he or we be left unto our selves,
in what are we superior to a Beast? who may not then pray, and say with
Augustine, A meipso me libera Domine: Whoever saw Moon, or man without spots;
and they be commonly greatest, when at the highest, and fullest: Great men's
sins are very great sins: It is the misery of men that be great, their sins
cannot be little. Vide sis, Estium in Sent. lib. 2. Distinct. 7. parag. 9.
Riberam in Apocal cap. 14.5


Jehosaphat was a man subject to like passions, as we are, and we are men,
subject to like passions as he was: we are not Angels, but men; and have many
frailties and infirmities to be covered, and cured, but none to be allowed.

Mention is made of his Integrity, ver. the third, Nevertheless there are good
things found in thee: When men praise with a Nevertheless, commonly they
nevertheless praise: Not so with Jeho: that he was a man, who had the root of
the Matter in him, appears evidently and eminently by three notable acts.

First, By what he did, in reference to himself, verse. 3. He prepared his
heart to seek and serve the Lord: This latter commendation wipes off the former
aspersion and accusation, and 2 Chronicles. 17.6. Vide A Lapide and Strigel. in
locum. Et Aug. in Psalm. 51 Tit. Andiant, qui non ceciderunt, ut caveant, qui
ceciderant, ut Surgant.
his heart was lift up in the ways of God.

Secondly, By what he did for the Church; he took away the high places and
groves out of Judah: It is true of Johosaphat, what Beza writ of Calvin, Non
aliter in Ecclesias quamvis remotas affectus, quam si illas gestasset humeris:
To complete the work, he sent Levites and Priests to instruct and teach the
people the good knowledge of the Lord; and Princes, such as were faithful, they
taught, either by the Levites, whom they did associate, countenance, and
encourage in the work; or rather, 2 Chronicles. 17.7,8,9.
the Princes taught the Laws of the Land, the Levites the Law of God; and both
mutually helped each other; where religion was blasted, he knew no good could
be expected: He knew Principalities could not be preserved, where Religion
was extinguished, or extirpated; as the Bishop de Monte Pulciano told Charles
the Emperor in the Council of Trent.

Thirdly, By what he did for the State: what did he? My Text and context tell
you: He set Judges in the Land throughout the fenced Cities of Judah.

This brings me from the Person by whom the charge in hand was exhibited: to
the Persons to whom it was specially directed, Judges.

And here three things are observeable. 1 Who they were, whom he constituted
and empowered: Judges: Judex est jus animatum. 2 The Circuit to which they were
confined: Judah, more specially: The fenced Cities of Judah. 3 The instructions
to them delivered: Take heed, Lavater in loc.
and do it; Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man (i.e.) non hominum,
sed Dei vices judicando geretis.


And now you see the Texture of this portion of Scripture; Senec. in Ep. 89. de
philos.
no more, by way of Analysis, remembering that of Seneca, Dividi non concidi
utile est; and yet I could say no less, Erasm. de ratione concionandi, l. 2.
p. 176.
considering that of Erasmus, magnopere conducit ad docilitatem auditorum
certarum partium praemissio.

The Explication of the Text drawn forth in ten observations.

Quanto videtur apertior, tanto mihi profundior, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 119. Prooem.
Augustine humbly begged of God, that if it were his pleasure, he would send
Moses to him, to interpret some more abstruce, and intricate passages in his
book of Genesis: But here is no great controversy about the Text, not obscurity
in the Text: Those Scriptures are most dark and difficult which are
Allegorical, and prophetical: upon the perusal, this will appear more
historical, and therefore from the parts observeable in it, I shall proceed to
those points deducible from it? Some few I shall propose by way of
Introduction; the last Thesis or conclusion I shall endeavor to open and
apply, as my strength, your patience, and momentous affairs will permit.

He set Judges: Note first, Here is a memorandum of Adams Apostasy, in the
state of Innocence, there was not, nor would there have been such need of
Magistracy. There would have been no contentions, nor wranglings about meum and
tuum, Meum and tuum si de medio tollerentur, homines in terris quietissime
viverent. Senec. Vide and Panormit. in Processu suo Judic. Fol. 1. Ante
peccatum politia nulla fuit, politia est remedium necessarium naturae
corruptae. Luther.
which two Pronounes (says Seneca) mine and thine, were they not in the world,
men would live more peaceably and piously; Nostra enim essemus, si non essent
nostra: In Paradise there was no room for Judges: Panormitan well observes, si
homines in primaevae dispositionis statu, and innocentia, permansissent, latio,
and executio legis postivae non fuisset necessaria; jam legis humanae positivae
promulgatio requiritur, quia nisi lites per justitiam reprimerentur, in mundo
non esset concordia.

We shall not dispute that Question: Utrum regimen politicum in statu
instituto locum habuerit: Perer. in Genesis p. 125. Fig. 70. 71, 72 Aug. d. C. D
lib. 19. c. 14, 15 Merc. Trism. lib. 2. Com 9. qu. 3. Scalig. Exercit. 2. Aqu.
1. 1. qu. 96. Artie. 4. Conclus. Biel. lib. 4. Did. 15. qu. 5. Et licet in
statu innocentiae, etc.
I well remember that Pererius concludes, having handled it pro and con: In
statu innocentiae alii aliis praefuissent dominatione non servili sed civili,
quae nihil violenti, in voluntarii and acerbi mistum habuisset; Augustine
answers it negatively, certainly order there was, and would have been, had not
Adam fallen, as Scaliger observes, and some kind of subjection of man to man as
the Schools note; but that dominion of man over man was not (...), but (...),
and that subjection not servile, but filial, not forced, or involuntary, but
spontaneous: Before Adam had sinned, there was none appointed, by whom Justice
should be executed, or punishment inflicted: Gibbens on Genesis 9.6.
and I find, some of the learned have thought and taught, that till the Flood,
the Lord reserved all revenge of murder to himself; he executed punishment on
Cain and Lamech, and performed the office of the Magistrate alone, bringing in
the Flood upon the old world; for their cruelty and Heaven-daring impieties.

He set Judges in the Land. Secondly observed: It is not said; Judges set him
in the Land, but, etc.

He set Judges in the Land. Thirdly note; Judges set not themselves in the
Land: As we cannot (de jure) preach, except we be sent: so ye cannot (de
jure) judge, nor are your definitive sentences of any validity, except ye also
be sent: The greatest persons, Qui non peccant usurpatione judicii? Vide
Becanum in sum. Theol. Schol. qu 60
be they Angellically gifted, rarely qualified, eminently accomplished, and
accoutred, are not permitted to act as Judges, nor would their decrees and
determinations be regarded; if they had no authority or commission from the
higher powers: Vide Ignat. Epist. ad Trallian. and August. de Civ. Dei. lib.
20. cap. 10
why then should any be allowed, privileged, or permitted to dispense the
word and sacraments authoritatively, without commission from the Lord Jesus
Christ?

Though all the Lords Prophets were the Lords people, yet never were all the
Lords people called to be the Lords Prophets: Estius. in Sen. lib. 4.
Distinct. 24. parag. 19.
Nec minus certo credendum est, externum sacerdotium non omnium fidelium*
multitudini commune esse: sed quibusdam proprium, said one of the Schoolmen:

Gifts and abilities alone, super-adde grace, if your Lordships so please; be
they never so eminent, make not a Magistrate, or Minister of Jesus Christ, in
an ordinary way, and in Ecclesia constituta, as ours is.

Judging and preaching are not merely acts of gifts, but of Offices:
Qualification for a work, and a legitimate vocation, and solemn designation, or
deputation to a work, are distinct things: The laborers, though both willing,
and able, Petri. Abaelar^i Comment. in Ep. ad Romans cap. 1. v. 1
yet went not into the Vineyard, till they were commanded: It is the
observation of a very ancient writer upon Romans 1. verse 1. Paul a Servant of
Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle; vocatus (says he) non a scipso
veniens ad praecandum; aliequin fur esset and latra: He was called, he ran
not of himself to preach the Gospel; had Paul done so, he had been a Thief and
a Robber: And Maldonate an acute Interpreter observes, Maldon. in John 10.3.
that the Lord Jesus Christ has laid down eight Signs and Characters of a
true Prophet, or Pastor, amongst which this is considerable; he enters in at
the door; but who is he that enters in at or by the door? he answers,
quisquis sibi non sumit honorem; per ostium ingrediuntur qui a Deo missi sunt;
they are Thieves and Robbers who climb into this high, holy, and honorable
function, through the window of their own pride, and self-conceit: If Origin, a
man of an excellent dianoy, and rare abilities, fell into dangerous errors;
and that as Chemnitius conceived, because he so long neglected orders; into
what errors may not they slide, who slight it, and contemn it. Sure I am, non
fortunat Deus labores eorum, qui non sunt vocati, quamvis salutaria quaedam
afferunt, non tamen edificant, said Luther truly: and a greater than he
commands me to tell you, who have power and authority in your hands, that they
shall not profit the people at all, Jer. 23.32.

Let not my Lords be angry: I am not here to inquire, by what authority you
act? or who made you Judges over us: We have heard your Commissions: Only this
I say, less I could not, more I shall not: Judges must have clear Commissions:
No man may take that honor of the Ministry, or this of the Magistracy upon
him, were he as wise as Solomon, or Daniel; before he be called.

He set Judges in the Land. Fourthly, It is registered and recorded as a most
royal and religious act of Jehosaphat, and as a great ornament and muniment,
and blessing to the Land: whence we may animadvert: that Judges who will
execute justice, and judgment carefully and conscionably, are very great
blessings to a Land or Nation: How great blessings they be, I cannot tell you
beloved this I can tell you, they are great blessings: Judges are like the
Prophets Figs; those that were good, were very good, and those that were bad,
were very bad: Judex injustus latro est, sicut medicus imperitus est homicidae:
Judex locusta civitatis est malus: said Scaligen: Such Magistrates as bear the
name of Magistrates, and stand in the room of Magistrates, but do not the
offices and duties appertaining to the Magistracy, are but as eyes of glass, or
Ivory-teeth, or Iron-hands, or wooden-leggs; as those artificial and equivocal
limbs stand the body natural in little stead; so do these the body politic.
Good Magistrates are the breath of our nostrils, Lam. 4.22. Grave Senators,
zealous Magistrates, faithful Ministers, are the props the pillars the
buttresses of Church, and Commonwealth: how can an Army be without a General,
or a City without a Governor, or a School without a Master, or a Nation
without a civil Magistrate? it needs no foreign force to dissolve it, it will
Amphisoene-like, destroy it self.

The taking away of the J^dge and the Prophet is threatened and accounted a sad
and sore judgment, Isa. 3.2. these commonly fall together: it was said by a
Royal Pen, no Bishop, no King: And I do believe, whoever lives to see England
without a Ministry, the same eye shall see England without a Magistracy: It is
very sad to lose an eye, more to lose both: now what the eyes are to the body
natural, that those are to there-publick, Isa. 3.2
as judicious Calvin notes upon that Text: we can better be without the light
and heat of the Sun, than without Judges to correct, and Prophets to instruct:
si decidant viri Consuliores periturae urbis, and Orbis primum indicium est: I
shall not gloss upon those Scriptures, though pregnant and pertinent, Amos 2.3.
Judges 2.7. and 4.1. and chap. 8.33. Judges 2.19,20. when the Lord raised them
Judges, then the Lord was with the Judge, and delivered them out of the hand of
their enemies, all the days of the Judge. But when the Judge was dead, they
corrupted themselves more than their Fathers, in following other Gods;
therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel.

If you, my Lords, will right the wronged, relieve the oppressed, judge for the
fatherless, who are commonly friendless; plead for the Widow: If you be eyes
unto the blind, legs unto the lame, harbors to the poor, terrors to the
unjust, succors to the innocent: If you break the jaws of the wicked, and
pluck the spoil out of his teeth: if you do these things, and no less (My
Lords) is expected from you: you will be to us mercies of the first magnitude,
as hiding-places from the wind, and coverts from the tempest; as Rivers of
waters in dry places, and as the shadow of great Rocks in a weary Land: when
such ride the circuits, and come amongst us; Gad, a troop of blessings comes:
You are the shields of the Earth, as the Psalmist calls you; you are the men
who protect from wrongs and injuries, and therefore are great blessings: you
turn away the wrath and indignation of the Lord from the Nation, Psalm.
106.23,29,30,31. the very Heathens extolled Moses with an (...), etc. are not
such blessings indeed to the places in which they live, and to the persons with
whom they converse, for whose sakes the Lord spares a Nation, a City, a Family;
nay one single person from desolating and ruinating judgments? Excellent is
that, Jer. 5.1. If there be any that executes justice; any that seeks the
truth; is there none such? find but one such, and I will pardon Jerusalem. You
see our judgments (My Lords) as to zealous Magistrates; we do not in this
Northern Clymate count you our Burdens, but our blessings; we bless God for
you, rejoice in you, and hope for much good from you, or by you, having had
former experience of your Integrity, Ability, and Fidelity. This is the fourth
in order.

He set Judges in the Land. Fifthly, Jehosaephat is not only contented to be
good, but he is also inquisitive and studious how he may do good: Grace
inlargeth the heart, the hand, Non solum nobis nati.
all; the welfare of Church and state will be much in their eyes, who have
most of God in their hearts: The holy Ghost writ Jehoiada's Epitaph, 2 Chronicles.
24.16.
and it is true of Jehosaphat; he did good in Judah, both toward God, and
toward his house, 2 Chronicles. 24.16.

Jehosaphat was a man of another spirit, of an excellent, heroic, public
spirit; (...); not Codrus, nor Curtius, nor Decius, nor Brutus, loved their
Countries, as he did Judah: He was not to learn; Kings were for Kingdoms,
not Kingdoms for Kings: Non mihi, sed populo, was Adrians Motto: I will seek
thy good, was David's royal and religious resolution, Psalm. 122.9.

He set Judges in the Land of Judah. Sixthly, In Judah was God well known,
both by his Word, and works; Psalm. 147.19,20
by his ordinances and providence; he dealt not so with every Nation: yet in
Judah Judges are set: whence note, that there is no Nation so knowing, no
People so pious, regular, and religious, but even amongst them sin is
committed, and punishment must be inflicted: It is the privilege of the
Kingdom of Heaven alone, to be without sin, suffering, sorrow: Show me the
State that is not pestered, nor infested with litigious, contentious, maligning
spirits without it, nor with factious, unruly, exorbitant spirits within it:
Against invasions and incursions of foreign Nations, garrisons are placed, and
Forces appointed for all the fenced Cities, and in the Cities of Ephraim: which
Asa his Father had taken. 2 Chronicles. 17.2
Against intestine broils, commotions, and injuries; he ordains Judges,
because sentence given by him, who is not authorized, and empowered to judge, is
of no validity in Law: and because no man can be Judge in his own cause: Aqu.
2. 2. qu. 67
others therefore are constituted to give every man his right, and due, and
that in Judah: In Germany each Jurisdiction or Territory has a Leens-man; each
Parish a Nembdemanus (i.e.) a Judge; but here Judges are only set in the
fenced, or as the Seventy read it, in the strongest Cities.

And said unto the Judges. Seventhly, Judges have need of sound and wholesome
instructions: It is fit for Princes and Judges to have some godly-learned
(...), Remembrancers, or Monitours with them: Themistocles had his Anaxagoras,
Alexander, his Aristotle, Scipio, his Polybius, etc. The Angel in the form of a
Macedonian, had need of Paul's assistance: Come and help us, and might not you,
my Lords, take with you some eminently learned and experienced Minister in all
your circuits? Jehosaphat here both gives the commissions, and the
instructions: Be instructed ye Judges of the earth; there is a Judge that
needs none, the Judge of all the earth, but you do: It was royal Council which
our Henry the eighth gave to Sir Thomas Moore, when he made him Chancellor:
Look first at God, then at me: It is your duty and discretion to look first
and most at God, and his Law; for ye judge for him, and he is with you in the
judgment, if it be just; against you, and your judgment, if unjust: I must
confess, as Nazianzen said of great Basil: (...): The Sea needs not (nor does
it disdain) the little Rivers that run into it; nor do your Lordships need the
Instruction of so raw and young a man, a man unacquainted with matters of this
Nature, and your distinct duties, Vel hic Collige, quam difficile est
Ecclesiastae munus, qui Monarchis and judicibus debet consillum, doctrinam, and
correptionem. Erasm. de Ratione concionandi.
offices, etc. nor very studious to learn, yet remembering, and therein
encouraging my self, that young Samuel spoke boldly, and plainly to old Eli, a
very grave and reverend Judge, without the least check; and being commanded to
this service, which I looked upon, as pensum par animo Pauli; I humbly crave
your attention to what shall concern you.

Take heed what ye do. Eighthly, Observe, Something is to be done; the Note
is, (...). Ar. pol. lib. ^. cap. 2.
The greatest persons are born for Action; intelligere and operari, says the
Philosopher: to Know, and Do, is the end of man; as man is (...), a sociable
creature, and (...), a reasonable creature; so he is (...), an operative
creature; by how much the greater I am, by so much the more I labor, and by
how much the more I labor, by so much the greater I am: was a notable saying
of a gracious man: Of all created Natures, the most noble are the most nimble,
active, agil. The Seraphims are not for sight, Vide Aquin. 1. 1. qu. 112. Art.
2. and Aq. in Heb. 1.14. and A Lapide in locum.
but service: I shall not trouble you with what the Schoolmen tells us about
the Ministration of Angels; they say, they are not all ministering spirits; they
build more on Dionisius and Gregory, than on blessed Paul: read that remarkable
Scripture, the Epistle to the Hebrews, writ by Paul, (not Barnabas, Camero in
Heb. qu. 2. mihi page 368.
as Camero) chap. 1.14. Are they not All ministering spirits? that interrogation
is a positive assertion; they are All; Deus nunquam ullam creaturam ea lege
condidit, says Camero excellently; no creature was made by God, but with this
law, or proviso, that it should depend upon God, Camer. (...): mihi page 779.
Jun. in Jud. ver. 6
both in fieri, and in facto esse: both in esse, and in operari, and also do
service for God: Natura Angelica non potuit, humana non debuit esse otiosa,
said Junius, The Angels, of all created beings, are most serviceable, though
they have small benefit of their Ministration; the Lord having the glory, the
Elect the comfort, the profit.

David first served his Generations by the will of God, then fell asleep: Let
not death surprise us, before we have served our Generations: Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth they rest from their labors, Rev.
14.13
(...); from henceforth: expect not blessedness if you rest from your labors,
Job 3.17
before ye die in the Lord: There, viz. in the grave, the weary are at rest:
That sentence is entailed on all Mortals; In the sweat of thy brow, or brain,
shall thou eat thy bread, till thou return unto the ground, Genesis 3.19.

By Mahomets law, the Grand Turk himself was to be of some trade: The
Athenians hated (...): By Solons Law, idle persons were to suffer death: Non
solum negotii, sed and otit redenda est ratio, said Tully truly: The
Lacedaemonians called men to account for their idle hours; an idle Magistrate,
or an idle Minister, or an idle Gentleman, the Lord abhorres: it is not enough
for you venerable Gentlemen, Vide p. Mart. in 2 Samuel 11. Fusius agit contra
otium.
not to do evil: It is required that you as well as others, nay, that you more
than others, should be doing good: A Negative Magistrate is no Magistrate: Nic
Machiaveli disput. de Republica. lib. 1. cap. 1
Machiavels counsel is good: Otium prohibeatur, and perpetua quaedam honestorum
exercitiorum necessitas imperetur, vitanda est maxim sterilitas, etc.
Idleness exposes to the Devils malice: Idleness disposes to the Devils
service, Vide Doctissimi, Saunder soni concionem quartam ad populum. Res age,
tutus e^is.
when he finds you about nothing that is good, he will employ you about
something that is evil: otium animi mors est, and vivi hominis sepultura, says
Seneca: it is the death of the soul, the interring of a man alive: An idle hour
is the hour of temptation: a flying Lark who makes his mark: Hispani bellum
quam otium malunt. Justin. Hist.. lib. 44. p. 349.
The Spaniards had rather be warring, than idleing, if the Historian may be
credited: and in my judgment it is more eligible; Legitima authoritas, justa
causa, intentio recta; moderamen debitum requiruntur. secundum Bielem. lib. 4.
Sent. Distinct. 15. Qu. 4.

Illicit a non sunt Christianis bella, sive defensiva, sive invasiva, modo
adsint haec tria; justitia causae, potestas publica, intentio recta. Estius in
Sent. lib. 3. Distinct. 37. Parag. 20.


If there be a good cause, a good call, a good end, and if managed in a right
way, and manner; for War, (though a necessary evil) is the solemn instrument
of Justice, the restraint of vice, and public insolences; the support of a
body politic against foreign invasions, and Domestic rebellions: Up then,
and be doing: Honorable Lords, and worthy Gentlemen, account your selves
happy, in that God accounts you worthy to do any thing for him: especially to
be so honorably employed under him: your time is short with us, your work is
great: though the Sun stand still, or go backwards, yet still time goes
forward: five or six days, beyond which you cannot sit, will soon expire.

Reverend Fathers and Brethren, Remember you and I that Motto of famous Mr.
Perkins: Minister verbi es? Vide Bezam in vita Calvini. 2 Per. 1.12,14
Hoc age: And that worthy saying of judicious Calvin: Quid si Christus cum
venerit, me otiosum invenerit? what if Christ when he comes to summon me to
death, shall find me idle: It was holy Augustins wish, that Christ might
find him, aut precantem, Possid de vita and moribus. Aug p. penult. Vel
inveniendis rebus; ^ de jam inventis; etc.
aut praedicantem; praying, or preaching: Possidonius relates this of him, that
he was ever employed, either inventing, or dictating, transcribing, perusing,
or preaching; praying, or visiting the Fatherless, and the Widows: Et hoc
agebat in die laborans, in nocte lucubrans. Minima portio temporis dabatur
somno, minor cib^, nulla otio, ita Adri^om. de Hieron.
And memorable is that which Augustine himself spoke to Eudoxius, and the
brethren with him, in his eighty first Epistle: As Fire and Water, so Pride and
Sloathfulnesse are by Ministers to be shunned: It is certain, a whet, is no
let: Recreation may be used, but in its due season, Amice quisquis huc venis,
aut Agito paucis aut abi, aut me laborantem adjuva haec erat inscriptio musaei
Urfmian. Vide Mel^i. Adam. Vide P. Mart. in 2 Samuel 12;
and with a right intention, to fit us for our work, but never as our work; not
to procure wealth, but to preserve health, which such as live sedentary lives
seldom have; and also with choice persons.

The two witnesses, of whom you read, Rev. 11. end their lives, and their
labors together: Nullus est in Anglica diligentior Episcopus, quam Diabolus,
said Latimer: There is not a more busy Bishop in all England, than is the
Devil; shall we learn some good of him: To bestirre our selves the more,
because our time is short, Rev. 12.12.

The Levites in the Law were discharged at fifty, in part, Numbers 8.25. Let
not us pretend more weakness of body, or decay of memory, of natural
abilities, and faculties, more than is, to gain a dispensation: Augustine
preached till his last sickness, aged seventy six: And Ambrose dyed commenting
on the Psalm, Usque ad suam ipsam extremam aegritudinem. Possid, ubi supra.
on that 47. Psalm, if A Lapide mistake not: Oportet Episcopum conscionantem
mori: soul-work is sweet work, though we sweat. Paul did not say, I converted
more than they, yet he could say, I labored more than they; and herein may
we solace our selves, if Israel be not gathered: we have discharged our duty
in some measure; sincerely, though slenderly, and non curatio, sed cura Ovium a
pastore requiritur, as A Lapide well observed. A Lapid. in 1 Timothy 4


Christians, this is of concernment to you also: you must be doing; (...): Our
Religion consists not in wording, Justin. Mar. Aq. 1. p. qu. 1. Art. 4. Estii
praefat. in Sent. Tenendum est, Lev. 25
but in working; not in speaking, but in living great things: The Jews usually
called the seventh year, the idle year, because then there was no plowing, no
sowing, no reaping, or mowing: with many Christians, every year is the idle
year: Should we be examined what we have done for God, what naked backs we
have clothed, what hunger-starved bellies we have refreshed, what duties we
have discharged: should conscience speak, and all tongues be silent: shame
might cover our faces: Seneca jeered the Jews, because they lost one day in
seven: Vide Aug. de C. D. lib. 6. cap. 11
To observe the Sabbath day, was with him to lose a day: well might he deride
the Christians of this lazy, drousy age, were he now alive, who lose Lords
days, Exercise days, and other precious seasons for soul advantages; too many
dividing their lives, one half they are idle, and the other, they do nothing;
Pauci hoc agunt, said the Heathen Philosopher: It was Erasmus his wish, Angli
ingeniosi, utinam and laboriosi: Let me rather be numbered amongst the
unprofitable, than the idle servants: We have a days work for every day, an
hours work, for every hour; every day we should go a days journey toward
Heaven.

The life of Christ was a most active, Act. 10.53
may I not say, a most laborious life: he never spoke idle word, never spent
idle day; he went about doing good: That is the character which Peter gives of
his Master: no sooner began he to walk, but he began to work: where he was,
there he was doing good, and where he was not doing good, there was he not:
Now he is our great Exemplar, and Looking-glass, his actions (not his
miraculous, etc.) his moral actions are our instructions: Mark. 7.37
He did all things well, and shall we do nothing? God forbid! Non otiose
vivit, qui qualitercunque utiliter vivit, Aq. 2. 2. qu. 187. Art. 5. resp. ad
Arg. 2.
says Aquinas; but we must see that it be utiliter, as he said, John 9.4.
so we say, we must do the work of him that sent us, while it is called to
day; for a night is coming, a night of desertion, a night of affliction may
come, a night of death and dissolution will come, and then no man can work:
Frustra est ea potentia, quae non reducitur in actum; quando debet, and potest
reduci.
Let us therefore while we have the light, walk in the light, and work by the
light: while it is called to day, let us go about our work, not neglecting the
seasons, nor napkinning up the Talents which are delivered to us: I shall
conclude this with that notable saying of Cato, subscribed by the wiser
Heathens, as an Oracle, Nihil agendo male disces agere.

Take heed what ye do: Take heed, and do it. Ninthly, In that the charge is
ingeminated, two things may here be intimated. 1 The greatness of the work,
which on them is imposed. 2 The neatness or exactness in the workmen, who are
herein employed:
But I pass this.

Quest. He said unto the Judges, Take heed what ye do; but were not they also
to take heed what they said?

Ans. Carthusian upon this Text (of whom we spoke in the Analysis) has this
Gloss: Non solum act us vestros, verum etiam verba, and sententias diligenter
pensate: ponder not only your works, but your words; be not rash in either:
and I am induced to conclude with him, that both they and we must take heed
what we say, or none will regard what we do.

The Apostle, if any man, Vide sis Greg. Thaumat. Metaph. in Ecclesiast. c. 5.
p. 87
requires this of every man: If any man seem to be religious, or righteous,
and yet takes no heed to his tongue, all his Religion is vain: If Hell be
where the Devil is most, it is in most men's mouths and hearts, and there is an
Hell Moral, as well as Local: The whole life of man, Vita nostra referta est
linguae delictis. Basil.
(said Basil) is full of the sins of his tongue: It is most true, lingua mors,
lingua vita, lingua Deus, lingua Demon: the wisest of mortals voucheth it:
life and death are in the power of the tongue: Excellent is that council of
holy Bernard, Sermon. de triplici custodia mihi p. 385
Bis ad limam veniant verba potius, quam semel ad linguam, plus diligas audire,
quam audiri, and that of the Stoic Philosopher is worthy to be writ with a
pen of Iron: (...), Epicteti Enchirid. c. 41. in principio.
etc. Bridle thy tongue; for the most part be silent, or speak about necessary
things; and that curtly, concisely.

Ber. de triplici cust. Levis res sermo, quia leviter volat, sed graviter
vulnerat, leviter transit, sed graviter urit, facile volat, Ideeque facile
violat charitatem; modicum membrum est, sed nisi caveas, magnum malum. Bern.
Aug. Ennarrat. in psalm. 51 Claudamus oris nostri januam objiciamus repagultim.
mordiamus nos ipsos si quando grave ac durum quodd^m verbum dentes nostros
transire voluerit. Gillib. Bern. Succent. Sermon. 14. in Cant. prope sin. Aug.
Tom. 1. de verbis Domini initio capiris 1. and 2. Pelag. lib 4. (...) 35.
Drexelius in his Orbis Phaeton, tells us, that the Tuscians writ upon the
doors of their houses these two words, ARSE VERSE, which in our language has
this signification, Take heed of Fire, keep it warily; it might well be writ
on every man's breast, says he, linguae ignem cautissime custodi; keep the
fire of thy tongue most carefully.

Sicut eligis quo vescaris sic elige quod loquaris, cibum examinas per os
ingressurum, cur non etiam verbum per os egressurum; quod saepe graviores
tragaedias excitat in tua domo, quam cibus an tuo stomacho: As thou art choice
of what thou eatest, said Augustine, so also be choice of what thou speak:
Thou art curious about, and examinest the meat which goes in at thy mouth, lest
it may poison thee: and why not the words which go out of thy mouth, lest they
poison others: and thou shall find upon trial; that these do more mischief in
thy house, than those do in thy stomach: and elsewhere this holy man speaking
of the same subject: Si tu eam domare volueris: would thou tame thy Tongue?
thou can not, because thou art but a man; and no man can tame his Tongue:
Homo feram domat, linguam non domat; domat leonem, non refraenat Sermonem;
Domat ipse, and non domat seipsum, etc. Sisoius (as Pelagius reports) for
thirty years together prayed, and that often in a day: Domine Jesu Christ,
protege me a lingua mea: O Lord deliver me from my Tongue: Lingua malorum
omnium compendium, vere Phacton and orbis incendium, vix ullum in mundo malum
quod non vel incipiat, vel augeat, and incendat lingua; nulla pars ad nocendum
promptior ad fraenandum difficilior. Drexelius.
and yet found it a piece of difficulty to get the mastery and victory over it.

Of all the Members of the body there is none so serviceable to Satan, as is
the Tongue: when the hands are manacled, the feet fettered, and stocked, the
tongue is free.

Vide Pinedam in Job 2.8.

Sect. 1. Numb. 8.

Jobus a Satana dire habitus, nihil sui corporis habuit, quod sanum diceret,
praeter linguam.

Orbis Phacton. 1. 2. p. 344. Aug. Ennarrat. in Psalm. 39.1. and in Psalm. 34.13.

Quis sane numeret quantas modicum linguae membrum contrahat sordes; quam sit
gravis pernicies oris in circumspecti.

Bern. Sermon de triplici custodia. p. 98.


Pineda disputes the question, why Satan (having liberty to inflict diseases
upon Jobs Tongue, as well as upon the other members of his body) spared that?
And I find Drexelius hinting at the reason: Forsan ideo non ulcerosam habuit
linguam, ut eam in querelas laxaret; ut coelum, omnesque caelites execraretur,
etc. It was Satan's desire, and grand design to move Job to curse God, and
charge him foolishly: and therefore he spares his Tongue: Lingua non frustra
in udo est, said Augustine: Of all the parts and members of man's body, there is
none kept oiled, so moist and glib, as is the Tongue, and thereupon he
counsels: Perpende quod dicturus es, examina, consule interiorem veritatem, and
sic profer ad exteriorem auditorem: he is not, says the Apostle, (...), a
beginner, but (...), a good proficient in Religion, that can curb his tongue.

Lingua pl^rima and certa satis, praecipue in Febribus, signa exhib^t.
As Metals are known by their tinkling, so are men by their talking: and
Physicians say, the nature of diseases is known, as well by the tongue, as by
the pulse, or urine: The mouth of the Righteous speaks wisdom, and his
tongue talks judgment; Morhi natura ex lingua non minus quam ex urina
cognosci potest: Senne^t. Instit. l^b. 3. cap. 16. Hyppoc. Aphoris. 13, 15, 16.
for the Law of the Lord is in his heart.

It is quaeri'd in the Schools, what was the first sin of the first Angel that
fell, (for they assert, that one fell first, and then the rest, Estius in Sent.
lib. 3. Dis. 6. parag. 8. Sex varias proponit ententias.
unus caeteris author, and suasor fuit transgressionis, as Estius speaks) Nine
or ten several opinions of theirs I remember I have read; some say it was envy,
others, discontent; and some suppose, it was their refusing to undertake, or
take up the charge given, Scotus lib 2. Did. 6. qu 2. Art. 2.
or to be given them about man: Scotus thinks, it was a certain spiritual
luxury: And some, Vide Othor. is Casmanni Angelo graphiam: in part 2. cap. 10.
q. 4. p. 395 Non per os serpentis, sed locutio quaedam spiritualis, ut
blasphemia in Deum. Estius ubi supra parag. 6, 7.
with many of the Ancients: Angelos amore mulierum captos per libidinem
peccasse: Others ingratitude: The most and best say, pride: but wherein that
Pride consisted, is not easily determined, nor by them unanimously resolved; by
some it is as confidently asserted, that it was a sin of the Tongue: but what
ever it was: you know they suffer eternally, and deservedly for it: and it
concerns us all to set a watch before the doors of our lips; a tongue that is
set on fire from Hell, is in danger to be set on fire in Hell.

Let none say, words are but wind; Quot tibi possim dicere, qui sub Tyrannis
sensuum suorum paenas luerunt propter incautam linguam, Lips. de Constin. c.
25. p, 181.
small, trivial, inconsiderable things: certainly they weigh heavy in Gods
balance, the least idle word is damning in its own nature: The Philosopher
could say, (...), are sometimes (...): Men die for coining single pennies
(contrary to Law) as well as Jacobus pieces: Physicians say, Worms in children
may turn to the Fever; and that into the Plague: Aug. Ennar. in Psalm. 128.1.
And the Father excellently, Dicis minora sunt, minuta sunt verba vana; sed
congere minuta, and faciunt ingentem acervum, and ignis gehennae non est parvus.

It was Zenophons wish to have all speeches writ; Melius est hanc artem ^ire,
quam esse regem and Diademate coronari. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Hom. 33. mihi p. 260.
it would make us more serious: Of Taciturnity I may say, as he did of
Charity: It is better to learn this art, than to be a King, and crowned with
Diadems: Latimer, when some were taking his Examination, he took more
deliberation, hearing a pen walking behind the Curtains.

There is a book of remembrance in which all our words are recorded, the
consideration of it should work us to more wariness.

There are five or six things which every man has to keep: which if he do,
they will keep him doing all the days of his life: he has the Faith to keep,
2 Timothy 4.7. 2 Timothy 4.7
He has a good conscience to get and keep, and he has his heart to keep,
Prove. 4.23,24
his eye to keep, his foot, and his tongue: Pro. 4.25,26
Myriam was smit, and Myriads smart for the abuse of their tongues: a learned
Author delivers his judgment of Tully and Demosthenes: Si muti fuissent,
diutius vixissent; and suavius obiissent.

Senco. Ep. 10. in fine.
For every idle word we must account to God: The meekest man that ever the Sun
saw, or the earth bare, spoke unadvisedly with his lips; so may you, and so
have I too often: Let us therefore take up David's resolve, Vide Chrysostom. Tom.
1. hom. in Psalm. 140. mihi page 1038 Tom. 2. hom. 46. in Mar. c. 13. mihi p.
386 Tom. 5. hom. 52. ad pop. Ant. p. 297. Tom. 4. hom. 15. in Ephesians. ^. p. ^5
Tom. 1. in cap. 1. ad Genesis p. 20. Leonardus Rubenus de Aurea lingua cap. 59
To take heed to our ways, that we sin not with our Tongues: I have been too
long on this, yet not without warrant, such a digression is no transgression: I
shall crave leave to acquaint you with a memorable passage of Rabbi Jehuda: And
then pass on to the last and great Observation.

Drexelius Tells you, that Rabbi Jehuda openly proclaimed in the Marketplace,
that he had at home a certain golden water, which was of choicest virtue, and
highest value; very useful for all persons, for all constitutions: Excellent
for the prolonging of man's life: Many hearing this solemn proclamation, amongst
the rest, a little Daughter of another Rabbi, acquainted her Father with the
sum and substance of it: who addressing himself with thousands more to see
those strange waters, and offering great sums of monyes, might they have some
of them: Drexel. Orbis Phaeton. 1. 2. p. 515
The Rabbi opens his Bible, and turns unto the 34. Psalm. 13, 14. What man is
he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see good? Keep thy
tongue from evil, etc. Et haec est illa aqua vita aurea, says he; this is
that golden, life-prolonging water: Come taste and try: come near and buy this:
My Lords and Gentlemen, and you beloved Brethren. But he said unto the Judges,
Take heed what ye do.

Tenthly, Observe, That it is the duty and discretion, it is the part and
prudence of Judges, to do justice and judgment, and in the administration
thereof, to take heed what they do (i.e.) from what principles, by what rules,
in what manner, by what authority; and in a word, for what ends they act.
Arist. 2. Polit. Scaliger. Exer. 307. Sect. 3. God is rich in Knowledge. 1 Samuel
2.3. In goodness, Romans 2.4. In Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. In Glory, Ephesians. 1.18. And
in Mercy also, Ephesians. 2.4


It is a main, plain, and a momentous Truth: I am now to discourse of the
execution of justice: Justice is (...), fulcrum and anchora civitatis, says
the Philosopher in his Politiques: It is conservatrix humanae conjunctionis,
quae ad beatitua tidem via est: says Scaliger, I am easily convinced, that
mercy best becomes a Ministers mouth: God loves mercy best, and we need mercy
most: he is in Scripture styled, the Father of mercies, for he begets
mercies, as Fathers beget children: and loves mercies, as Fathers love
children: He is a Sea of mercy, both bottomless, and boundless, an
overflowing, and an ever flowing fountain of mercy, and yet ever full: He is
(...): rich in mercy, not rich in wrath: he delights in mercy, not in
judgments: Isa. 7.20
he hires the raisor wherewith he shaves his people, Isa. 7.20. Judgment is
his work, (...)
but his strange work; he loves freely, but corrects not willingly, not from
the heart: though men do willingly grieve the children of God, Lam, 3.33
yet God does not willingly grieve the children of men: O Ephraim! what what
shall I do unto thee? and how shall I give thee up O Ephraim? Hos. 11.8
how shall I deliver thee O Israel? how does the most High debate and project
with himself to show mercy: Excellent is that of Vossius, upon that Text: De
Extr. Judicio, These. 3
Go ye cursed; it is said, come ye blessed of my Father, but not, go ye
cursed of my Father: Benedictionis author and pater est, non item
maledictionis, etc.

But be all this, and more granted; we must sing this compound ditty of
judgment, and mercy: Unisons make no good music: Such are his Attributes,
that he will not cease to be just, that he may be merciful: As he is the
Father of mercies, so he is a Lord of wrath: Baal chemah, (...)
a possessor of wrath, Nahum 1.2. As he has a time of reprieving; so he has
a time of reproving: a time of correcting man for sin, as well as a time of
conniving at man's sin; his patience has fixed bounds, and limits: None may
leave sin unpunished, who are thereto deputed, upon pretense that God is
merciful: it is said, that no attribute of God is so often iterated, no act of
God so often inculcated, no work of God so often repeated in sacred story, as
Justice, Judge, Judgment, etc.

Two Branches of the Observation. 1 Justice must be executed, and Judgment
administered. 2 And that exactly, conscionably, deliberately, etc.


First, Of the first, It is the more common observation; and therefore I shall
not injure this reverend Auditory by prolixity: I come then to clear it by
testimonies, both divine, and humane: out of the inspired Prophets, and Heathen
Poets and Philosophers. Consult. Jer. 22. 2, 2^. 12


For Scripture proofs, consult, Deuteronomy. 16.19. Judges and Officers shall thou
make in all thy Gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee throughout the
Tribes, and they shall judge the people with just judgment: Psalm. 82.3
Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall not respect persons; Deuteronomy. 1.16 Et
A Lapide in loc.
nor take a gift; that which is altogether just shall thou follow: Deuteronomy. 19.21
In the Original it is more emphatical, Justice: Justice shall thou follow;
(...), all manner of Justice, and nothing but Justice, carefully, constantly,
etc. Micah 6.8. Calvin conceives, that that Prophesy, as we now have it, is
but the Synopsis or Epitome of certain Sermons collected by him, and recorded
for the Churches benefit: And Gualther thinks, this is part of his fourth
Sermon: the marrow whereof you have in this eighth verse, He has showed thee
O man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee? To do justly: Vide
Guath. in locum.
Kings and Princes, Magistrates, and Ministers; Masters, and Servants; Judges
especially must learn to do judgment justly: though your dispositions may
incline you to mercy, yet his command must praeponderate and overawe you to
justice: there can be no mercy in injustice, and nothing but injustice in
disobeying the Lords command.

Exodus 23. Thou shall not speak (no not speak) in a cause to decline after many
to wrest judgment: Thou shall not wrest the Judgment of thy poor in his
cause: Keep thee far from a false matter: the innocent and the righteous slay
thou not, and verse 13. In all things which I have said unto you, be
circumspect: Take heed what you do.

Nor is that time the least considerable, though last considered, in Zachary,
8.16. The Persians were so in love with Justice, that this was the first of
those five things which they taught their children from their fifth, to their
tenth year; as Zenophon Hist. lib. 1. de Institutione Cyri.
Execute the Judgment of Truth and peace; q. d. It is not sufficient to build
the Temple, and to have an eye to his ceremonial worship: you should mainly
mind the moral Law, see that the main duties be performed, some particulars
are mentioned, under which the rest are comprised: Execute the Judgment of
Truth and Peace, judge according to law, and the rules thereof, and according
to true information in matters of fact.

It is the conclusion of the Philosopher, (...), the more just any person, or
action is, Arist. and hic lib. 1. c. 1 and lib. 5. c. 1
the more excellent and glorious it is: (...): as peace comprizeth all
blessings, so does justice all virtues: Ubi nec cura juris, Senec. de Clem.
lib. 1, cap. 2. 4
said Seneca, where there is no care of equity and justice, Kingdoms must
needs be in a tottering condition: P. Parad. 4
this is Civitatum vinculum, says Tully, the Ornament, the Muniment, the
Cement that holds Cities and Kingdoms together: no society can subsist without
it: Vide Valor. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 5.
Amongst Thieves and Robbers were no justice observed, but one take all; the
society would suddenly (and happily) dissolve.

It was Pythagoras his grave advice to his Scholars. Aur. Carm.
(...), etc. both in word and deed: inure your selves to equity; ever
remembering you are mortal: and Hipparchus his Motto, (...): Think on
Righteousness as thou go along: or practice Righteousness in thy life and
conversation: Vide Phocylidis (...).
Another of them has his, (...); first, worship God, then honor thy Parents:
in the next place, do justice to all men: Plato, Plotinus, Hesiod, and others
are very full in this; who would not blush to hear Pagans pressing this so
much, and to see Christians practicing this so little.

For Arguments to convince, take nine or ten: Justice must be executed.

Ratio 1
First, That Authority may be preserved: The Authority of God and his Officers,
the Authority of God in his Officers, hereby it is kept in its viridity, and
splendor, in its fragrancy and beauty: Should Justice lie long dormant, and
malefactors pass without condign punishment, wicked men would vilify, and
scorn all Magistrates, and Magistracy: You read of some in Judes Epistle, who
despised, disdained, and contemned the Magistrates, and desired that dominion
(i.e.) Magisterial power and authority were extinct and disanulled, Vide Calv.
in locum.
verse. 8. who were those persons? but carnal men, seducers, and impostors; such
there be amongst us; therefore do it.

Three things you should especially uphold, The fundamental Laws, Dan. 7.25.
The Peoples liberty, Act. 22.28. Your own Authority, Prove. 20.8.

Secondly, That the most holy may be eased: therefore must justice be
administered: When oppression, blasphemies, murders, and robberies are acted,
the eye of his glory is provoked, and God blessed for ever is pressed: Amos
2.13. Sub foeni onere Aridere est pondera and iniquitates peccantium cum
querela tolerare.
Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is laden with
sheaves: Behold! rem novam, inopinatam, atque mirabilem de signat, says
Lorinus: it designeth and points out unto us something new and admirable: and
is not this such? such were the iniquities of the old world, so universal in
respect of persons; so universal in respect of places; so abominable and
intolerable was their wickedness, that it repented the Lord that he had made
man; not that he had made the Fish in the Sea, nor the fouls of the air, nor
the damned spirits in Hell: but alas! that he had made man: with what
abhorrency does he look upon men thus sinning, who took so much delight and
complacency in man standing: It grieved him at the very heart: the heart even
of God is broken with a peoples wickedness, his soul is grieved with their
iniquities, pressed with their impieties: how does the Lord complain there; a
Father will suffer much, and bear long before he complain of his child: Tam
Pater nemo, tam pius nemo: but no sheaves can press, as sin, and Sinners do:
Angels and men, the whole Creation, yea, the Creator himself groans under them:
but the punishing of the offender is an easing of the Creator; and therefore
the Lord says, Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries, I will comfort, I will
satisfy my self by taking vengeance: Indeed, when his children are corrected,
he himself is afflicted; no sooner has he stricken, but he repents, as it
were, that the blow was given; the Rod no sooner falls on their head, Judge.
10.16
but he feels it at his heart: But when he by his heirs of restraint, his
Ministers of Justice, makes evil doers smart; he eases himself; he speaks, as
if while they are punishing them, they were unloading him; and who will not in
his station endeavor this for his Maker and Master?

Reason 3.
Thirdly, That evil doers may be reformed, and others by due execution of
justice, deterred, and restrained: When the Thunderbolt kills one, the clap
affrights many: Paena ad unum, terror ad omne^: Notable is that of Seneca,
pereant impii, non ut pereant, sed ut alios pereundo proficiant: When Justice
is faithfully executed, Aul. Gel. N. Atr. lib. 6. cap. 14.
God has the Praise of his Justice, and men have the Profit of his Judgments,
Deuteronomy. 13.10,11. Thou shall stone him with stones till he die, thou shall
surely kill him, that All Israel may hear and fear, and do no more any such
wickedness: A parallel Text you have, chap. 17.13. Aquinas upon that question,
whether it be lawful to put malefactors to death; concludes it not only lawful,
but necessary: As we cut off a putrid corruptive member, a leg, or an arm, 2.
2. Quest 64. Artic. 2.
when the more principal and vital parts are hazarded: Laudabiliter and
salubriter abscinditur, and in answer to another utrum, he asserts, that
Princes and Judges may take away the lives of flagitious malefactors, 2. 2.
Quest. 64. Artic. 3. and 4.
in quantum ordinatur ad salutem totius communitatis: If their death may
conduce to the tranquillity and prosperity of the Commonwealth: We will shut up
this Argument, with that of an Ancient: pertinet ad innocentis Magistratus
officium, non solum nemini malum infer, verum etiam a peccato cohibere; and
punire peccatum, aut ut ipse qui plectitur, corrigatur experimento, aut alii
terreantur exemplo.

Reason 4.
Fourthly, That peace and love may be preserved: This peace is a costly, choice,
and comprehensive mercy; Pax una triumphis innumeris potior, pacem te poscimus
omnes. Vide Naz de pace 1. Orat. 3
it is earths joy, and heavens glory; a blessing which we have sought for, and
fought for, prayed for, and paid for; (...), says Nazianzen speaking of
peace: war is the worst of all Gods ^our sore judgments; it is the plague of
plagues: when God gave David leave to choose the Rod wherewith he should be
whipped (a favor very seldom vouchsafed to the godly: and never that I
remember, to any wicked) and put him to that Trilemma, in 2 Samuel 24. he cast by
the sword at first sight; that judgment seldom comes alone: Cicero de Repub.
lib. 2. Aug. de C. D. lib. 2. cap. 21.
Now Tully tells you, sine justitia pax nulla est, etc. And we by experience
and observation cannot but know, that the execution of Justice is a sure, pure,
a special and speedy way and mean for the prevention of that, and the
conservation of this: Memorable is that of the Prophet Isaiah 32.17. the work
of Justice (whether distributive, or commutative) shall be Peace: This is the
fruit that grows upon that root, the product of due execution of Justice:
Distributive Justice has stocks for Vagrants, See Dr. Halls True Peacemaker.
whips for Harlots, ropes for Felons, stakes for blasphemous Heretics, Gallows
for Murderers, and the Garland of Peace hangs upon all these Engines of
Justice, Psalm. 72.2,3. He shall judge thy people with Righteousness, Vide
Panormitani Judic. process. Fol. 2.
and thy poor with judgment, and what shall follow thereupon? Then the
Mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little Hills by
Righteousness: When Joram asked Jehu: is it Peace? is all well at Ramoth? Jehu
answers him peremptorily, yet prudently; what Peace? that is, there can be no
solid, settled, well-grounded peace expected, till Justice be executed:
Idolatry exterpated, Jezabel deposed, 1 King. 15.

Reason 5
Fifthly, That Judgments may be prevented, if threatened; removed, if
inflicted: This is the way to divert the Judgments of God from your persons
from your posterity; from the whole Nation: My Lords! if you bear the sword in
vain, God will not.

You read in Samuel of old Eli, a grave and reverend Judge: You read of his,
and his Sons sins against God; and Gods sentence against him, and his Sons; His
Sons were deeply guilty of great and gross impieties: All Israel rang of their
lewdness, nor could their wickedness be altogether unknown to their aged
Father; as he was a Father, he should have curbed and checked them; Vide
Cornel. A Lapide in 1 Samuel 2.17.
as he was a Judge, he should have punished them; as he was an High Priest,
he should have deposed them; but they made themselves vile, or accursed, Non
corrugavit frontem.
and he frowned not upon them, non contraxit rugas in eos, says Ludovicus de
Dieu: he wrinkled not his brow against them, as good Parents are sometimes
necessitated to do: when God is dishonored, relations should not be
remembered: But mark, quia ira Eli tepuit in filios, Bern.
ira Dei exarsit in illum; because Eli his anger was cold toward them: Gods
anger was scorching and scalding hot toward him. We may be angry, and not
sin, when we are angry first for our own, then for others sins: Eli was not
so; therefore such Judgments are threatened, Eli ab eo tempore semper se^e
flevit, quod in filios su^s dei vindictam certissimam expectaret. P. Mart. in
Sam. page 17.
and were after inflicted, as who ever heard of them, their ears tingled; and
theirs heart trembled; and Josephus says, that from that very time old Eli
never ceased weeping: Here is then a divine project, a sure way to secure your
persons, your progeny from ruin, and destruction: Spare not the rod as you are
Fathers, nor the sword, as you are Judges: Fiat Justitia; It is a famous
Scripture, Jeremiah 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the City, through the
streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know; seek in the broad places thereof,
if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes Judgment, and I will
pardon it; (...): I will be merciful and propitious to them, be they never so
many, and though they be an undeserving, and an ill-deserving people: It is
the Lords own counsel by his servant the Prophet Amos, a Prophet, not by
education, but by inspiration; a man of a stammering tongue, as his name
imports (but ex quolibet ligno fit Mercurius, cum digitus Dei est statuarius)
yet how freely does he speak, Vide Drus. in Am. 1. 1.
chap. 5. 15. establish Judgment in the Gate: (it is something more, says
Drusius on it, to establish Judgment, than to administer Judgment) what shall
follow thereupon? It may be (says he) that the Lord God of Hosts will be
gracious to the remnant of Joseph: Take up and read the 25. of Numbers, you
have it recorded, that Israel had sinned, and Gods Wrath was incensed, the
Plague was begun; Numb. 25.14.
four and twenty thousand dead; Israel was in a doleful, dismal condition: But
Phineas stands up, and executes Judgment, and the Plague stayed: The Lord said
to Moses, Phineas the son of Eleazer has turned away my Wrath from the
children of Israel, that I consumed them not in my jealousy: Zimri was a
mighty man, a Prince of a chief house, among the Simeonites, Cosby was Daughter
to the King of Midian, who would have meddled with such persons of Quality?
Phineas no Magistrate, nor was his proceeding in so legal and judicial a
course, the parties were not convented, nor were they by witnesses convicted:
The Commission was given to the Rulers, Phineas was none: where then is his
warrant for their execution? The School-mans conclusion is sound, Aqu. ubi
supra.
Principibus and Judieibus tantum, non autem privatis personis peccatores
occidere licet, ad eos solos pertinet, quibus committitur cura communitatis
conservandae, etc. but what was done, was of the Lord accepted; he had an
extraordinary motion from the Spirit of God; the Agent was holy, the Act
zealous, the issue happy: Gods hand is stayed.

Till Justice was executed upon the bloody house of Saul for his cruelty,
inhumanity, and breach of Covenant; staying the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1. to the
15.
who were Proselytes to the Jewish Religion, and so serviceable to the
Sanctuary; the Famine was year after year continued.

It is wisdom to let out some corrupt blood in the arm, to keep the blood pure
about the heart: He is a fool, not a wise Physician who suffers many patients
die, Isa. 56.1.
when by one vein pricked, one Achan stoned, many may be preserved.

Reason 6.
Sixthly, Hereby the greatness, and the glory of the Nation is maintained:
Politicians say, and truly, that seven things are of great importance to the
honor and magnificency of a state; I shall but hint at them, and leave you to
read more of them in Aristotle's Politics; and Machiavels disputations de
Republica. etc. 1 Religion, for without adoration of a Diety, no Commonwealth
can subsist; (...). Arist. Pol. lib. 7. cap. 8. Match avelli disput. lib. 1.
cap. 12. and lib. ^ cap. 7.
All care then about divine matters, may the Philosopher be heard, must not
be cast off: Photius in a learned Epistle, wherein he discovers the Duties of
Princes, excellently speaks to this: But I must but hint, 2 Achademies, and
Schools of learning are necessary. 3 Variety of Artificers, exercising their
manual Arts and Trades. 4 Privileges and freedoms from customs and
exactions. 5 Peace, This causes all to flourish; and 6 Plenty, this sustains
the life of man with ease and much contentment. 7 Courts of Justice, with due
execution of the same; this assures every man his own:
These much enable, and ennoble a City, or Commonwealth; they conduce much to
the opulency and magnificency of a State: Martial Policy, S. W. Rawleigh.
true Religion, and civil Justice, says a learned Knight, are the three
pillars, which uphold all; the Sicylian Ambassador told Ptolomy at his royal
Table, that this made their state famous, and their Commonwealth to flourish.

Reason 7.
Seventhly, Hereby God is glorified; this is the Alpha and Omega of our being
and living in the world; this is, Psalm. 119.157 Prove. 16.4 1 Cor. 6.20 John
17.10
My Lords, and Gentlemen, the mark at which you should level all your
expressions, affections, and actions: this is the Fathers end in your creation,
his Sons end in your redemption; his Spirits end in your sanctification; to
glorify him; Vide A Lapide in locum.
and he is glorified chiefly, 1 By your humble and penitent confessions, Josh.
7.19. Achan perhaps was converted when the stones flew about his ears, says
Mr. Fenner in his caveat against late Repentance, page, 101.
such was Achans confession, that some have concluded his salvation, with what
warrant from the word, I am yet to learn. 2 By your holy Observation of his
day; not suffering your Tongues their worldly, week-daies expressions; nor your
hearts your wonted, wicked, excursions, Isa. 58.13,14. 3 By your Thankfulness;
who so offers praise glorifies me, Psalm. 50. ult. 4 By your Fruitfulness
under the dews and droppings of his Word; under the whippings of his Rod, John
15.8. the more graces are multiplied, the more God is glorified. 5 By your
Faithfulness in sufferings, and in services, 1 Pet. 4.14.16. To give up your
names to Christ, and afterward to make defection, and apostatize from Christ
is matter of dishonor to him; if any man draw back, his soul has no pleasure
in him: Christus ipse tacit accusatur, quasi iniquus; but not to stand on
these.

6 By your contentedness with him alone; and your unsatisfiednesse with any
thing you have from him, while you are without him; This sets the Crown upon
his head. 7 By your forwardness to, and uprightness in the Administration of
Justice and Judgment; when the Angels came with power to judge Babylon, Vide
Rib. in loc.
Rev. 18.1,2. It is said, the earth was lightened with his glory: There is so
much beauty and brightness in works of Justice and Judgment, that they are
called (...). The Glory of the Lord, Numb. 14.21. God was glorious, as well in
destroying the Egyptians, as delivering the Israelites.


8 God himself has commanded it; peruse the Text, Do it, verse. 7. Here is his
Sic volo, sic jubeo; his will is the rule of all reason: It is disputed in the
Schools, whether God does at any time give out a command, which he himself
would not have obeyed; and why he does so is queried, as in Abraham's case,
Genesis 22. Estius in Sent. lib. 1. Distinct. 47. Parag. 3.
Lombard produces another which Estius rejects as impertinent: They conclude
it with a non modo fatendum est, non omnia fieri velle deum quae praecepit, sed
interdum cum velle non fieri quod praecepit, atque ideo praecipere ne fiat:
Certainly what here concerns the execution of Justice, ought conscionably to
be obeyed; because by him commanded; that was a prerogative command, but this
is not; and his Will is reason sufficient why you should obey: Authoritas
praecipientis est ratio praecepti: He said, do it, who has authority to
command you to do it; and ability to consume you, if it be not done; he is
resolved Justice shall be done, and highly provoked if Justice be not done,
this is the Will of God; Et sufficit pro universis rationibus Deus Vult.

Reason 9.
9 Justice must be executed, that your oaths may not be violated: To fear an
oath is the character of a good man: The violation of an oath is so heinous a
transgression, that some of the Schoolmen peremptorily conclude Perjury a
greater sin than Homicide, Biel. lib. 3. Qu. 39. Dub. 4.
or Murder, though Biel does not assent thereto, yet he confesses it is a
sin to be punished by the Judges, especially then in Judges: Heathens dare not
adventure to infringe, or violate their oaths, though guided only by the
pur-blinde light of natural conscience.

Attillius Regulus preferred the obligation and observation of his Oath, before
the safety and preservation of his life: he made choice of that which was
indeed more eligible, to be punished, than to be perjured: The Carthaginians
being engaged to the Romans, chose rather to entombe themselves in flames of
fire, which they had kindled in the Marketplace, than to break their sacred
vows: Notable is that of Pocylides. (...)
(...)


But once more and then we shall let this branch pass.

Reason 10.
10 This is the end for which you are empowered and constituted: The Queen of
Sheba, though an Heathen, could tell, that therefore God made Solomon King,
because he loved Israel, and that this was his work, to do Justice, and
Judgment; 2 Samuel 8.15. 2 Chronicles. 9.8.
she was convinced that (...); by him Kings reign, and that for this very end
Solomon was set on the Throne of Israel, to dispose of the affairs of his
Kingdom with Judgment wisely, and in righteousness justly; Judges that will
not do judgment, have nomen inane, and are guilty of crimen immane. Such sin
against the very nature and end of their function: Remember then my Lords, that
Instrumentum eatenus est Instrumentum, quatenus est inusu: And as the
Philosophers speak; Frustranea est ea potentia, quae non reducitur in actum
(i.e.) quando debet, and quando potest) you have authority put into your hands
to do judgment, and you have one opportunity more to do judgment; up then and
be doing; receive not that power and authority in vain.

2 Branch^
In the Administration of Justice you must TAKE HEED what ye do; do it exactly.

This is the second Branch of the Observation; it is de modo: how you are to
dispose, and dispatch, manage, and transact the affairs in hand: Not to
multiply Arguments: Take these ten; why you should Take heed what you do, and
do all exactly.

Reason 1.
First, Because you are the Deputies, the Vicegerents, the Ministers of a most
holy, just, jealous, and exact God: He is exact in all his ways, Vide Tirin.
in locum.
works, promises, as fearful in praises, so faithful in promises, both in
making, and in keeping them; he is ever as good as his word, sometimes better;
exact in rewarding, in punishing, in all; his understanding is infinite, he
knows what to do, when and how to do all things: Now then my Lords! A Lapide in
locum.
you are his Ministers, non tam mei, quam Dei est is vicarii, a Deo scilicet
per me constituti Judices est is populi sui; and therefore it highly concerns
you to take heed what you do; read the seventh verse; There is no iniquity in
the Lord your God: All Righteousness is in him, nothing at all of
unrighteousness in him; let there be none in you: All his officers shall be
peace, and his exactors Righteousness, it is in the abstract, and you know:
Abstractum est forma concreti; it has more in it, and carries more away with
it: It is his pleasure that all his should be like him: It is your duty to
meditate frequently on, and to conform your selves to that perfect pattern of
your sovereign Lords exemplary Justice: This should be the first step of your
care, Vasquez disput. 116. cap. 4, 5. Suarez. Metaph. 30. Sect. 6.
it will be the last rise of your honor.

The divine Attributes are neither really distinct from the divine Essence, nor
one from another; his mercy is the same with his Justice, and both God himself:
A man may be a man, and yet be unjust: Justice is not quid constitutivum, but
should the most high be unjust, he could not be God: Justice is no quality
in him, but the very nature of him: There is a Maxim of state: The King can do
no wrong: Certainly they may, and in some respects did; Thom. Bradw. lib. 1. de
causa dei.
God can in none: Eo ipse quod aliquod vult and facit (said Biel) just vult
and facit, sua enim voluntas est omnis justitiae regula, and Bradwardin, that
profound Doctor, as the Pope called him, clearly against all the world,
demonstrates the absolute perfection of the first cause: the immutability and
rectitude of his will, etc. Remember then for whom ye judge; it is for this
God: We will shut up this Argument with that excellent passage of Cornel. A
Lapide upon the Text: Cogitent hoc, saepeque ruminent Principes and Judices, se
Dei judicium exercere; qui hoc cogitat, nec favore, nec amicitia, nec donis,
nec minis a recto justitia tramite inflecti se sinet.

Reason 2.
Secondly, The best of men are but men at the best, and may err in Judgment;
therefore it concerns you to Take heed what you do: It is said of one, Biel.
lib. 4. Distinct. 15. Qu. 6. Mark. 7. ult.
and besides him, of none, in all the Scripture; (...); He has done all
things well: It is not easily answered who they were that so said; but of whom
it is true, without searching the Scripture you may know, viz. of Jesus Christ.

It is disputed in the Schools, whether it was possible for any Creature, or
created Nature, Angelical, or Humane, to have been made impeccable by Nature?
or free from all possibility of sinning, or erring; there are not wanting to
assert it; Est. lib. 2. Distinct. 7. Parag. 9. Aqu. p. 1. Qu. 63. Art. 1. Aug.
de vera relig. mihi page 159, 160. de C. D. lib. 12. cap. 1. Vasq. Disp. 231.
cap. 2. Bradw. de causa Dei. lib. 2
the most, I meet with, deny it; cuicunque creaturae convenit non posse
peccare, hoc habet ex dono gratiae, non ex condition naturae; says Estius,
nihil peccare solius dei est; And Aquinas before him draws the same conclusion;
and Augustine before them both, once and again delivers his judgment in the
negative: Vasquez and Bradwardin say truly, cuicunque rationali creaturae
praestatur ut peccare non possit, hoc non est propriae naturae, sed dei gratiae.

Aug. Retrac. lib. 1. cap. 2.
It is very memorable which that holy man retracts, when he had writ his book,
de vera Religione, and dedicated it to Manlius Theodorus, he confesses that
he had spoke too much good of him, though he was ver pius and Doctus, yet he
had his (...), Lib. 2. Did. 5.
his (...): Magister ipse (says Estius) sua habuit inopinabilia, and partim
abjurda: Bernard himself saw not all things: when you were made partakers of
the divine nature, did you put off the humane nature?

It is said of one in Scripture, that he was a man after Gods own heart; and
fulfilled all his wills; yet you shall sometimes find him out of Gods way; he
has his except in the matters of Uriah: it is said of Cato, Pambo, and Tully,
that they never spoke word, or did work which they could have wished unspoken,
or undone; Augustine censures the last for a fool, Aug. Ep. 7.
rather than a wise man; and Cyprian speaks freely. Qui se inculpatum, etc.
whoever says he does not, he cannot err, is either a proud man, or a mad
man: There is in you, my Lords! a posse falli, decipi, errare; it is a very
easy matter to sin about things which are not sinful, to mistake in judging
through inconsideration, or inadvertency is easy, and of dangerous consequence,
and malignant influence; Lam. 3.36.
He that justifies the wicked for a reward, and he that condemns the just,
is so far from acceptance with God, that he is an abomination to God, Prove.
17.15.

Reason 3
Thirdly, You have a most righteous and exact exemplar, President, and Pattern,
viz. the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore it concerns you to take heed what you
do: Genesis 18.25
Shall not the Judge of all the earth (Christ) do right? Act. 17.31
he is the man ordained of God to be Judge of quick and dead; 2 Timothy 4.8
and he will manage it in righteousness, he is (...), the Righteous Judge;
Other Judges may, and should do righteously; this cannot do otherwise: The
wills of all other Judges are regulated by Righteousness, here Righteousness
it self is measured and regulated by this Judges will: There is none like him,
so pure, and spotless; so holy, and harmless; he was conceived without sin,
born without sin, lived without sin, and dyed without sin; he was no ignorant,
no covetous Judge, no respecter of persons; in this his enemies justified him,
Matthew. 22.16. hic Judex nec gratia praevenitur, nec pecunia corrumpitur, nec
misericordia flectitur; it is as true as trite: None can see him, force him,
fear him, flatter him out of his way: No intercession of Monarchs can persuade
him, no reward can corrupt him, no affection can blind him; nothing in all the
world can induce him to do any thing rashly, inconsiderately, irregularly: Say
Angels, say men and Devils what they will, it shall be well with the
Righteous, they shall eat the fruit of their doings, and it shall be ill with
the wicked, the reward of his hands shall be given him: Let this direct you
then, my Lords, in transacting your judicial affairs: He has given you an
example, that you should do as he did, all things exactly, (...). Lactantius
reports of the Heathens, that they had this notion amongst them; that the way
to honor their gods, was to be like to them, and to do as they did: Certainly
this is the way to honor Christ; the mighty God: Though you cannot go the same
pace Christ did; yet go the same path Christ did, follow him, licet non
passibus aequis.

It was the height of Caesar's glory to walk in the steps of Alexander, of
Selymus a Turkish Emperor, to walk in Caesar's steps: Themistocles did the like
by Miltiades; Scipio accounted it no small disparagement for him to walk one
foot awry from that course of life which Cyrus in Zenophon had gone before him;
but be it your endeavor, it shall be your honor to follow Jesus Christ as
dear children: Take his Spirit for your guide, his Glory for your end, his Word
for your rule, himself for your Exemplar; and you will do all things well,
exactly.

Reason 4
Fourthly, You have a most just, exact, and holy rule by which you are to act: A
righteous Law, by which you are to judge; and therefore it concerns you to Take
heed what ye do: I mean, the Law of the Lord, and of the Land: It is a Maxim
of the Law of England, that the Law it self is, and ought to be the only,
rightful, and sufficient Rule, by which all Judges are to be regulated, all
cases and controversies tried, and decided: We have not time to inquire into,
or discuss that question, Aq. 2. 2. q. 60. ar. 5.
utrunc sit semper secundum leges scriptas judicaudum? Aquinas concludes
positively; nor that, whether Judges be always bound to give sentence
secundum Allegata and probata? Becan. Sum. page 425.
It is ((...)) very famous, and by many debated, Aq. 2. 2. Qu. 67. Lessius.
lib. 2. de jure cap 9. dub. 10.
both Schoolmen, and Casuists; many conclude positively, that Judges may upon
Allegations, proofs, and evidences of others, adjudge a man to dye, whom they
themselves certainly know to be innocent: Aquinas his conclusion is harsh in
my opinion, I leave it for the judicious to weigh in the balance: Bp. Halls
Decads.
Cum judicium ad Judices spectet, non secundum privatam, sed publicam
potestatem, oportet eos judicare non secundum Veritatem, Juris naturalis est
secundum ipsius rei veritatem judicare, jus gentium derogare nihil potest juri
naturali. Pilatus secundum deposita testium quorum testimonium falsum esse
dicebat, judicans and condemnans Christum, ab omnibus pro injusto judice
habetur. Baldw. Cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap. 12. Cas. 6. page 874.
quam ipsi ut privatae personae noverunt, sed secundum quod ipsis ut personis
publicis per leges, per testes, per instrumenta, and per allegata and probata
res innotuit; The law of God, which must be your rule, and which neither is to
be avoided, nor dispensed with, requires that the innocent and righteous dye
not, Exodus 23.7. false accusations make no man faulty, they may make him to
seem so, but not to be so: He that shall knowingly condemn the innocent,
cannot himself in that be innocent.

There is a saying amongst you; men's legis est lex, not the letter of the Law,
but the mind and intention of the Law, is the Law: Now the intention of the
Law is to protect the innocent: In such cases Cardinal Cajetan conceives it
meet, that Judges should in the presence and audience of all the people give
their oaths, that they know the party guiltless; Dom. a Soto.
others would have the prisoner secretly slip out of the Gaol, and by flight
secure himself.

To omit what Azorius and others say, Azor. lib. 2. Instit. Moral. cap. 17.
Deuteronomy. 17.11
It is your duty, My Lords, to follow the prescript of the Law; for this end
were they established and promulged, Deuteronomy. 17.11. According to the sentence of
the Law shall thou judge: A verbo legis in criminibus and paeni non est
recedendum. Ahasuerus (though in rage and drink) would not apparently
transgress the Law; therefore this Heathen Prince calls unto the wise men, who
knew Law and Judgment, and inquires, What shall we do to the Queen Vashti
according to the Law? Esther 1.15
In Courts of Judicature you are not (jus dare, sed jus dicere) to make new
Laws, but to interpret and execute Laws already made: We may not say what we
will in the Pulpit, nor may you do what you will on the Bench: Lord! what will thou have me to do, and I will do it, is the language of a good Judge: I will
show mercy, to whom mercy belongs, and I will give right to whom it belongs,
they shall dye, whom thou have appointed to dye: We shall close up this
Argument with that passage of holy Ambrose, which I have met with in many
Authors: Aqu. ubi supra Gerard. de Mag. Pol. etc.
Bonus Judex nihil ex arbitrio suo facit, and domesticae voluntatis proposito,
sed juxta leges and jura pronunciat; statutis juris obtem perat, sicut audit,
^t a and judicat, and sicut se habet negotii natura decernitur, obsequitur
legibus, non adversatur, examinat causae merita, non audit; This is the fourth
reason: The Rule is exact, and therefore it concerns you to take heed what ye
do.

Reason 5
Fifthly, You must dye, and give an exact account of what you have done, and how
you have judged, and therefore it concerns you to take heed what you do.

By his leave it is that you live while you live, and by his Law it is that you
dye, when you come to dye; and then you must be responsible: Vain man seldom
or never thinks of that, which were he truly wise, he would never have out of
his thoughts, Deuteronomy. 32.29
his latter end: Templa saxea, marmorea, ferro plumboque consolidata tamen
cadunt, Aug. de Tempore Sermon 113
and homo se nunquam putat moriturum! notable is that of Sophocles. (...)
(...)
(...)


My Lords, no sooner were you born, but you were old enough to dye; and now you
are so old, that probably you cannot live long: Though you be styled gods, yet
you are mortal gods, though Scuta terrae, shields of the earth, yet you are
withal scuta terrea, earthen shields, or shields of earth: I am telling you in
your ears (the Lord speak it home to all your hearts) that you are dying men,
Psalm. 47.9
a solemn Knell may sound anon before the next morning, to tell the world, that
there are two Princes, 2 Samuel 3.38
or great men fallen this day in Israel.

And what shall attend your transmigration or remotion hence think you? but
Judgment: you that now call to Judgment, shall then come to Judgment: though
you could approve your selves to the Higher-Powers, Aqu. Suppl. qu. 89. Art. 5
this will not serve the turn; All the Lions of the world must bow before, and
give account to the Lamb of God.

He has appointed a day ( Coruel. A Lapide calls it, Act. 17.31
Horizon temporis and aeternitatis) in which he will judge the world in
Righteousness: Vide Gerard. Vossium de extremo Judicio.
Say the Borborians, the Florians, yea, and the Manichees, what they please to
the contrary; and shall you be exempted, when all the World shall be judged?
surely no: And how exactly and severely the Lord Jesus Christ shall exercise
his power and authority at that great day, the Ancients have writ so much, that
I have nothing to say, but with that learned interpreter, Ipse a Vobis rationem
vel praestitae vel neglectae justitiae severam exiget, ac (pro meritis)
praemiabit, A Lapide 2. merita.
vel puniet. This brings me to

Reason 6
The sixth Argument; According to your doings, you must be rewarded; therefore
it concerns you to take heed what you do: Behold I come: I come who have been
so highly provoked, and so long expected to come: I come who was from eternity
designed and deputed to come, and am now preparing to come, and my reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall be: I cannot
determine, not do I remember the Scripture that decides the question and
controversy, whether every man's, and all a man's doings, Good and Evil shall be
revealed, and at the last day come into the judgment of discovery, or
discussion?

Augustine and others of the Fathers, Aquinas and others of the Schoolmen assert
it: Aq. Suppl. qu. 87. Art. 1. Est. lib 4. Did. 47. Par. 2 Aug. C. D lib. 20
cap 14 Et Med. cap. 4 Vossius Disp. Theol.
Some of both deny it, Rationabiliter hoc dici non potest, said Lombard: This
is most certain: When Christ shall come to judgment, there will be the
greatest discovery of men that ever was in the world. You shall then discern
between the Righteous, and the Wicked, between the sealed ones, and those that
were not sealed, between the Lambs and the Wolves: Reve. 7
There shall be the greatest alteration that ever was in the World: there
shall be the greatest confusion to wicked wretches, the greatest consolation
to the ransomed ones that ever was in the world, and there shall be the
greatest rewards dispensed that ever were in the world: According to every man's
works, shall every soul be rewarded: If punishment be not now inflicted on
such who are appointed to inflict punishment, but do it not; or do it
negligently: Certainly they shall be stripped and whipped, such Judges God will
judge: He will bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron; Hell was
ordained of old for wicked, unjust Judges, as well as for other men: with what
face can any expect mercy from God then, who will not do justice for him now:
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently, (...), and cursed be
he that keeps back his sword from blood: Execution of Justice, you see, my
Lords, is the work of The Lord: and not only shall they be cursed that do it
not, but they also that do it, if it be negligently, deceitfully, Jer. 48.10
carelessly done: The Lord whose deputies you are, does mainly mind the Manner,
how this work is done; The Adverb is in his Eye: Not only do THIS, but do it
THUS; considerately, exactly; it is of concernment then, That you take heed
what you do.

Seventhly, And it is Jehosaphats Argument in the Text: It is Argumentum
palmarium: God is with you in the Judgment; therefore take heed what you do:
My Lords, God is with you, God is with you; with you, to counsel you what to
do, and how to do, with you, to comfort you in what you do, with you, to assist
you in what you are to do, what ever rubs, remora's, or obstructions be cast
in the way; with you, to observe you in all your expressions, inquisitions,
determinations, etc. and will you not then. Take heed what you do?

It was said of old, that the King is Virtually in his ordinary Courts of
Justice, so long as they continue his Courts: God is really present in these
Courts of Justice: precious is that promise, Exodus 20.24. In all places where I
record my Name; I will come unto them, and I will bless them: There is no work
in which he imploies his servants of the Magistracy, or Ministry, but (if
sought in a due order, and in a right manner) he will be present, and
assistant. In Ecclesiastes chap. 8.10. the Seat of Judicature is called the
place of the Holy: (...)
I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the Holy:
(...)
(...)
Pagnin renders it, a loco sancto, from the holy place: Junius renders it, E
loco sancti, out of the Place of the holy: And why the Place of the holy? 2 Samuel 23.3
because holiness is required in them that sit there: or because matters are
to be debated in a holy manner there: I conceive this may be said: because
he who is Holiness it self sits as chief Lord there: the Rabbines (as Buxtorf
tells us) put Makom, which signifies place, Apud Rabbinos deus, dicitur Makom
locus, quia omnia in se comprehendit, and in nullo loco comprehenditur. Bithner
in Exodus 21.13
amongst the Names of God: Bithner brings them expounding that Text in Esther
4.14. deliverance shall arise to the Jews from another place; that is from God:
They called him place, because he is in every place: in his solemn Assemblies
more eminently and conspicuously.

When the Ethiopian Judges were set in their seats of Judicature, certain empty
chairs were placed about them; into which they imagined the holy Angels came:
Angels are very frequent in, and observant of such solemn conventions: Hoc
judicum animos ad vigilantiam and reverentiam inflecteret, says Quintus Pius
on my Text: This they thought (and so it ought) would work an awe and fear in
their Magistrates, a resolution and care in them to Take heed what they did: A
greater than any of the Cherubims, or Seraphims, is this day with you,
attending on this Consistory: he whose center is every where, and
circumference no where: He, who fills the Empyreal Heaven with his glory; the
earth with his mercy, and Hell with his fury; he is with you; and this should
quicken you to. 1 A Lion-like courage; as I was with Moses, so will I be with
thee: Be strong and of a good courage; and to, 2 Angel-like carriage: Notable
is that practice of the Egyptians, Lib. 1. cap. 6. ni fallat mea me memoria.
Diadorus Siculus relates it: When their Judges were set, they caused the image
of a divine Numen, by them called Truth, to be hung about his neck, who sat
next unto the Judges: The God of Truth is now amongst you; Take heed therefore
what you do:
To proceed,

Reason 8
Eighthly, Satan will certainly improve his power, policy, and his malice at
this present opportunity for his advantage, and your prejudice, or damage;
Therefore Take heed what you do: He is a Spirit, Vide Aug. in Psalm. 62.11
and therefore can act indiscernibly, invisibly, and imperceptibly; he is a
Spirit, and therefore can act, very powerfully, almost irresistibly: It is true
as Augustine speaks, potestas est, sed sub potestate; Aug. in Psalm. 91
he has astutiam suadend, non potentiam cogendi; it is not in the power of
his hand to force; it is in the purpose of his heart, A deo non potest cogi
voluntas, ergo non a daemone. Vasquez. Tom 1. qu. 8^. Art. 3
and he has policy enough in his head to entice you to wrest Judgment: He
is a Spirit, conclude thence the facility and easiness of his approach and
access to you; Spirits fear no Penetration of Dimensions: Omnis spiritus est
alatus, says Tertullian: He is a Spirit, Non semper saeviunt Nerones, sed
nunquam cessat. diabolu. Cypr.
Take notice then of his activity; Eutia quo magis spiritualia, eo magis
activa: beings, the more spiritual: the further remote from matter they be,
the more dexterous and nimble they be, He has no body naturally united to
him, Job 1.7
he never tires, his malice and nature make him busy in the world: 1 Pet. 5.8
his design this morning is mainly upon you: My Lords, as the Panther hates the
Effigies and portraicture of a man, so the Devil hates the very picture of a
good Magistrate, and of a good Minister; he will endeavor to dis-swade you
from your duty: distract and disturb you while you are doing your duty; yea,
and he will (if he can) discourage you, when you have done your duty.

As God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, Job 1.6
judging amongst the Gods: So the Devil stands in the Congregation of the
mighty, tempting, and corrupting those mortal gods: As God stands at the right
hand of his servants, Psalm. 110.5. so Satan also stands at the right hand of
Gods servants, Zech. 3.1. if God assist from Heaven, the Devil will resist from
Hell; the left hand is the lazy hand; there he stands where he can do most
mischief.

He is an evil spirit (Metaphysically good indeed; but) Morally and
Theologically evil; therefore called (as Maldonate and our Anotators) in the
Lords Prayer; Evil; Deliver us from Evil; Cum hostem cernimus aliquid agere
quod plane videatur imprudenter actum, and abhorrere a ratione, suspicari dolum
aliquem subesse debemus. Match. Disput. de Repub. lib. 3. cap. 48.
from Satan: If ever he move to any thing that is good; observe it, and it is
either from a bad principle, in an evil manner, or to a bad end; at a wrong
time, to an improper work, etc. And therefore as Machiavel counsels in another
case, suspect him, he intends you no good; Take heed then what you do.

There are special seasons in which Satan's Temptations, are most seen by
discerning Christians; a hint or two I shall but give, or shoot an arrow or two
friendly to admonish you, when there is most danger, and need to look about
you. 1 In times of great pressures and afflictions, felt or feared, when God is
afflicting, Satan is plotting to put the Saints on indirect ways and means to
be delivered; or to repine against God. 2 In times of spiritual desertion;
when the Lord hides his face, Satan puts out his head, and troubles greatly. 3
In times of great discoveries of divine assistance, and manifestations of his
loving kindness, which is better and sweeter than life unto a sincere convert,
after extraordinary enlargement of heart in duty, etc. 4 At the day of death
and dissolution: if he cannot keep the soul from going to Heaven, yet he will
endeavor to keep Heaven from coming into his soul: I mean the joys and come
forts of the Spirit; he is the Prince that has power in the air: the souls
that go to Heaven, pass through his territories, by his very nose; how does
he snarle think you, or has he done when the Saint is newly dead? and his
soul taken up to Heaven. 5 At such times, and upon such occasions as this, when
some great piece of work is upon the Loom: some notable enterprise for Gods
glory is upon the Anvile; Satan chops in, retards the work; the instance is
pregnant, Zech. 3. begin. you are now forewarned, take heed therefore what ye
do.


Reason 9
Ninthly, The eyes of many are upon you this day; and therefore you are obliged
to Take heed what you do: Notable is that of Seneca: Custos te tuus sequitur,
Senec. Fragm. p. 1271.
put as tibi contigisse ut oculos omnium effugias? Demens, quid tibi prodest
non habere conscium habenti conscientiam? what if thou, vain man, could
escape the view of mortal men, go further: Suppose the holy Angels, and the
immortal God did not behold thee: what if thou had no other conscious or
privy to thy transactions, when as thy conscience, which is in stead of a
thousand witnesses, is guilty: but we have supposed what is not, what ought
not to be asserted: Hear that Heathen again: Magnum, nescio quid, majusque quam
cogitati potest, numen est, cui vivende operam damus, Huis nos approhemus,
nihil prodest inclusam esse conscientiam, Deo patemus.

The eye of God is upon you; apposite is that of Elihu, in Job 36.7. He
withdraws not his eyes from the Righteous, but with Kings are they on the
Thrine: He is, totus oculus, All eye to see you what ever you do; All Ear to
hear, whatever you say, Angels are knowing Creatures, De scientia Angelorum
plurima notavit Estius. lib. 2. Distinct. 7. Parag. 11, 12
but they know not the thoughts and imaginations of our hearts; si signo non
prodantur externo, as they speak; they are not within the ken of men, nor
within the walk of humane Justice, nor subject to the censures of terrene
Courts, or Consistories: But God sets them in the light of his countenance:
Lips. de Constable. lib. 2. cap. 13, 15 Aug. Soliloq. cap. 14
Nobis ergo (as Lipsius speaks) magna est indita necessitas just agendi,
recteque vivendi, qui cuncta facimus ante oculos Judicis cuncta cernentis.

The eyes of the glorious Angels are this day upon you; as they inform you of
Gods Will, so they inform God of your ways, Zech. 1.11
and works; they tell him what is done here amongst men.

The eyes of many honorable Gentlemen are upon you: Aliquis vir bonus nobis
eligendus est, ac semper ante oculos habendus, ut sic tanquam illo spectante
vivamus, and omnia tanquam illo vidente faciamus, etc. Sen. Ep. 11. ad finem.
And it was Seneca's council to his Lucilius, ever to have in his eye either
Cato, or Laelius, or some good man: This he thought would overawe his Spirit.

Certainly whoever judges and pleads as in his eye, who is to be feared,
will in short time come himself to be feared: to say no more, the eye of those
trembling Prisoners at the Bar will be upon you; All which considered: It will
appear of great concernment, that you Take heed what you do. Once more,

Tenthly, The lives, liberties, the rights and privileges, the estates and
interests of persons are sacred, choice and precious things; therefore it
concerns you, My Lords, to take heed what you do: O let not the line of Justice
be made crooked, let not the course of equity be perverted: Life is precious;
silver and gold are dull and dead commodities to THIS: Job 2.4
How did that unparrellel'd Queen beg for her life, Esther 7.3
like a Creeple on a bridge? Let my life be given me at my petition (not
riches, nor honors, Stemmata quid prosunt?) Incomparable was the love which
God manifested to the world in giving his Son Jesus Christ; So; So God loved
the World: That is such a Sic, as never had a Sicut: John 3.16.
Non unum e multis, sed unigenitum: Vnigenitum in quo omnem suum amorem
collocaverat; non quoquo modo dedit, sed dedit ut tanquam serpens in deserto
exaltaretur: (i.e.) cruci affigeretur, says Maldonate: Audi quomodo amatus es,
O homo. Aug.
O quantum dilecta spousa, prae qua filius ipse aut non dilectus, aut sa'tem
neglectus. Incomparable was the love which Christ manifested to man, in praying
for us: paying a great price for us, dying for us, and now making intercession
for us; his very life was the Jewel he pawned for us: Vide Bolducium in Job 2.4
precious it was to him, and so is ours to us: Skin for skin, and All that a
man has will he give for his life: Now this is in your hands: What Seneca
said of Nero, to Nero, in that excellent book of Clemency, Lib. 1. cap. 1
so highly prized by Queen Elizabeth; Ego vitae necisque arbiter, qualem
quisque sortem, statumque habeat in manu mea positum est, quid cuique
mortalium, etc. is true in part of you: notable was the answer of Alexander
Magnus to his Mother Olympia: when she had a design to take away the life of
an innocent man; she remembered him, how she had carried him in her womb,
nourished him with her blood, painfully labored in his birth; therefore he
must not deny her request; but his return was grave and serious: Life was
precious: Misera vis est valere ad nocendum; there is less evil in sparing ten
that be nocent, than in sentencing to death two that be innocent: For that,
there is a plea of mercy; This is pure injustice: He was none of the wisest
Judges, who solemnly professed (as the Italian Orator speaks) to hang many was
his Jubilee, Silesio.
and a great execution was his great recreation: He had not the reason of a
man, but the rage of a Lion, the venom of a Serpent, the malice of a Demon:
And

How dear our Civil Interests, Immunities, Rights, and Privileges are, I shall
not speak: Do not too many make their Gold, their God; their Bonds and
Indentures, their Scriptures; The world their All in All? They would rather
part with their part in paradise, than in Paris: While gracious souls say, What
is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? The Cry
is greater; what is a man profited, if he save his own soul, and lose his
Riches, his Rights, his Honors, his Flax, and Wool, the great things of this
world?

The Application.

In which I shall study more brevity, I cannot more perspicuity: But one thing
I must remember your Lordships of, and my self of another, before I can proceed
on safe ground any further: Remember you that of Chrysostom; (...). Nisi
fideliter dixetim vobis crit damno sum, mihi periculosium, Timeo itaque damnum
vestrum damnationem meam, si Tacuero.
The Church is not a Theater, where men's ears are tickled, but their hearts are
touched; nor are you come hither I presume to hear what will please, but
profit: It may be (it should be) what is most profitable, will be most
delectable and acceptable: And I shall remember Bernards, Nisi fideliter
dixerim; he who has advanced you to this Authority, has engaged me to
fidelity: The plaster which causes most smart, is most sovereign: To proceed
then,

1 Use.
And First for Humiliation.

Is this so? Must Justice be executed, and Judgment administered THUS? with
this deliberation, etc. Then let us Humble our souls this morning in the
presence of the Eternal God; for the Male administration of Justice in the
Nation: This is one burden which England has too long groaned under; it is our
sin, our shame, our judgment; a state desolating, sinking sin; it carries
destruction in the very face of it: when there is little, or no Justice, Truth
or Knowledge of God in a Land, God will enter into controversy with it, Hos.
4.1,2. Gualther might well call that Text, sui (an non and nostri) Temporis
speculum: It is Englands Looking-glass; who can say we are free from
injustice, oppression? Aqu. 2. 2. Qu. 57. Ar. 12
etc. the Schools say, Justice is the chief of Moral virtues: sure then
Injustice is chief of Mortal vices: May it be spoken? My Lords, May it be
spoken? Nay, is it not to be spoken with tears of blood? Judgment has been
turned backwards; Justice has stood afar off: Truth has fallen in our
streets, the Widow and the fatherless have been oppressed: The Name of God
blasphemed, his holy day profaned; his Ordinances slighted; and his Laws
violated, while the Statutes of Omri are observed. -- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis? --


Let Rivers of Waters run down our eyes, because men keep not thy Laws, O Lord.

Seneca unmasking the face of their corrupt state, has this notable passage:
The news from Rome take thus, the walls are ruined, the Temples are not
visited, the Priests are fled; the Treasuries robbed: Old men are dead, young
men are mad: Vices are Lords over all: The Dictator blames the Consul: The
Consul checks the Censor, the Censor chides the Praetor, the Praetor falls foul
upon the Aedile, and he casts all the fault upon the Quaestor; and because no
man will acknowledge himself in fault, we have no hopes of better times: I
shall not take the boldness to apply: It was a strange saying, yet very true:
Nic. de Clemang.
There is more justice and equity in Hell; than in France, there the oppressor
is oppressed; there he that would not give a crumb of bread, is denied a drop
of Water; there such as shed innocent blood, have blood to drink; there is no
respect had to persons, potentes potenter puniuntur: Every man has according
to his deserts; but in France, etc. let this never be true of England: Not to
travel far: In this County, which is not the greatest; there is too much of
Rome, and Hell: You may behold the tears of such as are oppressed, and crushed
by Malignant Antichristian Lords, but they have no comforters; you may behold
Seducers, and Impostors, Vaintalkers, and idle persons, whose mouths are not
muzled: We fear the setting of our Sun at Noonday, the removal of our
bright-burning, and shining lights out of our territories; we tremble; O that
we could tremble to think of Gods striving with us no more by his Spirit, and
his Word: We fear not the downfall of Tithes; so much as of Truths; unless that
be a forerunner of this.

Herb.
The Gospel upon tip-toe stands,
And's ready for the American strands.
If Justice be not executed; Errors suppressed; faithful and painful Ministers
encouraged, and Gods Ordinances frequented and attended on: Woe unto us! if
Judgment be established, Salvation shall come, and his Righteousness shall
be revealed; Luther had never any great design on foot for Gods glory, and the
Churches good, but he was brought very low before by the afflicting hand of
God: My Lords, the work you have in hand is of God, and for God; humble your
selves this day before God, the work will go better on; Vis magnus esse (says
the Father) incipe ab imo; would you be great, and do great things for God,
begin low; lay the foundation deep: We have our Kingdom broken, our Countries
broken, our comforts broken, and all because our hearts are not yet broken:
This may be thought improper for this Auditory. To proceed then;

2 Use. Exhor.
The second Use is of Exhortation: I shall look upon you under a double Notion,
or Consideration; And

First, As Men, as Christians, and so it highly concerns you to Take heed what
you do: You have noble immortal souls to be saved, as well as others; 2 Argum.
and therefore it concerns you to Take heed what you do: 1 They have noble
souls to be saved, Ergo.
If you consider the subtilty and enmity of Satan: The miscarriages of so many,
who have been fair for Heaven, and yet have fallen short: if you consider that
Temptations without you are many; corruptions within you mighty, and the
exactness of the way to Heaven; You Will say with them, who then can be saved? or
that there is great cause why ye should take heed what ye do; Your souls are
choice and precious things: Deificatur anima, says one of the Ancients; if the
soul be considered in her essentiality; it is enough to make a man heavenly
proud, to contemplate of how noble a nature, quality, and essence it is: Coelum
Dei sunt animae sanctae, Aug. in Psa. 97
of all losses in the world, this is the saddest loss: To thousands it is an
unexpected loss; and it is to many, a wilful loss: Nothing shall be had in lieu
of this loss; they who lose their souls, shall have nothing of that for which
they did adventure their souls. In many it is a loss for a little matter, a
little pelf, a little dross: These once lost, and you have no more to lose; it
was the opinion of the Manichees, as the Schoolmen tell us, that every man had
two souls; I shall not now stay to tell you what Zabarel and other Philosophers
say of that subject: This is sure, if a man lose one, he loses all: Are not
your souls, My Lords eternally and irrecoverably lost? Bless you God for Jesus
Christ, who shed his precious blood for the redemption of them; and Take heed
in the fear of God for the future, what you do.

2 There is a great God to be served, Ergo.
Again, There is a great God to be feared, loved, served; he is so high and
holy, that he far transcends the highest Titles we can give to him, the
holiest conceptions we can frame of him: There is none of you too great, or
too good to serve God; God is too good, and too great (rather) to be served by
you; if he employ you, it is not because he wants servants, but because you
want service: Remember Paul's, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: The
flesh of Kings and Counselors, of Magistrates and Ministers is venison in
Heaven, very rare: Few Kings and great men come there, as Bucanan told the
King: K. James.
of all miracles, it will be the greatest to see a great man past all the
shelves and rocks here, and safely lodged in the haven of Heaven: When the
fullness of time was come, then God sent his Son, and when God sent his Son,
the fullness of time was come to save his people (not all) from their sins: not
in their sins, nor with their sins; How few (great ones especially) take Christ
for their Sovereign, as well as for their Savior? Their Nobles put not their
necks to the work of their Lord, Nehemiah 3.5. Did any of the Rulers believe in
him? Chrysostom propounds the Question; who ever saw a bad Minister a
repenting man? Ezekiel. 22.30.
It is very rare; I sought for a man among Them, but found None: Is not this
true of wicked Gentlemen? Take heed then what you do.

Secondly, Ad Polyb. cap. 26.
As you are Christian Magistrates; and in short; I may now speak in Seneca's
language, Multa vobis non licent, quae humillimis, and in angulo jacentibus
licent: An error committed in Navigation is easily corrected by observing the
Elevation of the Pole: Many errors and mistakes in judging may be prevented,
or amended, if you be observant of your high station: and this Caution in the
Text: I am now to exhort you to close with your duties: Inward principles will
more sweetly work you to a due execution of the Law, and administration of
Justice, than external Motives; yet to discharge my trust, I shall humbly offer
these animating and encouraging Considerations.

To execute Justice exactly, etc. 1 It is a very glorious and honorable act,
no servile sordid work; it is work for Princes; yea, for Angels: they are this
way employed, they execute the Judgments of God upon wicked men: they fetched
( Geheunam de coelo, Dan. 10.20. Psalm. 78.49. Act. 12.23. Isa. 37.36.
as Salvian phrased it) Hell from Heaven, and destroyed Sodom: it was an
Angel, an holy Angel who smote Herod: Though Lorinus thinks it was the Devil:
Zech. 1.8.
Those red horses, speckled, and white, which stood behind the man riding on
the red horse (who was Christ) were Angels: the red were appointed for
Judgment, the white for Mercy, the speckled for mixed actions: It is Angels
work to shield and deliver the Innocent: Consult those Scriptures at more
leisure, Rev. 7.1,2,3. Psalm. 34.7. Genesis 32.1,2. 2 King. 6.14,15,16,17. Psalm.
91.11. Rev. 21.12. Act. 5.8,9 Rev. 12.7, etc. Nothing can more conduce to the
glory of God, or your own eternal honor and renown, than this which I am
pressing your Lord-ships to: Agesilaus hearing one calling the King of Persia,
a Great King, asked, wherein is he Greater than I, except in this, that he is
more just than I. Nothing says Plutarch makes men truly Great, but Justice:
Solomon was never more glorious, than when he executed Justice between the two
Harlots, 1 King. 3. ult.
calling for the sword to divide the child, and so decide the controversy.

When Phineas executed Justice on Prince Zimri, and the Lady Cosby, how
glorious was he in the eye of God, and in the hearts of the godly? that
Heroic act was by God well rewarded, by good men much admired: You are now
honorable Lords in your Scarlet Robes, honorably attended, and strongly
guardded; but it is not your rich attire, or royal vestments that makes you so
venerable, and formidable, as will the due execution of Justice; those are
shallow badges, very empty marks, and Ensigns of dignity: This brings lasting
honor, and raises to your posterity, Juris and aequitatis quae virum principem
ornant, eram studiosissimus. Vatab. in Job 29.14.
monumentum are perennius: Notable is that of Seneca, Pietate and Justitia
Principes Dii fiunt: My Judgment was as a Robe and Diadem, says Job: There
are many Ornaments for men: Eloquence is an Ornament to an Orator; Humility is
an Ornament to a Christian; Magnanimity is an Ornament to a soldier: Clemency
is an Ornament to a Prince; Senec. de Clem. lib. 1. cap. 3. 5. 16, 17.
but Justice is the Judges Ornament.

Dispute who will those questions in the Politics, (...). Eurip.
whether a wicked man may be a good Magistrate? and whether it be better to
have good Laws, or good Magistrates? In a word to the former: When wicked men
shall become good men, (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 3
then, and not till then will they become good Magistrates; and to the other;
though good laws be the walls of our Cities, the ligaments of our body
politic; the glory of our Nation, the Rule of our lives, the Pillars of our
state, and that to the Nation which the soul is to the body; as Demosthenes
speaks: ((...)) they are in a word so useful, that no Commonwealth under what
form of Government soever, could never be without them: yet what good will
they do, if they be not executed? I cannot commend Draco's laws, which are
said to be writ in blood, because (as A. Gellius says) whatsoever the offense
was, they were to die who offended: nor yet Theano's laws which were writ in
sand: I take the law to be the line, execution to be the life: Good laws
without execution, are like golden swords in withered hands: Good laws are our
glory; Good Magistrates the glory of our glories: Arise, Arise then, Justice
and Judgment are not things to be talked of, but done: My Text tells you so:
The work is glorious; such as are more zealous for the glory of God, most
faithful and active in this work of God; they are most honorable in the eyes
of God, and most high in the favor of God: God will honor them that thus
honor him.

Secondly, Heb. 6.10. Job 8.6.
It is a very advantageous and profitable act: This is the way to prosper: Your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: See the last verse of this Chapter;
The Lord shall be with the good: Aderit, Vatab. in locum.
and bonis judicibus favebit, eosque mercede donabit: If God be with you, all
good is with you: 1 Chronicles. 11.9
every thing prospers where God is. Behold I give unto Phineas my Covenant of
peace, he shall have it, and his seed after him (here is a plot laid for the
good of posterity) because he was zealous for his God, Numb 25.11,12.13.
and made an atonement for the children of Israel: It is worthy your
observation which the Lord said to Jehoiakim, concerning his Father Josiah,
Jer. 22.15,16 Did not thy Father eat, and drink, and do judgment and justice,
and then it was well with him, he judged the cause of the poor and needy, then
it was well with him, diu vixit, pacifice regnavit, nihilque illi defuit: he
lived long, and much in a little time; Maldon in loc.
he lived cheerfully and comfortably, free from carking cares, distrustful
fears, distracting thoughts; he reigned peaceably, the Land flourished.

Remarkable is that also, 2 King. 10.30. because thou (Jehu) have done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes; therefore thy children of the
fourth Generation shall sit on the Throne of Israel (i.e.) as Kings they shall
reign over Israel: Mark it; God will not be behind with Jehu, if he do any
act of Justice for him: Hieron.
Etiam Ethnici, si quid boni fecerint, non absque mercede praetereuntur.

It was a sad time when Israel was without Rain for three years, and six
months: How great a mercy is it to have the Rain falling in its season; it is
so promised by God, Levit. 26.4. Jer. 14.3,4.
and so prized by men, (...); Sometimes God dries up the precious fruits, and
sometimes drowns the precious fruits of the earth; and what tremblings are
there then: It it said in Ezra. 10. Ezra. 10.9.
9. All the people sat in the street of the house of God trembling, because of
this matter, and for the great Rain: What would not the King of Israel have
parted with for a shower of Rain? and what course is taken for the porcuring of
it? it is not the Heavens of God, but the God of Heaven that is the Father and
giver of it: they go to Elijah, Elijah goes to God; he was a potent, a
prevalent man with God: Prayer an appointed, approved way and mean, gracious
hearts by this key open Heaven (almost) at pleasure; he prays as Daniel in
the den; Jonah in the Whales belly; yet something else was done, Baals Prophets
must be executed, and then a sound of abundance of Rain is heard, 1 King.
18.40. and 41. The execution of Justice and Judgment brings down showers of
blessings, showers of blessings.

Thirdly, Jer. 9.24.
It is a very Pious and acceptable act: Read at your leisure those pregnant
passages, 1 Samuel 15.22. Isa. 1. The word in Prove. 21.3. is from Bachar Elegit,
Selegit.
11. Micah 6.7,8. and that of Solomon, Prove, 21.3. To do Justice and Judgment
is more eligible, more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice: As that mercy may
be showed, so that Justice may be administered, the Lord is contented that the
Acts of his immediate worship shall pro tempore be intermittted and suspended:
-- Though the Lord delight himself in holy persons, and in holy performances,
yet of Prayer, as I remember it is only said: It is the Lords delight; O! it is
prevalent with him, and pleasant to him: Let me see thy face, let me hear thy
voice; yet when Joshua (the Christian Hercules as some) with the Elders of
Israel were expostulating with God, prostrating themselves before him,
deploring their misery, and imploring his mercy, rending their clothes, falling
on their faces, putting dust upon their heads, and crying in prayer, Lord what
shall we say when Israel turns their back before their enemy? Josh. 7.10.
Lord what shall we say or do? Mark Gods reply, Get thee up, why lie thou
upon thy face, something else is now to be done; Israel has sinned, I am
highly provoked, Achan must die: Joshua is here called off his devotion, to the
execution of Justice.

Phineas executed Judgment, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness;
though others censure him as a Murderer, his act, as unjust, his attempt as
rash; no matter if all the world snarle and frown, so God smile: he approves
it, and accepts it; but I shall not enlarge this, unless I had less before
me in my meditations.

Fourthly, This is a self-securing act: See the close of this chapter: The Lord
shall be with the good; If the Lord be with you; who or what can harm you:
Esse Paulum cum Christo est magna faelicitas, Bern. in Phil. 1.23.
esse Christum cum Paulo magna securitas: So may I say, were you, My Lords,
with Christ in Heaven, this would be your bliss and faelicity; if Christ be
with you on earth, Otho Casmannus; Angelograph. p. 2. cap. 10. Aq. p. 1. q.
113. At. 4. Est. lib. 2. did. 11, etc.
this conduces very much to your present safety and security.

It is queried in the Schools; whether every man has his particular Tutelar
Angel assigned him for his custody: Most of them, and many of the Fathers, they
tell you, answer it positively: Our Orthodox Divines conceive it a platonic
conceit, no Scripture Truth; Camero sufficiently and solidly refutes it;
Camero. prael. in Mat. 18.10
This is a very certain Truth; the Angels are appointed for the custody of men;
they have a special charge to safeguard such men as you: And as they are
invisible, so they are invincible: Nay, the Lord himself is your pavilion: he
has engaged himself to be a Sanctuary, an hiding place, a shield and refuge.
To the Oppressed, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a
refuge in time of trouble; To such as walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. To such as
are exiled and banished, Ezekiel 11.16. Though I have scattered them among the
Countries, yet I will be to them as a little Sanctuary; or, a Sanctuary for a
little time: To such as trust in him, Prove. 30.5. To the meek ones of the
earth, Zeph. 2.3. To such as keep the word of his patience, Rev. 3.10. To such
as hide his people in a storm, God will hide such people; as Rahab, etc. To the
humble person, Job 22.29. To such as say not a confederacy with them that say a
confederacy, Isa. 8 12.14. To such as are much in prayer; he will not keep such
from him in a storm, as will not be kept from him in a calm: Heaven ever stands
open for such; it fears no Devils; the highest they can go, is the air, Psalm.
32.6,7. Ephesians. 2.2. To such as do Justice and Judgment: He that walks; or,
works righteously, and speaks uprightly, that despises the gain of
oppression, and shakes his hands from holding of bribes (does not this concern
you? See Isa. 33.15,16
My Lords:)
Now mark what follows: He shall dwell on high; he shall be as safe as
castled, or immured in some invincible Tower, or impregnable City: Walls and
bulwarks shall not be His Salvation; but Salvation shall be for walls and
bulwarks.

Chap. 50.7 Psalm. 90.1
In Jeremies Prophesy God himself is styled the Habitation of Justice: Justice
dwells with him, and just men too; Such need not lie down, nor rise up in fear:
If there be one that executes Justice, and I will spare it. Jer. 5.1. Will
the Lord spare It, and not Him? will he show such favor to the City for the
sake or such a man, and will he not be so favorable to one such man, if found
in the City?

Fifthly, It is a conscience-quieting, and soul-solacing act: As there is joy
in the presence of the Angels, when a sinner repents unfainedly, so when one by
the sword of Justice dies deservedly: And this will be your rejoicing, the
testimony of your consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity you have
administered Justice exactly amongst us: When with Hezekiah, you turn your faces
to the wall, God will in mercy turn his face toward you; if you walk before
him in truth, and with a perfect heart, doing that which is Just in his sight:
Samuel was one of the last, and one of the best Judges that ever Israel had:
he purged the Church from Idolatry, he restored Religion to its purity, he
executed Justice and Judgment impartially, and herein he comforts himself
exceedingly. I have walked (says he) before you from my childhood unto this
day: 1 Samuel 12.2,3,4
In my minority when I was a Levite doing the service of the Sanctuary; and
since I came to more maturity, administering Justice as a Judge: Here I am, and
witness against me who can, before the Lord, and his anointed, your King,
Saul; whose Ox have I taken, or whom have I defrauded, or of whose hands have
I received any bribe? q. d. if any bribery, or cruelty any injustice, or
partiality can be justly charged upon me; let them now speak: Beati qui
gaudent quando intrant ad cor suum, and nihil mali ibi inveniunt, says
Augustine, they are blessed who can come unto their houses, Ener. in Psalm. 33
and unto their hearts, and find no guilt there. Thus it was with that good
man Samuel.

Augustine pleases himself much with the comparison of an evil, corroding
conscience, to a scoulding, discontented wife, he has it often: I find it in
his Enarrations upon the 33. Psalm, and upon the 35. Psalm, etc. Qui habent
malas uxores, quommodo exeunt ad forum and gaudent, caepit hora esse qua
intraturi sunt in domum suam, and contristantur: As they vex men infinitely, so
does a guilty conscience; but as a good wife, so a good conscience is a
continual feast: Moses solaced himself in the integrity of his heart, and Job
also, Numb. 16.15. Job 29.14.15. When other covetous Caitiffs, unjust wretches
shall have fears falling upon them, and anguish of spirit, which makes their
bones shake and tremble, the hairs of their heads stand up; their heart strings
burst and break, when the terrors of Hell shall take hold upon their filthy
consciences: Then you, My Lords, who discharge your duties, and high trust
reposed in you, shall have the Honor of it in life, and the comfort of it in
death.

Sixthly, Not to do Justice and Judgment, is a sin most heinous and
abominable; it is malum complexum; it is peccatum complicatum, a big-belly'd
Evil; a land desolating sin, that God will be avenged on: It is a sad charge,
Jer. 5.28. Among my people are found wicked men they over-pass the deeds of the
wicked, i.e. they are worse than Turks and Pagans; they judge not the cause of
the Fatherless: Such as are least able to right themselves, should have most
help from others, but the right of the needy they do not judge: Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? To think any sin little, is no little
sin; yet some are greater than others, and this is one of the greatest.
says the Lord: yea he will surely visit for these things, Amos 5.12. I know
(says God) your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins; peccata vestra
valida and fortia, as Drusius. Gravia and copiosa, says Vatablus: magnopere me
irritantia, Ribera: obstinata and enormia scelera vestra vidi, says Lambertus
on the Text: words are wanting to express the sinfulness of their sins; the
Original is more full and emphatical; your boney sins, but what were they? They
afflict the just, they take a bribe, they turn aside the poor in the gate from
the right; therefore says the Lord, I hate and despise your Feast-daies, I
will not smell in your solemn assemblies; let judgment run down as waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream, verse. 21. to the 25. There has been much
wrestling with God in prayer, and soul-afflicting; yet prayers are not
answered, though they cry, and shout; yet he shuts out their prayers; what may
be the cause of this great indignation? Is it our Covetousness, or Idleness,
that are employed in the Ministry? Is it the peoples impaenitency, infidelity,
barrenness, or non-proficiency, under the dews and droppings of the Sanctuary?
who dare excuse, or draw up an Apology for himself, or lay the fault at the
Judges door? but if the want of due execution of Justice through the Nation,
be not THE Sin, yet sure I am; it is a God-provoking sin; and of such an
influence, that if the Lord shall this day call it to remembrance, instead of
blessings, which we have humbly begged, we may go out with curse upon curse,
which he has threatened, and we have long deserved: they who were appointed
to stand upon Mount Ebal to curse, denounced a curse against such sins and
sinners: Cursed be he that perverteth Judgment; Deuteronomy. 27.19.25
the Judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and the widow, and all the people
shall say, Amen. Cursed be he that takes a reward to slay an innocent man,
and all the people shall say, Amen.

In Jeremy 22. two things are observable to my purpose and discourse in hand,
and with them I shall shut up this Consideration. 1 Jehoiakims sin against God:
He shed innocent blood, not only his hand, but his heart was for oppression
and violence to do it, verse. 17. 2 Gods sentence against, and Judgment upon
Jehoiakim: They shall not lament for him; he shall be buried with the burial
of an Ass; drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem; non sepelietur,
Maldon in loc.
sed projicietur extra urbem in sterquilinium; A horrid sin, and an heavy
Judgment;
But once more.

Seventhly, You must be responsible and accountable at that great Assize, the
day of Judgment; for what, and how you have done: The Athenian. Magistrates
were in authority no longer than a year; when that was expired, proclamation
through Athens was made, whoever can justly accuse the Magistrate of any
injustice, bribery, partiality, or injury, let him come forth, for his power
and authority is resigned; your Lordships can apply: The meditation of death
and Judgment in your morning thoughts, and cold blood, will excite and quicken
you, animate and encourage you to do Justice and Judgment with exactness and
circumspection.

I shall produce, and press no more of these Considerations, though many offer
themselves.

3 Use.
The third Use of Direction.

If you cordially endeavor a conscientious discharge of this great duty
imposed on you, and high Trust reposed in you; These following particulars may
prove helpful, and useful: I shall sum up all in twelve, each of which is
reducible to one, or both the branches of the Observation now in hand; Briefly
then,

1 Look to your Hearts, Vide Photii Epist. 31
that they be right: Whilst Justice is in your Hands, Mercy must be in your
Hearts: Remember, as you are men who smite, so they are men who smart: It is
true of a good Judge.

Ille dole^ quoties cogitur esse ferox. Basil Ep. 79
It is good, obductis velis judicare: Avenzoar used to say, he never gave
purgation, but his heart trembled many days before: With us, Butchers may not
be Jurors, nor Judges because they (q. d.) wade and trade in blood: Augustus
never pronounced a Capital sentence without a deep sigh. Sic succenseas
iniquitati, ut consulas humanitati. Aug. Ep. 1^9 Claud.
-- Diis proximus ille est
Quem ratio, non ira movet, justique tenorem
Flectere non odium cogit, nec gratia suadit.


Goodw. Ant q.
The Jews would have none to be Magistrates, but such as were, or had been
Fathers of children: they supposed their paternal affection would incline them
to commiseration. Non paena, sed justitia delectetur Judex, says Camero well;
in this the Lord delights, not in that, Jeremiah 9.24. Ferina rabies est
sanguine and vulneribus gaudere, says Seneca, illos crudeles vocabo, De Clem.
lib. 1. c. 14
qui pumendi causam habent, modum non habent; Let your moderation be known to
all, many are not just enough, some over much: He that tills his Land overmuch
loses by it: A Judge should be like the Planet Jupiter situate betwixt hot
Mars, and cold Saturn, ex utroque temperatis est salutaris: When Bias Prienaeus
adjudged any to death, he would weep bitterly, being asked the reason, he
replied: Necessarium quidem esse naturae condolore, a lege vero, and justitiae
tramite and regula discedere magis periculosum. Non paena semper, saepe
paenitentia contentus. Aug. Ep. 158


Augustine tells us, that Agricola was often contented with the Malefactors
repentance, Consult, Zech. 7.9. Prove. 21.21. Micah 6.8. I proceed.

Secondly, Aqu. 1. 2. qu. 1
Look to your Ends that they be right: Omnibus operationibus nostris caelestis
intentio adjungi debet: Vos. de virtutibus Gentilium.
The end in all acts, of what nature soever they be, is mainly to be regarded:
A sinister end ruined Jehu; he did the work of God, but not for God: his end
was base; this turned his Wine, into Water; his Silver, into Dross: He did
what was right, good, quoad materiale, non quoad finale; for the former he was
well enough rewarded, for the other he was severely punished; served as he
deserved: I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu; remember,
Hos. 1.4
bonum oritur ex integris, malum ex quolibet defectu.

Thirdly, Labor for more wisdom and knowledge: Vide Phil. Jud. de officio
Judicis. p. 144
Ignorantia judicis est calamitas innocentis: It is Biels conclusion; Judex
damnificans per negligentiam, sive per ignorantiam, tenetur ad damni
restitutionem: There are three things requisite in such as you, Aqu: ad Hebr.
cap. 1 Lectio. 2
My Lords; Generis prosapia; ne contemnatur judex praecipiendo; Virtutis
potentia in exequendo, sapientia ne erret judicando: Aquinas and Becanus,
Becan. sum. p. 425
hint them to me.

The Calcidenses had a Law, that none should be invested with judicial power
and authority, till the fiftieth year of their age: Lib. 7. cap. 9
As Innocence is the privilege of Infancy* so wisdom of old age; as the
Philosopher observes in his Politics; (...): Indoctis Magistratibus tradere
magnarum rerum gubernationem, Epist. ad Joh. 2 Wed^. Nobilem.
quid aliud est, quam legum tabulas trunco, aut parieti affigere: It is
Melancthons: Silesio an Italian Orator reports of a precious stone, Diocletes,
which though it have many rare and excellent qualities, and soveraignties in
it, yet it loses them all, if put into a dead man's mouth: Even so, Justice
(which is the sole ornament and accomplishment of States (Corona and columna
reipublicae) though it have many rare and exquisite virtues in it, yet does
this soveraignnesse of all Princely virtues lose them all, if put into a mad
man's mouth: May it please you to compare 1 King. 3.5,6,7,9. with 2 Chronicles. 1.10.
you read of the Lords appearing to Solomon in a dream, he bids him ask, and
have; a high favor, a parallel will not easily be found; Solomon was now
sleeping when the Lord appeared to him, he made his choice before he awaked;
Constans est omnium sententia, non solum dormienti Salomoni apparuisse dominum,
sed etiam illum dormientem and somniantem postulasse sapientiam. Vide Sanctium
and Tirinum in loc.
what was the choice he made? See 1 King. 3.9. a hearing heart, wisdom, and
knowledge: Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in
before this people, for who can (without them) judge this thy people that is so
great.

Augustine thinks, Solomon prayed so much for wisdom when he was awake, that
now when God puts him to ask what he will, his thoughts ran all on wisdom:
Solomon asked wisdom with abundance of wisdom; had he not been wise before,
he had not known the worth of wisdom; Pavon. Ethic. and P. Matt. in loc.
and it was that wisdom, which the morallists call, prudentiam practice
practicam, i.e. an ability of the mind, whereby we know what is fit to be
done, all circumstances considered, and are inclined to act accordingly: Had
Solomon, so wise a man, need of more wisdom? Averroes said of Aristotle, The
Civilians of their Baldus, the Papists of their Tostatus, Prudentia politica
and scientia been regendi alios excellentior fuit in Salomone, quam in Adamo.
Perer. in Genesis 2.19,20 Tostat. in 1 Reg. 3.9. qu. 7
the Schoolmen of their Bona-ventura, that they knew all things possible to be
known, And wants Solomon yet more wisdom, who was wiser than them all?
Pererius disputes this question, whether Adam was wiser than Solomon, yea or
no? and concludes that in some respects he was: Tostatus, and Abulensis before
him, asserted the same: I shall wave this, and say of him as one did of
Bradwardin; he was doctus ad stuporem: Has this wise man need of More
Wisdom; then surely My Lords, this is needful for you, you are not so great
strangers to your own hearts, or parts, or this great work you now are employed
in, but you will say of Wisdom, store is no sore; without this you can do
nothing exactly.

Fourthly, Take heed of Pride and Arrogance; This was the first sin of the
Angels; remember how they smarted for it, that will make you more humble: It is
Calvin's note, Regis animum quisque intra se habet; In 1 Pet. 5.5
Every man has in him the mind of a King: But be you humble; Domine, qui dat
gratiam humilibus, da gratiam ut sim humilis. Bern.
such he will guide in Judgment: Thou Lord, who give grace to the humble,
give us grace that we may be humble, is a good prayer for all, especially men
in authority. It is much when God lifts up men's heads, for them to keep down
their hearts.

Homo Humilimus, cur non humillimus.
It is a saying amongst the Rabbis, the Fly and the Worm, yea the most
despicable and contemptible creature (if there be any such) was man's elder
Brother, at his first Creation: -- When Antipater recommended one to Philip
King of Macedon; Philip immediately made him a Judge; afterward being informed
that he used to paint and crisp his hair, he deposed and rejected him,
saying* A man that is proud, and uses deceit in his hair, will be false on the
Bench; such a man will not deal truly in a good cause.

We know not what use to make of broken vessels in our houses; God knows how to
make the most, and best use of humble, broken hearts, in his house, in Church
and State.

Fifthly, Take heed of Intemperancy; It is nor for Kings O Lemuel, Prove.
31.3,4,5
it is not for Kings to drink Wine, or Princes strong drink, lest they forget
the Law, and pervert Judgment: The greatest employments require the greatest
indowments, the greatest places, the greatest graces: Men in authority should
be of approved sobriety; you are not hid in corners; all your expressions and
actions are weighed in the balance: Solon made a Law at Athens, that
Drunkenness in a Magistrate should be punished with Death: The Carthaginians
had a Law, that none of their Magistrates, during their Magistracy should drink
any Wine: We have a Law amongst us, but nothing regarded: Be not drunk with
Wine, Ebrietas in Noah ab omni peccato est excusanda. In Genesis p. 383
wherein is excess: Drunkenness in Noah was no sin, says Pererius; it was
not so great a sin in him then, as in men now; there is something in his
grounds; but a sin it is which God is now dealing with England for. I have seen
a Drunken Judge upon the Bench; and therefore I speak, though I hope better
things of you.

Sixthly, Let the Fear of God be upon you; In your Hearts, before your Eyes: It
is Jehosaphats counsel, verse. 7. Wherefore now let the Fear of God be upon
You: Now; not now and no times else, but now and all times else; yet Now more
than at other times, and Now rather than at other times: See verse. 9. This
shall ye do in the fear of the Lord; He that judges or rules over men, must
^ee just, ruling in the fear of the Lord, said the Rock of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.3.
When Joseph's Brethren were imprisoned, and much afraid of harsh usage, Joseph
tells them, I fear God, q. d. I dare not do any thing but what the word
commands me: The Fear of God does chain the hand, and change the heart: I
shall not dispute that question whether Dominium temporale fundatur in gratia:
This I crave leave to speak, that such as fear God are fittest and meetest for
judicial authority. Moses must look out able men; fearing God: Such are
fittest, and meetest for Judicial authority: Such will not do, what is
prohibited; they will do what is enjoined: The Fear of God will make you to
abhor, the fear of man will make you to abstain from injustice: The fear of
man will make you to hide, the Fear of God will make you to hate bribes: Let
the Spirit of the Lord be upon you, the spirit of Wisdom, and understanding,
the spirit of council and might, the spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of
the Lord: The fear of all the Creatures is upon man; let the fear of God be in
and upon us: When this we do, we shall all take heed what we do.

Seventhly, Phil. Jud. de officio Judic. p. 146 Alex. Hal. p. 2. q. 136. Art. 1
Respect not persons in Judgment; in res magis quam personas inquirendum:
Pliny reports of Scipio Nasica, that he was sworn to speak without affection,
so should you: It was Alphonsus his advice; To leave affection (as Abraham did
the young men and the Ass) at the threshold, when you go to the seat of
Judgment: Justitia by the Graecians was placed 'twixt Leo and Libra; to
intimate two things. 1 The Magistrates impartiality in determining. 2 And their
Magnanimity in executing.


It is well hinted in my Text: The Lord your God is no respecter of persons,
nor should you be: Eccles. 5.9
What the wise man said of the Profit of the earth, I may say of the Benefit of
the Law; it is for All: The Heathens placed the Portraictures of their Judges
by their well heads: whence they might learn to refresh all comers, rich, and
poor: Judgment must run down as a River, Biel in Sentent. lib. 4. Distinct.
15. Qu. 7.
not be pal'd in as a pond: The Schoolman is peremptory in his Conclusion:
Judex damnificans per acceptionem personarum tenetur ad restitutionem.

The Prienean Sage wished rather to be a Judge amongst his foes, than amongst
his friends; his reason for this option was, the intimacy he had with, and the
affection he bore to his friends might incline him to partiality; but the
jealousy he had of his enemies, would cause him to be more cautelous and
wary: Though Coniah be as the signet upon my right hand, yet will I pluck him
thence, says the Lord, Jer. 22.24. God will not spare the very signet of his
right hand, nor may you, My Lords: Many have clean hands, free from bribes;
clear heads, free from mistakes; valiant hearts, free from fears; Yet relations
and affections get the Mastery and victory: Relations, we say are of least
Entity, and of greatest Efficacy; here they should be of none: Personam
Judicis exuit, qui amici induit: Partiality in such as you, caused Solon and
Anacharsis to compare the Laws Aranearum telis, to Cobwebs, which catch small
flies, when great ones escape: You may not with Saul spare Agag, and the fat
Cattle, unless you mean to contract the guilt of Rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.23
which is as the sin of Witchcraft.

Some Jewish Doctors say, that upon every step, as Solomon ascended to the
Throne of Judgment; there stood one, who cried aloud to remember him of some
special things which appertained to his place and office.

When he fixed his foot upon the Weemse.
First, He cried, Lo Titeh Mish at; wrest not Judgment. On the second, Lo
Tiker Panim; Accept not faces in Judgment. On the third, Lo Tikahh Shohher;
Take no Bribes. On the fourth, Lo Tittang lech Asherah. Plant no Groves. On the
fifth, Lo Takim lech Matzebah, Set not up a Pillar. On the sixth, Lo Tikbah
Shor, Kill not an Ox.


Most, or all of these are given in charge to the Judges, Deuteronomy. 16.19,21,22. If
for fear, or favor, or hope of reward, you shall sinfully respect others: God
will not mercifully respect you: Study that passage of Solomon: Prove. 28.21
To have respect of persons is not good.

Eighthly; Take no Gifts: Judges should Hate Covetousness: Notable is that of
Cajetan, on Exodus 18.20,21. Quantumvis sufficit homini non esse avarum, non
sufficit tamen principi, aut Judici, sed oportet tam alienum esse avaritiae, ut
ipsam oderit: A woe is denounced against them, who being in places of
Judicature, do justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
Righteousness of the Righteous from him: The Schoolmen cry down this crying
sin: Vide Alex. Alens. p. 3. q. 40. Memb. 6. Art. 3
Judex recipiens a partibus munera prohibita, sive just, sive injuste judicet,
sive ut non judicet, sive ut judicium differat; tenetur recepta restituere:
Biel. lib. 4. Did. 15. qu. 6. Concl. 4 cap. 1. 23
It is true, as Scultetus speaks in his fifth Sermon, on the first of Isaiahs
Prophecy: It is lawful for Judges to take a gift from their friends, as well as
other men: Si muneris loco offeruntur ab amicis; but not from the parties,
whose causes are depending before them, nor from Their friends; this brings an
evil report upon them: I remember a Germane Proverb; Gualther has it on Amos
5.12. Pauperes ex collo, divites ex mar supio suspenduntur: It is too much in
use with us; poor men hang by the neck, rich men by the purse; It is an
expression of a great Philosopher, (...): If thou be a covetous man, thou
art an unjust man, and if unjust, the Lord abhorres thee.

Vide Riveti. Explic. Decal. de officio Judic. p. 421. and 422
I have read of Sysamnes, a covetous, hide-bound, tenacious Judge, who for
filthy lucre pronounced a false sentence; Cambyses, King of Persia commanded
him to be killed, and after flead, his skin nailed over the Tribunal; his son
commanded to sit as Judge there, to curb him upon the sight thereof from
injustice; Philo. Jud. de officio Iud. mihi p. 144
and to be a terror to all that succeeded: Lysander, Aristides, Epaminondas,
and Coriolanus, with many others, I must pass by; Plut. in Epam.
It was their resolution; if the things were just, they would do them without
bribes: if unjust they would not do them with bribes: It was no sin, they
thought, to be poor; it was to be unjust, covetous, etc. It was Tully's grave
advice to his Brother Quintus, a Magistrate at that time in Asia; to show
himself an enemy to bribe-givers, as well as to bribe-Takers: The sinfulness
of this sin is set out to the life in holy writ, Micah 3.10,11. Hos. 4.18,19,
etc. you should have open ears, Exodus 23.8
to hear the truth without golden ear-picks: To say no more of this; Gifts
blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the Righteous.

Ninthly, John 7.51
Inquire diligently into the causes and cases, and testimonies which shall come
before you: It is the Lords own injunction, that Judges shall make diligent
inquisition, Deuteronomy. 17.4. and 19.18. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing,
but the honor of Judges to sift and search out a matter.

An ill report, makes not an ill man; a good name, makes not a good man: It
makes them so to be accounted, not so to be: The Lord himself examined Adam,
propounded interrogatories, then Judgment is denounced.

In those his two great Acts of Justice, when he confounded Babels builders,
and overturned Sodom: Says he, I will go down, and See; Genesis 11. and 18
Certitudo in cognitione causae is one of the three things required to just
Judgment; Sum. Theol. Schol. q. 60
and as Becanus confesses; Judicium temerarium in judicio prodiens in actum
externum per sententiam semper est peccatum mortale: Without evidence of the
fact, or true Knowledge of the cause or case, though the sentence may be right,
yet it cannot be just: It was the practice of holy Job, chap. 29.15,16. The
cause which I knew not, I searched out; he used all means, spared no pains to
understand the Truth: Heraclitus would not adventure his body with an ignorant,
or rash Physician: you are the Physicians of the body politic; if you know not
the diseases, how can you remove them? Picus Mirandula reports, that among the
Jews, none came into the number of the Raebbins, till they could speak seven
languages: None are fit for Magistrates, who are not furnished with Wisdom, to
sift and search into the causes, etc.

Tenthly, Be men of courage: A Judge that is timorous will soon be
treacherous, if he be fearful, he cannot be faithful: Quis metuit offendere,
cum Judex metuit abscindere? you have need of an Eagles Eye, Act. 17.22 Deuteronomy.
1.17 Romans 13.4.6
and a Lions Heart: In Athens there was an Hill called Mars-Hill; there Paul
stood when he rebuked the Athenians for their superstition; and a street,
called Mars-street, where their Judges sat; to intimate, that Magistrates and
Ministers should have Martial, and High-Spirits: It is said of Aristides, for
his constancy and magnanimity: You may as soon stay the Sun in the Heavens, as
put Aristides out of his way: If courage be without knowledge, the eye of
Justice is blind; if Knowledge be without courage, the sword of Justice is
blunt.

It is Augustins observation: God would have Moses to be a Magistrate, Peter
and Paul to be Apostles: had Moses lived in our age, he should have been no
Magistrate, he killed the Egyptian; Paul and Peter no Apostles; the one had
been a Persecutor, the other had denied Christ to be his Master, himself to be
a Christian, had cut off Malchus his ear, etc. but says Augustine, such would
God have employed in Church and state affairs, as will smite home: resolute
men, of invincible, undaunted courage: The Lions on each side of Salomons
glorious Throne, and at each end of the steps, signified his vigilance and
magnanimity, 1 King. 10. It is a joyful sight when they on the Bench be like
the men Nahum speaks of; the valiant men are in Scarlet: Nahum 2.3
A Judge should neither be ((...), nor (...)) without head, nor without heart:
Judex cordatus, quasi lapis quadratus, a stout Judge like a four corned stone;
no wind, no weather stirrs it; you should be Luminosi, and Animosi; But I
proceed.

Eleventhly, If possible; Hear all causes; put a period to those which have
long depended: It is not safe to ride Post over matters, it is confessed: yet
demurres are dangerous,, and disadvantagious; as in matters which concern the
soul, so in those which concern your civil interests: Say not of this or the
other, as Archias did in Plutarch, (...); Let these alone till to morrow,
refer them not, as Foelix did Paul, to a more convenient opportunity, it may
prove a more convenient inconveniency: Hippocrates would permit none of his
Scholars to practice, till they had taken an oath before the Altar of Apollo,
to abbreviate diseases to the utmost of their power and skill: A long Suit in a
Court, like a long sore under a Surgeon, may increase coin, but decreaseth
credit: Long delayed Justice may as much prejudice both parties, as injustice
either: I remember no other fault mentioned in that Judge, who neither feared
God, nor regarded man, from whom the Widow wrested Judgment by her
importunity; but Delay: But once more.

Twelfthly, Engage God by prayer to go with you to the Judgment seat: He is
the God of Judgment, and will help in the execution and administration of
Judgment, but he looks to be called in: Ut recte judicent Principes and
Judices, Muscul. in Psalm 72.1, ^
and justitiam exerceant, dei donum est, etc. It is the work of the Lord which
you are now about: It is only the help of the Lord can carry you on, and out:
when men and means fail, there is help to be had from God by prayer: Notable is
that in Exodus 3.6. The Lord proclaims himself to be The God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: The God of Abraham; Abraham was a man
strong in Faith; Isaac a holy man, a man that meditated much of God: Jacob, a
man of prayer; be you such, and he will be your God, as he was their God, and
if he be your God, he will (if called in) engage with you in this great work:
Weak men with assistance of a mighty God, can do mighty things: O pray, pray;
and Brethren, improve all the interest you have in the God of Heaven, in the
behalf of these reverend Judges; Orate, ut hos hic judicaturos dii sentiant.

Exhortation both to the Judges, and Justices.
To You, Right Worshipful, and worthy Gentlemen; you are met by the good hand
of Providence this morning together; give me leave to exhort you together.

You are the Representatives, the shields of our Country: Help! O help to
defend it! you are the Physicians, O help to heal the breaches! Our Fathers,
patres patriae, do your endeavor to protect us, and provide for us: you are
our Gods, (the immortal God so styles you) you bear the Name of Gods; your
persons are in the place and room of Gods; your powers derived from God, and
the account you give, must be to God: Therefore in the fear of God, appear for
God in your several Orbs and Spears, as you have occasion and opportunity:
Appear for that God who has so frequently and wonderfully appeared for you,
and with you, and in you: As in times of war with Zebulun and Naphtali, you
offered your selves willingly, and hazarded your life's unto the death, in the
high places of the field: So now in times of peace, stand up for Truth and
Holiness: Let it appear what love you bear to the way, the day, the worship,
the word of Christ, by your discountenancing such as contemn, profane,
pollute, and undermine them: As he in the Gospel looked up to Christ with
tears in his eyes, and a prayer in his mouth: Lord! if thou can do any thing,
have compassion on us, and help us: Even so, I beseech you: My Lords and
Gentlemen, if you can do any thing (we know you can, and hope you will, and
pray you may) have compassion on us, and help us.

First, Against the Impostors, the Seducers; I mean the Quakers now swarming
amongst us; and within the view of us; with holy Polycarp, may we say; Good
God! (...), etc. unto what times have thou reserved us, that we should live to
see such separations, divisions, such cursed Heresies, and horrid blasphemies?
Take heed what you do: Do not countenance them: Those false Prophets, and
dreamers of Dreams, which endeavored to turn away the Israelites from the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 13. per totum.
were to be put to death, though they should plead to the civil Magistrate; it
is our conscience, and therefore ought not to suffer: There are many unruly,
and vain-talkers among you, says Paul to Titus (and too many such loud and
proud boasters with us) their mouths must be stopped, muzled: It is almost all
one to deny the Truth, the Faith, Vide Luth. Ep. ad Spulat. and Melch. Adam in
vita Luth. p. 130
and not to defend it against Impostors: It is peccatum irremissibile, etc. a
sin bordering upon that sin of sins; for Magistrates to lie dormant, and
Ministers to be silent at such a time, and in such a Town as this: Pace nihil
est optabilius, silere autem perpetuo non est integrum, etc. Excellent is that
passage of Luther to Staupicius a German Divine, whom he dearly loved, Vide
Melch. Adam in vita Staup. page 20
calling him, HIS Staupicius; Non hic tempus tacendi, nec timendi, sed
clamandi, ubi Christus damnatur, blasphematur: Inveniar sane superbus, avarus,
adulter immo omnium vitiorum reus, etc.
Let me rather be called a mad man, a proud man, and guilty of the greatest
vices, than guilty of cursed silence, when Christ and his Truth are suffering.

It is damnable silence to see and say nothing: To hear and do nothing, against
damnable Heresies: Maledicta sit illa charitas quae servatur cum jactura
doctrinae fidei Luth. in Gal.
They are the basest cowards breathing, who will not maintain the Truth, and
contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints: Does it not grieve your
spirits to see, and hear them thus grieving the Spirit of God?

Res delicata est Sp. Dei.
His Spirit is grieved, When the Motives of the Spirit are resisted. When the
Gifts of the Spirit are perverted. When the Warnings of the Spirit are
neglected. When the Precepts of the Spirit are dis-obeyed. When the Promises of
the Spirit are distrusted. When the Testimonies and comforts of the Spirit are
undervalued;
when he is dishonored; how is he grieved? how is an honest man grieved when
his reputation is stained, and bastards fathered on him, which are none of his.
The Spirit of God is a Spirit of Truth, a Spirit of Light, a Spirit of Love; a
Spirit of Liberty; not freeing men from the conduct, or command of the Law, but
from the curse of the Law; not from duty, but for duty, and in duty; a Spirit
of power and peace; a Spirit of supplication, and sanctification; but they
bring their brats to his door; Father their errors and heresies on this
blessed Spirit; they have much of the Spirit in their words, but little of the
Spirit of God in their works; They Will tell you of a Light within, and a Spirit
within, but if the dictates of the Spirit within accord not with the directions
of the Spirit without. If the spirits in their breasts speak not the same
things which the Spirit of God speaks in his book, it is a lying, seducing
spirit: The Apostle tells us, that notwithstanding the glorious light of the
Gospel shine bright in our eyes, and the sound thereof be loud in our ears;
Ephesians. 2.2
yet there is a spirit working efficaciously, very strongly, and very strangely
in the children of disobedience: This is the spirit which rules in these unruly
persons: The Spirit of God puts men upon nothing that is against the Principles
of Nature, sound reason, and the Word of God; The Spirit of God is no
Sacrilegious, blasphemous, Antichristian, Antiministerial Anti-scriptural
Spirit.

Plato would not permit in his Republic, any such persons as asserted and
maintained, that God was the author and actor of all their impieties, of all
the evils which they committed: Such miscreants there are amongst us: Aug. Ep.
61. ad Dulcit.
Augustine would have such executed in his Epistle to Dulcitius.

Though Saul, after he was anointed King, had the supreme power in his hand,
yet Samuel as long as he lived, exercised the power of a Judge, he went from
year to year in circuit to Bethel, from Bethel to Gilgal, and thence to Mizpeh,
from Mizpeh to Ramathaim; some of the learned give this reason why he went
this circuit from year to year; To see if he could find any Idols, of the
Gentiles, graven images, carved works, any Idolaters, etc. I humbly crave leave
to tell you, My Lords, if there be any Idolaters, or seducers in your circuit;
it is your duty to take special cognizance of them, and according to Law, to
proceed against them: Pereant impii magistratus, pereant impiorum dogmatum
patroni, pereat and totus mundus, said Luther, ut servetur Deo sua gloria, suum
verbum and cultus: Weak consciences are to be tendered, errors of weakness
with much gentleness and meekness to be handled; yet Divines say, there are
four kinds of errors which are not to be suffered: Such whereby the peace of
the Commonwealth is evidently disturbed; such, whereby Faith and Godliness are
perverted; such, whereby Civil Government is destroyed, Vide Synops. pur. Th.
dispur. 50. fig. 60. and 61
such opinions as are destructive to the state, may be destroyed by the State;
and such, whereby God blessed for ever is highly dishonored; as Blasphemies,
Idolatry, etc. Are there none such Peace-disturbing, Faith-subverting,
State-desolating, and God-dishonouring opinions amongst us? with what faces can
men in power punish such as abuse their names, disobey their commands, and
suffer Gods name to be blasphemed, his day profaned, etc.

Arise, Arise; Stand up for the Truth, whilst others bend their Tongues like
bows for lies; be you valiant for the Truth of God upon the earth; as the
least filings of gold, and shreads of Scarlet, Vide Melancthonis Epist. ad
Picum Mirand.
so the least Truth is very precious: Do what you can to stop the mouths, and
stay the pens of such as are seduced, and do endeavor to seduce others: P.
Martyr. in 1 Samuel 23
Non semper infirmis cedendum est, si enim abutantur patientia Dei, aut si
fides infirmetur, aut dogmata laxentur fortiter agendum est: The three things
which God minds most, and loves best below Heaven, are, his Truth, his
Worship, and his People: The Heathens animated their Martial Spirits, with an
Estote viri, libertas agitur: May not I excite and quicken you with an Estote
viri Veritas agitur: Absit ut excisa -- Far be it from me said Anchises,
that I should think to outlive Troy, or Truth.

For the Lords sake, for the Lands sake, for your own, and others souls sake,
that are this day in danger to be corrupted; For the Truths sake, which is
strong, and shall prevail; maugre the malice of men, and rage of Devils, be
more active; It is said of Scanderbeg (who was Turcarum Clades, Othomanni
Nominis horror, Epiri tutela) that he was somesomes so earnest in the cause of
Christ, Melch. Adam. in vita Zwingl. p. 37
that his very blood would spin out of his lips: O that you and I had the noble
Spirits of Castriot, Luther, Zwinglius, who dyed in the open field, fighting
valiantly: be valiant for the Truth of God, of you may miserably fall under
the wrath of God: I shall crave your honorable attention to that of the Leyden
Divines, speaking to the point in hand in their fiftieth Disputation: By how
much the greater power, authority, and opportunity the Civil Magistrate has
received from God above private persons, by so much the more vigilant and
diligent should they be, lest any Heterodox opinions spread within their
jurisdictions; Notable is that of the Philosopher in the seventh of his
Politics; Quo quis sanctior, eo promptior novellis contraire solet. Virenener.
(...): The Magistrates first, and greatest care should be about things
divine, about Religion, the Orient pearl of the Nation; nor can I pass by that
of Guevara in an Epistle to the Emperor Charles the fifth: Christianus nulla
re magis dignosci potest, quam si Deo factas contumelias and blasphemias
severissime ulciscatur, suas obliviscatur: A true Christian can by nothing
better be discerned, than this: by forgiving and forgetting the injuries and
indignities done to himself, and severely punishing such contumelies and
blasphemies, as tend to, and end in the dishonor of God: In Christ's Catalogue
there is no Neuters: He who is not for him, and his Truth, and Honor, are
against all: Learn of Nebuchadnezzar, an Heathen Magistrate, he decreed, Dant.
3.28,29
that whosoever should speak amiss (mark it) but speak amiss of the God of
Shadrach, should be cut in pieces, and their houses made a Dunghill.

Help us we humbly pray, against the Prophaners of the Lords day: What the
Philistims said of Sampson, is true of these men: They are the destroyers of
our Country, etc. Nehemiah was a famous, Neh. 3.17
exemplary Magistrate, he contended with the Rulers, and Nobles: What evil
thing is this that you do, and profane the Sabbath day: Haec olim curarunt
Christiani principes, says Gualther, how is the Lords day lost amongst us?
that most refined part of time, consecrated by divine sanction: how is it idled
and bezled away: Time was, our Savior whipped some out: Now there is need of
whips to bring some into the Temple: Conscience I confess cannot be compelled
to love Virtue, or embrace the Truth, yet in regard of outward conformity, men
may, and should be enjoined the frequenting of Gods public worship and
ordinances. It is a chief branch of your charge to see to the observation and
sanctification of the Lords day: Exodus 23.12
The Fourth Commandment has a memento praefixed, which none of all the rest
have; and why so? why is this prefixed? I shall hint at some Reasons. 1 Because
we are most apt to forget this; and therefore. 2 Because none can keep this
day holy, when it is come, that do not remember it before it come. 3 Because
this is one of the greatest (if not absolutely the greatest) of all the
Commandments: It is sometimes put for all the ten; it is the Synopsis of them
all: Vossius, though he confesses there be ten great and principal commands;
yet asserts there are in those, Exodus 16.28
four more, which he calls, secondary, or appendical commands, Gerard. Vos. de
Divis. Dealogi.
and most of them are in this fourth Commandment. 4 The Observation of all the
Commandments depends chiefly upon the Observation of this fourth; none walk so
much after the Spirit on other days, as they who are most in the Spirit on the
Lords day; as Luther said of the first: In the observance of this, obedience to
all the rest is comprised, In Exodus p. 131
or as Alsted said of the fifth (so may I of this) stante honor superioribus
debito, mandata reliqua totius decalogi manent in viridi observantia. Vide Rib.
de Templo. lib. 5. cap. 1 Cum essent, etc.
5 Because the observation of this Commandment was by reason of their cruel
Taskmasters much neglected; now they are delivered, it is with a memento
inculcated. 6 The forgetting of this duty, and profaning of this day, Ezekiel.
20.12. 22.8. 23, 38
is one of the greatest sins that a people can be guilty of: It is a violation
of all the decalogue at once, Levit. 26.2. and 14 Lam. 2.6,7 Neh. 13.17
it is a sin against all the commandments and concernments of God; one of the
greatest sins in Israel.


To add no more: Many heavy Judgments are threatened against, and have been
inflicted upon the prophaners of this day: It was not, their not trimming of
their Churches (as some of the German Nobility thought) but the profanation of
the Lords day (as others) which brought those desolating Judgments upon that
Nation: Some think the Flood began on the Lords day; from that Genesis 7. they
were grown such notorious prophaners of the Sabbath. The Council of Matiscon in
France attributed the irruption of the Goths and Vandals to their neglect of
this day. My Lords, Cum oritur veneris stella consequens occasum solis, etc.
Ribera de Templo l. 5. page 247. and Sheph. These. Sab.
it is your duty to see every one have his due; shall not the Lord have his? is
not the Lords day the Lords due? Nehemiah did his endeavor to keep men from
this sin of sins: When the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark (for then began
their Sabbath, and in the evening begins ours too, as I conceive) he commanded
the Gates to be shut; he did his endeavor, and the Lord remembered him for
Good: Do you yours; this will be your Glory, your Crown, your Comfort: In
short, as none truly endeavor the salvation of their own souls, who endeavor
not the salvation of more souls than their own: So none truly endeavor the
sanctification of the Lords day, who do not cordially endeavor the
sanctification of it by all within their families, precincts, and
jurisdictions: Little do you know, worthy Gentlemen, what acceptable service
you may do to God in this very business. Help us

Against the Alehouses, those Hell-houses, and that accessive drunkenness
which is so prevalent and frequent amongst us: TAKE HEED how you countenance
them: It is almost as easy a Task to conquer the Turk, as to bring down a
rotten Alehouse; so many of the Gentry patronize and plead for them: Reduce
them to a smaller number, command them to keep better orders; they are very
exorbitant, and irregular. These houses are the very suburbs, and seminaries of
Hell, the nurseries of all sin, the Synagogue of Devils incarnate; the Devils
fish ponds, the Devil is the fisher, drunkenness is the hook, pleasure is the
bait; Fools are his fish, Hell their drying pan.

In ardentem salite sartagine prunam Are such houses to be privileged or
licensed, in which the Name of God is so notoriously blasphemed, the precious
fruits of the earth so shamefully abused, by occasion whereof the Lords day is
so much profaned; so many families impoverished, young ones empoysoned, all
manner of wickedness increased?

In the time of the Law, Deuteronomy. 21.21
Drunkards were to be stoned to death; and shall it escape now in the time of
the Gospel? It was one of King Lewis, his Apophthegmes: That Prince who can
punish a fault, and will not, or does not, is no less guilty than the offender
himself: It is true of Judges and Justices: Favor these fellows, as they are
your friends, of your Alliance and acquaintance, punish them as Drunkards; we
have good Laws for the suppressing of this sin. Currat lex. It is a sin so
odious in the eyes of Turks, and Pagans, that they punish it, in whomsoever
they find it, with eighty stripes.

Plutarch reports of Philip King of Macedon, that he built a City, called it
Poneropolis, Drunkards and such like persons were sent thither: In Rome there
was a street called Vicus Sobrius; no tippling house was found there; can you
find its parallel:

Augustine in his Epistle to Aurelius laments this sin: Ep 64. contra ^briosos
Aphros.
Tanta est (says he) hujus mali pestilentia, ut sanari prorsus, quantum mihi
videtur, nisi consilii authoritate non possit: With us are not many playing
without, while they should be praying within; drinking in the Alehouse, while
they should be about the service of God, and the salvation of their souls in
Gods house.

The Manichees used to fast on the Lords day; was it not proper for them to
fast then? Aug. Ep. 86. ad Casulanum. Senec. Ep. 83 Plin. N. H. l. 24. c. 22
Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 3. c. 13, 14. de Tap. and Bizant.
Sure it is more incongruous to feast and be drunk then: Time will not permit
to tell you how the Ancient Fathers, yea Heathens have stigmatized and branded
this sin; and these sinners; they will one day say they had been happy, if they
had been turning spits, while they were toffing pots: If you can do any thing,
suppress this sin.

Adam Contzenus the Jesuit gave this advice; To endeavor the extirpation of
our Ministry, and then our Religion should surely fall; but says he, do it
not all at once, but take away some first, and disgrace the rest; haeresis enim
cui patrocinium decrit sine pug^a concidit.
Let not my Lords be angry, and I shall but offer one thing more to your
honorable consideration: Encourage the faithful, painful Ministers about you:
Take heed what you do, in reference to them: They are much opposed, abused, and
wronged (do not you discountenance them) and which speaks more evil to us, than
all our evils upon us, the extirpation of the Ministry is by many endeavored:
The falling of the salts of the earth is very ominous: we now fear many are
poisoned, but then more will be starved: There is nothing more necessary, said
the Philosopher, than the Sun, and Salt: A soul-saving Ministry may be added:
It is necessary for such as are out of the way, to bring them in; for such as
are in the way, to bring them on toward Heaven: It was a sad time when there
was no Smith in Jsrael, 1 Samuel 13.19,20. much sadder when Israel was without a
teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles. 15.5. Dan. 8.10,11,12. In Rev. 11. You read of two
witnesses, who were they? Quoniam nomina eorum non indicavit, says Ribera,
relicta est authoribus opinandi libertas: A Lapide in 1 These. 2.4
A Lapide thinks Enoch and Elias: Some the two Sacraments, others the two
Testaments, others the two great Ordinances, of Magistracy, and Ministry, and
why not faithful Ministers only? to determine is no young man's task; but if
they be killed, they shall be revived, while the God of Heaven has a Church
on earth, he will not, she cannot be without them. It is said by some,
Nunquam meipsum habui magistrum. Hieron.
we can do well enough without them, we can teach our selves, and have not
we the Oracles of God? and of what use is their humane learning? etc. To which
I say in short; he that is a Scholar to himself, has a fool for his Master.

The Saints in former ages accounted them blessings, do you account them
burdens? it was a misery to them to be without them, is it a mercy to you to
want them? have you the Spirit of God? what will that do without the Word of
God, Cam^re.
or the Word without faithful dispensors: Nec verbum quicquam potest sine
Spiritu, nec Spiritus quicquam vult sine verbo: And for humane learning I may
say with Tertullian (though he was a professed enemy to Philosophers) quomodo
repudiamus secularia studia, sieve quibus divina esse non possunt? It is a
famous Text, though forgotten in this age, Psalm. 77.20. Thou leddest thy people
like a flock by the hands of Moses and Aaron: Observe the necessity,
usefulness, and consistency of Magistrates and Ministers, the Word is, Bejad;
in the hand, not hands; not by the hand of Moses, without the help of Aaron,
nor by the hand of Aaron, without the help of Moses; this was Gods old way of
leading his people; he is the same, and changes not; What God has joined
together, men and Devils shall not put asunder: Endeavor then My Lords and
Gentlemen to protect them, provide for them: See they do their duties, and have
their dues; Nehem. 13.10,11 2 Chronicles. 31.4,5 Aqu. in 1 Timothy 5.17
Nehemiah, a godly Magistrate did so: Amongst the Romans there were certain
Magistrates, whose work it was to provide Fire and Salt for public
Ambassadors; shall none provide for Christ's? Can the outward worship of God or
Religion, be continued without a Ministry? or a Ministry without Ministers? or
Ministers without maintenance? Leave us not, O Lord, to their courtesy, who
think too much for themselves, too little; Too little for us, too much; they
would have us so to mind the matters of God, as wholly to forget the things of
the world, as if we were not men, but Angels; and yet themselves so mind the
world, as wholly to forget the things of God, and live not like men, but Devils.

We are commanded to preach the Word, in season, and out of season: Does this
charge nothing concern our people? Yes verily: If we must preach in season,
and out of season; then they should hear in season, and out of season; and pray
for us, and reward us in season, and out of season: None honor the Lord with
their souls, that will not honor the Lord with their substance; We labor not
in the Word and Doctrine, that we may have a liberal reward, and recompense,
but therefore should we, and desire we to have a liberal reward and
recompense, that we may without distraction labor in the Word and Doctrine,
and give our selves to prayer, and the Ministry of the Word.

To the Lawyers.

My Text commands you also to Take heed what you do: Plead now, as you may with
comfort and courage stand up at the last, and have Christ to be your advocate,
and plead for you: Remember the day of Judgment is not yet past: All your
councels and pleadings shall be scanned: Keep ye far from false matters; it
was Moseses advice; plead not such causes with your tongues, as your
consciences tell you are rotten and base: For every idle word in the Pulpit, on
the Bench, or at the Bar, account must be given: Who can read that Text, and
not tremble? Augustine and Basil could not; who can hear you plead a bad cause,
and not conclude you have a bad head, or heart, or both? Augustine would rather
lose his friend, than tell a lie: It is better to lose ten Fees, than tell a
lie; it was Seneca's council: A^iis ita prodesto, ut tibi non noceas, age sic
alienum, ut tuum non obliviscaris: Notable was Papinianus his answer to
Caracalla; Facilius est, Herodian l. 4. Fig, 8
etc. It is more easy to commit murder, than to defend it: Thou may command
my neck to the block, but not my tongue at the Bar: Pericles used to say,
that he never pleaded any cause, but first he entreated the Gods, that he
might speak not one word falsely, or unjustly: Let not the Morality of those
Heathens outstrip the Religion of us Christians, Go you, and do likewise.

In Denmark their State is governed only by a written Law: There is no Advocate
or Proctour admitted to plead, the parties themselves plead their own causes,
and then a man stands up, reads the Law; the Law-book it self is their only
Judge: Happy were all Kingdoms, were it so with them, said a royal person.
King James in his speech at the Star-Chamb. Anno 1616.


The Sycionian Ambassador tells Ptol^my King of Egypt, that with them, Voyages
were not permitted, lest men brought home new fashions: Physicians were not
suffered, lest they kill the sound; nor Lawyers retained to plead causes: I
shall not say, you are useless, who will say you are blameless; I know there
are conscientious Lawyers; There was a man named Joseph, a Counselor; he was
a good man, and a just, Luk, 23.50. I reverence the learned and golden Oracles
of Law, and Justice; yet cannot but admire to see such young Lawyers so
dim-sighted, that they must needs have silver spectacles; some golden pearls
be in their eyes: The sight of an Angel only can make them open their mouths.

A Lawyers tongue is like the Celedony Stone, which retains its virtue no
longer than while it is rubed with gold: Good reason the Law should be costly,
lest it be too common: You come far, and are at great expenses, yet remember,
there is a conscience to be used: Cato admired how Soothsayers could forbear
laughing when they met one another, because they knew how they had guld the
people; you can apply it: It is Panormitans advice, Promptior sit quisque
vostrum ad componendum, quam ad contendendum, and indeed, as Basil speaks,
(...), however if you will plead, be not at all for Causes unjust, be not at
all for your selves in any causes, be they never so just.

(...). Aq. 2. 2. q. 75, Artic. 3 Biel l. 4. Did. 15. qu. 6 Alex. Al. p. 3.
qu. 40 Aug. Ep 54. ad Mecedon.
Plutarch reports of Phocion (a man whom Athens never saw smile, or weep) that
he would not defend his Son in Law Chariles, in an evil cause: Why should you
strangers? It is long since concluded by the Schoolmen; that Advocatus; si
injustam causam scienter defendat, graviter peccat, and vinculo restitutionis
tenetur.

To the Jurors.

Take heed what you do: You are in number twelve, so were the Apostles, but one
of them was a Devil; the Devil will be busy about you, but be none of you
Devils: Judas sinned in betraying his Savior, you may sin in betraying a
sinner: You are twelve men; Man is a rational Creature; not twelve Sheep; they
go, qua itur, non qua eundum: All the rest follow the first; Remember your
Oaths; let not the fear of great men, the neernesse of Kinsmen, the malice you
have to any man, nor the hope of reward from rich men, cause you to clear the
guilty, or to bring in a ver-dict to oppress the innocent: It is one of
Mahomets eight commandments: Thou shall do to others as thou would have
others do to thee; thou shall do to others, not as others do to others, not as
others do to thee: would you have others deal perfidiously, treacherously,
unjustly in your causes? do not so then in theirs.

To Witnesses.

This charge concerns you also: Every man is not omni exceptione major: I need
not tell you who are fit or meet persons, Conditio seru^ aetas, discretio,
fama. Et fortuna fides in Testibus ista requires. Panormit. Judic. Process. p.
85. and sq.
who not; nor what things are generally required in such as give evidence; my
work is to give you your charge; and my charge is, That you take heed what you
do; bear not false witness against your neighbors, Accuse no man falsely,
Luke 3.14. Take heed of Perjury; it is mendacium juramento firmatum, Vide
Estium in Sent. lib. 3. Did. 39. parag. 2. Et Bielem fusius hac de re lib. 3.
Did. 39. qu. 2. Artic. 1 Aq. 2. 2. q. 98 A^t. 1
a lie confirmed by an oath; it is committed many ways, as the Schools show: I
shall not mention, nor examine them; it is good to have that in your eye and
heart, when the book is in your hand: Thou shall swear in Truth, in Judgment,
and in Righteousness; si ista defuerint, says Jerome, nequaquam erit
Juramentum, sed perjurium: The Prophet Zachariah saw a flying Roll, and in it a
curse writ; against Thieves, and Swearers; Zech. 5.4,5
such as swear rashly and falsely; the curse of God will follow thee to thy
house; it is not possible to avoid, or evade it; into thy house it will,
destroy thee it shall: Perjury and Forgery expose to many calamities: Such were
by the Romans plunged headlong from the Tarpeiant Mount: The Schoolmen dispute
this question, whether Perjury, Vide Bielem ubi supra. Et Richardum de Media
Villa. lib. 3. Did. 39. qu. 1. and 3
or Theft, and whether Perjury or Adultery, be the greater sin; they conclude
positively; that it is greater than either of the other: such as are guilty of
this, sin against God; by them he is contemned; against the Judge, by their
lies he is deceived, against the Jurors, who by their lies are deluded;
against the innocent person, who by their perjury is injured; against
themselves; they shall never more be believed: It is not meet, said Tully to
believe such a man, though he should swear by all the Gods of Heaven; and
Seneca thought it was just that such a man should dye for his iniquity: It is a
sin to be punished by the Judges; and against their posterity, how many
miseries are they involved in, and exposed to? Love not a false oath, this is
that which the Lord hates, as the Prophet speaks, Zech. 8.17. Hear this ye
Knights of the Poast: Truth is the character of a gracious man; surely they are
my people, children that will not lie, much less swear a lie; they fear an
oath; Ne pro animae quidem salute mentiri licet, Eccles. 9.2
said P. Martyr; It is not lawful for you to tell a lie, though by so doing you
might save your souls; nay, says Augustine; though thereby you might save a
world: In a word then: whether you pronounce Judgment, as Judges, or assist as
Justices, or debate as Counselors, or depose as Witnesses: Take heed what you
do, or say: A lie in Judgment is directly against the being of Government, the
honor of Tribunals, and the Commandment of God, It is (...), as Arist.
speaks: And let us in the Ministry study this Text more: It does mainly concern
us to Take heed what we do: We are the men who carry the message of Christ in
our Mouths, the marks of Christ in our sides, and should have the image of
Christ in our hearts: It is truly said, an ill man is the worst of all
Creatures; An ill Christian is the worst of all men, an ill Professor, the
worst of all Christians; and an ill Minister is the worst of all Professors:
Let us weep and pray for more enlarged hearts and parts; for holy lives, and
sound Judgments; then shall the arm of the Lord be sooner revealed, and our
reports of Christ and his way the better believed: Let us pray much, Erasm. ad
Ponsecam.
as Luther did, and preach much, and endeavor with Augustine, ever to leave our
people, non tantum cruditiores, verum etiam inflammatiores ad been vivendum,
Melch. Ad. in vita. Lutheri. p. 165.
etc. Let us take heed of those three things which Luther says ought not to
come with us into the Pulpit: Superbia, Avaritia and Invidia: Could I speak to
you reverend Fathers and Brethren, Vide Vasq. Tom. 2. disp. 213. Melch. Ad. ubi
supra.
and the rest not here, as the Schoolmen say the Angels can, I should say more,
more to you, and more to others; but I have learned of Luther, Cum vides
attentissime audire populum, Enarrat. in Psalm. 39
conclude, eo alacriores redibunt: I shall say no more, but as Augustine did of
that Text, Matthew. 24.13. Prae caeteris hoc mementote breve; Above all that I
have said, remember this short saying, which is indeed, an Enchiridion Judicum,
Take heed what you do: Now the God of Heaven, whose Throne is a Throne of
Grace, whose Spirit is the Spirit of Grace, whose Word is the Word of Grace,
and who is himself the Author and Finisher of all our Graces: Give us all Grace
to know his mind, and do his will exactly, universally, and continually; Amen.

FINIS.
Catastrophe Magnatum; OR, King David's LAMENTATION, AT Prince ABNERS
Incineration. In a Sermon meditated on the Fall, and delivered at the Funeral
of the Right Worshipful John Atherton of Atherton Esquire High Sheriff of the
County Palatine of Lancaster, who dyed Janu. 17. and was interred the 24. 1655.

By J. Livesey, Minister of the Gospel at Atherton.

For I know that thou will bring me to Death, and to the house appointed for
all living,

Job 30.23. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
Sophoc. (...), etc.
Simplic. Comment. in Epict. Euchir. cap. 33. London, Printed by R. I. for Tho.
Packhurst at the three Crowns over against the great Conduit at the lower end
of Cheapside. 1657.

TO The Right Worshipful, and my Noble Friend, Mris. MARY ATHERTON.
Right Worshipful,
THe Book of Job (says Augustine) is the afflicted man's Scripture: Tirinus
thinks, it was first writ in Syriack, afterward turned into Hebrew by Moses
for the comfort of the distressed Jews at that time in the house of bondage
that they might lay before them this holy man, blessed Job (another Angel, as a
Father calls him) a man of sorrows, Christ. Hom. de patientia Job.
as a lively pattern of almost invincible and impregnable patience. Amongst the
many memorable passages of that precious Saint, may it please you to consider
how suitable that is to your present state and condition, This Text was fully
opened at the Funeral of the hopeful and much lamented Heir; who was interred
about ten da^es after his honored and deceased Father.
chap. 16.14. and thence learn, That

God does sometimes break his choicest and eminentest Saints, with breach upon
breach; Instances are at hand, of David, on whom troubles came thick and quick,
as waves rolling and riding one in the neck, or on the back of another: Heman
and Paul's state and fate you have, with Bills and Catalogues of their disasters
and sufferings; but Jobs is in stead of all, he was whipped and stripped of all,
he lost all his Sheep, Oxen, etc. all his children; ten children, ten
suddenly; ten children, in the prime and flower of their age, ten virtuous,
gracious children, as Chrysostom speaks, Vide Chrysostom. Hom. 5. de pat. Job.
and that by a violent death; This is not all, you find him full of pains, and
blains, byles, and sores from head to heel.

Pineda thinks all kind of diseases were in Jobs maladies; Pineda in Job 2.8.
p. 48. An uno tantum morbo laboravit Job? resp. Neg.
Ulcus pessimum, lepra, lues venerea, etc. He was a great man; some of the
Fathers say, he was an eminent Prophet, and therefore numbered with Noah, and
Daniel: Bolducius says, before his long afflictions he was a Captain, Aug.
Bold. Praelud. 7. in lib. sobi and Didac. Stun. in cap. ^ v. 2. Non dubito quin
Job fuerit Rex.
and after his pressures and trials, a King, a supreme Governor, a petty
Monarch within his own territories; it is probable he was; yet was he broken
with breach upon breach: As in some sinners there is a legion of Devils; so on
some Saints there is a legion of troubles every man has his burden: The
Saints have many and mighty.

If a reason of these his dispensations be searched for, or inquired after:
May not we return and say? Rev. 3.18
It is for the trial of their graces: the Graces of the Spirit are tried
Graces, and shall not such have their Trial? as natura vexata, so gratia
tentata prodit seipsam: It is to approve, and to improve their graces, their
Faith: Satan's batteries are placed principally against this grace; by it he is
most resisted; and by him therefore it is most oppugned: Their patience,
whether they will bless, or curse; how they will deport themselves in the
furnace: Their integrity, painted pot-sheards shine till they come to scouring:
Breach upon breach discovers the sincerity or hypocrisy of the heart; whether
we be right, or rot at the core; how low the foundation is laid: Batteries
upon a wall try the stability and strength of it, and breaches the basis of it;
an unsound heart may stand a season, while troubles come singlely and slowly:
renewed troubles are great trials: Their weanednesse from the comforts of this
life, how they can live without them, whether they do live above them; how they
will carry in the privation of them: Many can live without God in the world,
who know not how to live without Gold, and Silver, and children, in the world.

It is to humble them: Pride is the shirt of the soul, which it puts off last
when it shifts: The heart of man is the proudest little piece in the world:
Lest I should be exalted, above measure there was given me a thorn in the
flesh: An humble soul is Heavens delight: It is worthy our observation, Genesis
22.1. After these things God tempted Abraham. After these things, what things?
Solemn intercourses, twixt God and him: Express Assurances from Heaven, that
God was his God, and would be the God of his seed: After these things Abraham
is tempted, and pride prevented.

To refine them, waters are clearest when they are in motion; Dan. 11.35
so are the Saints in affliction.

Isa. 26.16 Hos. 5.15
To awaken them to duty: Grace ever acts like it self, gracious men not so; they
have need of awakening Ordinances, and providence: In trouble they will visit
him, and morning him.

To subdue the stubbornness of their will; children will not always be
wrought on, or brought to do their Fathers will with one lash; as stubborn
Oaks, so stubborn hearts and wills, must have many blows before they be
brought under.

To make them more modest in their demands; desires of, and prayers for
temporals, when men are low in condition, they are low in petition: A drop of
water was all Dives desired in Hell: Breach upon breach makes men more modest,
and moderate.

To work us more into love with, more highly to estimate and think of his
precious Ordinances: Many of Paul's Epistles cannot be understood well without
the Cross; the sweetest Scriptures were penned in, and are prized most in
times of afflictions: then is truth precious indeed.

To enlarge their comforts: It is the Method of Heaven to bring his Saints
first into the Wilderness, then to Canaan; every child of God is not taken up
into the third Heaven, till they have been cast as it were into the third Hell;
the tree is more firmly rooted by shaking, and the true Christian by suffering;
notable is that prayer, 1 Pet. 5.10.

To increase his own glory; he made all things at first, and does all things
to the last for his glory; then shall his name which is above every name, be
more exalted* when he shall make up those breaches in his Church, or in your
families: Notable is that, Psalm. 102.16. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he
shall appear in his glory.

The Case is yours Right Worshipful: He has broken you with breach upon
breach: Within the circuit of ten days, you have laid in dust the Head and
Hope of your family: The delights of your eyes are taken from you with a stroke
from Heaven: Ezekiel. 24.16
To help you to a right improvement of this great affliction; I humbly crave
leave to leave two or three words of Counsel with you.

First, Patiently bear the indignation of the Lord, acknowledge his
Righteousness; open not your mouth to murmr, or rep^ne against him. Let
these Considerations stay with you.

1 There are no more breaches made, than there was need of; I dare not say with
him in Theocritus. -- (...)


It is enough that ones dead out of a family: No, There is not one dram more in
the potion, nor one twig in the Rod more than there was need of: Notable is
that, 1 Pet. 1.6. Now for a season (if need be) ye are in Heaviness, if need
be; breaches are not made, but as there is need, and if there be a need: Were
we made Arbiters of our own afflictions, it is more than probable, we should
not award our selves the tenth of our corrections, yet the most High, whose
wisdom is wonderful, and understanding infinite, knows he should wrong us
much, should he whip us no more.

2 The Lord has done it, and who shall gainsay it, Psalm. 39.9.
or be displeased with it: Righteous are all his doings in our hearts, and in
our houses. His dealings with David; Job and Heman were sharp, but never
chargable with injustice; as the Word, so the Work of the Lord is good.

3 Have not you and we deserved it; has he not been highly provoked by us to
take them from us? wherefore shall a living, a dying man complain; since he
suffers for his si^: This is man's sin, and Gods wonders: Nay, has he not
punished us less than our iniquities have deserved?

4 They were none of yours, whom he has taken from you; they were his before
yours, more than yours, his, and none of yours; 1 Cor. 6.19
when we are not our own, what can we call our own? may not the Lord do what
he will with his own? and call them home at his pleasure?

5 His End is good in all the Breaches made upon your comforts; It is to break
your heart more for sin, and from sin; from the pleasures, profits, and honors
of the world; to make you partaker of his holiness; Now, finis dat
amabilitatem and facilitatem mediis; We are content to lose some of our blood
for the health of our bodies; why not the best things in our houses for the
health of our souls?

6 You will by acknowledging his hand, and submission to his Rod without
grumbling, advance the Lords honor; and cross Satan's expectation: It was the
Devils design not to make Job a beggar, but a blasphemer, unless the way to
make him a blasphemer, was first to make him a beggar, but Jobs blessing of God
crossed and amused the Devil: For Job not to miscarry after all those sad
tidings; This was a patience that honored Heaven, justified Gods testimony of
him, made hell ashamed, the whole world to wonder, and still to talk of the
patience of Job: He says not, Vide Chrysostom. Hom. in locum.
the Devil has taken this or that; had he said so, the speech had been true
enough, though not good enough for so holy a man; but the Lord has taken away.

7 It is a fruitless and bootlesse thing to contend with God; nothing is got
by murmuring; it is no wrangling him out of his way; besides, this would argue
much pride, and sullenness; nothing of a self-denying, humble spirit, which
you have a large share of.

8 Your noble soul is not yet lost; and your Redeemer yet lives. There is no
breach made twixt God and your soul; and Christ is better to you than ten
Husbands, Sons, etc. Seneca checks the folly and vanity of murmurers under
pressures: Be it supposed (says he) a man has a princely palace to lodge
in with gallant Orchards, pleasant Gardens, surrounded with tallest Cedars, or
other Trees for Ornament, or Muniment; what an unreasonable thing were it, for
this man to whine, repine, and complain, if a few leaves be gone by the
boisterous wind, the fruits, the trees, the house remaining: If the Lord take
houses from us, estates and friends from us; dearest relations from us, yet if
not himself, nor his Son, Senec. ad Polyb. Plut.
nor his Spirit from us, Fas non est de fortuna conqueri, etc.

9 As many children are remaining with you, Ep. 234. (...).
as are removed from you: I may say to you, as Anythus did of Alcibiades:
(...); he that took one, had power to have taken all: Photius on this account
comforts his Brother Patricius, (...), etc. Three are left, though three be
lost; nay, they are not lost; non amisimus, sed praemisimus; only the number of
Jobs children remained the same, when all things else restored double to him,
of which some give this reason; his other possessions were quite gone, but his
children remained alive, and were in peace with God.

10 Their times (as ours) were in Gods hand, not in the hands of their friends,
Psalm. 31.15
then they should have stayed here much longer; not in the hands of their
enemies, then their stay had been shorter: It is best to do what God would have
us, and to die when God would have us.

Prepare for future Breaches, who can say when the storm is over, he shall not
see another; you are yet on the Ocean, not in the Haven* Dis-ingage your
affections, take off your heart from those which are left behind; your
enjoyment of them shall be nothing the shorter, and it shall be infinitely
sweeter; they are certain cares, but uncertain comforts; In sorrow they are
brought forth, and up, yea and out unto the grave: On them we often fix too
much of our affections; from them we often have many of our afflictions: When
you think on them whom you have interred, withal be it your endeavor; to
meditate on death more, by which you were so suddenly parted. To love Heaven
better, where we hope they are arrived: To mind this world less, whence they
are, and you shortly shall be translated.

Hold on in the service of the Lord, notwithstanding the breaches in your
family: Of what stock or lineage Job was I am not able to determine, Tossed.
Super caput. 22. Genesis
R. Solomon (as Tostatus reports) confidently asserts that he was a Chananean,
and dyed but a while before the Jews entered into, Chanaan; and this he builds
on, Numb. 14.9. others as boldly say, Aug. and Amb. Vide Peter. in Genesis 36.33
Cajet. in cap. primum Jobi.
he was that Jobab of whom we read in Genesis 36.33. Pererius disputes the
question, whether Job was of Esau's Lineage, and concludes he was; Cajetan
thinks none can tell: It is certain he was a gracious person, and this he
did, notwithstanding All his losses, chap. 1.20. Then Job arose, and rent his
robe, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped: There
are some duties of great difficulty: As to love God when he runs upon us
like a Giant, and shows himself as an enemy: Credere invisibilia, sperare
dilata, etc.
To have our spirits lowest, when our employments are highest: And (to name no
more) to have our obedience then at the highest; when our comforts are at the
lowest; yet it is no pleading difficulty against a known duty; though he kills
us, yet we should trust in him, and worship before him; they who are not
faithless, cannot be fatherless, nor friendlesse; they are never at a loss;
When afflictions put us to it, then by a lively faith we put God to it, and
we know God can do every thing, Job 42.2.

Record the gracious dealings of God with you in your saddest losses, and
breaches: Keep a book of Remembrance for every passage of his Providence; and
improve former and present experiences in this hour of trial: When Moses went
up to the Mount to pray, he took the Rod of God in his hand; and why that Rod?
by that Rod the Lord had done wonderful things for his people, Exodus 17.9
and against his, and his Churches enemies; by it he turned water into blood,
brought Froggs, and Lice upon the Land; divided the waters of the Red Sea, etc.
the sight of that Rod did encourage Moses to pray to God, to confide in God for
future deliverances; you can apply it.

Weep not immoderately for the death of your dear Relations; They shall rise
again, and you shall see them again; their bodies now laid in the dust are
mellowing for immortality and glory; the business of a wise man, (said a wise
man) is not to be without, but above passions.

-- Flagrantior aequo,
Non debet dolor esse tuus, nec vulnere major. Juvenal. Sat. 13

Poverty made Fabritius famous, Rutilius was made excellent by his banishment;
Scevola by fire, Cato by his death, Socrates by prison, and you by patience.

It were easy to say more, but enough is better than all: One thing yet remains
which I humbly crave, I have half promised to my self, viz. your candid
acceptance of this short and plain discourse: it is below others envy and
observation, so is its Author, and therefore craves no protection: Hortensius
was weak in writing, but powerful in speaking; Albeticus was weak in speech,
but notable with his pen. I am in both very weak; you will however take it in
good part for HIS sake, whose death gave life to these unpolished line^; the
mantle of your charity will cover most of its infirmities: Bradwardin once took
small pleasure in reading Paul's golden Epistle^, he thought he had not
ingenium metaphysicum; the like is said of Augustine, and he ingenuously
confesses, Dedignabar esse parvulus, etc. It is not your humor to censure,
but your practice is to practice: If these lines which be in your hands, find
a room in your heart, if they work you out of Love with life, to a serious and
seasonable preparation for death. I have my design.

I could say very much of you, but I am writing to you, and therefore shall say
no more, but pray for you, that if the Lord will not show you what he will do
with you, and yours, yet that he would show you what he would have you, and
yours to do, and enable you thereunto: The good Lord make up this sad breach to
your afflicted Family, and this distressed Country: Fit you for, and fill you
with those divine comforts, which in the multitude of your perplexed thoughts
will rejoice your soul: This is, and shall be his prayer, who humbly desires a
room still in your memory under the title of

Your Faithful Servant, J. Livesey.
February 14. 1655.
THE Princes Fall and Funeral; In a Sermon, on 2 SAMUEL 3.38,39. And the King
said unto his Servants, know ye not, that there is a Prince, and a great Man
fallen this day in Israel?


And I am this day weak. WHen Harraldus King of Denmark made war upon
Harquinus, and both Armies were prepared to engage; a dart was seen flying in
the Air, hovering this way, and that way; as though it were seeking and
singling out a man upon whom to fall, whilst both parties stood gazing on it,
admiring at it, and wondering what should be the cause, and what would be the
product of this strange prodigy, every man dis-spirited, and fearing he should
be the man; at last it fell upon Harquinus his head, and slew him.

Right Worshipful, and thrice worthy Gentlemen; Honored and beloved Brethren;
The fatal, dismal dart of Death has long been flying over our heads, and
hovering over our houses; but now it is fallen, and we who survive do see on
whom; on an eminent and noble Gentleman, whose Funeral we are met to
solemnize, and celebrate this evening: Well may I sigh and say, as David did of
Abner: Know ye not, that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in
our English Israel? And I am this day weak.

It is an excellent passage of holy Augustine: Funeral discourses, and
panegyrical Orations are (magis vivorum solatia, quam mortuorum subsidia)
rather for the profit and instruction of the living, than for the praise and
commendation of the dead: Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 1. cap. 3.
These solemnities are not done, ad juvandas animas, as the Cardinal would have
it; nor are they mortuorum adjutoria, as Lombard asserted: These expressions
are but civil indexes of unfeigned sorrows.

Pet. Lomb. in 2 These. mihi fol. 201.
They who are taken out of this valley of Baca, and carried up by troops of
glorious Angels into the highest Heaven, stand in no need of the praise of men,
having the fruition of the eternal God; as Chrysostom speaks in that learned
oration compiled upon the death of Phylogonius; but we who remain on earth,
have need to hear of their holy lives, and happy deaths, with some seasonable
exhortations to excite and quicken us to an imitation of them: For this purpose
I have chosen this portion of Scripture left upon record for all our
instruction, it is without dispute very seasonable; the Lord make it, and my
distracted meditations on it, as searching and profitable.

Know ye not, etc. For the logical resolution of the Text, we shall answer
five Queries. 1 Who was that Prince and great man, who fell that day in Israel?
2 By whom, and how did that Prince and great man fall that day in Israel? 3
Whereabouts fell that Prince and great man that day in Israel? 4 What was the
cause, and what might the occasion be of that Prince, and great man's fall that
day in Israel? 5 What was the sequel, the consequent of that Prince and great
man's fall in Israel?


First, Who was that Prince and great man, who fell that day in Israel?

It was Abner, the Son of Ner: Cousin germane to King Saul; a man of great
quality; not a mere stranger to the blood Royal: A man of great Authority,
Princeps vir in Israel, ipse flos rei militaris, as P. Martyr notes upon the
Text; a principal man, the very quintessence and cream of the Militia: a Peer
and Pillar of the Land; Captain of the guard, a kind of Generalissimo to three
Princes, viz. Saul, Ishbosheth, and David, not to wander far, or squander away
time; the Text tells you, he was (...) Sar, a Prince; hence is the word in
common use with us, Sir, and he was (...) Magnus, a great man, a man of great
reputation, and estimation, of a noble, resolute, heroic spirit, for prowess,
policy, valor, and magnanimity, not second to any: Art not thou a valiant man?
and who is like to thee in Israel? says King David to him, 1 Samuel 26.15. This
is that Prince and great man who fell that day in Israel.

Secondly, By whom, and how did this Prince and great man fall in Israel?

I answer.

Not as Lepidus and Ausidius, who stumbled at the very threshold of the Senate,
and dyed; the blow came in a cloud from Heaven: Not by accessive joy, as
Sophocles did; nor by immoderate grief, as Homer, and the Scripture tells us,
old Eli did, whose heart was burst, before his neck was broak; he sat upon a
seat by the way side, not like an Athenian, of whom Demosthenes thus writes,
(...), etc. But solicitous about the Ark of God, inquiring what became of it;
and upon the sad report, he was a dead man: Nor yet as Julian, by an invisible
stroke from Heaven, nor fell this Prince, as Nero did; but as Agag by the hand
of Samuel; and as Asahel by the hand of Abner; so fell Abner by the hand of
Joab, verse. 27. Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him; Beshel^,
quietly, peaceably, or craftily; Abner little suspected his death so nigh at
hand; it is probable he thought that Joab had Arcana imperii, some secrets of
state to impart and communicate unto him, which none but themselves, men of
high command and trust might take cognizance of; there most basely and cowardly
he stabs him: I confess in the 30. verse it is said, Joab and Abishai his
Brother slew Abner: but Abulensis and Sanctius on it say, illi non procul
aderat Abishai, ut si res exigeret, illi subsidio esset.

Antigonus, a King, was wont to pray to God, that he would protect him from his
friends, when one of his counsel asked him, why he prayed so, he returned
this answer, Vide Strigel. in locum. Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere
nomen, Tuta frequensque licet, sit via, crimen habe^.
every man will shun or defend himself against his professed enemies, but from
our professed, or pretended friends, of whom few are faithful; none can
safeguard himself, but has need of protection from Heaven: pregnant and
pertinent is that of Basil, in one of his Epistles, (...), etc. Fools will take
heed of their Foes, but wise men will take heed of their friends: For as
Theognis said truly, (...)


Thirdly, Whereabouts fell this Prince and great man? I answer, Both as to the
place of the City, and part of his body, from the 27th. verse; It was in the
gate, the place of Judicature, of public concourse, and solemn meetings: It is
probable this bloody, barbarous wretch, thought he should not be suspected to
be the man, a man of so much impudence, and imprudence, there to murder so
great a man; well might the King and Courtiers conjecture it was some other
man: The wound was given under the fifth rib; the short ribs are in number
five, under the lowest, a little beneath the Armor is Abner wounded; it is a
ridiculous conceit of some Jews which Tostatus speaks of: Dicunt Hebraei quod
Joab petivit ab Abner de modo discalciandi solu^arem illum and cum se
inclinaret se, percussit cum Joab. Tostat. in 2 Reg cap. 3. ^. 23
As Abner before had smitten Asahel, a man of a noble heart; and nimble foot:
So Joah smites him, out of which wound it is said, his guts came, as Julians
did. -- Sine caede and vulnere pauci,
Descendunt Reges. --


Fourthly, What was the cause, or what might be the occasion of this Prince or
great man's Fall in Israel?

It was Jobs suspicion (may it admit so fair a construction) that Abner would
prove an Ambodexter: Abner had revolted from Ishbosheth, because he had
questioned him for the familiar usage of one of Saul's Concubines; we may not
conceal the truth: Abner was deeply guilty (if of no more) of a treacherous
inconstancy. If Ishbosheth had no true title to the Crown, Abner sinned in
maintaining it; if he had, Abner sinned in forsaking it: Tostatus says, that
he knew the Kingdom did not de jure belong to Ishbosheth, but to David:
Suppose his former undertaking was evil, yet to desert him, eo modo, and hoc ex
injusto furore (as Tostatus) to withdraw his professed allegiance upon a
private revenge, was to take a lewd leave of an evil action: In a word, Joab
thinks it is no trusting a Turn-coat: Or it was pretended revenge for the blood
of his Brother Asahel, verse 27. Joab was Ish dammim, a man of bloods: Tostatus
disputes the question, whether Joab sinned in slaying Abner? Vide Tosta^. in
loc.
he concludes positively; He killed the man without a just cause; he killed
the man without a just call; he had no authority to do it, non erat Judex ad
infligendum illi mortem, he slew him, modo in honesto, and he broke the peace
granted him by the King: The pride of Joabs heart put him upon this horrid and
hellish fact: Mallem hic primus esse, quam Romae secundus; Caesar de oppidulo
quodam, dum Alps transiret.
He was afraid least Abner by this important service, should grow too great in
the Kings favor: It was cursed pride that put Zimri on to murder Elah his
Lord and Master: It was pride that made Athaliah to destroy all the seed Royal
of the house of Judah: It was pride that put Herod on to seek the blood of
Jesus; and it was pride in which Joab dipped his dagger wherewith Abner is slain:
Nebuchadnezzars pride ushered in the destruction of the Assyrian Monarchy:
Cyrus his pride made way for the overthrow of the Babylonian Monarchy:
Alexanders pride was the cause of the Annihilation of the Persian Monarchy: The
Roman Commanders by their pride, occasioned the subversion of the Grecian
Monarchy, as it is by some observed: It was pride that put the Pharisees on to
persecute Christ, and it was pride in Joab that curtaild Abners days: Joab
would have none so deep in the Kings books as himself; no corrivall with him in
honors and preferments: Joab suspected his reputation would be blasted, his
fame eclipsed, his service less regarded: If Abners design be now
accomplished: This Magnum Nihil, of Honor, he is so tender and jealous of,
that he is resolved, Abner shall die. Nec quemquam jam far potest Caesarve
priorem
Pompeiusve parem.


Fifthly, What was the fruit, or the sequel of this Prince, and Great man's
Fall? I shall hint briefly.

1 David's vindication of his own innocence, verse. 28. I and my Kingdom are
guiltless before the Lord, q. d. I am not to be accused of, nor charged with
this bloody fact: It is lawful for the most humble man, to vindicate, and plead
his own innocence, when he sees others may suspect him: It is lawful for a man
to do himself open right, when others do him open wrong: David might say as
once Augustine did, Mihi sufficit conscientia mea bona, vobis vero necessaria
est fama mea: Sometimes the subjects go mad, and Kings are sent to Bedlam:
Though that be mostly true, Delirant reges, etc. David will have the fault
laid at Joabs door; and therefore Apologizeth for himself, as well he might.

2 David's fearful Imprecation, verse 28. Let there not fail from the house of
Joab one that has an issue, or that is a Leper, etc. All sore and heavy
Judgments, the Issue makes the body to pine away, the Leprosy makes the body
loathsome, both make it unclean, so that it must not come into the
Congregation, the Gout, or Palsy make a living man, as if he were dead: To
Fall by the sword of an enemy, a sad Judgment, 2 Samuel 24. and so to be
starved to death for want of bread: Tostatus disputes the question; An peccavit
David maledicendo Joab, he answers negatively, and says, licet maledicere,
quando ille qui maledicit est Judex, and imponit maledictionem in partem
paenae: The Rabbines are too rash, who say, that David was too much carried on
with violent passions in this direful, dreadful imprecation upon Joab, and all
his Fathers house; and therefore say, all these evils fell upon some of his own
posterity and race: Rehoboam had an issue, Uzziah was a Leper, Asa was pained
in his feet, Josiah fell by the sword etc. It is granted, cursing men are
commonly cursed men; but David was not here moved by humane passion, but by a
Prophetic spirit.

3 The Declaration of Joabs cowardice, and Abners valor: Died Abner as a fool
died? he died not as a fool, nor as a felon, nor as a fugitive: No, he was
suddenly and treacherously surprised: Had Joab and Abner tried it out in open
field and fight, Abner no doubt had given evident discoveries of his dexterity
and activity: of the couragiousnesse of his heart, and nobleness of his spirit.

4 Abners honorable Interment, or Incineration, verse. 32. They buried Abner in
Hebron, loco revera honorifico, says P. Martyr. R. Solomon thinks Adam and
Eve: Abraham and Sarah, Vide Cartwright electa Targumico. Rabbinica in Genesis
23.2 Pe^er. in Genesis 23. p. 663.
Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Lea, were buried there: Adricomius, Pererius,
Borcardus, and others write much of it: It was the principal royal City
belonging to Judah; hereabouts was that great entertainment made, the covert of
a Tree was the dining room, the ground the Table, Abraham the Caterer, Sarah
the Cook, Veal and welcome the cheer; Angels in the shape of men, Christ in the
notion of an Angel, the guests. Adrichom. ^. Theatrum Terrae Sanctae. p. 49.
fig. 145 Aug. de Cur. ger. pro mortuis.


A comely burial is an office of humanity, a duty of charity, a great blessing;
it is so promised and prized in sacred writ; the want thereof, as a curse, is
threatened, Jer. 22.19.

Tully calls Clodius his body, infoelix cadaver, because it was cast out
unburied; Abners was not so: Never man was killed more cowardly, and interred
more honorably.

5 King David's, and all Isreal's bitter lamentation, verse. 31. They lift up
their voices and wept: The sweet singer in Israel, is now chief mourner in
Israel; To honor Prince Abner, forgetting his royal sovereignty, and Kingly
dignity; David himself does follow the Beer; it is disputed by Interpreters,
whether David's tears were real, or hypocritical, feigned and forced: P. Mart.
in loc.
I refer them to the learned Martyr, who would know more of this, for
satisfaction.

6 King David's commendation of this deceased Prince: Abner in my Text, in which
something is spoken to the living: Know ye not, etc. Something is spoken of
the Dead: There is a Prince and a Great man fallen.

7 David's ingenuous confession: I am this day weak, though anointed King: Of
which, now something more by way of explication; no more by way of inquiry.

The Explication.
To the living, King David directs his speech:

Know ye not,] i.e. as Carthusian rightly; Ignorare non debetis, etc. you who
are Chieftains in Israel cannot, ought not to be such strangers in Israel; our
breach is great, like the Sea, who can heal it?

Know ye not? It highly concerns you to know it, to be much affected with it,
and afflicted for it, and with tears of blood to deplore it; Verba sensus
connotant affectus.

There is a Prince] The Scripture which speaks no Treason, gives this title to
many.

There is the eternal Prince, our Lord Jesus Christ, Isa. 9.6. The Father of
eternity; the Prince of Peace: Some of the Rabbines understand that of
Hezekiah, we must of Christ, he is our peace.

Ephesians. 2.2 John 14
There is the infernal Prince; Satan so styled once and again in holy writ:
Princes have their Territories, so Satan has his; they have their subjects,
and he his; Their Thrones, and he his: they have their homage, and peculiar
honor done unto them, Satan has his, Rev. 13.4. he is indeed a Prince, but a
Captive Prince, under pains and chains of darkness; he can neither do what he
would, nor shall he ever do what he can: potestas est, sed sub potestate, as
the Father speaks: There is some order even amongst the Devils, the damned
spirits in Hell.

There are spiritual Princes, every child of God is such a Prince: In some
Nations all the Kings children are called Princes; the first born only in
others, in the Kingdom of grace and glory, every Subject is a Sovereign: Every
one resembles the child of a King, as Zeba and Zalmunna said to Gideon of his
Brethren: consider their original, they are born of the blood royal; his Sons,
who is King of Kings.

Or their possessions; All is theirs, Dan. 7.27. Rev. 21.7. all under Heaven,
and in Heaven's theirs, fidelibus totus mundus est divitiarum, Aug Ep. 89
as Augustine speaks:

They have the power of Princes; Are guarded as Princes, are adorned as
Princes, entertained as Princes, they feed on Christ clothed as Princes, with
a Stole of Immortality, and garments of praise.

There are saecular Princes, such are the first masculine branches, which
spring from the stem of Majesty: Abner was none such: How then could he
promerit this honorable title of a Prince?

I answer, Persons in great authority, and of great quality: The worthy, the
wealthy ones of a Nation in sacred story are styled Kings and Princes: Genesis
14.8 Isa. 23.7 Gen 40.1.37. p. 36
It is said of Tyrus, her Merchants were Princes, and her Traffickers the
honorable men of the earth.

Thus Abner was a Prince; a Prince and a Great man: A Great man prudentia,
strenuitate, ac virtutibus, ad bellatorem spectantibus, says Carthusian, in
four respects, he deserved the style of Great man: In respect of his great
alliance, In respect of his great influence, In respect of his great
attendance, and in respect of his high promotion and office: We have read and
heard of Alexander the Great, and Pompey the Great, and Charles the Great, and
of Herod the Great, and here of Abner the Great: Know ye not that there is a
Prince, and a Great man fallen. Fallen? i.e. dead: I shall not stand now to
discourse of Death: (...), Plotin Enn^ad. lib. 7 p. 62 and lib. 4. c. 30
as Plotinus speaks; To dye, is for the soul to put off the body, as does the
body put off its clothes; David the Orator at Abners Funeral calls it a Fall,
which came by a fall: Fallen this day] Not without an Emphasis, it deserves an
hand in the Margent.

This day: The design he had now on foot, the project upon the Anvile was the
reduction of all Israel to David, to yield subjection to his royal Scepter:
about this work he was the man employed; but in ipso limine impingere, is
matter of saddest lamentation: a noble work was now on Abners Loom: Israel must
be reduced: Abner is the instrument, if his skill run parallel with his will,
or the event answer his intent, twice happy Israel, thrice happy Abner; but in
this nick of time, and juncture of affairs; This Prince and project too are
fallen in Israel.

And I am this day weak] Tenellus, as Tirinus renders it: Sicut ramusculus
tener de Novo plantatus, as Nichol. de Lyra, like a tender plant, that has not
yet taken root; and therefore stand in much need of Abners help to establish
me in the Throne. The Seventy read it, (...), cognatus, so near allied to
Joab: I cannot do justice and judgment on him: Others read it, (and the
original well bears it) weak, i.e. of small power to execute justice and
Judgment on Joab, and Abishai the sons of Zerviah, who was the Kings Sister:
They were principal men; had a mighty influence upon the tribe of Judah, and
the rest of the tribes were not at this time in confederacy: It is disputed by
Interpreters, whether David did well in delaying the execution of Justice upon
those wilful murderers; They who condemn this act, say, that wilful murderers
should be taken from the very horns of the Altar, if they fly to it for
shelter and sanctuary, and be put to death, and that the guilt of blood lay
now upon the King, and Kingdom, during Joabs reprieve: There was from God an
absolute, preremptory command: Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed: For demurs there is no warrant in the Word: They who excuse
this act, and apologize for the King, say, To have punished Joab immediately,
might have been extremely prejudicial to King, and Kingdom. It is said, when
Honorius the Emperor had cut off Stillico his General, that he had cut off
his own hands; he never did worthy act after: Joabs punishment was not
remitted, but respited: The Law of Executing murderers does bind to take the
fittest time, not to all times: Not to determine, but without further
explication of the terms: I shall now pass to such instructions or
conclusions, as flow naturally from the Text, and are most seasonable for this
occasion; they be in number three. Observe.
1 Princes are not privileged from falling, nor Great men from dying. Observe.
2 It is every man's duty to take notice of, deeply to be affected with, and
bitterly to weep over, and lament the falls of Princes, and Great men,
especially if they be good men. Observe.
3 It is a lawful and needful thing to speak honorably of Great men at their
Falls and Funerals: King David's expression affords this position.
Of these in their order: And first, and most of the first:

Doct. 1 Princes are not privileged from falling, nor Great men from dying.

Indeed, Riches are not for every man; Honors are not for every man, Learning
is not for every man, but death is for every man: This is the end of all men,
so says the wise man, Eccles. 7.3. Death, like the Duke of Parma's sword,
Mista senum ac juvenum densantur funera; nullum saeva caput Proserpina fugit.
Horat. l. 1. od. 28
knows no difference twixt robes, and rags, twixt Prince, and Peasant: In the
common bag of mortality the Rook is check-mate with the King: The mortal
Sithe (says one) is Master of the Royal Scepter, it mows down the Lillyes of
the Crown, as well as the Grass of the Field: Though Machiavels policy,
Catalin's activity, Hectors valor, with the Martial prowess of Menelaus, and
Agamemnon, should concenter in one man, yet could he not escape the jaws of
death: Notable is that Text, Eccles. 8.8. of which I may say As Chrysostom
does of that, John 5. It is locus multi auri plenus, John 5.21
non tamen omnibus in promptu est. There is no man that has power over the
Spirit, to retain the Spirit, neither has he power in the day of Death: There
is no discharge in that war; in this war the press is so strict, that no one
is exempted, no dispensation can be procured: If the Tenant would go for his
Lord: He shall not be accepted, the Lord must serve for himself: it the
Father would go for his child (as David would for his Son: Would God I had dyed
for thee, O Absalom my son, my son:) He will not pass, nor please; the child
must go himself; no bribes will here prevail; no protection from the Prince can
here be read.

Aug. Ennar. in Psalm. 121
Memorable is that of Augustine; Fratres intendat charitas vestra, resistitur
ignibus undis, ferro resistitur potestatibus and regibus, venit una mors, and
quis ei resistit: If your houses be fired, by good help they may be quenched;
if the Sea break out, by art and industry it may be, the breach will be
repaired: It Princes invade, by power, and policy they may be repulsed; if
Devils from Hell shall tempt, by assistance from Heaven they may be resisted;
but death comes into the royal Palaces, into our meaner Cottages, and none
resists that King of Terrors.

I read of one (and besides him of none) in Scripture, Isa. 38
who had a lease of his life, for fifteen years; but as that expired he died:
Of those worthy Patriarcks before the flood, they who lived longest dyed at
last: Of every one it is said: And he dyed: Enoch is only excepted, Genesis 5.24.
of whom I may say, (...)
he lived like an Angel, and died not like a man; but privilegia non sunt
amplianda; his translation was equivalent to our dissolution, moritur, and qui
demutatus est, says Drusius. Aben-Ezra and R. Solomon mortuum Henochuni
asserunt. Vide A Lapide and Camer. in Heb. 7.3 Melchizedeck was not Shem, For
his Genealogy is recorded in Scripture, not so Melchizedecks. Lib. 3. Did. 1^


Death conquered him who was the great Conqueror of the Jews, and though he
querulously accused Heaven that he must dye, not having deserved it, yet he
escapes not upon that score and plea.

In Scripture you read of one, who was (...) and (...), without Father, and
without Mother, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, yet this
man dyed; how is it possible that we should ever live, when such as he does
dye?

What shall I cry, said the Seraphick Prophet? Cry, All Flesh is Grass; Cry,
Most are deaf on this ear, they will not hear, nor heed: All Flesh, the flesh
of Kings and Counselors, the flesh of Princes, and Potentates, the flesh of
Martyrs, and Confessors: All Flesh is Grass.

It is disputed in the Schools whether Jesus Christ, so soon as ever he was
born into the world, lay under a necessity of dying? Scotus boldly asserts it:
Si homo non peccasset, Christum fuisse incarnatum, inter homines habitaturum
and moriturum, etc. and Estius has this passage in answer to it: Si Christus
violenta morte occisus non fuisset, tandem tamen senectute defecturus ac
moriturus fuisset, etc. I shall wave this, and only acquaint you with that
other by them discussed: whether Adam in Innocence was subject to mortality?
Aqu. 1. 1. qu. 97. Art. 1
Vossius excellently handles this, Voss. disput. Theol. de peccato primi hom.
qu. 3. p. 43.
and will give satisfaction to his reader.

There is a threefold Immortality (as some.) A simple, independent, primitive,
essential Immortality: This is proper to God alone, 1 Timothy 6.16. Carthusian.
Enarrat. in Genesis Art. 19. page 42 A Lapide in Romans 8.16.
A dependent, derivative Immortality, this is peculiar to Angels, and rational
souls. An Immortality by the power or gift, by the mercy or Justice of God.
This is proper to the bodies of the just, and unjust, after their resurrection:
As for man's body in the state of Innocence; it had a conditional, not an
absolute Immortality: Quicunque dicit Adamum primum hominem mortalem factum ita
ut sive peccaret, sive non peccaret, moreretur in corpore, hoc est de corpore
exiret, non peccati merito sed necessitate naturae, Anathema sit. Council.
Melevitan. Canon. 1.
His life should last as long as his obedience; he had a possibility not to
dye, not an impossibility to dye, as the Schoolmen speak. Si Adam non
peccasset, mortem non gustasset: I say with Augustine: It is out of doubt, Adams
engagements to God were great, his communion with God was sweet, his knowledge
of God was clear, but his enjoyment of God was not sure; He might fall, and
being fallen, must die; but had he never sinned, he had never dyed: How ever
it was, or would have been with him: It is sure, we must all dye, and be as
water spilt upon the ground.

Notable is that of Gregory Thaumaturg, (...); none can be found of that
strength and policy, as to divert the Messenger of death; and Photius in an
Epistle to Taracius Patricius his Brother, comforting him mourning for his
deceased Daughter, (...), etc. and a little after speaking of death, (...):
Thaumat. Metaphr. in Eccles. cap. 8. mihi page 91
It is no new thing, no paradox to tell of men's mortality, (...), etc.

It is one of Solomon's sacred Aphorism's: The rich and the poor meet together;
sometimes in the same bed, Prove. 22.1
and at the same board; ever on the same earth, and in the same world: Kings
live not in the highest, Nobles in the middle, poor men in the lowest, but all
in one region: All meet together in the grave; this is commune hominum
diversorium, the common Inn of all mankind; The Scripture and the Sepulcher
know no difference.

It is not the royalty of the Palace; it is not the pomp and Majesty of the
Prince, nor the piety of the Prophet; it is not the nobleness of your birth;
it is not the pregnancy of your parts, that can exempt you from Death; nor
privilege persons of quality from Mortality.

For all your Princely houses, your vast estates, your high descent, your great
authority and command, your famous victories: Vide Dionys. Carthus. de 4.
Noviss. de morte. Artic. 13. p. 53. and sq.
The Grave shall be your bed, sheets shall be your shrines, the clods of the
vallyes shall be your cover, the Grass shall be your carpet, death will
demand his due; from his sentence, there is no appeal, from his arrest no bale.

Paracelsus shows the way to revive a dead bird; not a dead man. lib. 4. de
natura rerum.
It is not Hippocrates, or Paracelsus, not mortal men, nor mortal means, that
can keep you an hour in life, beyond the prefixed time of death: What is man?
the noblest, wisest, learned man? he is (...), regula, ac mensura omnium
animantium; whatever excellencies be scattered in the other creatures, are
summed up in man: Sennert. Tom. 1. p. 113
Seneca propounds that question, and gives the answer: quodlibet quassum vas,
imbecillum corpus and fragile, nudum suapte natura ad omnem fortunae
contumeliam projectum, cujuslibet ferae pabulum ex infirmis fluidisque
contextum, etc. what is life? Paracels. de Natura rerum. lib. 4
it is but a vapor, a little warm breath (as one says) tuned in and out by
the nostrils, a very narrow passage, and soon stopped: Alas! we blow away our
lives, as often as we blow away our breathes; who can admire that men live no
longer? rather we may admire, that we dye no sooner; we were old enough to
dye, so soon as ever we began to live.

In the 6th. of the Revelations we read of four Horses, Of a White Horse, on
him sat Truth, verse 2. Of a Red Horse, on him sat War, verse. 4. Of a Black
Horse, on him sat Famine, verse. 5. Of a Pale Horse, on him rides Death, verse.
8.


As Men, so Death rides, either for greater pomp, or for greater speed, or for
greater strength: We are all posting toward Death, and Death is mounted
riding toward us: It is not possible but we shall meet: As there is a Terra,
quam terimus, and a Terra, quam quaerimus, and a Terra, quam gerimus; so there
is a Terra, quae e^imus: Dust we are, high and low, and unto dust we must
return: Will you have Authentic Testimonies, and clear Instances: Consult,
Josh. 23.14. Joshua a worthy Prince, a truly valiant and victorious General, a
mirror of piety, and magnanimity, speaking of Death. Behold, says he, I am
going this day the way of all the Earth; Consult that speech of holy Job chap.
30.23. I know thou will bring me to death; and death will bring me to the
grave, which is the house appointed for all the living, and stored with Myriads
of the dead, and Job 3.13,14. Then had I been at rest with Kings and
Counselors of the earth, which built desolate places for themselves: Take one
for all, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods, and the children of the most
high, but ye shall dye like men.

Ennead. lib. 9. cap. 8. contra Gnosticos.
Plotinus thinks the stars have eyes, and see us ears, and hear us: It cannot
be thought (says he) but that they are Gods; certainly the stars; are not
Gods; but those Gods are stars; stars of the first magnitude, but they may be
numbered amongst the Sporades, they are wandering stars, they cannot long keep
their station: Their days upon earth are but a shadow, and there is no long
abiding.

Hormisda observed, that in Rome (that everlasting City, as Am. Marcellinus
called it) men dyed, as in other places: Where is that Wisdom, which folly
has not tainted? that Honor, which envy has not stained? that Strength,
which sickness has not impaired? where is the body, which bad humors never
molested? the beauty, that age shall not, or has not defaced? The Prince or
Great man that is not fallen, or shall not fall one day in Israel?

-- Hoc muta cadavera clamant. Arguments to convince, I need not sure to urge
or enlarge, nor do I purpose to produce, or press many.

The decree is sealed, the sentence shall never be reversed. Moth Tamuth: ye
shall die the death, or in dying ye shall dye; you have tasted the forbidden
fruit: Is there not with you, even with you, Ye Princes and Great men: Is
there not with you sin against the Lord; were not you sinners as soon as
Creatures: It is appointed for all men once to dye: Lazarus dyed twice, but
sure all once.

Alas! you carry death about you every day, and every way; Death in its causes,
and in its symptoms; Death runs, rides, and walks hand in hand with you: your
sins (in short) will bring you as low as the dust: your sins commonly are not
common sins, and it may be your falls shall not be common falls; they may be
much sooner and sadder than others: Every man living shall have his fit of
dying; God has appointed it, his counsel shall stand.

Behold the Rock whence you were dug: Consider your original, Non
exqu^lilibet humo homo, sed exghaphar adamah, i.e. Ex pinguissima and
mollissima. Ar. Montan.
the matter and mettle of which you are composed: Dust ye are, ex pulvere
limoso and lutoso; you must be meat for Worms, before you can be mates for
Angels: May not you say of your selves, as did those poor, distressed,
oppressed ones, Neh. 5.5. Our flesh is as the flesh of our Brethren, and all
flesh is grass; which in the morning though green and flourishing, yet in the
evening cut down, it is withering: Our skins and bloods are much alike, omnis
sanguis est concolor, cutem habemus communem, si non vestem: wherein are you
from others differenced; only a few chips more are taken off, which makes you
something neater, but more tender and weaker: Or is the difference in your
empty Names and Titles of honor, which are as mortal as your selves.

Notable is that of Seneca, Conditor ille generis humani non natalibus, nec
nominum claritate nos distinxit, nisi cum sumus: aequat omnes cinis, Senec. Ep.
91
etc.

Cardinalis Barbarini poemata. page 209
-- Jactet nunc stemmata gentis,
Ignotos extrema dies insignibus aequat.
Behold the diseases, the sicknesses under which you have sometimes labored;
who can enumerate the maladies, the Aches, pains, the Leprosy, Dropsy, Stone,
strangury, to which you are exposed? Notable is that of Plutarch, (...); the
Velvet Slip-shooe is sometimes molested with the Gout: the Diadem cures not an
aching head, nor the chain of gold the toothache; And are not these Symbola, or
singultus morientis naturae?

But I proceed to the Application of this momentous Truth; mine eye is most on
that, but how to apply it to persons of quality, I am yet to learn: I may say
of this subject, Epist. ad Francisc. Sfort.
as Bellarmin did of his book, de Art been moriendi, non allicit ad audiendum,
absterret potius praesertim viros magnos sive principatu politico, sive sacro,
etc. but as Augustine called on his, so shall I on my godly hearers; Enar. in
Psalm. 39.4,5
orate pro nobis fratres, ut quod videndum est been videamus, and quod dicendum
est, been dicamus.

I shall reduce what is in my thoughts to two heads: Some practical Inferences,
and an use of comfort.

I begin with practical Inferences.

Are not Princes privileged from falling? Must they dye? Then

First, Let this be your greatest care, and most earnest prayer, that your
souls may live; Then life, nothing is more desired: Then the life of the soul,
nothing is less regarded: It was David's humble petition, Psalm. 119 and 175.
Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: What if your bodies fall, what
though you dye? If your souls live, you shall do well; O be more solicitous
about the lives of your souls: with what Arguments shall I excite, and quicken
you, Right Worshipful, and Beloved, hereunto? be pleased solemnly and
seriously to consider,

That you never more endeavor the prolonging of the lives of your bodies, than
when you are most studious and solicitous about the lives of your souls. Vide
Photii. Epist. 133. de nobilitate animae. E Coelo terra, omnibusque thesauris
suis pro ejusdem fabric^ quod molius ac praestantius desumit, ex ipsa terra
carnem and oss^, ab aqua humorem, ab aere anhelitum and flatum ab igne
temperamentum, and calorem a lunamotum, etc. d^ contemptu mundi. lib. 1. page ^


That there is nothing below Heaven so precious, and noble as your souls: I
confess your bodies in some respects are very precious; quid invenire potest
majori magisterio erectum and fabricatum, quam corpus humanum? Consumitur quasi
natura in fabrica operis tam excellentis, as Bartholdus excellently: But
speaking of the soul, says he, quid est Deus nisi anima increata, quid est
anima hominis, nisi Deus creatus, etc. The preciousnesse of it will appear, if
you consider three things.

1 Satan is most busy about your souls; he has an envious eye, and aching
Tooth at them: Non nisi magnum bonum a Nerone damnatur.

2 God principally requires the soul: My Son, give me thy heart.

3 Soul-murther is the greatest, next to the blood of Christ; the blood of
souls is most precious.

3 There is no life like to the life of the soul: The life of grace is the
grace of life; it is the sweetest life, it is the securest life, it is the most
honorable, comfortable, and durable life.

4 The life or death of the body follows the fate and state of the soul to all
eternity; and therefore it concerns you much to look after the lives of your
souls.

5 Till your souls be enlivened, they cannot be saved.

6 Till your souls be enlivened, no duty shall be accepted; they are all dumb
and dead services.

7 Till your souls be enlivened, the Lord cannot be praised, or glorified,
Psalm. 119.175.

8 Till your souls live, indeed you do not live; the Father of the Prodigal
dated his sons life from his return; This my Son was dead, and is alive: If my
words be of any weight with you; if your own souls be of any worth with you,
Honored and Beloved, then let this be your care and prayer: Your bodies shall
fall; I dare not undertake to tell you precisely where, nor how, nor when:
Utiliter Deus latere voluit illum diem, ut semper sit paratum cor ad
expectandum, quod esse venturum scit, and quando venturum scit, nescit, says
Augustine; Enar. in Psalm. 36
but this is certain, fall you must: Thrice happy are you, if your souls be
transported into Heaven, before your bodies be laid in the bowels of the earth.

Secondly, Learn hence the vastness of that distance, and infiniteness of
that disproportion twixt God and you; who can measure the disproportion twixt
an ever-living God, Isa. 40.15
and an ever-dying creature? The Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are
counted (when duly estimated) as the small dust of the balance: All Nations
before him are as nothing, less than nothing, and vanity: He cannot dye, nor
lie: Alas! we are all lying and dying creatures, and cannot live: When Moses
desired to know what was his name, Vide Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 102
he only receives this answer, I am that I am, i.e. I am a being of my self;
and truly we cannot say so of any creature; The Angels cannot say so, nor men;
he is an eternal being, we are all of yesterday; he is the Alpha and Omega,
we are neither: Before the world was, he was, what now he is, and shall be
to eternity; we all fade as a leaf, Isa. 64.6. are shaken as a reed, Matthew.
11.7. wither as a Rush, Job 8.11,12. Fade as a Rose, which is blasted almost as
soon as budded; our lives like winds, Job 7.7. or fomes, Hos. 10,7.

He is an unchangeable being, with him there is no (...), no parallax, no
revolution, no declination, nor shadow of turning: (...): How variable and
changeable is frail man? we dwell in houses of clay, our foundation is in the
dust; no food, no physic can keep us long from washing, and wasting away.

Thirdly, Whatever your hands find to do, do it with all your might, Serve
your Generation according to the will of God.
remembering that you must fall, and that there is no knowledge, nor wisdom,
nor working in the grave whither you are hastening: Reges non creantur ut in
otio vitam agant: Kings and Princes are not created to live unprofitably: It is
not for you who are persons of quality to spend your lives, your strength, and
estates, in doing what is worse than nothing; there are generous, ingenuous,
liberal employments, suitable to your high births and educations; Your noble
Ancestors, and renowned Progenitors raised their families to this pitch of
Gentility, not by tippling, carding, dicing, hawking, etc. Delay not the doing
of that which if once done, all is done, and if not done, you are for ever
undone: Speedy endeavors are very necessary, where delay is full of danger:
Some live as if this life should never have end; the other no beginning: I am
now going to dye, and yet have not begun to live, was the doleful lamentation
of Carolus, King of Sicely, as he lay upon his death bed.

Alas! your lives, like shuttle-cocks, are kept up a while twixt two
Battle-doors, at last they fall to the earth, for all your skill: Let not this
dis-spirit, or dis-animate you, but excite and quicken you to fall on with
double diligence, to dispatch the work cut out for you by your Lord and Master:
It is a great truth which Seneca writing to Paulinus hints at; It is the
complaint of all mortals (says he) and that because of natures malignity,
that gives to man so short a life, but the truth is, satis longa est vita, and
in maximarum rerum consummationem large data est, De brevitate vitae, cap. 2
si tota been collocaretur; and vita, si scias uti longa est, non accepimus
brevem vitam sed fecimus: O squander not away your Haleyon seasons, your golden
opportunities, as if you were not to be responsible for time; what rich and
rare opportunities have you of doing good, if the Lord gave you enlarged
hearts: The Persian King had one about him, whose office it was to mind him
every morning of his charge: Arise O King, and have an eye to those affairs for
which the great God has made you King, and dispatch them.

Work, O work out your salvation with fear and trembling; with much
accuratenesse and carefulness: (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in cap. 2. ad Phil.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found: Now you have tenders and offers of
Christ and grace: If you neglect the day of grace, Know, it may expire before
your lives expire, it cannot possibly last longer; then you may weep with Esau,
and not be pitied, and pray with Dives, and not be heard.

It was Chrysostomes wish, Tom 3. de praem. Sanctorum, mihi p. 830.
that while men are supping and dyning, eating and drinking, washing and
playing, mention were made of Hell, and Death, and Judgment; this would awaken
idle wretches, this would rouse and raise them.

Let no day pass without a line: Know God will bring you to death, and to the
house appointed for all the living, thence you cannot return to dispatch undone
work, to amend, or reform your selves, nor to advise and council others.

Fourthly, Learn hence, to put your hearts, and houses too in order: Though
Princes, and Great men, yet you must fall: Distraction and confusion follows
when persons die, and have not put their houses and estates in order; but
infinite and unspeakable is the Terror, confusion, and horror which seizes
upon the soul at death; which was not prepared for Heaven and glory.

Logicians that regard not their premises, infer wild conclusions, so
Christians too.

Lord teach me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; was
the Prayer of a Prince and great man, exactly calculated for our Meridian.

The measure of my Days; not the measure of my months, or years: No, No, The
life of man is not measured by the Yard of years, nor by the Ell of Months, but
by the Inch of days.

This is a main end of your lives, to make a good end of your lives, which can
never be without preparation for it: Unhappy man, whose life is like the lake,
of which Plutarch speaks; which runs pure in the morning, but muddy in the
evening; sweet at first, bitter at last.

If we prepare to dye, before we come to dye, then when we come to dye,
surely we shall not dye: Let not that deceiving, and soul-destroying hope of
living long, make you secure and careless of living well: I have read of one
(who deferring repentance till his old age, and then going about it) heard a
voice from Heaven, saying, Des illi furfurem, cui dedisti farinam: It is your
wisdom now to learn this Art of dying well; this says Bellarmin truly, is the
Art of Arts, Ep. 82.
in it all are comprised: Mors interea est, quae facile negligi non possunt,
said Seneca, I shall close this with that of Augustine: Quid in hac terra certum
est, nisi mors? Considerate omnia omnino, quid hic certum est nisi mors: Speras
pecuniam, incertum est an proveniat: Speras uxorem, incertum est, an accipias,
vel qualem accipias: Ena^. ration. in Psalm. 39.
pauper es? incertum est an ditescas, imbecilis es, incertum est an
convalescas, Natus es? Certum est morieris: or that of Bartholdus: Omnes res
hominis in dubium vocantur, Barthold. lib. 2. de morte. p. 201
concipitur homo an nasciturus? oportet ut responde as, forte sic, Forte non:
is a child conceived, shall it be born into the world? it is answered, perhaps
it may; Now it is born, shall it come to manhood? (or dye in infancy) perhaps
it may: Shall he be famous in his Country, a grave Senator, a great Scholar?
perhaps he may: But shall he dye: (sic, sic, sic, morietur, nullum hic forte,
nullum hic dubium reperitur:) There is no peradventure to be used here: It is
certain he shall dye; O then prepare for it: Never did any repent themselves
when they came to dye, that they began so early to seek God, to serve, fear, or
love God, or to prepare for death: thousands have repented that they began no
sooner; Augustine did so, sero te cognovi lumen verum, sero te cognovi: Solileq
cap. 33
Job never cursed the day of his new birth; that proverb was hatched in Hell; a
young Saint, an old Devil; if thou be a young Devil, thou will in time
become an old Beelzebub: O remember your Creator in the days of your youth; I
speak chiefly unto the young gallants, In diebus electionum tuarum, Pagnin
renders it so: In the day of your chusings, your younger days are your golden
days, your choice and choosing days: Quo semel (...), etc.
You read of a young man, Matthew. 19.16.20. It is said, Christ began to love
him, why? or for what? he was but a young man, and a great man: Vide Herodian.
lib. 1. p. 5
he was now in his youth, inquisitive after the salvation of his precious
soul, and eternal life: O it is a lovely thing in young gentlemen, in any, to
mind the one thing necessary in their juvenility: The Devil is very hardly
cast out of such, whom he has possessed in their youth, Mark. 9.20. But I
proceed,

Fifthly, Be much in the praemeditation of your frailty, mortality, and
dissolution: It was Seneca's complaint of some in his time; tanquam semper
victuri vivitis, De brev. vitae cap. 4
nunquam vobis fragilitas vestra succurrit, etc. Moses is to ascend, then he
should die; would you so die, that your souls may ascend, then meditate much on
death: It is a strange saying in Lipsius; Lips. de Constantia lib. 2. cap. 25
the names of all good Princes may easily be engraven, or written in a small
ring: A serious meditation of Death (if any thing) would work in you an holy
fear of offending God in any thing, an holy care to please God in every thing:
He is a sinner in grain, that will sin and look death in the face: It was
(says one) a wild meditation of one, but proved well in the conclusion:
Suppose (said he) I should thus say with my self; I Will drink, and be drunk,
I Will swear, and roar, I Will cheat, and do what I list; and what then? I Will quarrel,
and kill, and care for no man; and what then? Ah! Could I say, I Will go to Heaven
then, and be saved too; Vide Carthus. de 4. Nov.
I Will have bliss and happiness after all this; This were something, but then I
must die, I must come to Judgment, and hold up my hand at the bar of Gods
Tribunal, and afterward pay dear for all my short and momentany pleasures;
such a meditation by the blessing of God might in the conclusion free you from
confusion: The Text is Apocryphal, but the Truth is Canonical; Remember thy
latter end, and thou shall never do amiss: Let every Tomb be your Teacher,
and every Monument your Monitour: Let not the thoughts of your latter end, be
put off to the latter end of your thoughts: Thus Jerusalem sinned, for this
she suffered, Nauta nec in frontispicio, nec in medio, sed in fine navim
dirigit. Barthold.
Lam. 1.9. They who guide or steer the ship stand in the hinder part of it:
They who would order their conversation aright, should think of the up-shot and
heel of it, viz. Death: I remember Jerome reports of Plato, he left that
famous City of Athens, and chose to live in a little ancient village, almost
overturned with Tempests and Earthquakes, Hieronym. contra Jovinian. lib. 2
that by being often minded therein of his approaching dissolution, he might
get more power over his strong lusts, and learn to live more virtuously.

When you sit down at your boards think on death, let the creatures provided
for you, which even now were living, but now dead, put you in mind, that you
shall dye anon, Ante senectutem curavi been vivere, in Senectute been mori.
Senec.
though now alive: This will not hasten, but sweeten your dissolution: This may
procure an (...), an easier, nay, it will procure an happier passage and
egresse out of this world: Augustine dictates, and pens his Enarrations on the
39. Psalm, at St. Cyprians Table in Carthage; and it is an excellent Psalm, For
Items of our Mortality and Vanity: I shall not stay to tell you, how Severus
the Emperor caused a Marble Urne to be set at the gates of his Palace, Quod
saepe fieri non potest, fiat diu, Senec
to remember him of his mortality; nor of Philips boy, with his (...), on
certain days, and at certain times there was one appointed to salute
Ferdinandus Caesar, a Roman Emperor, with a vive memor lethi Ferdinande: When
Pausanias asked Simonides to deliver some grave Apophthegm, by which he might
apprehend his great wisdom, for which he was so famed and renowned: Simonides
smiling at him, Esse te hominem ne exciderit tibi.
delivered this; do not forget thy self to be a man: Pausanius puffs at this,
but suddenly after, being almost pined to death with famine, begun to think of
Simonides his saying, and cries out, Haec vita est (...), schola mortis.
O Cee hospes, magnum quiddam erat oration tua, sed prae amentia esse nihil
opinabar: Death is like a Dial, on which Sun never shines, few look on that, or
this; as if it were not best of all to be with Christ, who is all in all: I
could tell you of Philostrates, who lived seven years in his Tomb, before he
dyed, that his bones might be the better acquainted with the grave at his
dissolution: Dye daily, and you shall not die eternally.

Sixthly, Be contented with what the Lord shall bestow on you, It is better to
be poor by Gods appointment, than to be rich by the Devils advancement.
or cut out for you: In the grave it is all one, who has had all, and who had
none: you may make a good use of that expression of a vile wretch: Behold I
dye, and what good will my birthright do me? Were you Masters of all the
Indian Mines, and the gold of Ophir, it could nothing advantage, or avail you
in the day of Gods wrath, nor in the hour of your death: What folly is it to
lay up goods for many years, when we cannot lay up one day for the enjoyment
of our goods: Christ (who never mis-called any) calls him fool, who talked of
enlarging his barns, and building more, when the building within was crazy, and
about to be demolished.

Worthy Gentlemen; Do not mind this earth, as if there were no Heaven; nor
these things below, as if they were more durable and profitable, than those
good things which God has laid up for them that fear him: Miser est emnis
animus vinctus amicitia rerum mortalium.
We may seek the things below; but in the least place, and in the last place,
not more, nor before the things of Jesus Christ: Had you as much of the world
in your hands, as you could desire in your hearts, one dram or grain of grace
will afford you more comfort when you come to dye: Aug Confess. lib. 4 cap. 6
It is true, we may not trust in the strength of our graces, nor rest on the
worth of our graces for acceptance with God, yet grace gotten in life, will
afford comfort at death, when riches cannot.

Had you all the world (never was any man so rich as to have all things, and
where is one so poor as has nothing?) yet had you all the world: Know this,
God that gives it to you, can withold the comfort of it from you: he can
suspend the virtue of the creatures, and make that to be a dry breast, a
barren womb to you, which is full to others, if he lay his restraint upon the
fire, it shall not warm you; on your food, it shall not refresh you; on your
treasures, they shall not enrich you. Creatures (believe it) are better or
worser to us, according to the nature and virtue of Gods Warrant and
Commission, to them.

Had you the whole universe at your dispose, if the Lord let one drop of his
wrath fall, or set the guilt of sin upon the conscience, what good will the
whole world do you?

I remember a speech of Augustins up on that speech of Dives, desiring Abraham
to let Lazarus give him a drop of water; Tanta est du^cedo coelestis gaudii, ut
si una gut^ula deflueret in infernum, Aug.
totam amaritudinem inferni absorberet: If one drop of Heavens joys should be
let fall into Hell, it would swallow up all the bitterness and misery that is
in Hell: should one drop of wrath from an incensed Majesty fall upon thy soul,
I may say, Tautus paucissimorum jugerum pascuis impletur, una sylva Elephantis
pluribus sufficit; homo and terra pascitur and mari; quid ergo? tam
insatiabilem nobis natura alvum dedit, etc. Senec. Ep. 68
it would swallow up all the sweetness thou expectest in or from thy
creature comforts.

Worthy Gentlemen! You are the men, who have the world in a string; swim in
rivers of pleasures, and row in Treasures; but know, how much soever you have
of the world in your hands, it is not good to have any of the world in your
hearts: Know, that men of most wealth, are not always men of most worth; I
mean not the most worthy men: Have not some said; had they never been so happy,
they had never been so unhappy. Beatus qui post illa non abiit, quae possessa
onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant Bern.


These things below, were they the best things, Jesus Christ had had more of
them, and the Devil would not so freely have offered them: All these things
will I give thee, etc. These things below, they are more deceitful, than
delightful: si aliqua hujus saeculi prosperitas arriserit, nonne deceptoria
est, Enarrat in Psalm 40
nonne fluxa and caduca est, nonne plus habent deceptionis quam delectationis,
says holy Augustine.

If you make the world your God, while you are in the world, what will you do
for a God when you go out of the world?

Vide Bellarm. de A. B. morie^ di cap. 2
O love the world, my Brethren! as if you were ever about to leave the world:
Make not your portion, your God, let God be your portion.

The world is like water, the more eagerly you grasp at it, the less you hold
of it: Riches, like witches, are most hurtful to them, who are most conversant
with them; or as sands in your hands, the faster you gripe, Senec. Not. Qu.
lib. 7. c. 31 Aug. Ep. 82 ad La^gum.
the faster it goes: If you have the whole world, pusilla res mundus est, etc.
God, and all that a man has, is no more, than God, and nothing that a man
has: God is all in all, does all by all; and is All without all: Remember, I
beseech you, that you are dying men, you live in dying times, in dying places;
you have dying relations; get dying affections; Remember you must die, and when
you die, you shall carry nothing away, Psalm. 49.17. on which words Augustine
excellently; vides viventem, cogita morientem quid hic habeat attendis, quid
secum tollat, attend: Quid secum tollit? multum auri habet, multum argenti,
multum praediorum, multum mancipiorum; moritur, remanent illa, nescio quibus;
We bring nothing with us into this world, says that blessed Apostle, 1 Timothy
6.7,8. Nothing of the world comes with us into the world; we are not born with
gold rings on our fingers, nor with silver-spoons in our mouths; nothing but
sorrow and sin; and it is certain, we can carry nothing out: In that question
propounded to the Rich man, Luke 12.19,20. Whose shall these things be? it is
employed, that his they shall not be; He had the provision of them, but can no
longer have the possession of them, your works may, and will; your wealth
cannot follow you, when you flit hence.

A bundle of staves will hinder a man in his journey, one helps him: Vide
Plotin. Ennead. lib. 2. cap. 15
A little of the world will serve to bring thee to thy bed: Let not the
Heathens shame us: Elurus could say, Da mihi popicentam and aquam, Aquin. in
Phil. 4.13 Dictum illud Epicuri habetur in Senec. Ep. 110.
and ipsi Jovi de faelicitate controversiam faciamus: and Seneca excellently in
his eighty and sixty eight Epistles, speaks to this purpose; but I must pass
those passages: Chrysostom propounds the question, and gives the answer: Was
Job miserable when he had lost all that God had given him? No, he had still
that God, who gave him all; this is enough: I shall conclude this with that of
Cardinal Barbarinus. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. de patientia Job. Vide Barbarini poemata.
p. 165
Mitte super vacuum cultum, curisque solutus
Eripe te rerum strepitu; sibi vivere dulce est;
Vive deo, tibi sic vives, te sola sequentur
Post cinerem been facta; rapit reliqua omnia lethum.


Seventhly, Let this Meditation teach you a lesson of Humility: Though you be
Elohims, yet you shall die like men: and fall as this great man this day in
Israel: Oh what frail, mortal, sickly, sinful bodies do you and I carry about
us! Our bodies are the Anviles of pains and diseases; our minds the Hives of
innumerable cares and sorrows; and when we are extolled highest, we are but
those painted spots, against which envy and death direct their fatal darts.

Let not your hearts swell at the thoughts of your honorable pedigree, or that
you are the progeny of Noble Ancestors: Remember that you are all base born,
till born again: Juvenal could say of Moral virtue, Prove. 12.26 Lib. de
Educandis liberis.
Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus: It is grace alone that makes you noble;
it is the righteous man that is the excellent man, Psalm. 16,2,3. Plutarch could
tell the great ones of his age: (...); and give me leave to tell you, that how
nobly soever you are descended, unless you be virtuous your selves, you
disparage your Ancestors, discredit your selves, and shame your posterity; Let
not your Honors cause you to look high; the lofty looks of man shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of man shall be bowed down; the Lord of Hosts
has purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all
the honorable ones of the earth; and shall not his counsel stand? (...), Vide
Carthus. de 4. Novissim. p. 22 Heu qui finis fortunae? quam stultum est gaudere
de loco sublimi. and praecipiti. Inquit Mago frater Hannibalis.
says Plutarch in his book de Educandis liberis, (...), glory and honor is
venerable, but not stable; are you high in worth? be humble in heart; the way
to be truly honored, is to be thoroughly humbled.

Let not your vast estates, or great riches make you proud, it was Absoloms
saying, What are all these to me, except I see the Kings face: say you unto
your souls, what are all these to me, except I have saving grace: The whole
Turkish Empire is but a crust, that God casts to a dog, as Luther said, Nugas
King of Scythia asked the messenger who brought him those rich presents and
Ornaments from the Emperor of Constantinople; whether those things could drive
away calamities, diseases, or death; if not, those were not worth thanking for,
they are Dei ludibria, as a Heathen calls them, Ubi supra.
like a Tennis-ball tossed hither and thither from hazard to hazard; and anon
out of the Court: Notable is that of Plutarch, (...).

Let not your power, your policy, your command, or magnanimity puff you up:
Insitum est humanis ingeniis imperio insolenter uti, De Constable. lib. 2. c. 25
said Lipsius, as great men have been carried about in an Iron cage: The blood
which now is warm shall freeze anon in your veins, the marrow shall dry up in
your bones, your sinews shall shrink, and eye-strings crack, within a short
space you shall not be able to help your selves.

Let not your beauty or bravery make you ambitious, supercilious or haughty:
Your bodies are vile bodies; not God, but sin has made them so, (...); Elut.
ubi supra.
beauty is a thing desirable, but it is not durable: it is but skin deep, a
raise with a pin, or a days sickness may spoil you of it.

Let not your Rings, your Ornaments raise your spirits; they are but badges of
your sin, and shame: It argues a vain frothy heart to be so proud of such
petty things; a naughty heart to be proud of any thing: If thy outside be thy
best side, thou art poor, miserable, wretched.

Worthy Gentlemen! when God lifts up your heads, let it be your care to keep
down your hearts; all the world cannot keep that man up, that does not keep
down his spirit: Remember the doleful Catastrophe of Herod the great, of
Agrippa the great, of Alexander the great you are all in his hand, who touches
the mountains, and they smoke, who binds Kings in chains, and Nobles in
fetters of Iron; you are in his hand, who will bring you to death, and to the
house appointed for all the living: I shall close up this with that of Bernard;
Quid prosunt Divitiae, quid Honores? Divitiae non liberant a morte, nec
delitiae a verme, nec honores a faetore; nam qui modo sedebat dives and
gloriosus in throno, modo jacit pauper in tumulo; qui prius delitiis
oblectabatur, modo a vermiculo consumitur; qui paulo ante in aula principium
honorandus efferebatur; modo in sepulchro ignominiosus jacet.

Eighthly, Labor to get sin pardoned: No sooner did iniquity enter into your
souls, but mortality seized on your bodies: The parcels of dust which were
bound together in Adam by a bond of Innocence, were shaken loose upon the
commission of his first sin; and are not you of his posterity? Death like an
Archer sometimes shoots over the mark, and takes one away that was above you;
sometimes short of the mark, and takes one away that was below you; sometimes
on the right hand, there falls a friend, anon on the left, then dies a foe, but
the game is never done till you fall; and therefore it concerns you to
importune the sin-forgiving God to wash your souls in the blood of Jesus; to
free you from the guilt, and filth of sin.

Notable is that of Job c. 7. ult. And why do thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away mine iniquity? Observe the importunity of this
holy man, what is the matter that Job so expostulates with God for the remission
of his sin? Bern. Peccare humanum est, perseverare in peccato est diabolicum.
what need of so much speed and expedition? he gives you the ground and
reason: For now shall I sleep in the dust, (...): I shall go into the earth; I
shall die; thou shall seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.

It was Chrysostomes complaint, (...), Hom. in Mat. 22.
etc. (it is in that excellent piece of his, which Aquinas professed he had
rather have, than to be chief Lord of Paris.) Every man's care is, and labor
is about this present life, but about pardon of sin, Mallem habere opus
imperfectum J. Chrysostom. super Matthaeum, quam esse dominus Civitatis Parisiensis.
Carthus. de 4* Nov. p. 48
assurance of Gods love, and things to come, Death, and Judgment; Not, a word
is spoken: O that the Lord would make his own discoveries unto you of the
excellency and necessity of pardoning mercy: without pardon of sin you can
neither live well, nor die well: It is a mercy which God ever gives in mercy;
it is a mercy which makes way for the obtaining of eternal mercies; it is a
mercy which makes all other mercies to look like mercies, taste like mercies,
and work like mercy; it gives liberty to the soul in prison, ease in bonds,
life in death; sense of pardon takes away the sense of pain: It is bonum
comprehensivum, in the bossome of it, Jer. 33.24
all the riches of Heaven and Earth too are treasured up: It is the souls
Sanctuary, as Augustine speaks; The one thing necessary in the day of adversity,
then there is plus periculi, and then it is suavius beneficium: How few Princes
and great men have you heard upon their knees confessing and praying, with that
man after Gods own heart: For thy Name sake, O Lord, pardon our iniquities, In
hoc nomine vincam. Luth.
for they are great: Most miserabley on will be, though now honorable,
wretched you will be, though now rich, if you go out of the world, as you come
into the world, with the guilt of sin upon your consciences: Nulla satis magna
securitas dum pericli^atur aeternitas.
It is not imaginable that your resurrections shall be to glory, if you die in
your iniquity, your graves shall be but the suburbs of Hell: You shall be
dug out of those burrows, and dragged out of those nasty dens, to answer for
all your wicked pranks and practices done in your mortal bodies. Petitions for
pardon speak the Petitioners dependence on another; great men will not close
with this, they would be thought to have all others to depend on them;
themselves on none; petitions for pardon suppose guilt, and guilt the breach of
a divine Law, Princes and great men would be reputed guiltless, lawless:
Petitions for pardon intimate a power in God to punish delinquents, penes quem
facultas remittendi, penes ^um potestas puniendi, this is not much regarded.

The God who multiplies pardons, as we multiply provocations, open our eyes to
see the sinfulness of our sins, and the dolefulness of our state; Anon there
will be no place left for repentance, nor remission, neither in Christ's heart,
nor ours: Anon we shall have no more comfort from that promise of pardon,
Prove. 28.13. if now we neglect it, then now the Devils have; the gates of
mercy shall be shut eternally, and neither Christ in a capacity to give, nor
your selves in a capacity to receive a pardon: Remember, O remember this! lay
not the greatest burden upon the weakest beast, leave not the greatest work for
your sickbed: It is no beginning to caulk the Ship, when in a storm it is tossed
hither and thither with waves and billows: It is no time to begin to sue out a
pardon, when the pains of death arrest you: To get sin pardoned, and a soul
trimmed for glory, is too great a work to be done ex tempore, and in an hour
of death: when the thoughts of dying will (and no wonder to unpardoned
wretches) more affrighr, than that clap of thunder did Pyrander, King of Egypt.

Ninthly, Learn then, not overmuch to love your lives: Man is a life-loving
creature, Enar. in Psalm. 35.12.
(...); David propounds the question, what man is he that desires life?
Augustine returns this answer: Interroga, nonne omnis in vobis respondet, Ego?
an quisquam est in vobis qui non diligit vitam? Thou, and I, and every one; but
as that Father further: Vide August. fusius hac de ^e, De Tempore Sermon. 113
He that desires life ( bonam rem desiderat, sed non in regione illam,
quaerit, etc. desires a good thing, but seeks it not in the right place: This
life is, (...); it is life in name, but death in deed, (...), quid est aliud
diu vivere, nisi diu torqueri, says Augustine.

Consider this life in its Best and Worst, and you will say with Job in the
Paroxysm of his sufferings; I loathe it, I would not live always, Chap. 7.16.
it is as much to be loathed, as to be loved: It is as detestable, as
desirable: Were you called to give your judgment of an horse, you would
enquire concerning his breed, and speed, his age, in whose hands, how used,
with many things more; Quantum amanda est aeterna vita? quum sic amatur misera
haec and finienda vita, amasne istam vitam, ubi tantum laboras, curris,
sat^gis, anhelas? and non, etc. Aug. ubi supra.
but the case is altered, when we speak of life; the vanity, uncertainties of
it, the sins and sorrows, the calamities that do attend it, are not balanced:
Till you be without sin, you cannot be free from sorrow: When all sins are
washed from your souls, then shall all tears be wiped from your eyes: Eternal
life is the only true life, and eternal death the only true death; no other
life but that, or which is in order to that, is much to be desired; nor other
death feared; non est diu quod habet extremum, that is not, said Augustine, to
be deemed long, which shall have an end; this shall, that life cannot.

Tenthly, And what follows, chiefly concerns us of lower spears and orbs:
Learn we hence, Not to confide in these Princes and Great men; they are not
immortal, though they be styled Gods: Miserable is that man, whose God is
mortal: These Great men cannot support themselves, nor succor you when death
comes; like Absoloms Mule, they run from us when they should relieve us? Herod
the great, for all his pride and Royalty, could not shun the silly worms: Two
things commonly curtail the lives of our great ones, their slighting and
contemning; their despising and abusing of the Lords Prophets: I could make
this out, would time permit, 2 Chronicles. 16.10,12. 2 Chronicles. 24.21. and 25. 2 Chronicles. 26.19.20,21


Our overmuch dependence upon them, and trust in them: Gustavus A dolphus told
his soldiers no less, a little before his death; These both are of malignant
influences: See Psalm. 146.3
Excellent is that counsel of a great Prince: Trust ye not in Princes, why so?
because they are the Sons of men; suppose they be, may we not trust in the
Sons of men? No, because there is no help in them: Is it possible? how can that
be? alas! when their breath goes forth, they return again to their earth:
Suppose all this be true, shall not their counsels stand? No, in that very day
their projects perish with them: Si dicendum est aliquid mirabile, said one of
the Ancients: If I might speak a word which all the world may justly wonder at,
then I would say; Trust ye not in Princes, because they are Princes: Notable
is Augustins gloss upon that Text, Divina vox est, and de super nobis sonat
nescio qua infirmitate humana anima quando tribulata hic desperate de Domino,
and vult praesumere de hominibus, etc. and a little after, vere misera and
magna mors est in magnis.

-- Rara est in Nobilitate senectus. Old age, and healthful bodies are seldom
made the appendages to great Honors and Houses: Study my beloved that
soul-humbling Text, Psalm. 39.5. Verily, Every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity, Selah: Verily lets that in, and Selah shuts that up: Verily
every man; Man Gods master piece, Miraculum magnum, animal adorandum and
honorandum, spectaculum admirandum, (...)
as Trismegist and Plato call him, Col. Adam, Col. Hebel; every man is every
vanity, and we may not let pass that which is not least considerable in the
text; Every man at his best estate: In the original, it is, every man standing,
standing (as some improve it) upon his Tiptoe, in his beauty and bravery, in
his pomp and Majesty, is but vanity; is he a thing then to be trusted in? No,
No, To do so is both irrational, and irreligious.

O say with that man of God, My soul wait thou only upon God, Psalm. 62.5
for mine expectation is from him, and my trust is in him: Give us help from
trouble, for the help of man is a lie: Whom have we in Heaven but thee, to
call upon? or to rely upon? or to trust in but thee? Thou art our best friend,
when it is at best with us, and our only friend, when it is at worst with us:
Let our trust be only in him, for in the Lord Jehovah is strength, Strength:
Trust in him at all times, ye people, God is a refuge for us: Surely men of
low degree are vanity, Vide Aug. in Psalm. 62.9,10
and men of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance they are alike,
lighter than vanity.

Eleventhly, Learn hence; Not to fix overmuch of your affections. upon Princes
and Great men: There is a vanity upon all the whole Creation, upon them
especially: Cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for whereof is he
to be accounted; Isa. 2. ult.
be they never so potent, so prudent, so politic, their pomp shall be
brought down unto the grave, the worms shall feed on them, and the clods of the
valley shall cover them; Love them, but as ever about to leave them; or as if
they were ever about to leave you: Do not make your Lords your Gods. Let God
be your Lord: Ep. ad Zomobium and Cosmum.
It is good that Machiavel hints: Non ex statu fortune metienda virtus hominum,
sed ex animi dotibus and qualitate; strip your great ones of all their titles
of honor, their noble Parentage, their rich and royal Vestments, their Troops
and Trains: what is truly virtuous and amiable in them? for that love them: Yet
know, it is not safe to love any thing very much, but that which you can never
love overmuch, viz. Jesus Christ: Notable is that of Seneca, and Epictetus, two
grave Philosophers: Senec. (...)
Equum empturus solvi jubes stratum, detrahis vestimenta venalibus, ne quae
vitia corporis lateant, hominem involutum aestimas; si perpendere te vel alium
voles, sepone dignitatem, domum, pecuniam, intus te ipse aliosve considera:
When we go to buy an Horse, we prize him not by his rich saddle, Trappings,
and goodly furniture, we strip these off, and then judge of his worth; so
should we by men.

Boethius relates a passage of a Philosopher, if a man (says he) had Linceus
his eyes, or could see into the body of Alcibiades, though it be very comely,
and his feature admirable, yet how filthy and nasty would it appear: And I
remember Epictetus his counsel in his Enchiridion, cap. 8. (...), etc. Remember
what that is which thou set thine affections on, begin with the least, and
lowest things: Is it a fine glass, an Horse, or what? is it a man, a child, or
what: Remember a glass is brittle, and may be broken: an Horse may be
pricked, or stolen; a man may dye; certainly shall dye; if so, be not
troubled, (...): Who was greater than Alexander? I shall not tell you how he
lived, what he had, nor what he did; but rather how he died; his pomp and
solemnity at Babylon was great to admiration; within a few days after, he
could scarce obtain the honor of Burial, but lay many days above ground, Vide
Quint. Curt. lib. 10
at or before his Funeral some Philosophers meeting, spoke thus of him, as P.
Alphonsus relates it.

Yesterday all the world would not suffice Alexander, now a few yards will
serve his turn, and spare.

Yesterday (said another) Alexander commanded all men, now any man may command
him.

Yesterday Alexander could deliver thousands, how he cannot deliver himself
from death.

Yesterday Alexander with his troops pressed the earth, now it shall press him.

Yesterday all Nations feared Alexander, now all contemn him.

Yesterday Alexander had no superior upon earth, now every man of us is
something above him: Beloved, Consider what you fix your hearts, and your
affections on; Love not your Lords, as if there were no other: It is easier to
love them into their graves, than to bring them thence by all your doleful
Lamentations: But I shall proceed.

Twelfthly, Envy not the prosperity, the honor and majesty of these Princes
and great men; high seats to many are uneasy, and the downfall's terrible: All
the Kings of the Nations, even all of them, lie in glory, everyone in his own
house: Latemur ad ascensum, timeamus lapsum, non est tanti gaudii excelsa
tenuisse, quanti terroris est de excelsis cecidisse: It is not a matter of so
great joy to have been high and honorable, as it is of grief, anguish, and
vexation, to be afterward despicable and contemptible.

Lazarus envyed not the Rich man, for he was much happier himself; though he
was sine domo, yet not sine Domino; without food, yet not without faith: he
had not terrene goods laid up for many years, but a stock of grace for an
eternity: Though he had no Physicians for his body, but Dogs to lick his
sores, yet dying, he had a guard of Angels to transport his precious and
heaven-born soul into Abraham's bosom: Let me rather be a beggar of bread
with Lazarus on earth, than a beggar of water with Dives in Hell.

Friends, would you be great men? Know, greatness without goodness is but
like the greatness of a man with a dropsy, which is his disease, not his
happiness, a cross, and not a comfort: Know, your greatness could not exempt
you from falling; and by how much you are the higher, your fall by so much will
be the greater, if not shortly; yet surely, perhaps signally and miserably,
you shall down to the house of rottenness: have not some wished, when they
have been breathing out their last, that they had never been Kings, nor Queens,
nor great ones: where is there one of a thousand, who are advanced, and thereby
any thing bettered: Solus Imperatorum Vespasianus in melius mutatus: you will
not believe, beloved, what vexations lie under the Princes pillow; Damocles
highly extolled Dionysius his condition; Dionysius, to convince him of his
mistake, provides a royal Feast, invites him to it, commands his servants to
attend him; no meat, no mirth, no music is wanting, but withal he caused a
sharp sword to be hung over his head by an horse-hair, which made Damocles
tremble, and to forbear both meat, and mirth, such, even such, says the
Sicylian Tyrant, is my life which thou deemest so pleasant and delicate: It is
true of Riches, Honors, and all, what Euripides speaks of man. -- (...)


Saint Paul's coat with his heavenly graces, is infinitely better than the
purple of Kings with their Kingdoms: Argue your selves, beloved, out of this
sinful distemper, check your souls as David did his, once, and again: Psalm.
37.1.7,8 compared with 73.21.
Do not grudge them their grapes, their honors, and abundance, they will cost
some of them dear, you would be loath at last to have them at the rate which
they must pay for them.

Thirteenthly, Learn hence, Not to fear these Princes, and great men; who art
thou, Christian, Isa. 51^ 12
that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of man,
which shall be made as grass.

It is a notable saying of that Stoic Philosopher: Kill me thou may,
Epictet. Enchirid p. ult.
hurt me thou can not: Nihil magnum nisi magnus Deus: Let the Lord be your
fear, and your dread: the fear of man works a snare, it is extremely
prejudicial. Moses feared not the wrath of the King, though hot; nor the looks
of the King, though feirce; nor the words of the King, though terrible: We are
commanded to beware of man, but in the same chapter, Matthew. 10
and thrice in the compass of six verses, commanded not to fear man; An Deus
est in mundo pro nihilo? is his heart full of love, and is not his head as full
of care? We may lose much for Christ, we cannot lose any thing by Christ; we
cannot lose so much for him, but we shall find more in him: is it life?
liberty? are not these ensured us? has not he promised to pay us an
hundredfold: whether they fawn or frown* resolve with him, I will not fear
what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56.4. Once more.

Fourteenthly, Learn hence, Not to be afraid of death: It is (...), as the
Philosopher hints; yet another of them says, mors inter illa est, Senec. Ep.
82, per totam.
quae mala quidem non sunt, etc. If death be evil to any man, it is man's
fault, not deaths fault: It is a piece of folly to fear what cannot be
avoided, Nihil facit mortem malam, nisi quod sequitur mortem.
nor evaded by any, Prince, or Peasant: Good education may free you from
absurdities, grace may free you from Hell, neither can exempt from the arrest
of death: Certainly there is not so much reason for you, who have part in God,
peace with God, and well-grounded hopes of fruition of God, to tremble, as
Lewis the eleventh of France did at the naming of Death: Death will do that for
you in a moment, which all the Ordinances of God, the graces of his Spirit yet
never did: It will set you free from sin, sufferings, and sorrow: At the death
of your bodies, you shall be fully delivered from this body of death.

Why should men disgust their own felicity, and cherish an antipathy against
that, which so much conduces to their eternal bliss: It was more difficult to
persuade some of the Heathens to live out their days, than it is to persuade
thousands of us Christians to die: Were Death so great an evil, as is imagined,
Vide Ambros. de bono mortis cap. 2. and 8
Ambrose amongst the Fathers had not writ so much, de bono mortis, nor Plotinus
and Seneca amongst the Philosophers.

Take but the pomps of death away (says one) the disguises and solemn
bugbears, the Tinsel, Plotin. Ennead. lib. 7. c. 3. per totum.
and the actings by Torch, or Candlelight, and then to die is easy, and
quitted from its troublesome circumstances: The troublesomenesse of it is owing
to our fears, Enchir. cap. 10
as Epictetus speaks truly; (...): Methodius mortem piorum definit, (...).
Death cures us of all our maladies, determins all our miseries; Good men gain
this by it, that their calamities are not eternal: Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death, yea the dust of a Saint: Christ has taken away the death,
that was in death; whatsoever is an evil of punishment (though not death) from
the Saints; It is now but a sleeping in Jesus, a putting off of the old rags
of frailty and mortality, that they may be decked with garlands, and stoles of
glory.

For Consolation.

Use 1
1 Though Princes and Great men fall, and die; yet solace your selves in this,
Their souls are immortal; it is the body only that is laid in the dust: The
Romans when their Emperors and great ones died, and their bodies were burned,
they caused an Eagle to mount on high, thereby to signify, the souls
immortality and ascent.

Socrates told Chiton, asking him how he would be interred, or what should
be done with him when dead: Vide Heinsium de contemptu mortis, lib. 2
I think (says Socrates) I shall escape from you, and that you cannot catch
me, so much as you feize and lay hold on, use it as you see cause.

I could never yet be molded into their opinions, who maintained the
traduction, Est. in Sentent. lib. 2. Did. 17. Parag. 11. ad 17.
the propagation of the soul, and consequently the mortality of it: Aquinas and
Gerson both call them Heretics; who deny the creation of it; meethinks it is
absolutely impossible for any simple and uncompounded ( viz. essentially)
nature to be subject to death and corruption: Non excluditur omnis compositio;
solius dei proprium est, esse perfect and absolute simplex.
Contarenas argues thus (to omit all others) Nihil potest perdere esse, quod
non perdit actum per quem est; Istae autem formae simplices non possunt perdere
actum per quem sunt, quia sibi ipsis sunt actus, nihil autem potest seipsum
perdere: Ergo; Cont. de immort. animae lib. 1. Et Plotin. Ennead. lib. 7 per
totum.
The Scripture also is clear in my opinion, for its immortality, Phil. 1.23.
Matthew. 10.28. Eccles. 12.7. the Heathens had some glympses of its immortality,
as Plato, Tully, and most, or all of their Philosophers.

In a word, as Cato Major said, so I: If I do err in this, I err willingly;
neither will I ever suffer this error in which I delight, to be wrested from
me as long as I live.

2 Again; Solace and comfort your selves in this also: Though Princes and great
men fall, yet they shall rise again: If a man die (says Job) shall he live
again? yea, as sure as death he shall live again: There is a double certainty
of the resurrection of their bodies. 1 Certitudo infallibilitatis, ratione
divinae praedictionis; there is a certainty of infallability in respect of
divine prediction: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one of his words
fall to the ground. 2 Certitudo immutabilitatis, ratione divinae
praedeterminationis; a certainty of immutability, in respect of Gods decree and
eternal purpose; and his counsel shall stand:
This staid up the drooping spirit of holy Job; See his Creed, Job 19.25,26. I
know my Redeemer, (...), my Kinseman lives, and that he shall stand at the
last day upon the Earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet
in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another: How confident is this holy man of his resurrection in
the same individual body? It is disputed in the Schools, Resurrectionem and
Philosophis notam ex Hebraeorum doctrina affirmant non-nulli.
whether the resurrection of the body be quid cognoscibile lumine natura; It
is said, Theopompus, Zoroastres, and Plato (whom none of the Ancient Gentiles
contradicted) taught the resurrection of the body; and Plato thought that after
the revolution of some years, he should live again, and teach his scholars in
the same chair he sat then in; but resurrectio mortuorum est fides
Christianorum; as Augustine, Tertullian, and others more solidly: Vide Aug. in
Psalm. 101. Et D. Chytr. de fine mundi, and Res. Mort. ubi fufius.

Propria Ecclesiae dei sapientia est praedictio de fine mundi and resurrectione
mortuorum, etc.


Those Eagle eyed Philosophers mocked at the Doctrine of the Resurrection, Act.
17.32. divine mysteries are above humane reason's shallow capacity; from that
principle of nature, and axiom amongst Philosophers. A privatione ad habitum
non datur regressus; they argued against this fundamental truth; but know it to
your comfort, that you and yours too shall rise again; this Prince and Great
man shall return from his grave again, not by the power of nature, nor by the
help of the Creature, but by the power of the Creator; As for me (says David)
I will behold his face in Righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake,
with thy likeness, it is meant of the awakening of his body from the sleep of
death in the day of the resurrection, Psalm. 17.15. the Jews call the grave Beth
Chaiim, the house of the living; as they return from funerals, it is said, they
pluck up the grass, and cast it into the air, repeating those words of the
Psalmist, They shall flourish, and put forth as the grass of the Earth:
Amongst the Romans it is said, it was an usual saying of a dead friend; abiit
and reversurus est; He is gone, but will come again. Beloved, Aug. Ep. 6.
Melch. Ad. in Luth. p. 154
This Great man shall rise again, comfort your selves in this, you shall see
him again, and know, and love him better than ever: As Augustine spoke to the
Lady Italica, and Luther at his last supper.

Thirdly, (To conclude this) The Lord has a special care of your dead
relations: Keeps their very bones, Psalm. 34.20. He leaves not his in the dust;
Rizpah watched over the bodies of the sons of Saul, and guarded them against
the fowls of the air, 2 Samuel 21.10. but the Lord has greater care of his
children, living, dying, and dead. Observe. 2.


It is every man's duty to take notice of, and to lay to heart the death of
great men; especially if they be good men: Know ye not?

How was Saul's death lamented; Saul, P. Mart. 2 Samuel 1.19. and Sq.
(for whose salvation we have nothing to say, Nullum uspiam extat vestigium
verae paenitentiae) yet David and all with him rent their clothes, and wept,
hearing of his, and Jonathans death: The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy
high places; how are the mighty fallen? Jonathan was a chief Patient in this
woeful tragedy, but not the only subject of this doleful elegy.

Vide Perer. de laud Mosis.
Moses was a gallant man; an excellent Philosopher, more ancient than Socrates
or Trismegist: A notable Poet, the Penman of eleven Psalms, as Hierom thinks,
from the eighty eight to the hundredth; though De Dieu, says, some think Adam
penned, and sang the ninety second, the morning after his creation; how was
Moses his death lamented in the Plains of Moab? Vide Lud. de Dieu. in Psalm. 92
Deuteronomy. 34,8
was not a book of Lamentation writ upon the occasion of Josiahs Death? It is
thought that that sad Poem, or doleful ditty (which Nazianzen could never read
without tears and lamentation) was composed by the Prophet Jeremiah, Orat. 12.
mihi page 202
upon the fall of that most incomparable and unparalleld Prince, whereof
mention is made in the sacred Annals: Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all
the singing men, and singing women speak of Josiah in their Lamentations to
this day, and made them an Ordinance in Israel, etc. 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

During the Captivity, sundry Fasts were observed, on set days, and on sad
occasions: The Fast of the fourth month, the Fast of the fifth, Zechar. 8.9
the Fast of the seventh, and of the tenth.

Gedaliah, the Protector of the remnant of the Jews (after their King was
carried away captive) was slain on the seventh month; therefore they fasted and
mourned: We may write down this day; this very day, and mourn for the Death
and Fall of this Prince and Great man; the children yet unborn may also observe
it, when we shall be laid in dust.

Notable to this in hand, is that of King Joash, 2 King. 13.14. Mark his
pathetical exclamation, and his plausible acclamation: O my Father! My Father,
the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; observe what lamentation he
makes, though a wicked King.

And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over
him; the Syriack reads it, Act. 8.2
Gibre Mehemene; Faithful men carried Stephen to his bed, they wept for him
bitterly, or vehemently.

The Priests, and sometimes Prophets too, were not allowed (upon special
considerations in the Old Testament) to mourn, Ezekiel. 24.16. Thou shall not
weep, nor mourn, nor shall thy tears run down: make no mourning for the dead,
forbear to cry, etc. but if we bound our sorrows within the precinct of that
Apostolical precept; not mourning, as men without hope; Junius Brutus,
Valerius, Poplicola, Augustus, etc. viri optime de Rep. meriti annuo luctu
fuerunt defleti.
we may be afflicted, we ought to weep and mourn, our laughter should be
turned into mourning, and our joy into heaviness: Christ himself wept over dead
Lazarus; we may over this Prince and Great man, who was so useful an
instrument, both to Church, and State, grandis in eum est pietas, as Jerome
speaks of another. Quae ratio?

Why are we to take notice of, and to lay to heart the Falls of Princes and
Great men?

First, Because when such men are taken away by death, then Judgments hasten,
and post on apace: Their dissolution is an evident demonstration of the Lords
indignation; upon the death of Crassus, such miseries befell the Roman State
(says the Orator) that life was not so much taken from him, as a punishment,
as death bestowed on him, as a reward.

In 2 Chronicles. 34.24. I will bring evil upon this place, says the Lord (who owns
all paenal evils) and upon the Inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that
are written in this book; why so? see verse 25. Because they have forsaken me,
and have burned incense unto other Gods: Psalm. 39.11 Jer. 25.6 Lam. 3.39
Sin is the foundation of punishment, God does not punish, nor afflict
ordinarily, but in case of sin. Read on; But as for Josiah the King of Judah,
say you unto him, because thy heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self
before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the
Inhabitants thereof, and humblest thy self before me, Behold I will gather
Thee to thy Fathers, thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace; neither
shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon
the Inhabitants thereof.

The Philosopher speaking of the Stars, has this passage, when they shoot, it
is a sign of high winds following: When zealous Magistrates, Chytr. de morte.
p. 75
and faithful Ministers shoot and slide into the earth; such as survive may
sadly conclude, They are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1.

Methusalem that great and godly Patriarch died, Eo anno quo caepit diluvium,
Cartw. Electa. Targumico-rabbinica. in Genesis 5. and 25* 7. and 4 Vide Philon. ^
lib. 2. de Vita Mosis. Senec. lib. 3. Qu. Not, cap. 27. and Sq. Perer. in Genesis
p. 338
the very year the flood came: I know some have asserted that he lived
fourteen years after it, and others say, he died seven days before it: His
very name signified a messenger of death, his death presaged that fearful
Inundation, the causes whereof I shall not now so much as hint at.

Augustine that great Ornament and Muniment of Hippo, was taken away by death,
immediately before the barbarous Goths and Vandals sacked that City in which
he lived: Ambrose his death was afore-runner of Italies ruin; as Chytraeus
reports, and Luthers death, according to his prediction, was a forerunner of
the German wars. Vide Luth. in Isa. 57.1


I can do nothing says God, till thou be come thither, Genesis 19.22. non posse
se dixit, quod sine dubio poterat per potentiam, non poterat per justitiam;
says one of the Ancients: Aug. Sense.
Non posse praetenditur, non velle in causa est: No sooner was Lot in Zoar, but
the Lord rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom: Such stand in the gap to
turn away the Lords wrath; but when they are removed, what remains to stop the
current of divine vengeance? when the precious fruits of the earth are gathered
into the barn, the hedges are broken down, the beasts overrun all: When the
Jewels are taken out of the Trunk, the courser things are thrown overboard;
when Noah is housed in the Ark, his Pella, the fountains of the deep are broken
open: Woe is me, says the Prophet Micah, The Good man, (the Great man) is
perished out of the Earth: Psalm. 12.1 De contemptu mortis.
and David cries and prays, Help Lord! as if the Heavens had been falling on
him: Heinsius reports, that the Sun withdrew its shine, and was eclypsed when
Joseph Scaliger dyed. Darkness seizes upon us in these parts, we have had
many of quality lately taken from us; it is well if the Lords wrath be not
coming upon us.

Secondly, Because when they fall, the persons with whom they conversed, Jer.
48.25 Zech. 10.4
the places in which they lived are exceedingly weakened: As in the Text; And I
am this day weak: And are not we this day weak? Behold the Family; is it not a
weak Family, a disconsolate Widow, tender, sickly children: A weak Town, he
was under the most high, our strength and munition, our defense and protection:
Should we unite our hearts and hands, our power and policy? Alas what can we
do! Our strength is weakness, our wisdom foolishness; As Jehosaphat said, so
we say, O Lord we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee: In uno
Caesare multi insunt Marii; There are many men in one Great man: One Josiah in
a Kingdom, one Lot in a City, one Paul in a Ship, is of more value and virtue,
than many thousands: Labans family fared the better for Jacobs sake, Pharaohs
Court and Kingdom fared better for Joseph's sake, and has not this Town, these
parts of the Country, fared much better for this great man's sake? Every great
man, if he be a good man, is a great blessing and strengthening to the place
in which he lives; a blessing by his presence, a blessing by his prayers, a
blessing by his example, which is as a Looking-glass for others to dress
themselves by; a blessing by his counsels: The death of faithful Ministers
weakens wonderfully; the weapons of their warfare are mighty with God, 2 King.
2.12
and mighty through God: The death of zealous Magistrates weakens infinitely;
but I must not expatiate.

See that notable Text, Judges 18 7. when there was no Magistrate in Laish, ^n
increased, and ruin approached.
Thirdly, Because when such fall; sin commonly increases exceedingly: Not only
the Laws, but the lives of great men, it truly godly, give a shrewd check to
daring impieties and profaneness; many whose hands only were chained but their
hearts not changed, may break our, and fall off, returning with the dog to his
vomit, and the Sow to wallow in the mire again: It is not unknown to hundreds
of us within these walls, that this great man's countenance had special
influence upon all the vile wretches that came nigh unto him: He could do very
much with a look: I could not in that compare him to any other but Luther, De
vita Lutheri. p. 168
Melchior Adams reports of him, that he had such a Leonine aspect, ut oculorum
suorum intentionem recta aspiciendo non omnes far possunt.

How was the profanation of the Lords day prevented; Travelers according to
Law punished; drunkenness subdued, etc. Tremble godly souls to think how the
eye of Gods glory is like to be provoked; let rivers of waters run down your
eyes.

Is there not matter of lamentation, when the winds are rising, the Sea
swelling, the Heavens lowering, and the enemy approaching? to behold the
soldiers gasping, the Pilots and Steers-men dead upon the deck: How shall the
little flock be kept out of the jaws and paws of the wild boar, and Beasts of
prey? O pray, Lord remember thy Lilly amongst the Thorns, thy Lambs amongst the
Wolves, thy love amongst the daughters; The Saints are as speckled birds, Jer.
12.9. Jerem. 12.9
All about them are enemies to them.

Fourthly, Because otherwise they cannot make a right use and improvement of
their death and dissolution: It is the Lords will that we should make a right,
good use of his rod upon others, and of the fall of others.

Quest. What use should we that survive, now make of this Princes dissolution?

Answer, A threefold Use. An Honorable Use. An Charitable Use. An Profitable
Use.


An Honorable Use, in relation to God, acknowledging his power and supremacy,
his sovereignty and authority over man, to kill or make alive, to deliver from
death, or to death.

A Charitable Use, in relation to them who are afflicted, or taken away by
death; not concluding them the greatest sinners, because they are the greatest
sufferers; or that it is for some notorious impiety that they are cut off in
the midst of their days: Their death may be in mercy to them, in judgment to
us.

A Profitable Use, in reference unto our selves; we should learn thence to
walk humbly, to put our hearts in order, to see what the bitter fruit of sin
is, etc.

Though the occasion of our coming together this evening be very sad, yet the
opportunity is sweet, if we can learn rightly to improve this great man's fall:
I remember Plotinus has this passage: Men should so live, and so die, that
others might learn some good from them, both living, and dying: Anatomists and
Physicians advantage themselves by dissecting dead bodies, and prying into the
inward parts, we may spiritually profit our selves by a serious consideration,
and observation of his dispensations in the Fall of Princes and Great men.

Fifthly, Not to take notice of, not to lay to heart the death of such men, is
a God-provoking sin, a fruit of sin, and the cause of many horrid iniquities,
and grievous transgressions: This inconsiderateness is that which the Prophet
checked and much lamented, Isa. 57.1. None considers that they are taken away
from the evil to come; none pondered it in their hearts; they did not search
into it; what should be the mind and end of God in it; God lays it to men's
charge, that they lay not those things unto their hearts; as if personal
mortality were not sometimes a presage of public misery: This is a direct
violation of a divine injunction, Eccles. 7.3. The living shall lay it upon
their hearts: Is not the hand of God in this sad providence? It is he that
helps us into the world, and it is he that helps us again out of the world:
the key of the womb, and the key of the grave are in his hand alone: The
actions of Princes and Great ones in the world, every eye almost observes; and
shall we slight the operations of his hand; the Lord complains of this, and
severely punishes it Isa. 5.12. Isa. 4^.25. Jer. 5.3, etc. Once more.

Sixthly, This argues our due, Phil. 2.29
and true estimation of them, according to the charge. Hold such in reputation:
It is otherwise a clear demonstration we neither loved them, nor prized them;
if they dye unlamented, it is strongly presumed, they lived undesired how can
we say we love them, when their lives are not worth our prayers, nor their
deaths our tears? A good man is a common good, a common treasure, wherein every
soul has a share, that man has a hard heart that can hear of such men's deaths
with a dry eye.

In the eleventh of John you have Christ weeping at Lazarus his funeral: it is
observed, that he wept thrice, but never laughed: Ter flevisse legimus, risisse
nunquam legimus: why wept he now? (...).

Andreas Cretensis gives this for the reason; he thinks Christ lamented not
over Lazarus, but over the Jews, because of their infidelity, that although
they should see the miracle, Lazarus raised from the dead, yet they would not
believe in him.

The tears of others (as others) who were bystanders did draw tears, even from
Christ himself, (...).

I shall pass by the reasons given by Cyril, Rupertus, and others, and only
acquaint you with Augustins, and Maldonats: Christ therefore wept, says the
Father, that by his example he might teach us to weep at the funerals of
religious and useful persons.

Christ therefore wept, says the Jesuit, as the Jews interpreted it, non
pessimi in hac re authors; because he loved him, you can apply it: I pass it.

The Application of this Observation, In two Uses.

Use 1
For Correction, This checks such, if there be any such, amongst us, as take no
notice of, and lay not to heart the falls of great ones, eminently useful in
their Generations: I hope there are none such with us in this throng Assembly,
of whom it any be said, as was of those Widows of the Priests, Psalm. 78.64.
Their Priests fell by the sword, and their Widows made no lamentation: Yet if
there be such elsewhere, that are glad in their hearts, that they can see with
their eyes, such Great men laid in their graves; let such tremble: Now they may
drink, and be drunk, stagger, and fall, quarrel, and braul, now they may
profane the Lords day without control or contradiction; they are as good as
the best, who now survive; they may swear, and swill, and swagger, and fill
themselves with Wine and strong drink, and sin securely; O miserable, vain man!
Nullum pejus malum liberate peccandi; Thou have the most reason to lament the
death of such; if thou did but apprehend thine own condition: It is a fearful
character of a graceless man to rejoice on this account, in the death of
great, good useful men: Paulinus reports of Ambrose, that he would weep
bitterly when he heard of any godly Ministers death: Are not good Magistrates
Gods Ministers? Heirs of restraint? The better they be to us in their lives,
Romans 13.
the more bitter to us should be their deaths; as while they live, they are
much to be honored; so when they dye, they deserve much to be lamented:
There is no strong rod to be a scepter to rule us: Ezekiel. 19. ult.
This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

Use 2
For Exhortation; Weep, yea, weep bitterly, ye persons of quality; Ye Noble
Colonels, ye valiant Captains of his acquaintance and alliance: Your number
is lessened, your hands are weakened: There is a Prince and a Great man fallen,
who adventured himself in the high places of the field; a man of an Heroic
undaunted spirit: Weep, yea weep bitterly Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry: Know ye not that there is a Prince and a Great man fallen this day in
Israel, whose paternal care was manifested in his provision for you, and
protection of you?

O Leigh! O Lancashire lament thy loss; with trembling hands and bleeding
hearts may we remember the year 1655. Three Suns set, Three Stars of the first
magnitude, shot, Three great men in one year, two of them in one month;
Holland, Ashurst and Atherton.

That thrice, worthy, and deservedly honored Gentlemen, Mr. Edward Holland, a
man admired by all who knew him the Phaenix of Lancashire, of whom I may say,
having had more special occasions and opportunities to know him intus and in
cute: For depth of learning, especially in Philosophy, and the Mathematics;
for solidity of judgment, strength of memory, quickness and acuteness of
conception, and which is the Ornament of all, Holiness of life, fervency in
prayer; for Humility and Affability, his fellow is not easily (if at all)
found in the North of England; Mr. Cases. (...). Ep. to the Reader.
if any suspect my partiality, let him read his praise in print by Reverend Mr.
Case; if learning make a man (as it does, not naturally, but morally; not
essentially, but accidentally; it is the beauty, the luster, the Ornament of a
man) then I may say, he was one: If grace make a good man (as it does without
dispute, no man can have it, but he shall be like it) then he was one; of
him I may say (and I shall say no more) as Nazianzen did of Athanasius,
Hollandum laudare est idem ac virtutem ipsam laudare.

The second I mentioned is Mr. William Ashurst, of whom all that knew him (and
he was known by the most knowing and worthy men in England, Scotland, and
Ireland) may say as Nehemiah did of Hananiah, Nehem. 7.2.
he was a faithful man, and feared God above many: he was the glory of his
Country; it is Scripture language; they that are truly godly and noble, they
are the blessings of a Kingdom, Eccl. 10.7. the glory of a Kingdom, Isa.
5.13. Their honorable men, (or their glory) are men of famine, an incomparable
man; did you ever know so good a head, so well hearted; or so good a heart, so
well headed? I shall say no more of him, but as one did of Hercules. -- Quis
Ashurstum unquam vituperavit.

And before our tears were wiped from our eyes; another of Jobs Messengers, as
it were, brings us tidings of sorrow, and bitter lamentation, of this Prince
and Great man's fall this day in Israel: We are the men who have seen
affliction, and still do see: and I am fearful, shall see more; the dart of
death (I doubt) is not removed from this afflicted, shattered family: Joseph is
not, and Simeon is not; and must Benjamin go too; Holland is not, and Ashurst
is not, and Atherton is not; and shall the hopes of these worthy Families go
too? all these things are against us.

Shall I call on you, Worthy Gentlemen of his dear Relations, to take notice of
this sad providence; this invaluable, and almost irreparable loss; it is your
wisdom to study these dispensations, and to be sensible of the Lords
displeasure; weigh your loss in the balance of the sanctuary.

Vide Pos. in vita Aug.
Weep! O Weep ye Inhabitants of Atherton: As Augustine did by David's penitential
Psalms, even so do you by the words of my Text: He caused them to be drawn
upon the walls of his chamber, that he might read them as he lay in bed; he
read and wept, and wept and read: it may be our iniquities, have provoked the
most high in much displeasure to take him from us, and put a period to his
days that so he may bring upon us the judgments long since deserved, and now
much feared: He was a Star of the most benign influence that has risen in our
Horizon within the memory of any now alive; the more therefore by us to be
lamented; let not that be our sin which was their Judgment, Jer. 16.5. Ezekiel.
24.23.

I remember Seneca reports of Senecio Cornelius, that he was a tenacious, Ep.
10
covetous man, care who would for their souls, he was only solicitous about
his body, and his money; when he had all the day long waited on his dying
friend, and his friend was dead, he returns to his house, sups merrily,
comforts himself quickly, goes to bed cheerfully, his sorrows ended, and time
of mourning expired, before his friend was interred: Let none of us follow his
example and practice: Let us lay this Great man's Death close to, and keep it
long on our hearts; let us lament over him, saying, Ah Lord! Ah his glory! let
us fall down upon our faces, as Ezekiel did, when Pelatiah the son of Benajah
died; and deprecate the process of his Judgments, that no more breaches be
made upon us; In wrath; O Lord! remember mercy.

3 Observation.

It is a lawful and needful thing to speak honorably of Great men at their
Falls and Funerals. We may say good of when dead, whose constant work and
practice it was to do good while they lived.

It is lawful thus to do; the practice of the Spirit of God is warrant enough;
it was the Holy Ghost who writ Jehoiadaies Epitaph; They buried him in the City
of David, 2 Chronicles. 24.16
among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and
toward his house: It is said of Josiah in his commendation, like unto him
there was no King, 2 King. 23.25. Moses and Mordecai; Hezekiah, Saul, and
Jonathan, with Abner in the Text, after their deaths have their due praises.

In Fest. om. Sanct. Sermon. 5
It is useful thus to do, plane quod eorum memoriam veneramur nostra interest,
non ipsorum, as Bernard speaks; E^ sanctorum commemoratione gestorum ad omnes
provenit utilitas.

Use. Cave ne lingua tua feriat collum tuum Scalig. Arab. Proverb.
Let this silence the detractours of our times and territories; no sooner is
dust cast upon the heads, but they throw dirt in the faces of our Worthies:
Augustine fitly compares such to Dives his Dogs, they lay licking, and sucking
Lazarus his sores, his sounder parts they never meddled with.

It was one of Solons Laws, that none should dare to speak evil of the dead,
and Plutarch tells us, (...); Plutarch in Poplic. p. 102
it was highly commended, and duly observed: It is not so with us in this
censorious age: veterum mos fuit (says one) neminem sepelire, nisi prius
laudatum, etc. The Tongues of many are like the Duke of Medina Sidonia's sword;
it knew no difference between a Catholic and an Heretic; but that he came to
make way for his Master. Qui regit, signum est in quod Satan omnia jacula
dirigit, Luth.
It was the custom of old to lay none in their graves, till some Orator had
given the by standers a full account of the deceaseds virtues; but tempora
mutantur, and nos: It is recorded to Vespatians honor, that he was more ready
to conceal the vices, than the virtues of his friends; such commonly are best
acquainted with others infirmities, who are least observant of their own
iniquities, and irregularities: To trample upon the reputation, and stain the
glory of the dead, argues thee to be a kin to Fleas, who bite most, when men
are asleep; or as the Poet speaks, (...)


Rectus ordo requirit, says Bernard in his Epistle to Bru^o, ut prius
propriam, deinde alienas curare studeas conscientias: The charge is, Levit.
19.17
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise reprove
him, by no means reproach him: Observable is that of our blessed Savior, Luke
7.37. Vide Mald^na^. in Luke 7.37

Constans omnium vererum authorum opinio est, fuisse meretricem, si non vulgo
prostitutam, parum certe cast viventem.


There was a woman in the City which was a sinner; no wonder, what woman is
not? we may guess both who the woman was, and what the sin was, and which City
it was; but he neither names the City, nor the sin, nor the sinner; seeing her
reformation, he consults her reputation: Go and do likewise: Omit no
opportunity of speaking well of others; do not ever speak evil of others, when
you have opportunity and just occasion, it is a greater commendation of your
goodness, that you might, and would not: Posse and nolle nobile est.

For us to be ill spoken of, and not deservedly, is neither our fault, nor our
case alone; A pimpled face discovers a distempered Liver; a stinking breath,
corrupted Lungs; and a backbiting tongue, a base rotten heart.
it is a comfort that ill tongues cannot make ill men: Nemo est tantae
faelicitatis, qui dentes semper evadet malignitatis: It was said, Christ was a
wine-bibber, and Paul mad: It is an ill property, never to requite any
courtesy, ever to revenge an injury upon men living; it is basest when dead;
but to conclude this Use, let the Motto which was fixed upon the door of a
certain Senate House, Drex. Orbis Phaeton.
be in every detractours eye, Si quem laudare non potes, ne vitupera: It was
matter of sharpest censure to the Grammarians, that they were better acquainted
with the evils of Ulysses, than with their own.

Use 2
Let me exhort you all, high and low, to know, and do your duty; Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's: Render to all their dues, honor to whom
honor belongs: To practice my self what I press on you, is your expectation:
I shall do in this what I can, though I cannot do what I would: And not only at
this time, but when ever just occasion is offered; I shall do it of others:
Foolish and sottish people snarle at the Painter, if the Portraicture be not
in all parts very beautiful, and comely, when as the effigies is drawn unto the
life, and exactly resembles, or represents the person in all parts: be it your
endeavor to do well while you live, if you would have others to speak well of
you being dead: Augustine blamed some Ministers for commending such in their
Pulpits, whose souls, probably were frying in Hell: Of Julian the Pelagian he
said, Idoneus erat dicere panegyricum Satanae; he was a man fit enough to make
an Oration in commendation of the Devil, as Bruno an Italian did.

It shall be my care to say what I know is true; and not to leave a lie
behind me, nor draw the guilt thereof upon me: All the Princes in Europe
will not do me so much good, as a ly may do me hurt: I remember that of
Zenophon, Page 527. de Agesilao.
(...): If I answer not the expectations of Relations, culpetur ingenium non
voluntas: If I seem to others exuberant, let them pardon me; I may know more
of him than others do: I confess my unfitness for this present task; neither
is my heart, nor head, nor hand inured to Panegyricks, or such funeral
Encomiasticks: I fear (as Nazianzen did) speaking of his Sister Gorgonia) I
shall speak below, not above the truth, nor his worth: I shall however be
short in the Narrative, and give you Homers Iliads in a Nut-shel: Ezekiel
pourtrayed the City of Jerusalem upon a Tile: deep sorrows (such is your
posture) will hear no long orations, they never make long speeches, as he said
of Psannenitus: Leves loquuntur curae, ingentes stupent.

Shall I then come to this Prince and Great man, whose sad Funerals you are now
celebrating; neither his person nor his actions can be hid; he was a City
built on a Hill; his story is yet fresh and lively in all your memories, and
the stage whereon he acted, is yet warm: Shall I say of him, as Scaliger did
of Strisset, the Calculatour: I very well may, Dignus erat, quem nec senium
senem faceret, nec naturae lex vita privaret; but more distinctly: And

First, Concerning his original, the pedigree or Parentage of this worthy
Gentleman; it is so generally known to be Noble, that to say much were
superfluous in a thing so conspicuous; but to divine providence, and his worthy
Ancestors, he was most beholding, for that he was sprung of such an ancient
and venerable stem: (...), as the Philosopher speaks in the fourth of his
Politics, chap. 18. yet that is true of Plutarch before hinted* it is (...),
Men are not born of noble Progenitors by hap-hazzard: Sen. Rhetor, Contro. 6
Notable is that of Seneca; Si possent homines sibi sortem fa^ere, nascendi
nemo esset humilis, nemo egens, etc. Had men it in their power, who would not
spring from a royal root? He was not of a low and base extraction, as some of
the Grandees of our times: It was the Churches lamentation, that they who were
brought up in Scarlet, embraced Dung-hills; Lam. 4.5
it is a lamentation, and may be for a lamentation, that they who were brought
up on dunghills, are now clothed in Scarlet.

He was no reproach to his Parentage, nor was his Parentage a reproach to him:
As he was the Head, so he was the Honor of that ancient Family: Its Ornament
and Muniment: In his youth he was accounted worthy of command, in a valiant,
victorious Army: with Adino the Ezrite he deserved to sit in the chief seat
among the Captains, 2 Samuel 23.8. He never trailed the pike to come to
preferment: He was not a Lion before many Hearts, nor an Heart before many
Lions; but a Lion before many Lions: Another Scanderbeg, or Zisca, so prudently
and valiantly did he deport himself: Seldom was such a man so caused, or such
a cause so manned, as that which he managed, and in which he was engaged:
For his Magnanimity, all that knew him, much admired him: This David commends
in Abner, and we in him; in a word, he was stirpe and ingenio bellicosus.

Providence now puts him on to change his condition: Though there be some
truth in that of the Heathen.

(...) A single life is not so sorrowful, yet there is a truth in this.

(...) A virtuous wife, is the life of life, which he was blessed with above
many; a Gentlewoman of honorable descent; one of rich and rare qualifications;
from her infancy dedicated to, Mris. Mary Bold, de Bold.
and educated for God; a child of many prayers, of unparrellel'd prudence,
providence, piety, humility, modesty, and beauty: To say no more, remembering
that of Salvian in his fourth book Ad Ecclesiam Catholicam: Praise cannot be
safe there, where life it self is not safe: while persons are subject to
mutability, they cannot be praised with security: It is matter of lamentation
to see persons of quality, so degrading and disparaging themselves by their
base carriages, and marriages: But I shall pass on.

Now must he serve his Generation and Country in another way; and therefore is
authorized and empowered to act, as, Conservator del peace, Dives potestas
pauperem facit Rempublicam.
a Justice of Peace, (...): In which he preferred the public good, before his
own private gain and interests: He consulted the welfare of Religion and
Justice, not his own case, or safety: O that all in Authority were more
negligent in things belonging to themselves, and more diligent in such things
as concern the glory of God, and the Churches good: Faithful Ministers were
encouraged, the Fatherless and the Widows righted, Justice duly executed; his
equity and impartiality was very exemplary.

Paulo majora canamus: Higher honors were yet prepared for him, and appointed
to him, viz. the Shrevalty: which he neither sought, nor bought, but shunned,
as far as modesty and safety would allow: Concerning his deportment, the
nobleness of his spirit, the unanimous and honorable attendance of the
Gentry, etc. I shall crave leave to be silent; many of you saw, or heard, that
his disposition ran parallel with his elevation.

Nor shall I leave him thus; something more remains.

For his Temperance and Sobriety; he was a copy for others to write after; a
Looking-glass for them to dress by: And this was the more memorable, because
he lived in Lubrico loco and aetate: A virtue this is of special influx; of a
sober man I may say as Apollonius did of Vespasian for his early rising, and
timely stirring, (...): It is a rare virtue in some persons of quality, whose
vivere is bibere, as Scaliger speaks of the Germans, both in pronunciation and
practice: It is a good quality in a sponge to drink up much, but not in a
Prince: as Demosthenes told Aeschines, commending Philip of Macedon, for a
jovial man, and one who would drink freely.

For his Humility and Affability I might say much; he was in honor, sine
tumore, in elatione, sine praelatione, etc. he knew when to stoop and stand
up, and did both; it is rare to see one so high, so lowly: so well descended,
so free from morosity and superciliousnesse, and humble-hearted; he knew that
pride was the badge of an ignoble spirit, a stinking weed, that is wont to grow
and thrive most in the worst soils and souls: he knew he might easily be too
high, but could never be low enough; he would not pass by an excellency in
others without observation.

For his disposition in relation to the poor and needy, it was generous and
liberal: I seldom, or never sound his ear or hand shut against charitable
motions: He knew that those that did good to the poor and needy, for Christ's
sake, God would do good to them for the poors sake; sure for his Sons sake: He
knew, that he who promised, they should have that asked, had first commanded
such to give unto them that asked: I might call on you honorable and beloved,
and plead the causes, and spread the cases of the distressed before you; in the
words of Augustine: Tu contemnis egentem tui? Deus non contemnit, egentem sui,
etc. why do thou give them childish or churlish answers, gives God such unto
thee? or as Nazianzen, (...), why should thou treasure up for Thieves, or
Moths, or mutability of times? Prove. 11.24
Look upon the necessities of others, not as strangers, but as members, as you
would have the Lord to look upon yours: Be good to all, God is so: especially
to the household of Faith: Unmercifulness is a sin which least becomes, and
worst beseems one that has tasted of the Lords graciousnesse: Date obolum
Bellisario, may be the cry of such as are now in pomp and Majesty.

For his Judgment, It was not Episcopal, nor Congregational, but Presbyterial:
as conscience-bound, he freely submitted to examination, the great Rock of
offense: His opinions such as might save him, rather than raise him; and
therefore he truly and duly observed the Lords day: His diligent attendance
upon divine Ordinances, was very exemplary; with what reverence and fear, so
far as man could judge, would he attend unto the word dispensed by the Lords
Ministers; when by reason of the weakness of his body he could not come to
the solemn public assemblies; we saw the willingness of his mind, that we
should come to him, and therefore had his Invitation (to us a command) to come
often to pray with him, and preach to him every Lords day evening at least,
till the Lord had either restored him to health, or removed him out of the Land
of the living by death; which was done, not without testifications of his
thankfulness. And

This was further memorable; There was not that omission of that
family-perfuming and preserving Ordinance of Prayer, reading of the Word, etc.
in his house, as is I fear in many families of quality: It is true: His house
was not so with God, as was desired; nor was holy David's, 2 Samuel 23.5
nor any of ours: yet it was not without calling upon God, nor without the
special blessing of God: Lib. 4. de Gub. Dei mihi page 114 Ubi fusius.
It was Salvians sad complaint, Si honoratior quispiam religioni se
applicuerit, illico honoratus esse desist it: Si fuerit sublimis, fit
despicabilis, si splendissimus fit vilissimus, si totus honoris, fit totus
injuriae, etc. Blessed be our God, our times are not such: O that you would
be more frequent, and fervent in your addresses to God! You may bid farewell to
all good days, when you bid farewell to all good duties: If you send up no
prayers to God, no desires to God, sure, you have no desires of God, nor after
God? Are not the least of his blessings (if there be any little) worth praying
and staying for? whence does this omission arise? From a principle of
ignorance, or negligence; of carelessness, or covetousness, or from a
principle of forgetfulness, or fearfulness? sure I am, if you and your houses
serve not God, God will neither save you, nor your houses; Read and tremble,
Prove. 3.33. Jer. 10.25. Psalm. 9.17.

In reference to his Relations, I may give this character of him in short.

To his precious Consort, he was a loving Husband; they lived some, and might
have many years together, many more had the Lord spun out his thread, as
Rubenius Celer and his wife did, without reconciliation; they did never need
it: Erant duo in carne una, Aug.
and duo in voce una; they were not one in many things, and two in some things,
but one in all: There was no cause of crying, -- Eia Johannes, eia Maria.

To his children, a tenderhearted Father: Not many (if any) more: O that you
and I could manifest more spiritual love to our little ones: The love which we
bear unto their bodies, is but the body of our love; the soul of love, is that
love which we bear unto their souls; Let us pray more for them; Gods goodness,
their Ancestors prayers, and their own lives, every day growing better: Were
the three Advocates which ( Grotius says) the Israelites had: Comeliness in
children, is riches, if nothing else be left them, said a learned Knight; It
is more true of godliness: Sir W. Rawleigh.
Si nil orarem, nil curarem, said Melancthon: Should I not pray for my
children, I should not care for my children: Your prayers may do them much more
good, than all the portions you can leave them: Before the flood children died
not before their Fathers, unless by a violent death (as some of the learned
say) they ground it on, Genesis 11.28. Hanan (say they) is the first that is noted
to die before his Father: Not much to build on this: Pray we for our children
constantly, and instantly, and whenever they be taken from us, we shall
resign them up more cheerfully; Vide Amam. Hebr. Gram. page 164 A Laolde in
Ephesians. 6.4
and though they die before us (as we see many do) yet our consciences shall
be much quieter, and our comfort greater.

To his Tenants he was very respectful, by them highly honored and
reverenced: And his death is, and will be much lamented: Though tears from
such be no commendation to a living, yet they are credit to a dead Lord: Such
another in his room, and of his name is, I am confident, the desire of their
hearts, and will be the delight of their eyes.

To the Neighborhood very useful: Causinus reports of one, that whatsoever
question was propounded to him, his answer still was Love: whence come thou?
from Love; and whither go thou? to Love; and where wast thou? with Love: It
was the design of this worthy, in all matters, as I have been informed, to
preserve Peace, and Love.

To us of the Ministry he was very dear, and deservedly precious: Salvus est
Artifex; is all we can solace our selves in: He had a great room in our
hearts, a great share in our prayers; he was a man of many prayers and tears:
How were your hearts enlarged, and assistance from Heaven vouchsafed, both in
public, and private, with him, and from him, as if deliverance from death had
been the Lords intendment: But his prayers for himself, and your prayers for
him, I hope are not lost; though in this they were not answered: The prayers of
dying persons are living, Priusquam egressa est oration ex ore ^uo; ipse soribi
jubet in libro suo. Bern.
lasting prayers; Stephens were so: God knows how to lay us by, and our prayers
up: He spared no pains, he used all means to encourage us in our work, and to
provide for us, riding many a mile, writing many a letter; We never wanted his
counsel, nor his countenance: His heart, nor hand, Another Hezekiah, Josiah, or
Nehemiah he was to us, you have heard it, we experienced it.

Si mea cum vestris valuissent vota. As Ulysses said of Achilles: Could our
prayers, or tears have prevailed with the most High for the prolonging of his
life, we might have had him with us to our comfort, whom he has taken from
us, to our smart and sorrow: But he is fallen, he is fallen: Shall I tell you
how? Not as Cornelius Gallus the Praetor, not as Tegillinus, Nero and others;
to the stories of whose shameful, sinful falls, I presume you are not
strangers, they fell; as if their real design had been to dwell with Devils to
eternal ages.

He lost not his life for treachery, as some within our memory; he dyed not
violently, not sordidly, nor suddenly; as this great man in my Text, his
sickness was long, his disease lingering, his patience great, his resolutions
religious, his tears many: It is said of Adam, that he would turn his face
toward the garden of Eden and weep often.

For his disease I cannot say much, nor is it very much material: The Clocks
never smote all at once; nor did the learned Physicians agree in their
opinions, or prescriptions: We see he is fallen by it, and left all that knew
his worth, Athenienses Phenoen nominant, Hippocrates Phtisin. Vide Gal. in
Aphor. Hip. lib. 7. p. 555
mourners: una dies interest inter magnum virum and nullum; as Seneca said of
the City.

It was conceived, and by most concluded to be a Phtisis, an ulcer of the
lungs, a consumption; of this the first man that ever lived, dyed* Tirinus
says so: If his assertion or testimony be with you of any validity; Tirin in
Genesis 2.17 Aug. Tract. super Joan. Perer. in Genesis p. 144 Greg. Hom. 37. in
Evangel.
Caepit mori corpore (eodem quo peccavit momento) longa illa Phtyseos, seu
internae corruptionis morte, Agustin, Pererius, Gregory, and others are of his
Judgment.

To say no more at present; He fell in the Meridian, in the very Zenith of his
Honor: Shall I say of his death, as Philip did of Hipparcus's: It was in a
good time for himself, but for me too soon: Wish I could, and thousands more,
had the Lord so pleased, that like the Sun in Joshua's time he might have
stood still amongst us; or if by some degrees he had gone back (as the Sun in
Hezekiahs time) by this sickness, yet that he might have recovered his days
and health again; But the will of the Lord is done, and ours in his.

I have but one word more by way of humble Advice, and it is to the Town of
Atherton: Study this black, this afflictive providence, Non est muta rerum
natura, sed undique loquax. Erasm^
which gives the occasion of this sad and solemn convention, there is much in
it.

Look upon the death of this your worthy Lord and Master, as a said prognostic
of some approaching Judgment: his death it is feared will make way for the
Lords wrath; Antequam occidere sinat deus solemn Justi alicujus, oriri facit
solemn Justi alterius, Eccles. 1.5
Quando Luminaria patiuntur Eclypsin, signum malum est mundo: The Jews have a
saying; The death or fall of one Great man is the rise of another: pray that it
may be so in this ancient Family: Moses was solicitous about a successor, and
beggs an immediate choice from Heaven, but one under his own roof, within his
own walls is to be the man: Vide Chrysostom. de orando deum, lib. 2. and Ab. Seult.
de precar, cap. 29
There is within the walls of this worthy Family a pair of hopeful, goodly
children to repair this breach, and recruit this loss; pray that they may be
double comforts to that Family, and blessings to this Town: O pray! pray, the
power of prayer is wonderful.

Labor to see your own mortality in his death; The Jews in dangerous
sicknesses change their names, this alters (say they) the sentence of death
given out against him; if death be decreed to N. it is not to M. now he shall
not die, as a new man he shall have length of days.
and since you must die, do not sin; so live, while you live, that when you
die, your death may lead you to a better life: Desire not long life much; the
longer you wish to live, the longer you wish (if godly) to be out of Heaven;
let your deathbed rather find you fit, than fit you for God: measure not your
lives by the years which are gone, but by the good which you have done: Notable
is that of Seneca, Respice celoritatem rapidissimi temporis, Epist. 99.
cogita brevitatem hujus spacii, per quod citatissimi currimus; and elsewhere;
nec ulla res magis proderit, quam cogitatio mortalitatis, Lib. de Ira.
stat super caput fatum and pereuntes dies imputat, propiusque ac propius
accedit; I have not time to english them.

Live more to God, and more upon God, since this Cisterne is broken: Satis
praesidii in uno deo. Calv.
Address your selves to him, in whom all your fresh springs are: In the Summer
season, viz. the day of prosperity many springs are drained and dried up, which
in the winter of adversity are fresh and full.

Take heed how you suffer your affections to wander abroad, and about terrene
Objects; the stars which have least circuit, are nearest the pole, and men who
are least perplexed with worldly matters, are commonly nearest God: Is not he
an unreasonable wretch, whom Heaven will not satisfy?

Notable is that of Chrysostom, (...), In Ma^th. Homil, 4^
etc. All these sublunary things are full of vanity, insufficiency, mutability,
deceit ((...)) they are but fantasies, they have no solidity nor congruity to
your spirits.

Preserve that peace and unity amongst you, which is so fresh and fragrant: It
is your glory, your beauty, your safety; quod in cantu harmonia, Aug.
in civitate concordia; Let there be amongst us no strife, nor contention,
unless, which shall be furthest from strife and contention; is there any
heart-burnings? let them be turned into heart-breakings; Let all emnities and
animosities (if any amongst you) be laid aside, and not resumed till you have
another Lord of Atherton, who can (as this could) reconcile or remove them with
a word: Remember how legions of Devils have agreed in one man: Shall not the
Christians of, and in one Town? when sheep But much one against another, a
storm is approaching: Divisions are dangerous, disadvantagious, and scandalous;
the winds are very high, when the arms of a tree knock one against another.
Vide Aug. in Psalm. 133.1
O how good and pleasant a thing is it for brethren to live together in unity!
so sweet is this, says Augustine, that those who could never read the Psalter,
yet can sing this verse: Be of one mind, and Psalm. 24. conc. 1.
live in peace, and (though this Worthy be taken from you) the God of love and
peace shall be with you.

Preserve the Ministry of the Word amongst you; Drus. in Amos 8.11
it is anima pabulum ad vitam aeternam; it is vita, victus, virtus, and
custodia: Luther could live better in hell (as he thought) with it, than in
paradise without it: You have done much, no Town in England (I am persuaded)
more for it, repent not of your good works, as Pharaoh did, In all places where
I record my name, Exodus 20.24. I will come unto my people, and I will bless
them; Precious Promises, Hear and your souls shall live: There is not so much
of duty in the Precept, but there is as much of bounty and mercy in the
Promise: The Ministry of the Word is bonum inestimabile, a good never enough
prized: I would not have you know the worth of it (as many do) by the want of
it: I might say of its excellency and necessity, as the Rabbines say of
liberty; If the Heavens were Parchment, the Sea Ink, and every pile of grass a
pen, the praises of it could not be comprised, or expressed: There are some
things which for their transcendent worth, and usefulness, are said to
surpass all humane understanding; As The Love of God, Ephesians. 3.19. The Peace
of God; Phil. 4.7. The knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. The Joys of Heaven: If
the joy of Faith be unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1,8,
what then shall the joy of fruition be: without the Ministry of the Word, how
can you come to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified? O lay not violent hands
upon your own souls: Turn not your backs upon the Lords Ordinances, they are of
divine institution, not of humane invention: Expect not mercy without respect
had to duty, lest you perish eternally; some say they are above Gods
Ordinances; the truth is, Gods Ordinances are above them, these are spiritual,
they are sensual, carnal, etc. I know better things of you, though I thus
speak; were ever premonitions prejudicial? I give you this advice (My Beloved)
for no by or base ends: My trust is in that God who never failed his poor
servant. If I live, Exiguo pane and halece contentus erat. Luth. Melch. Ad. in
vita. Luth. p. 166
some place may need me (though an unprofitable, despicable, obscure creature)
If I dye, I shall need no place: My Son, God will provide should uphold this
base unbeleeving heart: A little served Luther, can I look for much? But this
is my fear, Brethren, this is my fear, the removal of the Ministry from you;
and others too: Magistracy and Ministry commonly fall together; they are like
Hippocrates his twins; See Isa. 3.2. Lam. 2.6,7. Lam. 4.20
Our sins have provoked the Lord to remove our Magistrates, the breath of our
nostrils; and they will remove Ministers too, if not timely and truly repented
of: It is for the peoples sins that God sometimes strikes their faithful
Ministers dumb, and dead too, Ezekiel. 3.26. I shall leave one Scripture with you,
and then commit you to God; It is that of Solomon the Master of the sentences;
where there is no vision, Prove. 29.18
the people perish, (...) this is inter loca tremenda.

Some render it thus; Feriabitur populus.
the people will keep holy day; they will have nothing to do, but weep, and
wail; or they will do nothing that is good.

Others thus; Nudabitur populus.
The people shall be stripped naked, left as a City without walls, exposed to
the fury of the enemy, as a body without clothes open to wind and weather.

And some, Manifestabitur populus.
The people shall be discovered; it will then appear, what is within, grace,
or sin, what paintings, breathings after God in his Ordinances, etc. Rebellis
erit populus.


Pagnin thus; The people will grow barbarous, rebellious; and does not
experience and observation prove it.

Others thus, Contemptibilis erit populus.
The people shall be of no esteem or repute, others may pity them, but few
prize them.

And some, Dissipabitur populus.
The people shall be dispersed, scattered; and are not families strangely and
sadly shivered and shattered, Congregations broken in minutula frustula?

And others; Abstrahetur populus.
They shall be drawn away with errors; either starved or poisoned.

Once more:

Desolabitur populus.
The people shall be destroyed, or perish.

All conclude, it shall go ill, very ill with that people.

FINIS.
A Postscript to the READER.
THis is an age, in which many are more forward to drink in new opinions, and
belch out aspersions, than pay their old debts: Praise and public honor is a
debt owing to every good man; yea, as Nazianzen speaks, it is ((...)) a debt
that of all debts is most due and just; Orat. Funeb. pro Caesario fratre.
Commemorative Orations are not useless, when the persons interred were very
useful; why should we not embalme the memories of our Worthies: I remembered
that saying of Nicias an exquisite Painter, (Artis pingendi non minimam partem
in eo esse positam, ut argumentum^ eligatur pingi dignum, and quod spectantium
oculos idoneum sit tenere, Benignitas quae exeretur ^rga mortuos est benignitas
veritatis, quia n^n expectatur retributio.
and that other of R. Sal. (...); and therefore I was the more copious in the
commendation of this deceased Gentleman; and yet not so full as others might,
and would have been, had they been the Orators: That some snarled (I was
informed, while I was transcribing this short Sermon) cannot much be admired,
nor is it at all regarded, (...): Truth is tart, and unpleasant to fools, etc.
I see the Arabic proverb verified: Justus in patria sua est tanquam aurum in
fodina sua; nullius fere pretii aut valoris; and that of Tacitus; Non minus
periculum ex magna fama, quam ex mala; a great fame is not less dangerous,
than a bad one: and that of Quintilian, Nemo eodem tempore ass qui potest,
magnam famam, and magnam quietem; No mortal wight can in^oy a great fame
quietly.

I must say of him, that he was a man subject to like passions as other men,
and not without his infirmities: The present tense in Grammar is accompanied
with the imperfect; the future with the praeterpluperfect tense; such is the
condition of our present and future sanctity; Our future is more than perfect,
our present is really imperfect, yet real; the frailties of others are to be
observed, as well as their excellencies; but not with a partial, envious,
malicious, curious, censorious, wanton eye: I drew his picture, as Amelius, and
Carterus did Plotinuses, without his command, or consent; they did it as he
was disputing in the Schools: I did it, as he lay dead, and at a distance:
David drew no line in Abners portraicture with a black coal; why should I in
HIS? David's service is noted, and for that he is praised; his sin is not
mentioned, Act. 13.38. Jobs patience recorded, his murmuring and impatience not
remembered, James 5.11. Rahabs Faith is mentioned, not her lie, Heb. 11.31. Thou
art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee, says Christ of his Spouse; yet
she had her blots, spots, infirmities, and deformities: Too much is said by
way of Apology: The best answer to words of reproach and petulancy, is silence
and patience: It is thy best course (Good Reader) to let Bucers and Fagius his
bones lie where they are interred; if dug up, they shall be more solemnly
honored: Cato was, (and this Worthy shall be) as often cleared as accused: No
more, Ne duplo te oneret minus suavis oration, si and longa fuerit.

In obitum Joannis Athertoni, Armigeri illustrissimi and Lancanstriae,
Vicecomitis, Elegia.
PLangite (doctiloqui lectores) fata Magistri
Atherton, sacro cujus inerme jacet.
Pulvere seclusum corpus (miserabile visu)
qui fossus, lethi vi violentis, obit:
Intulit (heu) quantum patriae jactura dolorem
Iuctisonis obitum dicere jamque modis
Presserat ora dolor stirpem meminisseque vitam,
invictum pugilem, succubuisse neci.
Aequa falce secas justos, humiles, venerandos,
Atropos: aut votis tela reversa piis.
Illustres, patriae proceres, peperere parents
illum, praelustris, pignora chara, domus,
Undique praeclarem sobolem proavitaque jura
expandunt, cunctis crustaque picta viris;
Stemmate materno, patrioque exortus, equestri,
sanguine; virtutes inclyta gesta probant;
Quae a teneris animo fidoque exercuit annis,
in Parochos, primum, caetera rura, deum,
Constituunt haec signa fidem, reverentia honoris,
quam fovet, alit amor, parturit, atque fides;
Belliger arma capit, natus bis circiter annos
denos, dux validus Caesaris instar erat:
Quod fugat ense suo divini numinis hosts
non sontis mores perfida facta ferens.
Bellerophon ut fortis eques superare malignos
Angligeni potuit sternere monstra soli.
Post quam diffudit scurras velut ense Cimaeras,
justitiam tribuit, pacis amicus erat,
Et jam Pegeseis vectus petit aethera pennis
auxiliis animi, monstrae superba domans.
Dulcius ut moriens modulatur carmina Cygnus,
sic fuit ad finem, casta tenaxque fides;
Acriter (in pravos tantum) curverat arcum,
donec victrices conticuere tubae:
Fidus erat legum, ruris, defensor, inermis,
pauperis, and viduae vota libenter agit:
Complorant humiles, Proceres, Respublica, casum,
Herois tanti proluit unda genas:
(...) dulciloqui nati (O (...) patrona)
jure petat lachrymas mortuus, ille preces.
Dum vivus meruit, post fatum fama manebit,
and decus in terris singula gesta patent.
Quam generosus erat Comitatus posse notavit
and positis armis munia pacis obit.
Ergo illi tumulum tanti mo^umenta doloris
astruis, and querulis vocibus astra feris.
Languida mors rapuit nulli mage flendus Oresti
quam tibi, cui puero junctus amore fuit.
Nec periisse putes rapuerunt Numina mentem,
sorbet humus carnem, caetera mundus habet;
Aspice quam tenui terrestris gloria filo
pendeat, and vit am fac meditare aliam,
(Adjavet ille deus tandem) ut sua chara propago
auxilii, nostrae spesque salutis adest.
Per Joannem Battersbie, Scholae Leighensis Praefectum, compacta.
Id^bus Januarii, 1655.
Upon the much lamented Death of John Atherton, Esquire High Sheriff of the County
Palatine of Lancaster.
MEn, women, children, you that pass this way,
Divert your eyes to this sad Hearse, and stay:
The ground is holy that your feet stand on,
Do not profane it with oblivion.
Here lies the famous Atherton, my Rhyme,
Doubts not to call him Phaenix of his time;
Justice and mercy, and true courtesy,
Meekness, uprightness, and humility,
With other noble virtues, met in thee
As in a Center all the world may see;
Soon ripe, soon rot, the proverb true does say,
Else had thou been alive, not laid in clay:
If Birth, if Name, if Place, if Children dear,
If that fair Spouse of thine (whose virtues rare
Make her to be admired) if house, or lands,
Or Skill, or Art, or Love of dearest friends,
If Prayers, or Tears, which sometimes Heaven move,
If Youth, or Strength, if good men's Sighs or Love,
If any, or if all these had been able,
Th'ad'st lived as yet, but Deaths inexorable.
It Is said the day whereon thou wast interred
Heaven did weep, as though it had abhorred
So sad a sight, and men poured out their tears
Abundantly, as Symptoms of their fears
Of some sad fates approach, as when does fall
A Comet from above which warns all.
When good men so lament ones Death, sure then,
He that is dead, was not the worst of men;
By all this mourning, this my thoughts have scanned
He went by water, tho he went by land.
Death should not now be lean (me thinks) but fat,
And hide his ugly bones from sight, for that
He feeds on such sweet flesh of late, as on
Brave Holland, Ashurst, and our Atherton.
I am told thy lingering visitation,
Brought thee to heavenly meditation;
O blessed soul that thou could learn to kiss
The Rod, that brought thee to celestial bliss.
Grow fast young Babe, and let thy Fathers grace
Advance thee to his high renown and place,
Preserve his Name, and when you are dead he will be
An everlasting monument to thee.
J must now leave thee, grisly Death does call,
O do not weep my Dear, I hope I shall
Heavens bliss enjoy, this sanctified affliction
Now brings me to a state of true perfection.
Amongst the many joys that God has given,
Thou'st been my greatest comfort under Heaven,
Heavens bless thee Dear, with these our tender Babes,
Ere long I hope you will wear Christ's glorious Robes,
Renounce the world, love God, make Christ your own
It Is the only way to enjoy an heavenly Throne
O be to mine an help, a friend, a Mother,
Now Christ takes me, God give to thee another.
My dissolution I could better bear
A lass than tidings of thy Death to hear,
Remove Deaths stroke (O God) accept a price.
Yea rather take me for a Sacrifice.
And I had rather die, than live to see
Thee taken hence, then comes my Misery;
Heavens keep thy soul, my head shall be a grave,
Ever to hold thee whilst an heart I have:
Revive my Dear, can neither Skill nor Art
Take deaths sad symptoms from thy tender heart?
Of all the Woes that ever me befell:
None like to this, my Joy, my Dear. Farewell.
Erubuit Facultas,
Extorsit amor
Lugens posuit.
Bradleius. Hayhurst.

AN Elegy upon the never sufficiently deplored Death of my noble Friend John
Atherton of Atherton, Esquire High-Sheriffe of Lancashire.
ENvious Death! what is thy design? t'undo
Our Gentry, Clergy, and our Country too;
Lancashire's poor; in one year there are gone
Three Pillars, Holland, Ashurst, Atherton.
Could Paracelsus men (as birds) revive,
Great John within one hour should be alive.
Or in his room, should thou dispense, would I
Prepare for my accounts, and gladly dye.
Could tears or prayers thee from the dead regain,
Who would not sigh, and pray, and weep amain?
There were in Caesar many Marii,
It Is true in thee more, both did live and die;
I dare avouch it, contradict who can
Each part of thee could make a perfect man:
Envious Death! sum up thy gains and tell,
What have thou got? This body, in this cell.
His noble soul was pure etherial fire,
His heart and thoughts did far above aspire
The Crowns and Scepters of most potent Kings
He held their Diadems inferior things.
Thou could not such a soul surprise: It Is fled
From Earth to Heaven, where not one tear is shed.
There is no pain, but pleasure, there is no trouble;
Life is eternal there; here but a bubble.
No moans, no groans, now no complaints can come
From him; There Is joy and triumph in their room,
Blessed soul! thou art in peace, and well do know
One hour in Heaven's worth thousands here below.
Another Epitaph on the Right Worshipful JOHN ATHERTON. Anagram. Ah no other in.
AH there is no other in thy place
Great Prince, who can it so much grace,
Heaven's fill it, and give to thy seed,
Age, Virtue, Honor with all speed.
This will repair our breach, and grief
In part abate, and yield relief.
Ah there is no other Magistrate
With us to serve the Church or State.
He Is fallen, and enshrined here lies
One noble, valiant, just and wise.
Give us an age to tell the rest
Which may, All cannot, be expressed.
Posuit Richardus Jolly Schola Athertoniensis praf.

Ad tumulum Principis illustrissimi, viri honoratissimi, Domini Joannis
Athertoni, Armigeri, totius Commit. Lancastriensis praefecti. Epitaphium.
ISte Athertoni tumulus tegit ossa Joannis,
quis, qualis fuerit, scit? scio, Magnus erat
In vivis talis, qualem vix Zoilus unquam
dente Theonino carpere possit, erat:
Esset Apellis opus te pingere, Clare Joannes,
languentis patriae fida calumna tuae
Pastorum tutela, tuae decus (Inelyte) stirpis,
gloria Magnatum, religionis honos:
An generis splendour nil? non illustria prosint
stemmata? nec virtus bellica? chara phalanx?
Nil tua te pietas? nil te veneranda potest as
Juvit and? heu flecti mors truculenta nequit.
Occubuit magnus princeps florentibus annis,
lilia ceu saevo frigore verna cadunt:
Proh dolor! hic jacet exanimis, quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis? proh dolor ut cecidit?
Mart cadit, non Morte cadit, fatalia Parcae
stamina ruperunt non reparanda manu.
Pulvis and umbra sumus, quassum vas; somnus and aura,
Ros, spectrum, ventus, vita caduca vapor.
Te vivo suavis vita est, moriente peracris.
Dulce mihi tecum vivere, dulce mori.
Non longum praeclare vale vir; fidus Achates
Tu mihi pro multis millibus unus eras.
Tros Anchisiades amissum morte parentem
flevit ut, occisum Pergama maesta ducem;
Nos ita te miseros (longa O dignissima vita)
sedulus extinctum flere coeget amor.
Flere jubet Pietas, suadet Spes gaudia, Nomen
and tua ad extremum stent monumenta diem:
Molliter ossa premat tellus; clementia servet
alma dei sobolem, teque Maria tuam:
Macte tua virtute puer clarissime; tandem
(Solamen nostrum est) surculus arbor erit.
Vive Deo, precor, and quod patri fata negarunt,
producant vitae tempora longa tuae.
Ita precatur lugens. J. L.

Upon the much lamented Death of the honored and truly honorable, John
Atherton of Atherton Esquire High Sheriff of Lancashire.
Had thou grave Plutarch, or Laertius,
Or Trajans Pliny, or Hesychius.
Had thou Callisthenes to write thine acts,
As Alexander had his noble facts.
Had thou Achilles fate, great Homers Pen
To draw thy portraicture, or Nazianzen
To limne thee to the lire, or Melchiors quill,
Or quaint Protogenes with his pencil,
Rare Phaenix of our age, then might thy glory
Remain on record in eternal story.
The Babes unborn should ask, whose is this Hearse?
And we will our tribute pay in moanful verse.
But thy Renown is such, thy Name more graceth
The verse; then they can it, who ere thee praises.
Only Seraphick tongues due laud can give
To thee great John, too good with us to live:
If to admire, were to commend, then we
Thy worth could tell with more facility.
Thy virtues thee commend to after ages
Without the help of Elegiack pages.
Each tongue could tell, and every eye did see
An impetus heroical in thee:
Thy Grave deportment on the Bench was such,
Though young, that Myriads did admire it much
Just, Aristides like, concord and peace,
Heavens legacy, 'twas thy design to increase.
A parallel Husband, Father, Friend, or Brother,
Justice or Sheriff, where can you discover?
Eyes to the blind, legs to the lame, an Harbor
To the afflicted, and the poor man's succor.
Humble when Highest, of Manhood the Mirror;
Noble to Friends, to Foes a mighty terror.
Each wrinkle in thy brow (nay credit me)
Earl Nevils-like a Princes Tomb might be.
Thine eye (like Luthers) Leonine and fierce
Or as the Basilisks, so would it pierce.
When they beheld thee march, they thought another
Caesar was there, or Alexanders Brother.
In war thy prowess, policy and skill,
Scanderbegs like, ever appeared still:
True to thy trust, none in our Memory
Abhorred turn-coats more, or treachery.
Such was thy temperance and sobriety,
Thy patience, prudence, and dexterity;
Great Atherton, the style of Parasite
I need not fear, while in thy praise I write.
Thy care to curb profaneness, and to keep
The Wolves from preying on Christ's tender Sheep;
Thy pains about the Clergy, Helicon
We may exhaust in lamentation.
Better enough than All; such rare perfections
Centered in thee, as transcend my expressions.
As Croesus's son dumb and appal'd I Would rested,
Had not this fatal dart my muse molested.
But Death, like to the Duke of Parma's sword,
Spares not the noblest Lady, no nor Lord.
In Rome men died Hormisda marks; but we
Gods with us dying, and interred see.
They die like men whom we count Gods, and lie
In dust without distinctive Heraldrie.
Long live (Heavens grant) T'inherit lands and fame
That other in thy room, and of thy Name.
Another Epitaph.
Augustine retracts what he had writ before
In praise of learned Manlius Theodore,
We need not, nor half-faced may we draw
Thee (as Antigonus) to hide a flaw:
Thou was it, give us more time, and we will say what,
Sum up most Excellencies, thou wast that:
It Is an Herculean task him to commend
Whose worth knows no beginning no nor end;
We Will weep the rest, cease Muse, let him who can
Sail further into that vast Ocean:
Who so does live, and do, and die like thee,
His Fame shall last to all eternity.
To the Mourners.
Happy Nepotian, now thine eye sees
None of our eminent calamities,
Old Hierom so thee judged; and Zenophon
Thought Gryllus blessed; and we thee noble John.
Weep nor, as without hope; cry not Alas,
He Is better where he is, than where he was.
Hark! is not that His voice? does not He say:
Heavens meanest mansion's worth this Globe of Clay?
Posuit. Jac. Livesey.

Series Decretorum DEI, CAUSARUM QUE, ET Mediorum Salutis nostrae.

Cognitio Dei (ejusque decret orum) and studium Theologiae nostrum in hac vita
vere alphabeticum and infantile est, donec in caelestem Academiam ad ipsum Deum
fontem sapientiae translati, non tantum titulo tenus doctores, sed vere and
solid a deo docti and perfecti Theologi fiamus.

D. Chytr. de vita aeterna. page 179. LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson for Thomas
Parkhurst at the three Crowns over against the great Conduit at the lower end
of Cheapside. 1657.

Clarissimis nec non in Christo Charissimis viris, Dom. Joanni Tilsleio,
Ecclesiae Deanensis; ET Dom. Leonardo Claytono, Ecclesiae Blackburniensis, In
agro Lancastriensi Rectoribus vigilantissimis, concionatoribus politissimis,
Theologis eximiis. Vitam and faelicitatem.
QUatenus nobis denegatur diu vivere, relinquamus aliquid quo nos vixisse
testemur; inquit C. Plinius secundus in Epistola qua Silii Italici mortem
deflet, and ut satius est unum aliquid insigniter; Plin. Ep. Libro 9. Rustico
suo.
quam plurima mediocriter, ita plurima mediocriter, si non possimus unum
aliquid facere insigniter: Ori tamen meo digitum apponere proposueram sub
silentio delitescens propter ingenioli mei obtusitatem, scientiae pauperiem,
and insanabile illud scribendi cacoethes, quod nonnullos hodierno die (nollem
and me) tenet: Seriem vero praerosam hanc (qualem, qualem!) decretorum dei,
Causarumque and Mediorum salutis, ad implendas vacantes quasdam pagellas, bona
doctorum cum venia in lucem edere, and celeberrimis nominibus vestris (quae
volitant docta per ora virum) inscribere and dicare ausus sum; munusculum
tantis patronis penitus indignum fateor, memoris tamen gratique animi publicum
sit testimonium, pro multiplici vestra in me benevolentia, quam singulari cum
gaudio indies magis magisque sum expertus: Brevis est, inest autem sua gratia
parvis: suadae delicias fastidit, quid refert (ut Lipsii verbis utar) quo velo
aut vest eam texerit author; comptu philologico series hujusmodi non est
exornanda; placent deo non solum qui coccinum and dihaphum ad usum tabernaculi
proferunt, sed qui pro modulo quod possunt, caprarum pilos arietumve pelles
afferunt; acerrimi criticorum judicii vestrum moderabitur suffragium, si
misello and tenello huicce faetui arriseritis and aspiraveritis, hoc ipsum (ut
Salvianus ad Salonium) infructuosum saltem non erit quod prodesse tentavi; men's
boni studii, piique voti, etiamsi affectum non invenerit caepti operis, habet
tamen praemium voluntatis. Valetote (viri Ornatissimi) diuque Ecclesiae Christi
praesitis and prositis, omnigenis dotibus animas vestras: locupletet (...),
conatibus vestris vere piis benedicat, faxitque ut studia vestra adultiora
prelo mandentur (non tineis blattisve comittantur) cedantque in dei gloriam and
piorum emolumentum.

Ita precatur vestrum observantissimus Jacobus Livesey
Scripsi, Idibus Februarii. Anno 1655.
Sententia rigida Calvinianorum extrema.
Praedestinatio, cujus parts. Electio quorundam absoluta. Reprobatio
reliquorum absoluta. Creatio hominis Faedus legale sive operum Lapsus in Adamo.
Mors Christi pro electis. Faedus novum seu Evangelii. Vocatio externa per
verbum and Sacramenta, Defectus vocationis externa per verbum and Sacramenta.
Vocatio efficax and interna per gratiam spiritus. Defectus gratiae efficacis.
Gratiae habituales fidei, etc. Gratiae umbratiles. Perseverantia. Apostasia.
Obduratio Infidelitas.
Calus aterua Mors aeterna.

Sententia vel primo aspectu dura, quaeque urgetur duabus maxim
difficultatibus.

1 Altera, quod qui lapsui reprobationem praeficiunt (sive illi hominem ut
creabilem, sive ut jam creatum objectum praedestinationis statuant) videntur in
dei justitiam simul and bonitatem impingere, quibus utrisque nihil potest esse
pugnantius, quam hominem nondum aliquid mali sua culpa promeritum ad exitium
destinare.

2 Altera, quod ex ista sententia sequi videatur, deum in praedicatione verbi
fide agere haud satis integra, quin imo serio illudere humano generi dum vocat
ad fidem in Christum, and ad promissiones novi faederis pariter cum electis
reprobos, ad quos tamen, ex praecedanea sua intention; mors Christi and faedus
Evangelii nullo modo pertinent, aut pertenire etiam possunt.

Secunda Sententia Arminianorum extrema altera.
Creatio hominis. Faedus operum. Lapsus in Adamo. Mors Christi. Faedus
Evangelii. Electio conditionata and indefinita omnium viz. sub condition
fidei, etc. Vocatio universalis ad fidem per media externa sufficientia.
Auxilium generale, seu gratia universalis sufficiens ad conversionem. Fides
gratiam oblatam libere apprehendens. Infidelitas gratiam oblatam libere
respuens. Perseverantia finalis. Apostasia finalis and totalis a fide and
gratia. Electio peremptoria Reprobatio peremptoria. Salus aeterna. Mors
aeterna.

Qui sunt partium Arminianorum, quid intus ac serio sentiant nondum illis
libuit explicato profiteri, ne eos juxta cum Pelagio sentire, nimis palam
constaret and liquido; cujus olim damnatas haereses ab orco revocatas
distinctiuncularum duntaxat subtiliori lima politas de novo instaurarunt, non
sanius sed cautius locuti; in istorum dogmate cum alia debent esse merito
suspecta, tum illud imprimis ad suum authorem Pelagium est relegandum, quo
statuitur divinae tam praedestinationis decretum quam gratiae efficaciam ex
naturalium virium exercitio voluntatisque humanae inclinatione and
determinatione omnino pendere.

Tertia Sententia prima and Communior.
Creatio hominis. Faedus operum. Lapsus in Adamo. Electio quorundam ad salutem
gratuita Derelictio reliquorum in peccatis justa, quae and reprobatio. Mors
Christi. Faedus novum Vocatio externa Defectus vocationis externae.

Gratia conversionis, seu vocatio interna. Defectus gratiae efficacis.

Gratiae Habituales. Perseverantia. Infidelitas.

Salus aeterna. Mors aeterna.



Haec est opinio Communior eorum Theologorum, qui a Lutheranis and Arminianis
Calviniani dicuntur; in qua fuisse and ipsum Calvinum non pauci existimant;
Inque hoc uno differt haec Sententia a prima illa and duriori supralapsorum seu
rigide-Calvinianorum, quod quum illa electionem lapsui anteriorem facit haec
demum collocet post praevisum humani generis in Adamo lapsum: Adeoque e duobus
ejus Sententiae incommodis alterum facile vitat, constante nimirum ex ipso
lapsu justitia Dei reprobantis quoscunque filiorum peccatoris Adami: At
posteriori illa difficultate, de vocatione scilicet reproborum ad promissiones
faederis and fidem Christi ex intention Dei ad solos electos praecise
pertinentes non minus urgentur qui hac via incedunt, quam durae illius
sententiae assertores.

Quarta Sententia, intermedia secunda, viz. Armin.
Creatio hominis. Faedus operum. Lapsus in Adamo. Mors Christi. Faedus Gratiae.
Auxilium generale (ex part Dei) sufficiens ad conversionem. Electio quorundam
ex beneplacito voluntatis. Praeteritio reliquorum sine auxilio gratiae
specialis. Auxilium gratiae specialis supersufficientis and efficacis, qua
infallibiliter and ^otu convertuntur. Infidelitas and impaenitentia, Fides,
charitas, etc. radicatae. Fides, etc. Scil. Temporariae. Perseverantia
Apostasia Salus aeterna. Mors aeterna.

Scripsit non ita pridem (cum in superis esset) Reverendus quidam praesul
nostrae Ecclesiae, brevem censuram super quinta capita doctrinae in Belgio
controversa, quae passim in manibus eruditorum teritur; ejus hanc arbitror
fuisse sententiam, quantum ex illo opusculo existimare licet, in quo media
incedens via utriusque extremae incommoda haud incommode declinavit; Si vir
pius and inter primos eruditus id egisset fusius and consulto, ut seriem
decretorum Dei, causarumque and mediorum salutis integram exhiberet, non dubito
quin ista omnia explicatius propositurus fuisset and accuratius; quo minus
tamen in hac sententia (prout jam supra (...) expressa est) acquiescam, praeter
alia nonnulla illud imprimis facit quod auxilium generale sufficiens ad
conversionem praedestinationi praeficiat, nulla interim facta uspiam mentione
vocationis externae in verbo, quum auxilium generale ejusmodi aut non sit
omnino concedendum, aut certe cum externo salutis medio praedicatione scilicet
Evangelii conjungendum, ut sit commune electis and reprobis intra pomaeria
visibilis Ecclesiae, non generale per extentionem etiam ad eas gentes quae de
salute per Christum parta ne fando quidem audivere.

Quinta Sententia intermedia tertia.
Creatio generis humani. Faedus operum sive legale. Lapsus in Adamo. Mors
Christi pro genere humano. Faedus novum and Evangelium de Justitia and salute
per fidem in Christum. Electio quorundam in Christo omnino gratuita, ut
participes sint faderis, adeoque justitiae fidei and salutis per Christum
partae, hujus decreti executio fit per media. Preteritio reliquorum and in
massa corrupta derelictio, in manifestationem gloriae justitiae Del.
Extraordinaria de quibus non est a nobis aliquid temere statuendum. Ordinaria
gratia Communis (et improprie dicta) vocationis externae per verbum and
sacramenta. visibilis Ecclesia and Mixta. Defectus gratiae communis and
vocacionis and externae per verbum and sacramenta. Gratia specialis (and (...)
dicta) salutaris and secundum propositum vocationis ^ternae and efficacis per
spiritum sanctum renovantem corda electorum pro cujusque scilicet mensura and
captu, viz. Defectus gratiae specialis and vocationis efficacis unde sequuntur
vel Viz. Vel Infantum per gratiam sacramentalem in baptismo collatam modo nobis
imperceptibili. Adultorum per infusionem gratiarum habitualium fidei, etc.
Gratiae umbratiles and (...) dictae ut in hypocritis. Caecitas mentis and
obduratio cordis ut in aperte impiis and prophanis. Perseverantia infide and
gratia. Apostasia finalis. Impaenitentia finalis. Infidelitas pravae
dispositionis, Infidelitas pure negationis.
Salus aeterna. Mors aeterna.

De hac Sententia quinta and ultima, operae erit fortassis pretium inquirere,
an non sit tutior and communior ad vitandas difficultates, quibus premuntur
duae Sententiae, quam duarum reliquarum alterutra, videtur conformis doctrinae
sacrae paginae, scriptis Orthodoxorum patrum, nec non in iis, Aurelii imprimis
Augustini, and Confessioni Ecclesiae Anglicanae.

FINIS.
It was the saying of Theodoctes, a famous Philosopher (as Stobaeus relates it,
Sermon. 66.) that every man desired two things, which when they had obtained,
they were quickly with them tired, viz. Old age, and Wives; I may add a third,
to be in Print; Importunity has halled this to the Press; the Press has in
some things erred -- Liber optimus ille
Qui minimis urgetur, sed sine crimine nullus;


The material mistakes are mostly in the Latin or Greek, and here marked, what
punctual or literal do occur, be so candid as to correct.

ERRATA'S.
PAge 1 read Worshipful, and line penult. Pythagoras, p. 3 r. Volusian, p. 5.
(...), p. 8 r. (...), p. 9 was at, r. were at, p. 11 in Marg. r. in omni
tempore, p. 12 in Marg. r. in veniri, p. 15 r. (not) without a parenthesis, and
absque dubitatione is misplaced, p. 28 r. (...) p. 29. r. even of every, p. 32
r. Trajanus his Pliny, p. 40 r. Analysi, p. 41 senescit, p 42 Marg. lavater, p.
50 read geritis for geretis, p. 51 r. nor obscurity, for not obscurity, p. 53.
in Marg. r. quinam, for qui non, p. 54 r. praedicandum, for praecandum, p. 61
r. (...), for (...), p. 66 r. concionantem, for conscionantem, p. 69 r. the
Apostl's, for the Apostle, p. 78 put our time line ult. p. 79. (...), p. (...),
p. 92 r. Phocylides, for Pocyl. p. 95 (...), p. 96 r. vir pius, for ver, p. 108
r. cessat Diabolus, in Marg. p. 124 r. ever for never, p. 125. r. most zealous,
for more zealous, p. 136 r. gratia suadet, p. 137 r. exutroque temperatus, p.
139 r. was not, l. antep. p. 149 four Cornered, p. 154 r. motions, for motives,
p. 162 r. excessive, for accessive, the same in p. 198 p. 178 resp. affirm, for
Neg. p, 182 1. Gods wonder, p. 197 r. Joabs, for Jobs, p. 218 r. inveniri, for
invenire, p. 233 r. Epicurus, for Elurus, and polentam, fer popicentam, p. 235
(...) for (...), p. 237 r. jacet, for jacit, p. 240 r. (...) for (...), p. 238
r. (...) for (...), p. 251 r (...), p. 273. for fin, r. sin, p. 282 for fufius,
r. fusius, p. 318 for pertenire, r. pertinere.

Books lately printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the three Crowns
over against the great Conduit, at the lower end of Cheapside.
A Learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, by Dr. Richard Sibbs, published for public good,
by Thomas Manton, Folio. There is newly come forth Mr. William Fenner his
Continuation of Christ's Alarm to drousy Saints, with a Treatise of Effectual
Calling: The Killing Power of the Law: The Spiritual Watch: New Birth: A
Christians ingrafting into Christ: A Treatise on the Sabbath, which were never
before printed, bound in one Volume, Fol. and may be had alone of them that
have his other Works, as well as bound with all his former Works, which are now
newly printed in the same Volume. Truth brought to light, and discovered by
time, or an Historical Narration of the first fourteen years of King James, in
4o. The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, wherein is contained
Directions, for the right method of keeping and using, according to the Rules
of Practice; a Day-book of National and public, personal and private passages
of Gods Providence, to help Christians to thankfulness, and experience. By John
Beudle, Minister of the Gospel at Barstone in Essex, large 8o. Mr. Robinsons
Christians Armor in large 8o. Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses
made upon (Lights) by Robert Farlie, small 8o. Grace to the Humble, as
preparation to the Sacrament in five Sermons, by Dr. John Preston. Picturae
Louventes, or Pictures drawn forth into Characters, 12o. A most Excellent
Treatise containing the way to seek Heavens Glory, to fly Earths Vanity, to
fear Hells Horror, with godly Prayers, and the Bellmans summons, 12o. Johnsons
Essaies expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies. The one thing necessary: By Mr.
Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook, 8o. (...) in the House of
Mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an Exposition on the fifth
Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of Upingham, in the County of
Rutland. Groans of the Spirit, or the Trial of the Truth of Prayer. A
Handkercher for Parents Wet-eyes, upon the death of their children or friends.
The Dead Saint speaking to Saints and Sinners living, in several Treatises,
viz. On 2 Samuel 24.10. on Cant. 4.9. on John 3.15. on John 1.50. on Isa. 58.2.
on Exodus 15.11. Never Published before. By Samuel Bolton, D. D. late Mr. of
Christ's College in Cambridge. Four profitable Treatises very useful for
Christian practice, viz. The Killing Power of the Law. The Spiritual Watch. The
New Birth. Of the Sabbath. By the Reverend William Fenner, late Minister of
Rochford Peoples Need of a Living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost,
M.A. by Mr. Zach. Crofton. A Treatise against the Toleration of all Religions,
By Mr. Tho. Edwards. Chatechizing Gods Ordinance in sundry Sermons, by Mr.
Zachar^ ^elton, Minister of Buttolphs Aldgate London, the second Edition,
corrected and augmented. A Coppy-Book methodized and engraven, by Thomas
Cross, wherein fair Writing is expressed, by which one may learn to write of
himself that can but read. Dr. Stoughtons thirteen Sermons containing the form
of sound words, and some other Treatises. The Godly Man's Ark, or City of
Refuge, in the day of his Distress, discovered in diverse Sermons, the first of
which was preached at the Funeral of Mris. Elizabeth Moore. Whereunto is
annexed Mris. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected by
her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness. By Ed.
Calamy. B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Alderman-bury. A Theater of Political
Flying-Insects. Wherein especially the Nature, the Worth, the Work, the Wonder,
and the Manner of Right-ordering of the Be, is discovered and described. By
Samuel Purchase, M. A. and Pastor at Sutton in Essex. There are going to the
Press some new Pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of Rotchford in Essex,
never yet printed, preserved by a special providence, one of which is a second
part of his wilful Impenitency, being five Sermons more that he preached upon
the 18. of Ezekiel and the 32. verse.
FINIS.

