LITTLE NON-SUCH: OR, Certain new Questions Moved out of ANCIENT TRUTHS.

I. Concerning the words, Let us make man after our own Image.

II. Whether that was a material Apple which Adam did eat.

III. Whether the forbidding of marriage be not a Popish injunction only, and
not rightly grounded from the Scripture.

Newly published with intent to find out the truth, if it be not here already.

Magna est veritas and prevalent. London, Printed for H. P. 1646.

Advertisement.
IF any will prejudicate, or have not patience to examine a truth, how long
soever concealed or obscured; or if he be fantastical and will laugh at his
shadow, not discerning from whence it proceeds, let him put a part this serious
(though little) discourse; it is intended for better judgments.

Since these late eruptions in Church and State the minds of men are become
much distracted; and no marvel, seeing the various opinions concerning civil
Government in the first place, whether Monarkia, Aristocratia, or neither but a
mixed; and some perhaps affecting Oligarchia, which is the worst. Then as
touching the rents in the Church, what shall suffice to be said? since many
both grave and learned Divines do avouch, that all the heresies fomented at
several times, informer ages, and condemned by several Councels, are now
extant, attended with as many more; and how shall it be otherways? when both
Fathers and Councels are derided and contemned (without control) by the very
offscouring of the people; yea, even such as settled and confirmed our
Christian faith (by refuting errors and heresies the first 400 years) which
till now the Christian world has received for Orthodox: yet is it no wonder to
see the Scripture abused and mis-interpreted by every Mechanicke, mis-applying
the sense to their fantastic humors; seeing there was never heresy broached,
but came with verbum Dei Scripture in the mouth: the devil himself could
find no fitter way to vent his impostury, when he came to tempt our Savior.
Although it may be doubted whether or no there be any thing new, that never
was; for nihil dictum quod non dictum prius, nothing said that was not said
before; yet many matters are daily opened, which have been shut up and clouded
by the Romish Church since the time of Phocas the Emperor when that Hierarchy
begun to usurp upon the rest: And likewise many errors and heresies that seem
to be new are but the same in substance, they were in former times, yet perhaps
with some additions as absurd as the principal. Now to reduce the Primitive
purity will be a work too hard for man's capacity; it must be God only in his
good time, who for our pride, vainglory, hypocrisy, and perhaps infidelity,
has suffered us to fall into these fractions and distempers. But in the mean
time if some grave and learned man will a little trouble himself to resolve a
few following questions, it may give comfort to weak consciences that are in
doubt, and perchance afflicted.

And herein we detest to be curiously inquisitive in things not necessary, but
only covet the health of our souls, and the bettering of our understandings.

BEginning then with the first Book of Moses called Chapter 7. v. 26.
Genesis. And God said, Let us make man after our likeness, V. 27. in the
Image of God created he him, male and female created, etc. Some then (seeing
the shape and form that man bears in his personal appearance) do conceive,
that God the Creator bears the same form in shape and person: some others
say, this Image is meant, in the likeness to our maker in soul and spirit;
and therefore blame them that imagine, or set him forth in the likeness of any
humane shape: To that is answered again, that the Text formerly cited cannot
be meant of soul and spirit, because at that time man was not a living soul;
for proof they say that God finished his work in six days, whereof the making
of man was part, and rested the Chapter 2. v. 3.
seventh, and hallowed it: but after the seventh day he breathed life into man,
and made him a living soul, Chap. 2. v. 7. Therefore he was made according to
the likeness of God in personal shape, because at his first making he was not
a living soul, till after God had rested the seventh day, and then breathed
life into him, as is formerly proved: And long after his transgression, God
said Chapter 3. v. 22.
the man is become like one of us; so it seems at first he had not a spiritual
understanding: It is likewise said, God showed unto Moses his back parts, but
his face should not be seen Exodus 33.23.
; therefore if he have back parts, and a face, he has a shape, which when he
pleases he can make visible, as then he did. And the Lord spoke to Moses face
to face, as a man speaks to his friend Chapter 33. v. 7.
: Moreover what were the three men that appeared to Abraham as he sat in the
tent? if not the Trinity Chapter 18. v. 2.
which did afterward eat of the Cake that Sara made, and the Calfe which
Abraham fetched from the fold, as appears, v. 8. Now though it is, and must be
acknowledged, that God is so infinite in wisdom and power, that therein he
cannot be circumscribed nor comprehended; yet (say some) that does not hinder a
personal shape or proportion: But some others (notwithstanding those plain
seeming proofs, do not allow that God has any bodily shape at all; which if
it be so resolved, and these things reconciled, to better proofs and reasons
out of Scripture by one that is wise and learned it will satisfy.

THe second question arises out of Genesis. And the Lord Genesis 2.16, 17
said, of every Tree of the garden thou may eat, but of the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die. Now some make a question whether it were a material Apple that
Adam did eat at the instance of his wife Eve. And if the question be of the
Species, it may well be doubted, for it does not appear in the Text to be an
Apple more then a Fig, or other Fruit; only in general terms it is called
the fruit of the Chapter 3. v. 2, 3.
Tree in the midst of the Garden: But I suppose the question is not of the
Species, but whether it were a material fruit, and so to be understood in
literal sense. It seems it should be so understood in the sixth verse, When the
woman saw the tree was good for food, and to be desired to make one wise, she
did eat, and gave unto her husband, etc. What can be plainer for a literal
construction? yet some will have the whole matter to be an Allegory; and
understand by the Serpent in this place no other then concupiscence, and by the
fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, some other thing then the eating
of a material Apple, because of some other words in the story that seems to
carry a spiritual sense, as verse. 15. I will put enmity betwixt thy seed and
the woman's seed; shall this be understood of the old serpent the Devil? we
suppose that he and his Angels were cast out of Heaven before the creation of
man; but in this Chapter the Serpent here is expressly called a beast of the
field. But if by this beast Verse. 1.
you will understand concupiscence, it may perhaps in a spiritual sense be
said to be the seed of the Devil, because it works in the flesh by his
instigation. The day thou eatest thereof, says the Lord, thou shall surely Chapter
2. v. 17.
die. And the Serpent said, ye shall not surely die, Chap. 3. v. 4. Now we see
in the verses following, they did not die the day they did eat, but had
mulcts, and punishments threatened, as the Serpent to go on his belly, and lick
the dust; the woman to bring forth children in sorrow; the man to get his
living by the sweat of his brow, the earth to be cursed, etc. And Chap. 3. v.
22, 23. Least he put forth his hand and take of the tree of life, and live
forever. Therefore the Lord God sent them forth of the Garden, etc. This seems
also to have some other sense, for we are not taught to live for ever by
carnal eating. Resolve if you please the doubt of this question with the
former.

THe next question is of marriage, Genesis Chapter 2. v. 18.
. And the Lord God said it is not good for man to be alone, I will make him a
help meet for him. verse. 21, 22. God took one of Adams ribs, made a woman, and
brought her unto him, v 23. Adam said, this is bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh, which is one flesh, v. 24. How comes it then that there are forbidden
degrees in marriage? or is it not so in truth, but a Popish injunction for
their profit? for in that respect they have given their dispensations ad
infinitum to the nearest kindred. To recite particulars in a matter so well
known (as the houses of Austria, Burbon, and many others) where profit or State
policy is at stake) were only to spend Ink and Paper. Then if it may be done
by dispensation, and for money, which is but an Ordinance of man; why may it
not much more be done without, seeing it is the Ordinance of God himself? You
know what Peter said to Simon Magus, Thou and thy money perish, because thou
think that these things may be bought for money. And here we see the woman
is not of the man derivatively, and by descent, but of his own proper
substance; then in regard there can be no more matches of this nature, the very
next of kin were to join in marriage, and that both by custom and command. For
example, we find that Sara was Abraham's sister, whom he took to wife; a better
president we can not have, for he was the father of the faithful; his seed
should be multiplied as the Stars in Heaven; all the Nations of the earth be
blessed therein Gen: 22. 17, 18.
, etc.

If it be said, that when Abraham went down to sojourne in Egypt because of
the famine, he wished his wife to say she was his sister, lest the Aegytians
should kill him and take her to themselves, for she was a fair woman to look
upon Genesis 12. v. 1^, 12, 13.
. And from thence you will argue, that to be but simulation betwixt them to
save his life; then it will appear in the same book of Genesis that in his
return to the South Country, they used the like practice, in saying she was
his sister In so much that Abimelech King of Gerar took Sara, but the Lord
kept Abimelech from touching her, and reproved him for taking another man's
wife; whereupon Abimelech blamed Abraham, saying, What saw thou that thou
have done this thing? Abraham replied, I thought the fear of God is not in
this place, and they will kill me for my wifes sake: yet to let him know that
he had not dissembled totally, he said, indeed she is my sister, for she is the
daughter of my father, and she became my wife Genesis 20 12.
. Moreover Cha. 24. v. 4. Abraham caused his servant to swear, charging him to
go to his own Country, and to his kindred to choose a wife for his son
Isaac. And so naturally confident were the servants of God in propagating by
the next of kin, that Lots daughters (when they fled out of Sodom with their
father, where the rest of their kindred perished) did not doubt to raise up
seed to their father, saying, There is not a man alive to come in unto us after
the manner of the earth, therefore let us lie with him, etc. Now there were
thousands (not to be Genesis 19 31, 32.
numbered) left alive, but there was none of their Tribe and kindred, for so the
Text seems to infer. We know also that many things are writ for our instruction
not for our imitation; and so Lot might justly be blamed for drinking so
liberally, that he perceived not what he did (which we ought not to imitate)
yet we find no reproof upon the daughters, because (it seems) what they did
was only for propagation, according to the institution, and not to satisfy
appetite. This appears by their interchange; yet Dr Willet says they did
offend, and brings with him Augustines opinion, which is, that they should have
done far better to have acquainted their father, so then (belike) all had been
well enough: But withal in the same Annotations of Levit. 18.) he brings
against himself a Jury of Doctors that justifies their intention to be good
and lawful in their case, viz. Soto, Lopes, Ledesma, Bellarmine, L^^inus, with
three of the Fathers also, Chrysostom, Theodores, and Origin, and (we see) God
gave a blessing unto their act, for the Text says, they were with child, and
there proceeded from them two great Nations, the Moabites and the Ammonites.
And that these children were blessed appears more plainly, where the children
of Israel in their warfaring journey were forbidden to distress them, and not
to meddle with them, for the Lord would not give them of the Land which he had
given to the foresaid children of Lot for a possession Genesis 13. 37, 38.
: If you say that notwithstanding they were afterward smitten and warred
against: so was it likewise with the most chosen people (according to the
covenant) for their Idolatry, infidelity, etc. The Ephramites fell by the men
of Gilead, Deuteronomy. 2.18, 19.
42000 at one time, and it were supererrogate to cite the several places of
Scripture, where the Israelites were punished, and carried captive, and cast
off into a reprobate sense, as now they are at this day for their
transgression; but that will be no argument to prove that propagating by their
nearest kindred (which they were commanded) was the cause: but most certain
their hardness of heart, infidelity, and idolatry, which was forbidden. For
was not Moses the meekest man, and Aaron, the sons of Amram, who married
Jocabed his Aunt?

The next place that seems to fortefie this opinion against all opposition, is
that of Judagh and Tamar his daughter in law, which you have in Genesis 38.
throughout the whole Chapter; there shall you find the wilful and unnatural
trespass of Onan in refusing to perform the kinsmans duty, and therefore the
Lord destroyed him: but what shall we think of Judahs intention? can we
approve of it? no verily; he took her for Judges 12.6.
a Harlot: yet was the sincerity and integrity of Thamar so sublime, that from
her Issue Verse. 15.
upon that conjunction came the Savior of the world; for from Phares descended
Boas, David, and consequently our Savior Jesus Christ according to the flesh:
and now old Judah could say, (because I have not performed what I ought of my
part) she has been more righteous then I.

Well, yet let us object Levit. 18. the prohibition there, with the gloss upon
the Text, entitled unlawful marriages; but we suppose it is a Popish gloss,
and of purpose mis-interpreted to increase his coffers: for it will appear
hereafter that the uncovering of nakedness there mentioned, is meant of
fornication only, and not of marriage: yet the Popes purse upon that pretense
has picked up many large fees, especially where the joining of Kingdoms or
Dukedomes together has been sought more for politic ends, (and chiefly if his
own cause has been interested) then the parties own particular liking. But
now who is so ignorant to believe that any sinful man can dispense with what
God has commanded or forbidden. In the beginning men gave gifts and presents
for fit wives of their own Lineage; as appears, Genesis 24.22.
where Abraham's servant gave Rebecca the Earings and the Bracelets: now since
men's own covetousness, or the Popes, have forbid such wives as is most
natural; the custom is to barter and exchange for strangers so much money, so
much land, etc. as you do for other things in fair or market.

But to return, the Answer to the foresaid prohibition in Leviticus 18. is,
that the many Laws given in that book were not perpetual, but only given to
busy the minds of the children of Israel for that present, and to divert their
inclination from Idolatry, unto which they were so subject from their
deliverance out of Egypt, in their march to Canaan, and perhaps for some other
reasons known to men of learning: for who does believe it is not lawful to
eat Hare or Coney, Swines flesh, etc. or to wear linen and woolen, plow with
beasts of several kinds; with many other prohibitions, whereof that Book is
full, as well as in the degrees in kindred: They were also peculiar to that
people, and therefore not binding elsewhere, especially to Christians under the
Gospel. But to make the matter more clear, let us see how we can prove the
prohibition in these degrees, to be meant of Fornication, as is formerly
mentioned, and not of the holy institution of marriage, for instance in the
foresaid, 18 chapter and 16. ver. it is said, Thou shall not uncover the nakedness
of thy brothers wife, it is thy brothers nakedness: uncover the nakedness,
mark that; though the Pope and ambitious men would delude us, the holy Ghost
is very wary; the Text here speaks not of marriage, but uncovering nakedness:
and now repair to Deuteronomy. 25. verse. 5. There you shall find that if a brother
die the wife of the dead shall not marry unto a stranger, her husbands brother
shall go in unto her, take her to wife, and perform the duty of a husbands
brother unto her. The rest of the verses following shows how disgracefully,
and with what reproach he was to be used that refused to perform this duty. So
you see there is a vast difference betwixt uncovering of nakedness, and taking
to wife; for else did not these two Texts controvert each other point-blanke,
if they were meant of one and the selfsame matter? what is then the right
exposition? no other then this; by uncovering of nakedness is meant
fornication, as is formerly said, which in kindred is utterly forbidden; but
the other Text in Deutronomy speaks expressly of marriage, and taking to wife,
which is likewise in kindred as directly commanded. One other gradation may
here be added, to wit, that the taking of strange women was sometimes in
custom, for it was no wonder before nor after to see men have children by
concubines, which they kept besides their wives. And the children of Israel
were commanded to kill all the males among the Midianites, but to keep the
women to themselves Number. 31.18.
: we likewise read the Levite had by him two Asses sadled, his concubine was
also with him, Judges 19. 10. but in regard that marriage is honorable, and
the free woman more Noble then the bondwoman, that great duty we ought to
perform to our next of kin; for so did Abraham to Sara that was his wife and
sister; but his coneubine was Hagar the bond woman, which Sara afterward dealt
hardly with, and caused her to fly Genesis 16. 6.
. Here we are to note, that Sara the kinswoman was a Type of the true Church,
and Hagar the contrary: Moreover you shall find what curses were threatened to
such as married with strangers (out of their Tribes) as namely, they should be
snares and traps unto them, Jesh. 23. 12, 13.
scourges in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, with many other of this
kind, which whosoever please to study may find at large. And that this practice of
marriage with kindred was in use, not only before the prohibition in
Leviticus, already answered, but eversithence, and never forbid, in the Law or
Gospel, for ought we can find, is the next thing we shall endeavor to prove:
alleging then some presidents after the foresaid book of Leviticus, (perhaps
omitting many) we will begin with the marriage of the daughters of Selophabad,
who married with their kindred by the Lords special appointment Number, 36.
. Then the foresaid Text in Deutronomy, touching the marriage of the brothers
wife, Chapter 25. v. 5. And Othinel the valiant man was rewarded with Achsah his
next kinswoman, who also obtained a further boon of her father Judges 1. 13.
. The story of Boas and Ruth is worthy our observation, it is so full of
goodness and charity, conducing also to our argument; first, we see that
Naomy, Ruths mother in law instructed her how to behave herself toward Boas,
that she might not be unprovided, as knowing, (it seems) the inflexible nature
of her very next kinsman: whereupon (after Ruth had uttered these words unto
Boas, Spread therefore thy skirt over thy handmaid, for thou art a near
kinsman) Boas replied, Blessed be thou of the Lord, for thou have not followed
young men, whether poor or rich. Then Boas called into judgment the next
kinsman, who out of covetousness suffered the accustomed disgrace, for
refusing to perform the duty he ought to have done: And Boas (as the next in
degree) took Ruth to be his Ruth 4.10.
wife. In this story we discern the many virtues of Ruth; it is to be observed
also that she was a Moabitesse, of the line of Lot, and of the issue he had by
his daughters of this offspring, shortly after came the Prophet David, from
whom also in process of time) proceeded the Savior of mankind.

Next we observe the passage betwixt Ammon and Tamar, where it is said, that
Ammon loved Tamar in an unlawful manner, which the maid as discreetly
reproved, desiring him not to force her, but to ask her of the King for a
wife, in that sense she knew the King would not withhold her 2 Samuel 4.13.
; but Ammon after his lust was satisfied, despised her, which act turned to his
confusion, and was the occasion of his slaughter. Still we see the sister did
not doubt to be her brothers wife, but did detest the act of fornication,
(which certainly is the thing meant in the forbidden degrees formerly
mentioned. And assuredly also that act proceeding from lust in kindred, is the
highest degree of fornication, and of some perhaps not improperly termed
incest, if there be such a distinction: But for the holy institution of
marriage with the next of Kindred. We see (by all examples before and after, it
has not only been permitted but commanded.

Neither do we find any thing to the contrary in the whole progress of the
Gospel, but still reproof of fornication, and especially amongst kindred,
which seems to confirm what is formerly said; for so St. Paul, It is reported
commonly that there is fornication 1 Cor. 5.
amongst you, and such as is not used among the Gentiles, that one should have
his fathers wife. But the same Saint Paul has these following words in the
same book, Chapter 7, v. 3. touching marriage. To avoid fornication, let every man
(excepting no degree or profession) have his own wife, and let every woman have
her own husband. And in verse 4. the wife has not power of her own body, but
the husband; nor the husband power of his own body, but the wife, in the
singular number. From hence may be inferred, that men since the Gospel ought
not to have plurality of wives; but neither there, nor in any other place where
the like precept is given, is there any exception to the next of kin, but in
case of fornication aforesaid. Then let every man have his own wife; this does
most and best represent the mystery betwixt Christ and his Spouse the Church;
else where it is said, the man and his wife is one flesh, not the man and his
wives. Although the Patriarks and Prophets (under the Law) had plurality of
wives for the greater increase of a good Tribe, or for other reasons and
mysteries, which here we have not time to discuss. And though the Turks and
other Nations do allow themselves plurality of wives (perhaps alleging the
foresaid custom of the Patriarks) as also to uphold the vastness of their
Empire, having such use for unmerous Armies, yet we take their reasons to be
more sensual and politic then religious; for we that live under the Gospel
ought to conform our selves unto that rule; Let every one have his own wife,
in the singular mumber aforesaid; but then (seeing there is not one word in the
Gospel to the contrary) that any Popish Ordinance or other should bar a man to
choose that single woman he likes best to be his wife (if she be also
consenting, and of ripe judgment) seems to be both against the law of nature
and reason. Wherefore we conclude this point with the Apostles words, that the
forbidding of marriage is the doctrine of devils. Again, marriage 1 Timothy 4.3.
is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge, Heb. 13.4. in all; mark this: here is no exception; yet it
would have been here or somewhere if it had been unlawful, either in kindred
or Ministers, as the Popish doctors teach, for lucres sake, as is formerly
mentioned. But we are to beware of such as would spoil us through vain
deceit, that follow the traditions of men, the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ Colos. 28.
, so then the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditious heresies envyings murders,
drunkenness, with many others, etc. But as touching Gal. 5.19,20.
the holy institution of marriage intended, according to the Ordinance with
true love and sincerity of heart; we find no exception in any degree or
profession. And if the prohibition in the law formerly mentioned, were meant of
marriage, as it is fully and amply proved to intend fornication only, because
of the practice in marrying with their next of kin, as well after as before,
formerly proved also: yet were it not binding now, for we understand the Law
contained in Ordinances to be Ephesians. 2.15.
abolished. And again, blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances that was
against us, nayling it to the Cross, Colos. 2. 14. for the Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity also a change of the Law, Heb. 7. 12.
observe also the second of the Corinthians, There is a veil in reading of the
old Testament, which veil is taken away in Christ, and Chapter 3. v. 14, 17.
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But how, what liberty? to
do the works of the flesh, formerly touched; no, God forbid, The holy Ghost
will witness with those that the Lord has made his Covenant with, he will put
laws into their hearts, and in their minds will he write them, their sins
and iniquities will he remember no Heb 10.16, 17.
more. And in 1 Timothy 4.9. The law is not made for a righteous man, (supposing
such a one as contriveth not against a good conscience) but for the lawless,
disobedient, ungodly, whoremongers, liers, stealers, etc. And in 2 Timothy 3. we
have a large description of such as have no testimony of the good Spirit, but
are called perilous, viz. Lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient, unthankefull, unholy, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, traitors, highminded, having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof: And of this sort are they which creep into houses,
leading captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now as James
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt
minds, etc. Then was the chief Magistrate withstood; how is it now; if this
portion of Scripture strike not point blanke at this very age and time wherein
we live, let some that are learned inform us better.

So then we perceive by this Tract and all the rest, it is fornication,
uncleanness, and these forenamed works of the flesh, which is forbidden; but
for that excellent and sacred institution of marriage, from which Ordinance the
blessed elect of Gods children do proceed; that holy Order, we see, is
honorable amongst all without exception, as is formerly proved. Now then
without all dispute that marriage is most just, which is made without any
ambitious or covetous end; and if this liking and mutual correspondency happen
betwixt the nearest of kindred, then is it also the most natural, the most
lawful, and according to the primitive purity and practice: nor is there now
any Popish Canons to restrain it, which perhaps some consciences might boggle
at in regard of the precept, you are to obey the Magistrate for conscience
sake. And indeed we would not argue any thing here against higher powers that
are in true orthodox authority; but only desire that no Law or prohibition
should bind the conscience in matters that the Gospel of Christ has left free
unto Christian people: And if we can judge aright all these works of the flesh
formerly recited, from several Texts in Seripture, did never so much abound;
and no marvel, for what fruit can be expected from bastard Plants? or what
match is made amongst a thousand, or perhaps amongst ten thousand without
ambition covetousness, inordinate appetite, or some collateral respect;
pardon the plainness of the phrase, for I have read of a Law (as I now
remember) amongst the Spartans, viz. No man should give a dower in marriage
with his daughter; then did the best men seek to acquire the most virtuous
women: and who, (then they) flourished more in Arts and Arms? Now if the
Patriarks, our forefathers, chose their kindred in obedience to a duty
commanded; the Heathens took wives for their virtues; and yet we Christians
will have none but for money, the attribute aforesaid deserves the less rebuke.

Well then, let us avoid communities, which is reported to be maintained by
some late sects: let us avoid fornication with all, and by all means, with our
kindred; for that is the highest degree of fornication, as is formerly
declared: But for holy wedlock, where there is hope of propagation, and hearts
consenting, as is proved to be the duty of the next kinsman, so was there never
more cause to shake off the Popish thraldom, and to revive that Primitive
custom, seeing by these late and common calamities) so many thousand families
are forced from their habitations, which they have honestly labored for, and
for ought they know, must starve and perish, at some have already done, if they
cannot find a dwelling more remote: therefore we must be of opinion with such
as do account mulct and punishments an Antichristian yoke, where they are
imposed upon the conscience, but most especially when there is neither act nor
intention against the service of God, or prejudice to our Christian brethren;
and here we remember the saying 2 Cor. 13.2.
of Saint Paul, Be of one mind, live in peace.

Now then, to close up all by asking of a question: If in such a case honest
women (that have no portion to bestow them, thorough the causes aforesaid)
should require this duty from the next of kin, whether (upon refusal) their
said kinsman deserve not the reproach mentioned in the story of Boas and Ruth;
and as touching the Deuteronomy. 25.5.
raising of seed from one brother to another formerly recited at large in the
beginning of this discourse; surely they do and must answer in their great
account for the misearriage of their kinswomen, if so it happen; yet we are not
ignorant the Civil law says, an Uncle to his Niece is in loco parentis, and
that they say is a bar in marriage; but (setting Law and evil Custom aside)
we demand (in reason) how he can stand her in better steed then to marry her if
she be willing, and has no means to be otherways provided.

We are commanded to fear God and the King, and not to meddle with them that
are seditious. Neither are these things moved out of nicety, or by way of
paradox, or as St Paul speaks, of 1 Timothy 6.
doting questions, or strife of words, whereof comes envy, and perverse
disputings* or as some cite Scripture to cloak their deceit and hypocrisy:
but only to find out the truth, which if those that are Orthodoxly learned
will take pains to resolve, it will be a charitable work, to satisfy the
consciences of some less learned, who are likely to seek habitations in
foreign Countries, and would in discharge of their duties do that which they
conceive to be most just, viz. without ambitious or covetous ends, adventure
upon the first Institution.

Now we know the vulgar sort (that looks no further then the times they live
in) will bogle at this doctrine, and think it a Navell. Then here we will put
you in mind of what some of you do yet remember; namely, a quality of two
eminent men esteemed very wise (especially in the laws) the one would not
abide a sholder of Veale, the other did not love a Duek: what would you have
thought these men wise to proclaim it unlawful for any other to eat these
kind of meats, because they did not love them? surely no, you would have held
them rediculons: So our question is not how any man's appetite likes, or
dislikes; we only desire to know yea, or no, whether the matter in it self be
unlawful, or where it is repugnant to Scripture, when all places of this
subject are compared together. And if it be controverted (not with Heathen
fables, or men's bare opinions, but by Scripture proof) by one that is learned,
and of a refined wit, it may satisfy; but if it come from a young head not
half codled, or from one that is old and Note.
doting, or from any that is popish or illiterate, it is ten to one such
judgment will be renounced, or at least suspected.

Some other questions we intended to move, as namely, those at the latter end
of Mr Smiths Sermon, entitled, The lost sheep is found, which yet we have not
heard any answer unto; and why through Popish superstition on the one side, and
diversity of Schisms and Sects of the other side, there is yet no certain
frame of Discipline settled to confirm the weak and wavering Christian: Or
(seeing we have found so much fault with Turk and Pope for their bloody
tenants; and that the weapons of the Church are preces and lacrymas, prayers
and tears) whether that will prove a good Religion which is settled or
maintained by the Sword; but if these be first resolved to be as they are here
conceived, or otherwise convinced of error by Scripture proof; we may then
have encouragement to move some other things necessary for the confirmation of
our selves and others LAVS DEO.

POSTSCRIPT.
1. WE have lately seen a little Book which says, the sin against the holy
Ghost has hitherto been mistaken.

2. We have seen another maintain that Independency is no Schism.

3. We have seen another maintain (out of Scripture) that our Savior Christ
shall live 1000 years with his Saints upon earth.

4. We have seen books writ against baptizing of Infants, though the custom
has been so for 1400 years.

5. We see the Office of Bishops of no repute, though their Function has
continued since the time of the Apostles; and what Heresies were by them
refuted in the first four general Counsels?

6. We know our own King Henry the 8. married his brothers wife, and put her
away, and took another, which we cannot approve of.

7. We have heard that Martin Luther married a Nun, (which in the Popes
opinion) was a greater trespass then if he had married his natural sister;
And in fear of the president the holy Father thundered out his
Excommunications; but the honest Doctor (to requite him) said he would open a
gap that all the bushes in St Peter's patrimony should not stop again, and
(...) as good as his word.

These things considered, our little Discourse (that maintains nothing
positively, but asks questions, under correction) will not be strange to them
that are judicious, however it seem strange to such as will laugh at their
shadow.

Salo. Nothing remains certain under the Sun.
FINIS.

