A BRIEF EXPOSITION UPON THE SECOND PSALM. Wherein we have That Time Modestly
pointed at, (by the favorable direction of that significant THEN in the 5th
v.) in which the Father will in Wrath to the (professing, refined) RULERS of
the World Set His SON on SION. AND A Description of the work the Son then
performs, both by his Spirit, and his Mystical Body. With useful
Observations thereupon. Tending to clear up the scope of the whole Psalm. With
Application to our Times.

By WILLAM LLANVAEDONON of P. H. C.

Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Henven is at hand, Mat. 3.2. But the Saints of
the most High shall TAKE the Kingdom, and POSESSE the Kingdom for ever, even
for ever and ever. Dan. 7.18. LONDON: Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the
Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1655.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
THERE is a Time wherein God will speak to the Rulers of the World (the
professing Rulers, the Rulers in Jerusalem) by verse. 11.
A STAMMERING LIPP, a stuttering tongue (in the 28th of Esaias) in such a manner,
as though this stammering lipp tell them, verse. 12.
This is the Rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest, and this is the
refreshing; though it show them the way to attain a sure and certain Rest, to
settle themselves upon an everlasting foundation, yet verse. 12.
They will not hear: God withdrawes from them, that notwithstanding his word
has been verse. 13.
Precept upon precept, and line upon line, it is now but here a little, and
there a little among them: But although the word of God come forth into the
world at this time in such a stammering weak posture, that it is despised and
set at naught by the Rulers of the world, those verse. 14.
Scornful men, yet, it is the Power of God; the breath of this STAMMERING LIPP
smites these Scorners to the earth. Behold! what a Sermon of Terrors this
stuttering tongue preaches to these Rulers in Jerusalem, from the 14 to the 23
Verse. These Rulers are pleasing and hugging themselves in their own ways,
with their Covenants and Agreements, Associations of Peace, as the most safe
and unerring way to their settlement: Say they, verse. 15.
We have made a Covenant with death (our strongest enemies) and with hell (the
torment of a conquered condition) are we at agreement, that shall never befall
us: When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto
us, for we have made lies (high pretenses for God and his glory, for the
welfare and peace of Jerusalem) our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our
selves: As confident as these Rulers seem to be, yet this weak stammering lipp
overcomes them, conquers them; verse. 18, 19, 20.
Your Covenant with death shall be disanull'd, and your agreement with hell
shall not stand, the overflowing scourge shall overftow and tread you down; it
shall be a vexation to you to understand the report, the bed is shorter than
that a man can stretch himself in it, and the covering narrower than he can
rap himself in it: And the Lord shall do this by laying in verse. 16.
Sion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation: Laying verse. 17.
Judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plumet; Sending a shower of
hail to sweep away the refuge of lies, and causing the waters to overflow the
hiding place: All your fine pretenses and curious slights of wisdom, those
garnisht coverings under which you hide your evil intentions from the eyes of
men, are now too narrow to hide you, you are discovered; thus your bed is
become too short for you, those fair and spetious designs of yours, which you
thought would prove as a bed of Down whereon you might rest your weary bones,
are become too short, that it is a become a sufficient vexation to you to
understand the report, the wisdom of God in this STAMMERING LIPP is got
beyond you to your great regret and misery: and least these men should in their
hearts make it an impossibility, these things should be brought to pass, says
the same stammering lipp, verse. 21, 22.
The Lord stall rise up as in Mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley
of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his
act, his strange act. And now therefore be ye not Mockers, lest your bands be
made strong, for I have heard from the Lord of Hosts a consumption, even
determined upon the whole earth. This Message God sends to these Rulers by a
stammering lipp (here a little, and there a little) verse. 13.
that they may go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.
There Is no way to avoid this judgment of the wrath of God, but by listening to
these stammerings of the lipp, spelling the mind of God out of them, bending
our hearts to a conformity to it.

And now Courteous Reader, all my ambition is, that these few Meditations I
here present thee with, may prove a piece of that stammering lipp, by which God
speaks to the world; Surely I can promse thee no more than a company of
stammerings, O that our Lord Jesus would cause something of his fathers mind to
be spelled out of them, that some glory may redound to his holy name! then
shall I have my aim, and I shall possess a dram of that joy which none can be
able to deprive me of: Neither despise nor reject them because they are but
stammerings, for you see by the forementioned Scripture, the Lord in wrath to
the worlds pretending Rulers, chooses a stammering lipp to speak forth his
mind to the world, so that if we would in such a day as the Prophet makes
mention of, be acquainted with the will of our God, we must sit down under the
Oratory of that stuttering tongue; therefore how greatly does it concern us to
search and try every thing, and hold fast that which is good. I might have
enlarged abundantly throughout the whole of this work, but upon several
considerations I have chosen rather to hint and point at things as well as I
could, than to dilate upon them. The good Lord water what has been done with
his rich blessing, and then a fruitful crop of honor to our dear Lord King
Jesus will spring forth: The God and Father of our Lord grant it.

Farewell.
MEDITATIONS On the SECOND PSALM.
THE Psalmist David, that sweet Singer of Israel, was a man after Gods own
heart (as is elsewhere testified of him) and God knowing that he would make such
an improvement of the discoveries of what he would do in the world, as would
be very suitable to the heart of God; according (as he dealt with his Father
Abraham of old, and) to his Promise, he keeps not his secrets from him, but
reveals to him things to come, what he would do in the last days; a
Conference between the Father and the Son, concerning the great interest of his
Son, (the sum of which is this second Psalm) wherein the father expresses so
great love, and manifests such strong resolutions, to exercise his wisdom and
power in doing that for his Son, which his love tells him becomes the love of
such a father to perform, and his dear Son does deserve. The Son seeing his
Father so full of wrath and jealousy for his sake, going about to make bare
the arm of all his wonderful Attributes, and set them all on work to bring to
pass his Decree concerning his beloved; he steps in, declares the Decree to
the Sons of men, and he does it with such tenderness of heart, such loving
exhortations, and invitations, that if possible he might persuade them to
submit to his Scepter, come under his healing wings, and be blessed for ever.

In this Psalm we have

First, A TIME pointed at. Secondly, WORK to be done in that time; which is
double. The work of God, and the Work of Christ the Son. Thirdly, The MANNER
of Christ's doing his work.
We have Two times pointed at by the holy Ghost in this Scripture.

1 All that space of time between Christ's first coming in the days of his
humiliation, and his second coming in the day of his power and glory, to take
the Kingdom to himself. For the clearing up of this, consider,

1 That the holy Ghost devides the enemies which Christ shall have in this
large Tract of time, into three ranks.

1 Heathens and People. 2 Kings of the Earth. And 3 Rulers.
Heathens and People (that is Jews) against Christ, for that space of time
wherein Heathenish Rome bare rule. Kings of the earth, while Antichrist Lords
it over the Heritage of God. And lastly, Apostate Rulers, men of more refined
Principles and professions (as will be proved in its place) that yet shall
prove Apostates, such pernicious implacable enemies to Christ in the last
days, such, as God shall be no longer able to bear with, but shall come forth
against them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

2 And surely, The holy Ghost's distinct manner of Characterising them,
signifies not a little to us concerning this matter. What more fit and true
Character can be given of Heathenish Rome (that great red Dragon) than rage?
What rage did that Beast exercise against the poor flock of Christ? How did he
rend and tear it to pieces? The ten first Persecutions witness to it; And
what vain things did the people of the Jews imagine, when they thought to
extinguish the light of the Gospel, that shone in their Horison, and to
extirpate the profession of Christ out of their Coasts? And secondly, How
directly and particularly does the holy Ghost point out unto us the ten Horns
that gave their power to the Beast, under the notion of the Kings of the earth
setting themselves against the Lord, and his anointed? How openly and stoutly
the Kings of the earth have set themselves against the Lord, and his anointed,
in giving their power to maintain the dominion, lusts, and blasphemies of the
man of sin, is evident by the havoc they have made in the Church of Christ
these many hundred years. And lastly, How exact and precise is the holy Ghost
in describing unto us by many notable Characters, the constitution of a third
sort of Rulers, that should come upon the stage of the world in the latter end
of those days, to finish the Tragedy of the old Serpent; yet, before the Kings
of the earth should be totally extinct, or put by from prosecuting their work;
for while the remaining Kings of the earth set themselves, these take counsel
together against the Lord and his anointed.

3 The Apostles and Brethren in the fourth of the Acts, are of our mind; they
begin the fulfilling of this Prophecy with the first coming of Christ, when
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel, were
gathered together against Christ, in the twenty-seventh Verse.

4 As to the finishing-time of this Prophecy, we have good and sure ground to
receive it for a truth, that this Prophecy runs down to the day of Christ's
power, when all the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lords Christ. For,

1 Here Is the forbearance and long-sufferance of God at an end: He speaks to
the world in wrath, and vexes them in his sore displeasure; A course God takes
not till he has tried all other ways and means, and that indeed the world
has filled the cup of her iniquity almost full, and the mystery of iniquity is
almost finished; then, God resolves to make a full end of her, as he did of the
old world, when the appointed time came: But 2 Christ steps in, and by virtue
of that authority he has with his Father, he says, he will declare the
Decree: He procures a little suspension of the devouring wrath of God, and
undertakes to declare the Decree in the midst of this wrathful dispensation;
now the Decree being only concerning the matter of his Kingdom in the world,
it is worthy our serious consideration, whether it point at a time past, or the
time present, or to come. PAST, I conceive it cannot be, for we do not find
that this Decree has been declared in former times, accompanied with the
weighty and material circumstances in the Text, viz. Declared, as his right
and Title to the Kingdoms and possessions of the Kings and Rulers of the
earth; in opposition to the present Governors of the world, though the best
and most Saint-like of them, who Take COUNCIL against the Lord, and his
anointed, that is, act against him hiddenly, that it appears not to the vulgar
eye; and particularly addressed to the Kings and Rulers of the world, as matter
for their consideration; denouncing no less than perishing, death, to those
that yield not to him; pronouncing them blessed, who forsaking their former
Lords and Rulers, put their trust in him: Now no time past being able to show
this Decree thus declared, therefore it cannot point out to us that part of
time. 3 Here is but a little time given men to repent in; which argues the day
is far spent, and the night is at hand, the glass is almost run out, there is
but a few sands behind to run; the voice was all the day long, beseeching and
woeing to repentance, by loving and patheticall persuasions, We beseech you,
says the Apostle, in Christ's stead, setting before men the tenderness of the
heart of Christ to sinners, and that matchless love of his that moved him to
shed his blood for them; pourtraying before them in a lively manner a crucified
Christ, with his Crown of Thorns on his head, his wounds in his hands and
sides, blood and water gushing out, and all this (with the merits of his death
and sufferings) to persuade men to believe the willingness of the heart of
Christ to save sinners, and that they would come and take him upon his own
terms, that they may be made happy by him. But now the day is so far spent,
the evening come, and the time for repentance almost expired, the voice is
altered, as we see in the last Verse of the Psalm, Kiss the Son least he be
angry, etc. A hasty exhortation to repentance, and submission to Christ, from
the consideration of his anger; it is but a little time he will wait for you,
if you come not in to him, when his wrath is kindled but a little, you will
perish from the way, then they will be only blessed, that have put their trust
in him. This Text holds a fair correspondencie with that in Rev. 22.11, 12. He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: And he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that
is holy, let him be holy still. And behold I come quickly, and my reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall be. And that other
follows at the back of it, Bring hither those mine enemies that would not that
I should reign over them, and slay them before me. 4 We have closely coucht in
this Psalm, some signs of the coming of Christ, as The Apostasy and falling
away of many (as appears by what follows) and the abounding of iniquity, upon
which the love of many shall wax cold; for certainly, iniquity must very much
abound, when such persons as these Rulers are (who they be, and what they are,
will be made manifest by and by) shall take counsel together to break the
bands of the Lord, and his anointed, and cast their cords from them: Which
manifests that the love they once made show of, is very cold indeed. 5 Here Is a
time spoken of, wherein Christ shall deal with the Kings and Rulers of the
earth, concerning the matters of his Kingdom, and provoke them to give place
to him, whose right it is. All the day long, he had been dealing with men
promiscuously, but now he is taking to himself his great power the father has
given him, he deals in a special and more then ordinary manner, with the
Kings and Rulers of the earth. Lastly, This Psalm seems by the style of it, to
present to us Gods coming to judge the world; God coming down to view the
works of men's hands (as he did to Sodom, to see what men did there) and
beholding the abominable wickednesses of men, he asks the reason of it, why it
is so? and finding none to give an account, no Advocate to plead their cause,
(his Son not appearing for them) he breaks forth into wrath and fury against
the world, resolves to delay no longer, but to execute the Decree, perform his
Promise to his Son, and power down his judgments upon the world: Sitting on
his Throne, he laughs at them, has them in derision, speaks to them in wrath,
and vexes them in his sore displeasure.
Whosoever does seriously ponder and weigh these Reasons, I conceive will see
cause to believe it for a Truth, That this Prophecy takes in all that space of
time between Christ's first and second coming.

But in the second place, There is some special particle of time, pointed out
unto us by that significant THEN in the fifth verse: THEN shall he speak unto
them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. THEN, when? The holy
Ghost affords us by the favorable Aspect of this THEN, many Characters to
guide us into a competent knowledge of that dismal time.

THEN, may have respect unto the heathenish rage, and vain imaginations of the
first company of enemies; and it signifies thus much, that when the rage of the
one, and folly of the other came to the full, THEN God would judge them; and
truly, at that time God put the old Dragon to his shifts, he had been quite
extinct, and put beside his Kingdom, had he not evaded it, by giving his power
to the Beast (Antichrist) and being contented to reign by his substitute, the
man of sin; but in a special and peculiar manner this remarkable THEN, has
respect unto the last of those counterfeits, that would be esteemed Gods
Deputies, yet are in truth Satan's Instruments, against the Lord and his
anointed. So that,

1 THEN when the RVLERS take counsel together. RVLERS, men that are neither of
the number of the Heathen, nor of the Kings of the earth, but a more refined
sort of men; such, as would be accounted Judges as at the first, and
counselors as at the beginning. RVLERS, not of the earth, no, that is not
expressed, only there are Kings of the earth; but these counselors are RVLERS;
of what? surely it is but genuine to say, they would be accounted Rulers of the
Lords people: But Christ when he comes to deal with them in the tenth verse,
says, they are of the earth as well as the Kings, Judges of the EARTH: He
discovers their hidden works of darkness, and makes them appear in their true
colors; Thus much I conceive is signified to us by this, that though when
Christ comes to speak to them, he calls them, as indeed they are, Judges of the
earth; yet here they are termed only Rulers, (and that in opposition to the
Kings of the earth) that is, such as they termed themselves, and would be
esteemed.

RVLERS, Counselors: No Heathenish Emperors, nor Popish Kings, but refined
Rulers; here is Satan transformed into an Angel of light; The Heathens cannot
prevail, and the Kings of the earth do not prosper, thus Satan being put to
his last shift, turns Saint in show, sets up his Rulers, that have neither the
violent rage of the Heathen, nor the open profaneness of the Kings, but the
soft hand of profession, to become nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to the
Church of Christ, (as appears by what follows) even while they are taking
counsel together against the Lord and his anointed: For,

They are RVLERS, that having cut off some of the Kings of the earth, Rule in
their stead: which is necessarily implied in the Text, for we know that the
Kings of the earth (those that committed fornication with the Beast, and gave
their power to her, Rev. 17.2.17.) ruled over the whole world (that part which
is called the Christian world, in which this contest is, between Christ and
his enemies) yet at last steps up some Rulers, and they get Dominion among the
Kings; for it is clear by the Order of the words in the Text, these Rule, and
take counsel, while the rest of the Kings are setting themselves against the
Lord and his anointed: which could not be, if these Rulers had not destroyed
some of the Kings, ruling in their stead; otherwise, there would be no place
for them, the Kings of the earth having all the Christian world under their
Dominion, it is no way reasonable to conceive, that those who love their Crowns
so well, would willingly give their glory to others.

And why may we not say, that these Rulers get their Dominion by fighting the
Lambs battles against the Beast; for, A Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand; If Satan be against Satan, how can he prosper? Therefore it is not
reasonable to think, that Satan should set them on work to destroy his Kings,
but that these Rulers did fight upon the account of Christ, and his people.

Again, Satan is on the loosing hand by these Rulers, for, as Satan was not so
visible nor so absolute in his rule over the world, in the Beasts time, as in
the Dragons; so now he looses more ground in the loss of his Kings, then when
he lost his Dragon; and can it be thought the wise Serpent would do himself
this mischief? Further, if these had gone out to war upon any lower account,
they would have been Kings still; as we see daily, when one King is gone,
another gets up into his seat, yet but a King; certainly, it is some weighty
reason, that moves them to forsake the glorious Title of a King, and make such
refined pretensions, as the very name Ruler (considering it stands in the Text
in opposition to the preceding Heathens and Kings) signifies to us they will be
forced to.

Again, They are RVLERS, that have given professed subjection to the Scepter of
Christ: That is hinted to us in the third verse, Let us break their bands
asunder: That these bands can be no other but that part of the yoke of Christ
to which they have submitted, those Laws and Commands of Christ to which they
have subjected themselves, being convinced in their consciences it was their
duty so to do: is clear to me upon these grounds.

1 Otherwise the holy Ghost should commit Tautology, and unnecessary redundancy
of speech; for Interpreters (and that according to the truth) expound these
bands and cords, mentioned in the Text, to be no other then the Laws and
Commands of Christ: And would it not be a derogating from the glory of this
blessed word of God, and that excellent significancy that is in every tittle of
it, to say, that these two manner of expressions, signify but one and the same
thing, to give to it no more than a bare elegancy of speech? Surely then, one
part of the verse would be superfluous, and may be left out, which God forbid:
This were to charge the word of God, and so God himself, with that
imperfection vain man is subject to; which I presume none that professes
himself a Christian dares to do. And if this be granted (which cannot be
denied) that there is a weighty significancy in both parts of the verse; then

2 What more genuine Interpretation can be given? For how come the Laws of
Christ to be bands to a man, but by his being actually bound with them? As the
cords and withes wherewith Sampson was bound, were not his bands before he
became bound with them; they were cords and withes before, but then they were
his bands, which he brake in sunder: They cannot be called a man's bands in
respect of the duty that lies upon him to yield obedience to them, for so they
are called cords, which these men endeavor to cast away from them. A man
becomes bound, either by Covenant, Oath, Vow, or Engagement; when a man shall
make a Covenant to walk in obedience to such and such Laws, and bind himself
to the performance of it with an Oath; when he shall make a Vow, and engage to
do such and such things; though these duties and obligations were but cords
before, yet now by these ties upon him, they are become his bands; these
Rulers, being thus tied and bound, take counsel together to break these bands
asunder, and to cast away the cords from them, that they are not as yet bound
with.

Object. If it be objected, That in the Text it is said, Their bands, that is,
the bands of the Lord and his anointed, so that they cannot be the bands of the
Rulers.

I Answer:

1 It Is brought in as the speech of the Rulers, and so I conceive holds forth
unto us their Apostasy, who now in an opprobrious scorn, call them their bands,
thereby denying that they were at all obliged to the observance of them: Or 2
By this term, their bands, may be intimated to us those Laws of Christ, which
Christ by the common and ordinary workings of his spirit, had wrought in these
Rulers some kind of love to, which moved them to a subjection to them; or, by
his providence had necessitated them so to do, otherwise they saw they could
not prosper in their work; or, that the people of God, Christ's anointed, by
their exhortations, calling upon them, and that formidable assistance they gave
unto them while they stood for Christ against Satan in his Kings, had obliged
them to be bound with; so that these may be truly called their bands, because
they are the cords, with which the Lord and his anointed have bound them; of
which they cannot be freed, except they break them: yet still they are the
Rulers bands, which they take counsel together to break. Therefore 3 The
consideration of the different carriage of these Rulers, toward the bands and
the cords, will add some further satisfaction; they will break their bands,
and cast away their cords; if the bands had no more tie upon them than the
cords, the same slight manner of carriage of theirs toward the cords, would
serve them also to be rid of the bands: But it is far otherwise, though they
think a bare casting and putting away, will clear them of the cords; yet, they
are sensible, the bands cleave so close to them, they cannot be rid of them,
unless they break them; as Sampson could not be free from his cords and
withes, wherewith he was bound until he had broken them: If they had not so
obliged themselves to the Laws of Christ, as that they were bound by them,
what need they take counsel to break them; a man needs not stand to break a
cord to clear himself of it, except he be bound therewith; if only a proffer
be made to bind him with it, he may put it by, and cast it from him, that is
easier for him so to do, and will serve the turn, as here in the Text they
consult to do; but if he be once bound with it, nothing but a forcible
breaking of it will free him: So that this carriage of theirs, toward the
bands and the cords, confirms our Assertion.
Yet notwithstanding this their professed subjection to Christ, these Rulers
turn Apostates; Satan debauches them, then entering into them, makes them his
own, to finish his warfare, to fight for him, though after another manner, in
a more subtle method then formerly, bringing forth the very masterpiece of
Satan's wisdom, for we see here, they take Counsel together, against the Lord
and his anointed.

2 THEN, when the Rulers take COUNCIL: Counsel, in distinction from, and
opposition to, the mad rage of the Heathen, and the open and public boldness
of the Kings; these two kinds of vassals not thriving in their way, Satan runs
to his Saintlike Rulers, as to a sure refuge, his Counselors; and they take
counsel, a secret clandestin way, as expert Warriors, when great shot will
not do, against the wall of a City, or Fort, then they secretly undermine it,
supposing to prevail that way: a secret way, They will not scruple to
transgress the regular punctillio's of the Law in any case, but, from counsel
to action presently, before their counsels may be known: These take counsel,
which way is best to be taken, what the most wise and prudent course may be, to
accomplish their design by; if by any way, by any means or course whatsoever,
they can have their will, and stablish themselves, though it be never so wicked
and unworthy. If no other way will serve, they will become Saints of the
highest form: in show, Paul's brethren, become all things to all men, that they
may gain some, for, they take counsel; and if need be (keeping a suitable
decorum) speak and act against all those, though never so excellent in their
Generation, that stand in the way of their designments.

To find out some new and neat way, the steps of their Predecessors they will
not exactly follow; no, they have seen the folly and weakness of those: But they
seek after a curious piece of Art, whereby they may be able to do that which
all the world before them (their great grandfathers the Heathen, and their
forefathers the profane Kings of the earth) could not do, against the Lord
and his anointed: They take counsel, they have wisdom (though from below)
with them; for the Scripture says, Where there is counsel there is wisdom:
They are the wisest and most subtle instruments ever Satan made use of; they
are Counselors, such as God who is wisdom it self, thinks it high time for
him to arise and disappoint them, least they prevail against his beloved.

3 THEN, when the Rulers take Counsel TOGETHER; when there is a Combination
and Confederacy in Counsels between these refined Rulers against the Lord and
his anointed: when they shall combine together to make their hands strong, that
they may keep their Dominion, maugre all the opposition, the Lord and his holy
ones make.

4 THEN, when the Rulers take counsel together AGAINST THE LORD AND HIS
ANOINTED; that is Christ and his followers, his anointed ones with the unction
of the spirit, that follow him in all his outgoings, against the backslidings
and Apostacies of these Rulers: True, the Apostles and Brethren in the fourth
of the Acts, expound this of the father, and Christ the Son, that the father
was this Lord, and Christ the anointed of his father; this they spoke of the
gathering together of the Heathen and Jews against Christ, when they put him
to death; but the father having given all power into his Sons hands, has made
him both Lord and Christ, as the same Apostle speaks in Acts 2.36. The father
in recompense for his finishing that which he gave him to do, has made him
Lord, and anointed him above his fellows; and he ascending up on high, gave
his gifts unto the Sons of men, anointing them according to his promise, with
the unction of the spirit; and let the Prophet David expound his own meaning,
says he in another place, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand (which Christ applies to himself) so that David understood Christ to be
Lord. Again, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; the
anointed are his Prophets, and his Prophets are his anointed, and who these
Prophets are, we may see in the Epistle to the Corinthians, they are the
Members of the Church of Christ; so that David Expounds his own meaning, and
clearly expresses himself, to point out Christ and his anointed, in these
words. Now the reason why I term them the followers of Christ in some special
design, is, because if all the Lords Prophets be anointed, then much more
those, (they have a greater measure of the anointing,) who follow the Lamb in
his sometimes rough, uncouth ways of his providence, who keep close to him
when he is doing his strange work, and bringing to pass his strange act in the
world, when he comes to take the Kingdoms of this world unto himself, whose
right it is to reign: And they are with him against these Rulers, is strongly
implied, in that these Rulers are so close in consultation, and so fully bent
against them; for, we cannot conceive, that these wise men would irritate any
against them without a cause, but on the other hand, they will foster all that
will come under their wing, and take protection from them; and truly, it is not
a small portion of this anointing will deliver them from the intanglements of
these Rulers; for they are Saints as to us (or at least to those who have not a
very narrow and quick inspection into the state of the times) the fairest
outside ever Satan had; And without doubt many of the people of the Lord may be
taken and deceived with them: Some good thing they will do (or they will prove
but foolish Counselors) they will go as far to meet a dissenting Brother, as
it is possible for them, and not endanger their Dominion. If Satan cannot uphold
his Dragon, he will be content with his Beast; but if he cannot keep up his
Beast in any place, he will be satisfied with his Image; yea, rather than give
out, the bare number of his name shall please him: So that many precious souls
may be deluded for a time, if they take not great heed, otherwise that voice
would be needless, Come out of her my people, least ye be partakers of her
sins, and so of her plagues.

5 THEN, when they Take counsel together, to BREAK THEIR BANDS ASVNDER, AND TO
CAST AWAY THEIR CORDS FROM THEM. The contest goes high, by this time it is come
to particulars: Before, it was but in generals; and it is about no small or
trivial business, but who shall have the Authority and power; The dispute is
about the Kingdom (that is clear from the whole Psalm; says God, Yet have I
set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: And the Decree is wholly concerning
Christ's Kingdom over the world) about the Authority and Legislative power;
Christ and his anointed say, the father has given them authority to bind Kings
with chains, and Nobles with fetters of iron; to bind the Rulers with his
Laws, as with a cord; and these Rulers take counsel together to break their
bands asunder, and cast their cords from them. We have already given our sense
what these bands are.

These Rulers take counsel to BREAK THEM ASVNDER. surely they had need of a
greater than Sampsons strength, that would break the bands of God asunder; but
these think to do it by slights and wiles, they take counsel: They would
break their bands, although they be bound by the strongest Oaths and
Obligations, the largest Vows and Declarations, the greatest protestations and
professions, yet they must be broken rather than the Lord and his anointed
shall have their due, and their right.

And to CAST AWAY THEIR CORDS; what though these cords be the most righteous,
holy and wholesome Laws of the great Jehovah, (that will bless those with the
greatest happiness, that live in unfeigned obedience to them) that the Lord
and his anointed would impose on them for their own good and salvation; they
will none of them, but take counsel to cast them away, scorning and deriding
them as a burden too heavy for man to bear, a yoke not fit for the neck of such
a free Creature as man is: Break their bands, and cast away their cords, that
they may have no power over them, that they may be their subjects, and not
their Lords, that they may not entrench upon their Dominion, nor deprive them
of their worldly enjoyments.

6 THEN, when they TAKE COUNCIL: Before they proceed to act; when upon
consultation they are ready to go forth in all their might, crying, LET US
break their bands, etc. Then God will arise and show himself, he will not
suffer them to act their counsels least they prevail, but while they are in
counsel, he will take them to task, and let them find he can in wrath tumble
them into those pits and snares they have dug for others.

7 THEN, when the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take
counsel together against the Lord and his anointed. The order of the words, in
that the Holy Ghost brings in the Kings setting themselves, and the Rulers
taking counsel together, before he tells us against whom; seems to me to be of
sufficient force to persuade us, that here is a hint given us by the Holy
Ghost, of another confederacy, that there shall be some agreement between the
(remaining) Kings of the earth (or at least some of them) and these Rulers,
against the Lord and his anointed; and then will God arise, bear with them no
longer, but speak to them in his wrath.

Lastly, THEN, when their Counsels shall be guilty of such a degree of
Apostasy, as moves God to laugh at them; when they set at naught the counsel
and reproof of God (which surely is contained in those bands and cords they
reject) then, will God deal with them in that dreadful manner mentioned,
Prove. 1.24 -- ult. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out
my hand, and no man regardded: But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when
your fear comes. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction
comes as a whirlewind; when distress and anguish comes upon you; Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me: For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear
of the Lord; they would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof.
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devises; for the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

And when the abomination of their counsels come to that height, that God
shall have them in derision, which is somewhat more then to laugh; It may
possibly be, that a man may laugh at one (and that in anger too) whom he yet
loves; but to laugh with derision, argues perfect hatred: When their counsels
and doings against the Lord, thus provoke the eyes of his glory, THEN, shall be
speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

And if we would know when God will thus laugh at them, and have them in
derision; The answer is plain in the Text, he will do it, upon their taking
counsel to break their bands asunder, and to cast away their cords from them:
when the cry is, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us: He that sits in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them
in derision.

Thus we see what a multitude of plain Characters the Holy Ghost has given of
that time wherein God will come upon the world, and do such great things for
his Son (who he has made Lord, and set at his right hand) and his anointed
ones: When we see these Characters written on the foreheads of the high ones of
the earth, then we may safely say without haesitation, That God will suddenly
come in wrath and fury, take their Dominion away, and give it to that rejected
corner stone, whose right it is to reign.

Let us now make a stand, and by a serious review, see what may be observed as
a beneficial Lesson for us to learn.

1 That in these latter dispensations, men may fill up the measure of their
iniquity, and bring judgment upon their Generation, by a bare taking counsel
against the Lord and his anointed. When the Rulers take counsel together,
then, God will speak unto them in wrath.

2 How Great matter of Comfort is it to the people of God, the followers of the
Lamb, that their father is so far from suffering their enemies to prevail
against them in these last days, that All that ever they can do cannot
prevail to break one band asunder, (that is, so, as to free themselves from
it, to settle themselves upon another foundation) but while they are taking
counsel together, God comes and gives them the rout, let us them hear his
mighty voice in wrath, that they run to the holes of the rock, and cry to the
mountains and to the hills to hide them from the tempest of his fury: He will
take the crafty in their own snares, though they take counsel to draw the
Lords people into their snares, and to throw them into the pits they have
dug; yet, shall they not be able to bring it to pass, but they themselves
shall be taken with, and fall into them; then the scourge shall teach them
Nebuchadnezzar's lesson, That the most high rules in the Kingdoms of men: In
former times, his long-sufferance was much, he lets them go on to rage and
madness, to open and bold (yea, and prevalent) acting, setting themselves
against them; but now, his patience will wait no longer, he will deal with
them, before they are well warm in their counsels; He will cut the work
short in righteousness, because a short work will the Lord make upon the
earth; those days shall be shortened for the Elect's sake.

3 What a dark and distracting day, is this day? When such men as these Rulers
have appeared to be, having followed the Lamb so far, to the cutting off some
of the Kings of the earth, and proclaiming the Lord to be King, made his cords
(his Laws) to become their bands, binding themselves with them (as has been
opened at large) when such men shall now turn head, and deal subtly with
the Lord and his anointed, taking counsel against them: What a dark day of
Apostasy is this day? The Dragon is able to cast down a third part of the
Stars to the earth; and when the Stars fall from heaven, what bitterness will
betide the Children of men? Without question these Rulers by their malevolent
influence, will throw down many who have been as shining lights, to the loss
of their glorious profession.

How great will be the distracting darkness of this day? When the cunning of
these Counselors (working underboard) not showing openly their intentions,
shall amuse men, that the most sharp-sighted observer, can scarcely discern
the temper of the times, so, as to demonstrate the truth of his observation to
the understanding of others, (for we must remember that Satan now is at his
last game, though men refuse to worship the Beast, and to receive his mark, yet
if they keep but within the number of his name, he will esteem them as his good
subjects, and be therewith content.) Here are Devils in the shape of Saints,
carrying things in such a posture, as that almost all men are in a maze, not
knowing what to dream the issue of things will be; surely, this day may truly
be called neither day nor night, neither Satan's night of darkness, nor Gods
day of light, in which men not having light enough to see clearly, nor wisdom
enough to light up their Candles, go poreing in the dark, ready to stumble at
every straw of infirmity they meet with in the sincere hearts of the times, in
the mean while hazard a choking, swallowing down the Camels of State
abominations; yet, notwithstanding all this, God has promised that at evening
time it shall be light.

What a distracting day of division is this, among Gods own people? When some
good souls exercising their charity shall consider the Rulers former good
actions, and plead them, with their apprehensions of their present good
intentions in what they do, to those, who being of a quicker insight into the
state of businesses, shall discover and assert their Apostacies, to persuade
them into a favorable construction of their proceedings; and when on the other
side, those, who retaining their sincerity in the life of it, being enlightened
by the spirit of God in the work of the day, both as to the work God would
have done, and the counter-workings of the evil one, shall cry out amain
against those abominations, that God may not be without witness to the
vindication of his honor, which men would lay in the dust: what inward fends
and heart-burnings? What breach of all Gospel rules, will be the sad fruit of
this dismal day? Let none say these things are far fetched, and have no
connection with the Text, if men will seriously with unbiassed judgments weight
the groundwork, I conceive they cannot but see these things a necessary
deduction from the premises.

4 The great faithfulness and love of God to his Son Jesus Christ his
anointed one, that although out of his long-suffering he bore long with men, in
their actings against his Son in the contest concerning his Priestly and
Prophetical Office (though then at his appointed time he met with them to
their confusion) yet, when it comes to the matter of his Kingdom, which the
father is so strongly engaged to give him, and wherein his honor and glory is
so abundantly concerned, THEN, will he wait no longer, but even while they are
taking counsel, while they are but thinking of it, while they are consulting
the wisest and most feasible way to bring to pass their purposes; it so
enrages the eyes of his glory to behold it, that he will not suffer them to
break so much as a piece of a band, but he will make bare his arm, and speak
to them in wrath, by the mighty working of his power; The Lord will break the
staff of the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers.

5 It Is worthy our observation, That those who bring up the rear of the
enemies of the Lord and his anointed, are Counselors. Or if you will thus,
That the last (and so the most subtle refined) design of Satan against the
Lord and his anointed, is managed by A COVNCILL. They take counsel together;
such, as having the example of all the feats of policy former times have
brought forth, and the advantage of that pattern of prudence and wisdom, the
old subtle Serpent has been drawing from the beginning of the world to this
day, shall be so crafty and wily, as that God by that shall be engaged to
rouse up himself in his might, least they prevail; The Rulers of the world
taking counsel, become wise against the Lord and his anointed; Their excess
in humane wisdom and policy, engages God to show forth the super-excellency
of his Divine wisdom, being above them in that wherein they deal proudly.

6 Although the fins of these Rulers be not so grossly profane as their
predecessors, but their thread is of a finer spin; yet, they are guilty of such
aggravations as the Lord Jesus cannot brook: They provoke him (him who is the
only Mediator for sinners) that he will not speak one word to his father on
their behalf; Though God come with fury in his face, asking the reason of
their doings, why is it so? and his wrath wax hot against them, we see our Lord
Jesus appears not, pleads not a syllable for them, we read not a word of his
intercession in this place: Formerly notwithstanding their sins were more
gross, and far greater in themselves, to the slaying the Lord of glory, he
prays, Father forgive them, for they know not, what they do; and the Martyrs
(as Stephen did) could beg on behalf of their murderers, Lord lay not this sin
to their charge: But now men are become wise, knowing sinners against his
glory, Hypocrites, be has not a word to speak for them, all that he will do
is to declare the Decree [I will declare the Decree] to the world and them, if
they will hear, well, but if not, they shall feel his wrath, and perish from
the way.

7 That when the world and its Rulers come to this manner and measure of sin,
they are excluded the intercession of Christ, (he prays not for them, neither
is it the fathers mind he should; when God puts him upon asking, it is not any
thing for them, but their possessions and usurpations for himself, and a rod
of iron to punish and destroy them) and so the prayers of the Saints. We ought
not to pray for them, and for that, for whom and for which Christ prayed not;
his intercession ought to be the pattern of our prayers; otherwise our
petitions are not acceptable, for, in his beloved he accepts us. It has been
several times at this pass with the world, Pray not thou for this people,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I
will not hear thee. God loves not to hear his people make such requests, he
has no mind to grant; Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind
could not be toward this people; cast them out of my sight, and let them go
forth. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should
deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord God. And
now it is come into the same predicament again; the world has run its round,
and is gotten into a like posture it was in when a flood of wrath overwhelmed
it: What a sad condition is this world now in? It Is tottering and there is none
to underprop it; it is sinking and there is none to uphold it; The wrath of God
is hovering over it, ready to fall upon it, and there is none to plead, to
undertake for it; Surely the world is beholding to the intercession of Christ
for its standing, and now that ceases, the foundations thereof are out of
course, and it is falling: The day of the Lord is coming upon it as a Thief in
the night, wherein the Heavens shall flee away as a scrowle, the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat, and the earth with the works therein shall be burnt up.

The second part of our work is, To search into the work to be done in this
remarkable time: Here is the work of the father, and of the Son.

1 The work of the father, which is twofold, A work of wrath to his enemies;
which is amplified by a double expression, speaking in wrath, and vexing them
in his sore displeasure: And secondly, A work of love and faithfulness to his
Son.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath. God speaks to men in diverse
manners, by the voice of his providence, the voice of his mercies, the voice
of his rod, and the voice of his judgments; and when God speaks by all in
wrath, his providence blinding their eyes, his mercies hardening their hearts,
his rod driving them from him, and (as the fruit of the former) his judgments
cease upon them; here is a dreadful day of wrath indeed, now God speaks to them
in wrath: But his has special relation to the voice of his ward; for, what
does he peak to them in wrath? The Text tells us, Yet have I set my King upon
my holy hill of Syon; the Gospel of the Kingdom: And that must needs be a day
of wrath and terrors indeed, when that word which was wont to be a word of
salvation, a word of love and good will, shall now be a word of wrath, in
wrath. O sad!

God speaks his word in wrath to a people.

1 When it has contrary effects upon them; a savor of death unto death,
instead of a savor of life unto life: As in Isa. 6.9, 10, 11, 12. This
Evangelicall Prophet Esaias, must make the hearts of this people fat, their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes; and that by speaking such gracious words unto them
as he does throughout his whole Prophecy: Certainly, this is none other but
the wrath of God upon a wanton and backsliding people.

2 When God lays stumbling blocks before a people, that they receive not nor
hearken to the word, but stumble and fall upon it, and perish, according to
that in Jer. 6.21. Therefore thus says the Lord, behold, I will lay
stumbling blocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together
shall fall upon them: The neighbor and his friend shall perish. This also is
none other but the wrath of God upon a stubborn rebellious people: They had
said they would not hear, and says God let it be so, they shall not hear; he
throws stumbling blocks in their way, least they should follow the voice of
his word, and he should bless them: Yet these stumbling blocks are not such,
as in the least extenuate or lessen their iniquity, by giving them good and
right ground to plead a necessity for their doings, but such, as men make to
themselves: True, God lays stumbling blocks before them, yet it is themselves
that make those so to them; they are not so to a sanctified heart, (he, by the
wing of faith can fly over them) but to an earthy lump of clay, whose eye is
fixed upon no higher than a carnal and worldly glory: As

1 Gods making use of obscure mean foolish instruments (in the worlds eye) to
publish his word and Decree to the world: He has chosen the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise, the weak to confound those which are mighty,
and the base and despised things of the world, and things that are not, to
bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence.
This has been his course all along since the world began, none must deliver
his people from a devouring famine, but a despised Joseph; The Message of
rebuke and threatening judgment to a Prince in Israel (good old Ely) must be
sent by Samuel a weak Child, unskilful in the word of Prophecy: And as if
none of the Princes and Royal blood could be molded after Gods own heart, he
must take David from the sheepfold, and make him (a mean shepherd) Governor
over and a deliverer of his chosen people; And who are his Heralds to proclaim
the Gospel of the Kingdom, but a company of poor despicable Fishermen? He
leaves the wise and learned Rabbis, Scribes, and holy Pharisees of the times,
and chooses the fools of the world, makes them prevalent to pull down
Principalities, powers, and strong holds, and they shall one day prevail to
the trampling their enemies under their feet as the mire in the streets. Thus,
out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings, he ordaining strength, perfecting his
praise, the spiritual man can discern the glory of it, his heart will admire
and adore it; But the men of this world, they take offense, stumble and fall to
the perishing of their souls: What! will God forsake our wise and holy men,
that excel in most excellent virtues, and speak by such Idiots, rash fools,
vainebablers, and mad men as they are? No, they cannot, they will not believe
it: If Peter and his brethren be filled with the holy Ghost, they are drunken:
If Paul speak of the true God, he is a vaine-babler: and reason of Temperance
and Judgment to come, much learning has made him mad; This is the sense and
judgment of the world. 2 The infirmities of his Messengers; their not walking
up fully to their profession of the glorious Gospel, nor so exactly as they
ought by the line of the word of truth in their mouth: Now, the men of this
world drawing the line of their judgment from a wrong point, they think those
men's Principles naught, and hypocrittically rotten, the word of truth in their
mouth an error, a delusion, a lie, not remembering the best of men must have
their grains of allowance: Here, they take offense, stumble, and fall, rising
up with their backs toward the truth: This God permits in judgment and wrath
to the world, that they may stumble, and fall, and perish. 3 The manner of
delivering the word of truth in this day of wrath, is a great stumbling block
to the world: God speaks to them in wrath, he was wont to speak in love, the
Gospel was glad Tidings; but now the word, is a word of wrath, threatening
judgment and destruction to the world for their wicked Apostacies and
rebellions against the Lord and his anointed; O say they, this is no Gospel
spirit, but a spirit of delusion; although, it is but the same Dialect the Holy
Ghost uses throughout the Revelation against spiritual Babylon (Antichrist:)
At this they stumble, and cast the word of life far from them, thinking they
have good ground so to do. 4 The Apostasy of false Brethren from the truth;
this is a great stumbling block to the world, by this the world blindly
judges, that the way of the truth is but a mere fancy, and has not that
real good in it the world has, otherwise these men would not change their
station, they cannot think they would take worse for better, thus they stumble,
and fall, and perish: This is also the judgment of God upon the world. 5 The
spirituality of the truth; At this also the men of the world stumble, being
blind and not apprehending the truth aright, put strange glosses upon it, and
draw unworthy and uncouth conclusions from it, representing it (Satan helping
them) to themselves and others in a monstrous shape, at which they stumble, and
fall, and perish: As those men did, John 6. when Christ had been treating of
that great and spiritual Mystery, of union with him, it is said, ver. 66. From
that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
And vex them (or trouble them, as it is in the margent) in his sore
displeasure. When God speaks in wrath, surely it cannot but bring great trouble
to men: When God spoke in wrath to Saul, that he had rejected him, and given
the Kingdom to a neighbor of his better then he, how did it vex and trouble
his soul? What fear ceized on him? How did it torment him, when he perceived
the Lord being departed from him was with David? Oh, says he to his Son, Thou
Son of a perverse woman, do I not know thou have chosen the Son of Jesse to
thine own confusion, for as long as the Son of Jesse lives upon the ground,
thou shall not be established, nor thy Kingdom. How was that most excellent
King Solomon troubled, when God spoke in wrath, that he had given the greatest
part of his Kingdom to another? And what trouble and vexation of spirit did it
bring to all the Kings of Judah, and Israel, when at any time God spoke unto
them in his wrath, concerning the matters of their Kingdom? The whole History
of the Kings make it evident.

And vex them in his sore displeasure. That must needs be a dreadful and
terrible trouble, great anxiety of spirit, that comes from the sore displeasure
of the great God: If we can imagine any trouble and vexation to be greater and
more deadly then another, that must needs be it: Vex them in his sore
displeasure; O dreadful! what horrors! what ghastly terrors of death, will
encompasse men about in that day? If they turn to the left hand; to their
Cisternes they have hewne out to themselves, behold, they are broken, and hold
no water; If to the props they thought to have upheld themselves with, behold,
they are rotten, and will not bear them up; and if to the arm of flesh, the
strength of Egypt, they trusted to, behold, it is a broken reed, and pierces
their hands: If to the right hand, from whence they are fallen; behold, nothing
but the frowning brow of a wrathful God, and the fiery spirit of an enraged
people; whose heart burns with the zeal of God, for the honor and glory of
their God: What killing disappointments are here? What no hope? Alas, alas,
very little, or none at all: What is the (feared) fruit this brings forth? Why,
they repent not, but blaspheme the God of Heaven.

Quest. But what is this that God speaks to them that thus troubles them?

Answ. The Answer you will find in the Text, Yet have I set my King upon my
holy hill of Sion; It Is the word of the Kingdom; that God will take their
Crowns from off their heads, and set them on the head of Christ: How was Herod
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, when he heard but a where is he that is
borne King of the Jews? How greatly did the tidings of a rightful King
trouble him? His conscience flies in his face, and stings him, his jealousy
and fear of loosing what he had surreptitiously gotten, rent his heart with a
thousand anxieties, which vented themselves in unheard of cruelties against
poor Innocents: And the Stories of the Martyrs tell us, that some Emperors
after the example of Herod, have been so troubled with the fear of, (and
jealous of) King Jesus his robbing them of their Thrones, they have sought the
destruction of the whole lineage of David: And at this day, what a dreadful
troublesome story is it to the Kings and Rulers of the earth, to hear the
doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ is asserted and preached to the people? How
jealous and full of wrath are they! How does it trouble them!

Quest. Why should men be troubled and vexed at this word?

Answ. Truly there is some reason why the men of the world should be troubled.

1 Because the word is spoken, as that which God has already done; I HAVE set
my King upon my holy hill of Sion: I have done it, says God, and the
subsequent is easily drawn; you must submit to him, or you perish: If the
doctrine were this, That Christ should have a Kingdom many hundred years to
come, the people of God might preach it while their lungs lasted, and meet with
no opposition from the men of the world, let them alone till that day, think
they; but when the word comes so near them, as to say, now is the time, God
has already done it, the time of performance is come; This galls them, rubs on
the sore too hard, and troubles them. 2 Because this Doctrine is preached in
opposition to them: YET have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: YET,
though you have taken counsel against the Lord and his anointed, to break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords; to keep them at a low and under
rate, as Pharaoh did, that they may be your subjects and servants, and never be
able to become your Lords: Yet says God, I will speak to you in wrath, and
trouble you with this, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: I will do
it, you shall know and find that I am above you in that wherein you are so
subtly wise; in spite of you he shall be King, and reign, it is his right,
and he shall have it; I have promised him, and I will give the Kingdom to him,
maugre all your envy and malice; I would not suffer the Heathen to keep the
Kingdom from him; and have brought down to the dust those Kings of the earth
you have slain, for their attempts against him; and shall you prosper in your
Apostacies and rebellions against him? I would not bear with their
superstition, and shall I now connive at your hypocrisies? Shall I suffer and
permit you to keep the Kingdom from him, and to interrupt the performance of
my Promises? No: know, I speak it to you in my wrath, Yet have I set my King
upon my holy hill of Sion. 3 Because it will destroy all their Idols, deprive
them of all their dear enjoyments; their powers, with their pomp and glory, to
which their heart cleaves so close, this sword of Christ's mouth will smite them
all; their Idols of gold, and their Idols of silver, and their Idols of honor,
etc. all these will it consume: And their Kingdoms must become the Kg domes of
the Lords Christ, and all their Dominion, and the greatness (the glory of it)
shall be given to the Saints of the most high, those whom they have trampled
upon, and to whom they have been so barbarously ungrateful: These things
trouble and vex these Rulers, that they gnaw their tongues for anguish and
pain.
And surely this is a day of great wrath indeed; as when two Kings, and both
strong, are striving for a Crown, it is likely to be a day of great wrath, a
bloody day: So, this day, for behold, what a feast will God make on this day,
For the Fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, the flesh of Kings, the flesh
of Captains and mighty men, the flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them,
the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.

We may conclude from these things:

1 It Is not unsuitable to a Gospel spirit, to denounce the wrath of God against
Rulers, for their Apostacies and abominable hypocrisies; yea, and to deal
particularly with them, laying the finger on the sore, pointing out the
Abominations by name, denouncing the vengeance of God upon them: For, we see
here how particularly God characteriseth these Rulers, laying open all their
abominations, speaking to them in wrath: And surely this also (as the rest of
the Scripture) is written for our instruction. 2 It Is no wonder that the Rulers
of the world are troubled at, and moved against the Gospel of the Kingdom, for
here God says, He will speak it to them in wrath, and vex them with it in his
sore displeasure. 3 It Is not so much the infirmities of the Saints accompanying
the delivery of their message to the world, or any other circumstance about it,
that troubles and vexes the Rulers, (let them pretend what they will) as the
doctrine it self, when it is rightly asserted, and thoroughly opened, as that
which is at hand, and ought to be submitted to without delay. O! how does it
trouble and vex them to hear of the coming of King Jesus, to depose them (of
their usurpations) and take the Kingdom to himself? If it troubled Herod, and
all Jerusalem with him, when they heard of this Kings first coming meek and
lowly; how then think we, will it not much more trouble the Kings and Rulers of
the earth to hear of his second coming in power, and the glory of his Sion? It
cannot be otherwise, for God says he will trouble and vex them with an, I have
set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. 4 When the Rulers come to this height of
ungrateful wickedness, to take counsel against the Lord and his anointed, to
break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from them, THEN is the
time of Gdos wrath come to that Generation; he will speak to them in wrath,
and vex them in his sore displeasure. 5 That before such time as God enters
into judgment with the rest of the Kings of the earth, and that Whore (mystery
Babylon the great) whom they uphold, God Judges these Rulers; he speaks to them
in wrath, to them in particular, to them that Take counsel against the Lord
and his anointed.
For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the
Valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to
pass his act, his strange act: Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the
Lord, awake as in the ancient days, in the Generations of old. 2 Here Is the
work of Gods love and faithfulness to his Son, in these words, Yet have I set
my King upon Sion the hill of my holiness: as it is in the margent of the
Bible. YET have I, etc. As if God had said, Notwithstanding your taking
counsel against him and his anointed, and that you have so far proceeded
(managing your business so wisely, to the very height and depth of wisdom)
as to make your selves formidable in your own eyes, thinking you have gotten
strength and power sufficient to put your counsels in practice, crying, Let us
break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us; yet have I set
my King upon Sion, the hill of my holiness: Though you take counsel against
him, to make the way to his Kingdom as thorny, difficult, and perilous as you
can; though you be so ungrateful, and unfaithful to forsake and take counsel
against him and his, yet will not I be so to my beloved Son, YET have I set my
King upon Sion the hill of my holiness.

Yet have I set MY KING: Though these Rulers will not make him a King, yet God
will; My King, though they reject him, would break his bands, and cast away
his cords, that he might not reign over them, yet God has made him a King,
and given him a Kingdom: He it is, who must go forth conquering and to
conquer, destroying all his enemies, breaking them to pieces like a Potters
vessel; plucking up every plant that his father has not planted, throwing
down all those superstructures that are not of his own building, creating new
Heavens and a new Earth, A New Creation, making it a suitable purchase to the
unvaluable price of his blood, clothing it with his glory, that it may be a fit
present for his father at the appointed time.

Yet have I set my King upon SION; That is, the Church of Christ, by Sion is
meant the Church throughout the whole Scripture; that I suppose is granted by
all, therefore I need not enlarge upon it.

Yet have I set my King upon Sion the HILL of my holiness. Why a hill? A hill
is a place of great advantage, on which, if an Army be encamped, it may be an
impossible thing for the enemy to dislodge them: So, God here sets his King
upon his Hill (his Church) a place of such advantage, that God does (if I may
so express it) even vaunt it over these Rulers, that he has (notwithstanding
their oppositions, policies, stratagems, and wisdom) set his King upon his
hill, where he is a nail fastened in a sure place, on which all the vessels
may hang secure and safe; such a place, as his being fixed there, frustrates all
their designs, undoes all their contrivements, and brings to naught all their
Counsels; it implies so much to me, for, it is as if God had said,
notwithstanding you have steered a contrary course, and taken counsel how to
make your selves strong, to break my Sons bands and cords, and have prevailed
very far, that you are even ready to put your counsels in execution, crying
out amain for action, LET US; notwithstanding all this, Yet have I set my King
upon Sion the hill of my holiness: I have done it, and there he is, and now
what can you do? It Is impossible for you to dislodge him, for my hill is
strong, Its terrible as an Army with banners: Why a hill? if a man be upon a
hill, he may see all round about him; so here, God sets his King upon his hill,
that he may from thence take a view of all the motions and contrivements, plots
and designs of his enemies. When the Son is seated on this hill, those
Counsels against him and his, which were secret and hidden, in the dark before,
(only the Eagles of the Age, a penetrating eye, could perceive them) are now
made manifest, and laid open to the view of all, to the shame and confusion of
these Rulers.

Again, when a man is set on a hill, he may be seen and heard of all, as
Jotham was by the men of Shechem: So here, God has set his King upon his hill,
that his glory may be perspicuous to the whole world, and the publication of
his Decrees may be heard far and near, that, though when the voice of the
Trumpet sounds shrill, and waxes louder and louder, the people may tremble for
fear, yet, the Moses's and Joshuah's may have mountain discoveries of the
glory of God, having fellowship with the father and the Son, as with a familiar
friend.

The hill of my HOLINESS: The Kings seat is a hill of holiness, yea, the hill
of Gods holiness: But why a hill of holiness? why, nothing less then
holiness is a fit qualification for the seat of Christ; It Is not the great
names of men, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers,
Non-church-men, above Ordinances; or Chancellors and Vice-Chancellors of
Universities, Deanes, Masters and Fellows of Colleges, Tryers, Parsons and
Vicars of Parishes, that qualify men for the work of Christ in this day; no,
it is only true holiness, the holiness (the Image) of God, that only makes a
man a fit seat for Christ to reign in, and of which soever of the first sort
of names of men, they are that have this qualification [holinesse] they are as
so many sands or pieces of this hill of holiness, and out of all these God
will draw his holy ones, and they shall become the hill of his holiness, and
he will set his Son there, and he shall be their glorious King. The holiness
of this hill is the strength of it, were it not a holy hill, it might be
overcome by the assaults and underminings of the enemy. It was the Image of God
(which holiness is) on Adam in the state of Innocence, that made him a
rightful King over the world, and struck such an awe and dread of him into all
the Creatures, keeping them under his obedience, but when he lost that, he lost
all; so, it is the holiness of the Church of Christ, this seat of the King,
that makes it an Impregnable Fort against her Kings Enemies.

And why MY HOLINESS, the holiness of God? All other holiness is nothing,
man's righteousness is but dross and dung, base metal; but that which is
Gods holiness, the holiness of God imputed to us through Christ, the Image of
that Imprinted on us by the mighty working of the spirit of Christ, is that
which the gates of hell shall not, nor cannot prevail against.

And MY HOLINESS; the holiness of God is a perfect holiness, and be ye
perfect as your heavenly father is perfect. It Is not to be holy in part, but to
be wholly holy, all over sanctified; to be holy, so, as to be set against every
wickedness, to allow of, or wink at none: It Is necessary this hill should be
clothed with the perfect holiness of God, otherwise it would be as tender
toward the wickednesses of men, as most professors are at this day, and so,
not be wholly set against all wickednesses, let them be in what men soever,
Rulers or people (though covered over with never so curious a covering) Christ
their King is, and they must be so, otherwise they are no seat for him; I have
set my King on the hill of my holiness.

I have SET my King, etc. Set him, in a posture becoming a King; set him, as in
a seat of Judicature, there shall he sit and judge his enemies; out of this
hill the Angels come to pour out the Vials of the wrath of God upon the world:
Set him, as in Majesty and glory, above the Kings and Rulers of the earth, that
have set themselves, and taken counsel against him and his anointed; here he
shall sit and behold the wonderful things the love of the father will do for
his glory and honor.

And I have set my King; it is God that sets Christ on Syon; I have done it,
says God; you thought (and took counsel) to deal wisely against my Son, but
I have dealt more wisely for him, then you could against him; you seek to hide
your counsels from me, and my counsel is hid from yon; you go in contrary
ways to me, and I steer a course beyond and contrary to your expectations, and
before you are aware bring my purposes to pass upon you, I have set my King on
Sion. God does this for his Son, in some eminent way, whereby it appears he
does it, and none else; that his Son is engaged to him for his exaltation:
There Is some remarkable unwonted circumstance accompanies this action, making
it eminently evident, to be the work of the finger of God only; that it is not
man, but God himself has done this; I have done it, says God. Upon this,
this hill of God is so consolidated and strengthened, as that Christ from hence
declares the Decree; hence, the Trumpet sounds, and all that will not hearken
to the voice thereof, are in great danger of perishing.

We see here what God does for his beloved, in the midst of the oppositions and
contradictions of men, He sets him upon Sion the hill of his holiness.

Let us hence Observe.

1 In this day of his wrath, God will give the Kingdoms to his Son, Yet have I
set my King upon Sion the hill of my holiness; the Rulers taking counsel, and
digging deep to hide it from the Lord, casting about to find out a way to keep
his King from his right, in the midst of his wrath and fury against them for
their wickedness, he sets his King on Sion; now, I have done it, says God; he
speaks it to them in his wrath, and vexes them (with the doing of it) in his
sore displeasure. God having overturned the Heathen Emperors, the Popish Kings
of the earth snatch up the Crown, and set it on their head; God overturnes
some of them, and these Apostate Rulers fasten the Crown to their Temples; but
their comes a third overturning, which is a thorough one indeed, for says God,
Remove the Diadem, take off the Crown, this shall not be the same, exalt him
that is low, and abase him that is high: I will overturne overturne overturne
it, and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give
it him: Where are these Rulers now? there is no hope for them, for his Kingdom
is an everlasting Kingdom.

2 That while these Apostate Rulers are taking counsel together against the
Lord and his anointed, the design of God is then, at that time, to set his
King upon Sion, the hill of his holiness: And he does it in opposition to
them, though they contradict it, YET I have done it, says God.

3 That the first thing God does for his Son, after he has made bare his arm,
and entered into judgment with the Antichristian world (for surely he began
that work, when these Rulers cut down some of the Kings of the earth) and in
opposition to these Rulers, is, to make him King in Sion, in his Church, Yet
have I set my King UPON SION the hill of my holiness; He is set there, in a
posture fit for the carrying on the design which he and his father are now
managing in the world; there is his Throne, and his holy ones about him; and
there he will sit, and together with them judge the world, and pour down his
fathers wrath upon it.

4 That Sion may be a fit seat for the Son to settle himself upon, in
opposition to all his enemies, God makes Sion the hill of his holiness; The
HILL of my holiness; a hill, for strength and stability, it is unmovable; a
hill, for union, all its parts are so united and compact together, as none can
divide it; a hill, for height, The mountain of the height of Israel, it is
above the world, reaches up to the Heavens: And a hill of holiness; the King
being seated upon this hill, this metaphorical hill becomes his Court, and
those in it his Courtiers; they are clothed with the same clothing his Majesty
is, (h^lin^sse) they are all like their Lord; each one of them resembling the
Children of a King, holiness to the Lord is written upon them: And a hill of
holiness, for they are consecrated, separated, and set apart for the work of
Christ at this day, sanctified for this service; enabled to overcome all the
assaults of the evil one, and having done all to stand, to keep their place
and station, a seat and Throne for Christ, to be such Carpenters as shall fray
away all the Horns; the spirit of the Horns shall not enter into these
Carpenters, for God says, Sion is the hill of his holiness.

5 Although at this day, many may fall away, and loose their first love, many
prove foolish Virgins, yet God has his true Church, his hill of true
holiness, a fit seat for his Son; his chosen number, which he unites together,
and by the mighty working of his spirit, they become the hill of his holiness:
He sets his Son upon this hill, and thence he issues forth the Decrees of his
father about the concernments of his Kingdom, notwithstanding the power and
forces of his enemies against him.

6 That under the Government of these Rulers the people of God have not liberty
to come up to the height of Gods holiness, for when they come to be a hill of
holiness, the world stands in opposition to them, and they unto the world.
Christ is set upon the hill of Gods holiness, in opposition to the Rulers of
the world: If any then blame the followers of the Lamb, as busybodies and
rash spirits, saying it is otherwise with them now, then it was under the Kings,
they may be as holy as they will, and live in their fellowship with God and
Christ in his own Ordinances to the highest; it is a falsity, for if they seek
after the height of Gods holiness, (to get to the top of this hill) to enjoy
the fulness of the Promises in Christ, by following him fully according to
the voice of his spirit in his word in this day, they are opposed by the
Rulers, and taken counsel against.

7 We may here see what God expects from his Sion (his Church) that in this
day, when the Rulers and great men of the world reject Christ, and take
counsel against him and his, that this his hill of holiness should receive
his Son, and cleave so close to him, espouse his righteous interest so
unfeignedly and so zealously, as that it may be a hill of advantage whereon
Christ may sit as King, in opposition to the Kings of the earth, and in despite
of these Rulers; although the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers
take counsel together against the Lord and his anointed; when the Kings and
the Rulers combine together to do their utmost, the one by an open perverse
setting themselves, the other by taking counsel (pernicious secret counsel)
against him and his, and at last shall conjoyne Forces, openly setting
themselves to act their counsels; things at this pass, God brings his Son to
Sion, his Church, the hill of his holiness, he is totally excluded the world,
by the men of the world, from having any share in their Royalties, in these
Rulers the father has tried the finest and purest piece of earth the world can
show, and finding it false, he brings his Son to Sion, sets him there, as in a
safe place, expecting they will submit their necks to his yoke, and their
shoulders to his burden, and follow him in his goings forth against his
enemies, after what manner soever they be, whithersoever he will lead them;
This indeed is the ready way to find out an everlasting rest, to get a full
possession of the promised Land, to be blessed in heavenly places with him.

Lastly, Behold, the Lamb with his 144000, his chosen number, standing upon
Mount Sion, having their fathers name written in their foreheads. ( Sion is the
hill of my holiness, says God.) Here are the Armies of Heaven, with the great
Captain of Salvation in the head of them, in a posture fit, ready prepared to
execute the Decree, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash
them to pieces like a potters vessel: But before they enter upon this strange
and wonderful work, being the will of their dear Captain and leader, they
sing as it were a new song of praise unto God, before the Throne; and though it
be a hard song that the world cannot learn, and it sounds harshly in their
ears, seeming to them such a thing as never was before, a new invention of the
spirit of delusion; yet, these chosen holy ones they are acquainted with, and
expert in, singing this song before the Throne of God: Christ their Captain
begins, and they follow on, declaring the Decree.

So that now we are come to the work of Christ in this day, to consider what
that is, that the Son goes about as his work in this day of his Fathers wrath:
It is, declaring the Decree of his father, as he tells us in these words, I
will declare the Decree: He being thus seated on Sion, the hill of Gods
holiness, he presently without delay sends abroad his Heralds, lays his
claim, and shows his right and title to the world, the Decree of his Father:
We may here consider,

1 The Person declaring. 2 The Declaration it self. 3 The Matter of the
Declaration. 4 The Persons to whom this Declaration is made.
1 The Persons declaring; I will declare the Decree; This is

1 Christ Personal, the Mediator christ Jesus: That Son of God whom the father
has set upon Sion the hill of his holiness, he declares the Decree by his
spirit in Sion among his chosen ones. 2 Christ Mystical; This cannot
reasonably be denied, says Christ, A body have thou prepared me, then said I,
lo I come to do thy will O God. Intimating, that it was of necessity Christ
should have a body before he could come to do the will of his father; It Is by
this body of his as the instrument in his hand, that he fullfills the will of
God; so, it is by his mystical body (his Church) that he declares the Decree;
does this his work in this day of his Regement in Sion: Further, it is said, The
Law shall go forth out of Sion. And again, Mat. 10.27. What I tell you in
darkness, that speak ye in the light; and what ye hear in the ear, that
Preach ye upon the house top. Here Is the man Christ Jesus teaching his Sion,
and a command to them to declare it publicly to the world; This is that sharp
sword going out of his mouth wherewith he smites the Nations. 2 The declaration
it self; I will DECLARE the Decree: Declare it, how? why, as a Herald declares
the Decree of a Prince or State, with sound of Trumpet, and a loud voice, in
places of greatest note and resort, in the most open and public manner that
can be, that all may hear, that the Decree may come the ear of every man: So
here, I will declare the Decree, so publicly, upon the house top, on the
Mount, the Trumpet shall sound so shrill and loud, that it shall pierce the
ears of all, yea, of the Kings and Judges of the earth; for, the exhortation
to repentance is grounded upon this Declaration, Be wise now therefore, etc.
which could not be a motive to them to repent, except they heard it; And I will
declare the Decree, lay it all open, make it fully known, spread it before the
understandings of men, that none may through ignorance perish from the way, and
loose that blessedness I have in my hand to give unto all them that put their
trust in me. 3 The matter of the Decree; in which we have these six
particulars. 1 The party decreeing. 2 The Decree it self. 3 The means by which
the performance is obtained. 4 The account or score upon which the father does
all this for his Son. 5 The person to whom this gift is given. 6 The time when
God will bestow this gift.

1 It Is the Lord Jehovah that makes this Decree: who then can alter, or
disanull it? Shall the Laws of the Medes and Persians be unalterable, and
shall not the Decrees of the great God of Heaven and earth? What folly is it
for the world to oppose it? What fools-hardinesse is it for men to fight
against the Almighty God?

2 Here Is the Decree it self: And therein

First, A Donation, or Gift: I will GIVE thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession; It Is a
Royal gift indeed, fit for a King to receive, and for the glorious God and
father of our Lord to bestow; no less then a whole world; Heathens for an
Inheritance, and utmost parts of the earth for a possession: O matchless love
of a father to a beloved Son! The Heathens that knew him not shall become his
Inheritance, he will call upon the Nation that has not been called by his name
to behold him; he will be sought of them that asked not for him, and be found
of them that sought him not; and the utmost parts of the earth shall be a
habitation for him, to have and to hold, as the good pleasure of his father:
all things shall be put under his feet; There shall be given him Dominion, and
glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations, and languages shall serve him:
And that this gift might be certain and sure, that nothing may be able to
interrupt his possessing it, we have in the Second place, The means decreed and
appointed, whereby he shall take this inheritance and possession to himself:
Thou shall break them with A ROD OF IRON, and dash them to pieces like a
potters vessel: Break them, take their power, rule, and Dominion away, break
their Scepters, and throw down their Corwnes.
Break THEM: who? why, all that in enmity oppose him, the raging Heathen, the
profane Kings of the earth, and all the Hypocritical Saint-like Rulers, that
would not have him to reign over them; them shall he break: THOU shall break
them; Christ, the Lamb on Mount Sion, he shall do it, with his followers, that
follow him whithersoever he goes: But with what? With A ROD of iron; Here is
the material sword, the instrument with which Christ shall break all his
enemies; He that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword; they
have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and he will give them blood to
drink, for they are worthy: Behold, I will make thee a new threshing
Instrument, having Teeth: Thou shall thresh the mountains, and beat them
small, and shall make the hills as chafe: And dash them to pieces like a
potters vessel; He shall break them all to shivers, grind them to powder, and
make them become as the mire in the streets, and the chafe of the summers
threshing-floore, that the wind shall carry them away, and no place shall be
found for them any more: And he shall do this with as great facillity and
ease, as a man dasheth a Potters vessel to pieces; he shall have no more
trouble in it, then a man has in dashing a brittle earthen pot to pieces
against the ground.

3 The means by which the Son obtaines the performance of this Decree; his
intercession; ASK of me; It Is but ask and have, if the Lord ask his father any
thing, he will give it him; if he ask a world, his enemies for an Inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the earth for a possession, his request is granted; The
father hears him always, he neither will nor can deny him what he desires.
Ask of me the Heathen for thine inheritance, and thou shall have them says
God, either thy slaves or thy freemen, which thou will, they shall be thine to
do with them as thou please: Ask of me, the utmost parts of the earth for a
possession, and thou shall have it; if thou will have a whole world for thy
Court, to entertain thy followers, thy chosen ones, it is thine: And that the
world may be emptied of all those usurpers, enemies of thine in it, that thou
may take quiet possession, Ask of me, and thou shall break them with a rod
of iron, and dash them to pieces like a potters vessel, send them flying into
another world to inherit their merited portion with hypocrites and unbelievers:
And ASK of me, and I will give thee, etc. If thou will have the gift of my
love, thou must ask it, ASK of me; I will give nothing without asking,
therefore come, Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for a possession.

4 Upon what account or score is it that the father will do so much for this
his Son? Why, it is solely upon the account of his Sonship; Thou art my SON,
this day have I begotten thee; therefore now, Ask of me, and I will give thee,
etc. God will give this gift to none but his Son, and were he not his Son he
should not have it; it is a gift too rich and too glorious for any besides the
Son of God, the Heir of the Promises: Thou art my SON, said God, and I am
engaged as I am thy father, to bestow a fatherly gift upon thee, and now Ask
of me, and I will bestow such a gift upon thee, as becomes my glory to give,
and thine honor to receive; Thou art my SON, this day have I BEGOTTEN thee, I
conceive this is not only meant of the eternal generation of the Son, nor
only of that day of Christ's exaltation and honor, when the father raised him
from the dead, not suffering his holy one to see corruption, making it evident
he was the eternal Son of God, a perfect and all-sufficient Mediator; but also
of this day, wherein God exalts him as King, and makes him King in Sion: THIS
DAY have I begotten thee, that is, this day have I made it evident to the whole
world thou art my Son; I have but now begotten thee as to them, they would not
believe before that thou wast my Son, such a Son, as I have made Heir and King
of the world; but now, I have set thee on Sion, and it being out of all dispute
in Sion, that thou art the only rightful King (and that I have made thee so)
they have received thee, thou art set as a King there; and there is a
sufficient light held out to the world from thence, of the truth of this, to
leave them without excuse if they submit not to thee; so that, as I have
begotten thee before times was, now I have begotten thee in this day also; and
being thou art my begotten Son, mine honor is concerned in thine honor, Ask
of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the earth for thy possession.

5 To whom is this gift given? To the Son as Mediator, for we see it is the
fruit of his Intercession, ASK of me: And if so, then, to him as a
representative, a common person, and so to all those he represents; if it be
given to him, then to his also, for Of his fulness we receive grace for grace.

6 What day, or time is this, wherein God puts on his Son to make such
requests, and promises to do such great things for him? Why, THIS DAY, wherein
God notwithstanding all the opposition of the world, and worldly powers (and in
particular these Rulers) and in wrath to them for it, shall set his King upon
Sion, the hill of his holiness; this day, wherein I have begotten thee; ask of
me this day; and I will this day give thee, the Heathen for thy Inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession: And this day thou shall
break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them to pieces like a Potters vessel:
even this day, wherein thou shall ask it of me.

4 Let us consider the Persons to whom this Decree is declared, they are, The
Kings and Judges of the earth: Those very Kings and Rulers (though here called
Judges upon a significant account) which set themselves and take counsel
together against the Lord and his anointed: The Decree is declared and
published to them, as is undeniably evident, by the Exhortation grounded upon
the Decree, Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the
earth; You oppose me, setting your selves, and taking counsel against me, but
you now hear the unalterable Decree of the great Jehovah my father, Be wise
now therefore.

From these things we may conclude,

1 At this day, when Christ is seated on Sion the Hill of Gods Holiness, there
begins a new quarrel between Christ and the worlds Rule^s: He lays his claim
to the world, which they say is their Dominion, and that he has nothing to do
with it, but with his Church, bidding him keep to his Sion, where his God and
father has set him, and meddle not with them, for that is out of his sphere:
And out of Sion Christ declares the Decree, his right and title to the utmost
parts of the earth, and, that his father has given him the Sword of his mouth,
and a rod of iron, to smite and break all that oppose him, taking possession of
his fathers Donation; This breeds such jealousy, wrath, and fury between these
two Competitors, that never was such a quarrelling day since the world had a
being; Now the contest is between Christ and man, not such (as God has made
use of formerly to bring to pass his purposes) as are between man and man, but
it is between Christ (who is God) and man, which of these shall have the Rule
and Government: Formerly, the world has had it is coverings, to hide and
garnish over its actions, that they have not appeared in their true colors,
and God suffered it so to be, but now the mask is taken off, they appear
plainly what they are, against Christ (notwithstanding all spetious pretenses
whatsoever) to the view of all the world: And as Christ deals more roundly
with them, so will they be more outrageous and inveterate against him, leaving
no place for repentance: I will declare the Decree, says Christ, and You Kings
and Judges of the earth, repent and kiss the Son, or you perish; This not
suiting with the high spirits of the world, they will yet kick against the
pricks, persist in their old practice, in persecution of, and opposition
against the Lord of life and glory. 2 That it is the Duty (and so no sin, nor
contrary to Gospel Principles and Rules) of the anointed of the Lord, those
Herralds of his glory that he sends into the world, (it is the very will of the
Father, and of the Son) they should Preach and declare this Decree concerning
the Kingdom of the Son fully, according to the due import of A Declaration, in
the ears of the whole world, yea, that the Kings and Judges of the earth may
hear, and fear, and tremble: If men or Devils in men besmear them with the
spurious conceptions of their own filthy hearts, what matters it? They have
the pure water of the word at hand to wash off all that dirt: It Is the work of
Christ in this day of his fathers love, (I will declare the Decree) that which
he will do by his body, his Mystical Members, and men cannot duly nor
rightly charge his holy ones with sin or folly, in this their obedience to
their Lord: It Is the work of Christ, to declare it in Sion by his spirit, and
it is the work of Sion (as the Instrument in his hand) to declare it again to
the world, in opposition to the Kings and Rulers thereof, in their usurpations
upon the Royal interest and Prerogative of Jesus King of Sion. 3 That this
Declaration is published in the time of the fathers wrath, neither is this
expression of the Sons love without some tokens of displeasure: The world and
the powers thereof, have so slighted, trampled upon, and provoked the Son, as
he will not speak one word for them to plead their cause with his father; but
by his silence suffers his fathers wrath to break forth, speaking to them in
wrath, and vexing them in his sore displeasure. The father having by his
Almighty power set his King on Sion, and he being ready to overrun the world
with the execution of his fathers just displeasure, his heart being tender, his
bowels roll within him toward poor sinners, he must declare the Decree, with
an Exhortation if now at last they will come in, submit to him, and he will
bless them; yet it is very hasty, and ends with the harsh sound of a threating,
in case of a non-sudden-acceptance, there is a tang of the fathers wrath, and
the Sons provoked displeasure goes along with it; the clearest sunshine of
this day is clouded with symptoms and tokens of wrath and displeasure, then
it is no wonder if God judicially throw stumbling blocks in the way of this
Generation in this day, that they may not hearken to the voice of his Son, but
stumble, and fall, and perish. 4 The father having decreed to give the whole
world to his Son, Heathens for an inheritance, and utmost parts of the earth
for a possession; it must of necessity be, that all the GREAT possessors of
this earthen world, will prove his enemies; and the declaration of this Decree,
will set the world on fire, fill it with a fiery fury: The heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. 5 That this is no
rebellious nor strange word, but a doctrine becoming the Gospel and Gospel
times, to proclaim the War of the Lord against all the enemies of Christ; it is
the mind of the father, for this is part of the Decree which the Son has
engaged to declare, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them to
pieces like a potters vessel. 6 That this day, is a day of great supplication
and prayer, ASK of me, says God, the father commands to ask, upon such an
encouraging account, as that it provokes Christ and his followers to lie hard
at the Throne of grace, for the performance of the fathers Promises, says God,
ASK and I will give; ASK, or you cannot receive; but ASK and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for
thy possession: If God command to ask, upon such an account, how can it be but
his people will obey with rejoicing, filling the Heavens with their cries? And
can we think Christ will not fill the Censor with these odours, and offer them
up upon the Altar as a sweet perfume to God his father, and then, what voices!
what thunderings! lightnings! and Earthquakes will this fire from the Altar
fill the earth with? These will fill the Vials of Gods wrath, and send the
Angels out of the Temple to pour them out upon the world. 7 Here Is a direction
for prayer, in this day: It Is the will of the father, the prayers of the Saints
should be chiefly, and in the first place, for the glory of Christ, that he may
have Heathens for an Inheritance, and utmost parts of the earth for a
possession; And for vengeance, and ability to execute the wrath of God upon the
world secondarily, merely as a means to accomplish the former, by removing lets
and hindrances out of the way; Their heart in prayer to their father, ought to
run out chiefly for the glory of Christ; and surely, if the world would be
converted and turn to God, it would redound much to the honor of our Lord
Jesus, therefore Christ undertakes to declare the Decree, tells them the whole
sum of the matter, with Exhortation to come in to him, that they may be blessed
with everlasting happiness; but if they will not hearken to this voice of
love, then, ASK, and thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them
to pieces like a potters vessel. 8 In this day the Intercession of Christ, and
so the prayers of the Saints, will be of very high concernment, of dangerous
consequence to the world and worldly powers; They reach at no less then the
Crowns and Scepters of the world, that the whole world may become the Lord
Christ's, Heathens for an Inheritance, and utmost parts of the earth for a
possession: As the Saints formerly prayed against the Heathens rage, and the
Kings open profaneness, in setting themselves against their Lord; so, they now
pray as zealously against the Clandestine cunning Counsels of hypocritical
Apostate Rulers; what though the men of the world, and some deluded sincere
hearts, call it sin (and gross infirmity at the best) leading to rebellion,
unwarrantable talking tending to naught but ruin, it matters not, they have
the command of the great Jehovah for it, ASK of me (says he) and I will give
thee the Heathens; ASK of me and I will give thee the utmost parts of the
earth; ASK of me and thou shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them
to pieces like a potters vessel: ASK these things of me, pray for them and I
will give them. 9 That in this day, the perverse opposition of the worlds
Saint-like Rulers to the Lord and his anointed, will prove such, as will
compel them, to ask of their father AN IRON ROD; such an iron rod, wherewith
they may break their enemies, and dash them to pieces like a potters vessel:
And if they ask it, he has promised he will give it, and that in their hand it
shall do his appointed work; and then woe to the world, for, how great will
the Vintage of Gods wrath upon the world be in that day. 10 Such prayers are no
way contrary to the will and mind of God, nor unsuitable to a Gospel spirit in
Gospel times, for we see at this day, wherein Christ is taking his Kingdom to
set forth the Gospel in all its glory, the Command is, ASK of me; God will be
asked for such things, the giving of which ruins this old world, and makes way
for the new Heavens and new Earth: ASK of me, the Heathens for an inheritance,
the Powers, Crowns, Scepters of the great men of the world, and I will give
them to thee; ASK of me the utmost parts of the earth for a possession, the
whole habitable earth for a place to display thy glory in, and I will give it;
Pray unto me, against the Rulers, their Apostasy and wickednesses, taking
secret wily Counsel, combining in leagues and agreements together, asosiating
themselves with the Kings of the earth against the Lord and his anointed, and
that, to break their bands, and cast away their cords; Cry aloud unto me
against them, and these their abominable practices, and I will put the iron
sword of my wrath and vengeance into thy hand, and thou shall break them with
it, and my spirit shall so assist thee, by an Almighty operation, as that there
shall be as great ease and facillity without let or hinderance in doing this
work of my just wrath and vengeance, as there is in dashing a potters vessel
against the ground. 11 Here is great encouragement to the Saints and people of
God to persist and grow valiant in the way of the truth, of this truth; Lift up
your hearts, cries, and groans higher and higher, to your God and father,
against the enemies of your Lord, and for the glory and Kingdom of Christ;
for, while you are so doing, you are in your fathers way, doing his Command,
ASK of me, says he. Again, you are in the way of the Promise, if you ask,
God has Promised he will give, ASK of me and I will give thee; yea, God
stands here in a giving posture, he waits but for a Petition, and when it
comes, he answers it graciously, he bids you ask that he may give; there is a
necessity you must ask, says God, I have a gift in my hand worthy a God to
bestow, but you must ask it ere I can give it, that is the order I have set
down to my self to walk by, and I cannot, it becomes not my wisdom to
recede from it, therefore ASK of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. 12 That
there will be in this day, a reluctance and backwardness in the people of God,
to the performance of this great duty this dispensation of the father lays
upon them; which may come to pass partly through the darkness of this day,
the uncertainty and unclearnesse of things, that they know not what to judge of
them, (as has been opened already;) and partly through that little betternesse
in their condition now to what it was under the Government of the Kings,
through carnality of spirit being ready to sit down there; and partly through
unbelief of heart, every little hardship and difficulty they fancy to be in
the way, they look upon as impossibilities, and the multiplying-glasse of
unbelief, makes them to seem such tall and mighty Sons of Anake, as God cannot
pull down and overcome; so that they are ready to cry out, Let us make us a
Captain, and return to our Onyons and Garlic, and fleshpots in Egypt, for
it was better then with us than it is now: If this were not so, this Command
ASK of me, were needless, for otherwise they would be willing enough and
forward enough of themselves, their own eternal happiness and glory is so
much concerned in it, that it would be a motive strong enough and sufficient to
draw them; but here God is feign to call upon and command his people, ASK of
me. 13 The time of Gods giving an answer and return to all the prayers of the
Saints, is now come: God having filled his hand full of blessings, he stands
ready to open it, and scatter them down upon his people, therefore says he,
ASK and I will give; ASK of me, that I may give; fill up the measure of your
prayers, that I may fill up the measure of my gifts; I have seen, says God,
the hard measure you have met with from the world for my Sons sake, how
ungratefully and unworthily they have dealt with you, trampling upon you as
dung, deriding you as the offscouring and dross of mankind; but now, come,
ASK of me, and I will give you the reward of all your labor of love, a Crown
of glory for your Crown of Thorns, a Royal Exchange indeed: O! how tender
has Christ (by presenting to his open view, the wounds he received, the blood
he shed, and the sufferings he underwent) made the heart of his father? He can
bear no longer, he cannot stay till his people come and ask, but calls upon
them, Come my Lambs, ASK of me, and I will give; ASK, that I may give you the
Heathen for an inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for a possession:
He that commands to ask, promises to give, this is the time of giving, here is
the time of receiving. 14 The necessity, and mighty force and power of the
spirit of prayer; says God, ASK of me that I may give; you must ask before I
give; and ASK of me, and I cannot deny you, but I must give you, Heathens for
an inheritance, and utmost parts of the earth for a possession; ASK of me, and
I must help you, and you hall break your enemies with a rod of iron, and dash
them to pieces like a potters vessel. 15 What a useful instrument has God
made Syon to be to his Son; as Sion must become the hill of Gods holiness
before she can be a fit seat for Christ, so before Christ can be exalted and
honored as King, he must be seated on Sion; he must be seated as a King there
before he is in a fit posture to declare the Decree of his father, his right
and title to the world; and as soon as he is settled there, he is accomplished
at all points, to encounter with the enemies of his Kingdom, sends them a
defiance, a declaration of his right and title to their usurped possessions;
Sion is his Magazine, out of which he fetches all his instruments of war, and
which he has made of sufficient force to blow up and bring to ruin all the
foundations of rebellion and opposition his enemies have laid against him. 16
It Is worthy our taking notice of, and of confiderable consequence for us to
observe, The way of our Lords proceedings in this day, wherein he is harnessing
himself for the battle; it is not the way and course of the politic
inventions, Machiavillian stratagems, under-hand-workings, and by the Maxims
of State of this world; but in a noble, plain, heroic way, like a piece of
the truest valor that ever drew sword, like himself, sends forth his Heralds,
commands voluntary submission, or else gives the challenge, lets them know,
there is no way but death, perishing from the way of blessedness. 17 That it is
the greatest folly and madness for the Rulers and Judges of the world to
oppose and fight against this praying people; for they are not only against
them, but the Father the Son and the spirit, and all the Host of Heaven are
against them: As Elisha said, They that be with us are more then they that be
against us, there is a greater and a stronger power with them, than the worldly
Rulers can raise against them, although they could bring up Hell it self from
the deep to serve them. 18 What a sad account will those be able to give, who
join and strike hands with these perverse Rulers in this day; also, those who
have not heart nor courage to stand up for the Son against these Rulers, and
their wickednesses; For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of
him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and
in his fathers, and of the holy Angels. What shame and confusion of face will
cease upon them in that day? If ever there was a time, wherein Christ expects
his friends should stand by him, and plead for him, it is now, in this day
spoken of in the Text, wherein the Rulers take such pernicious counsel against
him, and those that forsake him now, he will not own before his father, for we
see at the latter end of the Psalm, those that kiss not the Son, submit not
to him, and come under his yoke, perish from the way of blessedness; they
shall receive their portion with those that shall come at the last day, crying,
Lord Lord open unto us, and Christ shall profess he knows them not.
The third and last part of our work, is, To consider the manner how Christ
manageth his work in this day, and that is, with much love and pity to the
souls of men, exhorting them to a timely repentance, promising blessedness to
all that hearken to him; Although he has separated his Sion from the world,
and made it the Hill of Gods Holiness, a fit seat for himself; yet, he cannot
be contented to go with a sword in one hand to execute his fathers Decree, but
he must have a Pardon in the other, to bestow upon all those that will submit
and come in unto him.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed, ye Judges of the earth.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he
be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

In these words we have

1 An Exhortation. 2 Motives to provoke men to hearken to it.
In the Exhortation we have

1 The Persons exhorted, and they are chiefly the Kings and Judges of the
earth; those very Kings that set themselves, and those very Judges (or Rulers)
that take counsel together against the Lord and his anointed: But though the
Exhortation be chiefly to the Kings and Judges, yet not exclusive to others,
for we find in the last clause of the Psalm, Blessedness promised to all them
that put their trust in the Son; which ALL takes in more then the Kings and
Rulers, yea, ALL men of what rank and condition soever that put their trust in
him, shall be blessed; and it must of necessity follow, the Exhortation is of
as large an extent as that ALL, for the Promise is brought in as a Motive to
provoke to a hearty embracing of, and hearkening to it.

2 Here Is the matter of the Exhortation: which is,

1 To get a true and an exact knowledge of God and his ways, in this their
day: Which is held out unto us in two expressions, WISDOM and INSTRVCTION.

Be WISE now therefore O ye Kings: O you profane Kings, that having a whores
forehead and a face of brass, without shame and remorse have stood up, and set
your selves publicly, wilfully, with all your might against-me-without a
cause, to keep me from my rightful inheritance, and to prevent my entering my
possessions, the Copyhold my father has given me: Be wise now THEREFORE;
wherefore? why, you have heard the Decree of my father, the Justice and Equity
of my right and Title to my Kingdom; I have asked it, and he has given it me,
who has right and power to give it, he that made it has given it to me: And
my father having set me on Sion the Hill of his Holiness, I am prepared to
encounter you, I will wait your leisure no longer; therefore now be wise,
know, consider what you have to do, if you resist and stand it out, there is no
way but perishing and death; but if you submit your selves unto, and put your
trust in me, I will bless you, make you really happy; here is life and death
set before you, be wise now in your choice, that you may live and not dye: Be
wise with the wisdom of God wherein is life, for why will ye dye? You are
Kings, and it is a hard lesson for you to be willing to part with your great
possessions, and become Beggars, but learn it, and you shall find wisdom it
self in such seeming folly; Whatsoever any man forsakes for my sake, I will
give it him again in my Kingdom with great advantage, says Christ; Be wise,
know and consider the great Jehovah my father, and what he has already done
for me; know and consider me also, what I am to do to, and in the world, as
the will of my father in this day of his great wrath and fury.

Be INSTRVCTED ye Judges of the earth: Ye Judges, you that have set your selves
above the rank, and your feet on the neck of Kings, that would be accounted
repairers of the breaches, and restorers of the paths to dwell in; and yet take
counsel against the Lord and his anointed, to break their bands asunder, and
cast away their cords from you; you Judges, that carry it so underhand and
secretly against me and mine, while you seem to be for me, pretending a kiss,
when you intend a blow under the fifth rib, that you need not strike a second
time: Come you Judges be INSTRVCTED, know the wickedness and folly of your
malicious ways, they will yield you nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit,
the best fruit they can present you with is torment; for, this Proverb shall be
taken up against you, The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, and the
Scepter of the Rulers, yea, Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the King it is
prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much
wood, the wrath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it: ye
Judges of the EARTH; though you have set your selves in the highest form, and
will not be numbered among the Kings of the earth, but present your selves to
the world as Rulers, your Authority and Government to be of my fathers
appointment, and according to his will; yet, be instructed in this, know this,
that you and your inventions are of the earth, earthy; though you will not be
Kings of the earth, yet you are Judges of the earth, though the most refined,
yet still but earth; you, your ways, and inventions, are not of, nor from
heaven, but of and from the earth: Be instructed ye Judges of the earth in the
wisdom of God, in the service, worship, and outgoings of God in this your
day, you have been cunning and wise Counselors for your selves, and in your
own ways and concernments; be ye now instructed, become as wise and knowing in
the ways and concernments of God and his Son in this your day: Be wise ye
Kings, and be instructed ye Judges of the earth, hearken unto me or you perish
from the way of life and blessedness, and go into eternal death and misery.

2. To worship the true God, and him only* Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling; Here Is both service done to God, and rejoicing in God;
and they are exhorted to mix the one with fear, and to mingle trembling with
the other, and then they will be in the way of the Promise, Isa. 66.2. To this
man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word. And Psalm. 112.1. and 145.191. Mal. 4.2. Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments. He
will full fill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry,
and will save them. But unto you that fear my name, shall the Son of
righteousness arise, with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and
grow up as the Calves of the stall.

3 To a hearty submission to the Son in this way the father has set him;
giving him that honor and those dues, the father has decreed he shall have;
KISS THE SON; this kiss gives us to understand, the most absolute subjection
that is possible; not that which is only of the outward man, through fear and
inability to resist, but that, which is from the heart, and the fruit of the
strongest love, grounded upon the best and surest Basis of the highest reason.

2 The Lord gives the world several Motives to provoke them to hearken to his
advice and Counsel. And they are

1 The Consideration of the Sons anger; Kiss the Son least he be angry: All
the day long hitherto we were exhorted to repentance and submission to the Son,
from the consideration of his love and tenderheartednesse to sinners, but now
we are called upon with a Least he be angry; The day of Gods judging this
Generation, and putting the Decree in execution, the time for the full
performance of his Promises to his chosen ones, is come, and now Christ's heart
is so full of love to his suffering ones, that have been so long trampled upon
by the world, that he is so intense upon giving out the gifts of his father
(their Crown) to them, that he will not tarry nor wait long, but his anger
will be kindled, and then there follows nothing but woe, perishing, death: And
least he be angry, it strongly implies, that he will be angry, and angry to the
purpose with all those that will not readily and quickly hearken to him,
inflicting no less punishment upon them than perishing, eternal death.

2 The Consideration of the sad condition we shall be in, if his wrath be
kindled but a little: and ye perish from the way, When his wrath is kindled but
a little: Here Is a perishing woe; now his wrath is kindled and kindled but a
little, there is no way but death; how dangerous is it to provoke the Son in
this day, when a little kindling of his wrath will perish our souls! How
strongly ought this to work upon us, to move us to make have and meet him in
the way, least his wrath be kindled but a little, and he accuse us to the
Judge, not owning us before his father, and our portion be to perish with the
hypocrite and unbeliever:

And perish from the way; another piece of the Motive, and an aggravation of
our sin if we hearken not to it; While this Exhortation sounds in our ears, we
are in the way to happiness, the day of Salvation is not quite spent and gone,
the night has not yet totally ceazed upon us, but, if our dull and stubborn
hearts, by not closing with his gracious motions, kindle his wrath but a
little, we perish, the day of salvation is cut off from us, the night of
judgment and wrath ceazes upon us, and we are undone for eternity.

3 A Promise of Blessedness; Blessed are all they that put their trust in him:
Here Is love indeed! Come, submit to me, put your trust in me, and I will bless
you; if the consideration of my aptness to be angry in this day, and how
dangerous it is to have my wrath kindled but a little, if this will not move
you, but you rather (though unworthily and irrationally) count me a hard
Master; yet, let this prevail with you, that you shall get no less than
blessedness by trusting in me, yea, none shall go without it, but all they
that trust in me shall be blessed; yea, and be blessed with the highest
blessings, with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places; yea, with
blessedness in the abstract, BLESSED are all they that put their trust in me;
blessedness it self, the Fountain of blessedness shall be their Portion:
And now come, come and be blessed, made really happy; if you will not hearken
to this, I have nothing more to say, Blessed are all they that put their trust
in him; With these words the blessed Lamb of God closes up his mouth, and goes
about his fathers work.

From hence we may Observe,

1 That although this Decree be concerning the total Amotion of all the
Kingdoms of this world, and their being given to the Lord Christ, yet, it must
be declared with abundance of love to the souls of men, exhorting all to
repentance and submission to the Son, that they may be blessed. 2 That None are
exempted (no not the greatest of sinners) from the benefit of this Exhortation;
For, our Lord directs his speech chiefly and in the first place to his greatest
enemies, the Kings and Judges of the earth, that set themselves and take
counsel together against him and his, Be wise O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth: What encouragement is here to all and the greatest of
sinners to hearken unto this voice, and come under his healings, and they shall
be blessed? 3 We may here behold The abundant riches of free grace, and the
immense greatness of the love of Christ to sinners; That notwithstanding the
great and unheard of aggravations of the sins of the Rulers of the world at
this day, yet he will have them exhorted and woed to come in unto him, that
they may be blessed by him; yea further, notwithstanding this day is a day of
great wrath, and the world have so provokt him as he cannot find in his heart
to intercede for them, although his father in wrath enquire into their actions;
yet with what love and grace and strong persuasions, does he exhort men to come
and submit to him that he may bless them? He cannot be contented to see the
worlds ruins, and the destruction of souls, before he has made one Essay
more, pleading with the world to consider their present and future condition,
and accept of him upon his own Terms, that he may give Blessedness to them;
yea, though the wickedness of this world in this day be such, that it is flint
hard, and made so by love and mercy, that our Lord is forced to make a change,
alter his voice, from expressions and considerations of love, to a threatening
of, and pointing to his direful anger, to try how that may work; yet knowing
it is not the natural tendency of such a voice to work thoroughly upon the hearts
of men, his love closes with a blessed Promise of blessedness; as he began his
work here on earth (in the days of his flesh) with wonderful unparalled
expressions of love, so, will he finish his work here with the same glory, he
concludes with a large Promise of rich blessedness! How tender is the heart of
Christ! He speaks but two or three words that have symptoms of wrath and
displeasure in them, he hides his gracious and loving countenance but a moment,
and he can contain no longer, but he must unvaile himself and appear in the
glory of his Mediatorship; It is, as if he had said, I have exhorted you to
come and kiss me, to submit to me least I be angry, and you perish from the
way, but that has but little operation upon you, therefore now I display my
glory before you; do but come to me, believe on me, trust in me, depend and
rely upon me only and alone for happiness, forsake all your Idols, and
every thing that is grievous and contrary to me, and I will bless you; do but
trust me and I will do it, the father has given me power to do it, and by
that power I am able to do it, and my blood shall speak the willingness of
my heart to do it, Who ever shed his blood for his enemies (such enemies) but
I? and if I had not loved them with such a love as would give them the greatest
blessings, I would never have done it; And not one that does thus trust and
believe in me shall go without the blessing, all they that trust in me shall
be blessed. 4 That though these Kings and Rulers be guilty of most abominable
wickedness beyond all that ever were before them, such as moves God to speak
in wrath to them, yet, There Is hope of life and salvation for them, if they
will hearken to the Gospel of the Kingdom while it is Preached to them in this
Exhortation, and kiss the Son before his wrath be kindled but a little. 5 That
in this day of the fathers wrath, Nothing less than a hearty and through
submission to the Son will please him, and prevent his wrath breaking forth to
our destruction; KISS the Son least he be angry. 6 It Is No Treason against the
Royal Law of King Jesus, whatever it may be against the Laws of men, to seek
to draw men from their obedience to these wicked Kings and perverse Rulers, to
kiss the Son that they may be blessed with his everlasting blessings. 7 That
Men must be instructed in the wisdom of God, and be filled with the graces
and strength of the spirit, before they can be enabled to come under the happy
influence of this blessed Promise, for we see, that in order to this submission
to the Son, men are exhorted to be filled with wisdom and instruction, to
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, and then Kiss the Son,
put your trust in him, and you shall be blessed. 8 That in this day,
notwithstanding the cunning deceits and curious coverings of the Rulers, yet,
the Kings and Rulers of the earth, and King Jesus, are so diametrically
contrary to each other, in all their ways and stations, as that it is
impossible for a man to serve them, and be a friend to Christ; The Exhortation
is, Kiss the Son, that is, kiss none but him, give no obedience but to him,
yield subjection to none but to him alone, Come out of her my people, come from
under obedience to the worlds and Antichrists Kings, Rulers, and Laws, and
become the subjects of Christ, submit to the Scepter of the Son; Kiss the Son,
and then you shall be blessed. 9 That this Exhortation with the Decree, is
indeed and in truth no other but the Gospel of the Kingdom, the forerunner of
it; which is Preached to the world immediately before it is brought into the
world, to move them to submit to it when it comes, and to call the chosen of
God out of the world, to prepare themselves to meet their Bridegroom. 10 That
this Gospel of the Kingdom must chiefly and in the first place be Preached to
the Kings, Rulers, and Magistrates of the world: Our Lord directs his speech
first to them, Be wise ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth: It
must be preached to them in particular; it is Preached to the rest of the world
as it were by the by, they are put into the little word all, at the very close
of the Exhortation; therefore, how little cause will the Kings and Rulers of
the world have, to be wroth and angry with the Saints and people of God, for
preaching this doctrine to them, although it sound so dreadfully in their
ears? You see their Authority, they do but their duty in it, to follow their
Lord, and the dictates of his spirit, who has undertaken this work; and they
should perish together with you, if they should hold their peace, and break the
Command of their Lord: And their end is only, that you may be blessed if you
hearken to it; what a mighty aggravation of your sin will this be, if you
persecute, oppose, and take counsel against this doctrine, and the publishers
of it? The wrath of the Son will be kindled against you, and when it is kindled
but a little, you perish from the way presently, and that inevitably without
remedy. 11 The time of the Preaching this Gospel, Is the evening of the Gospels
repenting day; The Son of righteousness is now setting apace (as to sinners)
and he will arise again with healings in his wings only. to those that put
their trust in him; If this voice be not hearkened to, his wrath will be
kindled, and all his enemies shall perish from the way of Blessedness; there is
no longer day for repentance, they have lost the blessing, and though with Esau
they should seek it with tears, they shall find no place for it; they shall
hear this voice no more, but another, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I
know you not; after this voice ceases, there remains nothing but a fearful
looking for of Judgment: Therefore, it highly concerns the whole world, with
their Kings and Rulers, to be cautious how they stop their ears, against this
wise Charmers charming; surely if they do, what horrors! what terrors! what a
massy weight of wrath of the Almighty God! what unexpressible misery will be
our portion for ever? How unconceivably unsufferably tormenting, all our long
day of eternity, will the recounting over all those opportunities (and
especially this) we have had, to make our peace with the jealous God, and to
get Christ to be our friend by an easy submision to him upon his own terms,
be? This will be no small Worm gnawing our consciences to all eternity. 12
It Is worthy our Observation, That notwithstanding those symptoms of wrath and
displeasure that appear here and there throughout the Exhortation, Yet our Lord
will have it end full of grace and love, with a Promise full of blessedness,
Though this Exhortation be made in a day of wrath, and accompanied with wrath,
yet, at evening time it shall be light, the close of this day shall be with a
very clear Gospel demonstration of the good will of God unto the souls of men,
so that if they hearken not unto him now, they shall for ever after hold their
peace, be left without the least excuse, not have a piece of a word to say for
themselves, although the wrath of God break forth upon them, perishing and
destroying their souls with eternal death.
The great Correspondency this Interpretation holds with other Scriptures that
have relation to our times.
Now it remains that I should do these two things.

1 Show that great correspondency, this Scripture with the Interpretation given
of it, holds with other Prophetical Scriptures that have special relation
to these last days. 2 Give my opinion and judgment (according to the light
the father of lights has given to me) where abouts we (in this our day) are;
that we may consider and know our work, God expects at our hands.
For the first, This Psalm (according to the following comparison) is
contemporary with the 14th of the Revelation.

Psalm 2. From Verse. 6. to the end. Revelation 14. From Verse. 1. to Verse. 8.
YEt have I set mine anointed upon Sion the hill of my holiness, as the Margent
has it. I will declare the Decree, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the
Heathen for thy inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. ANd I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on the Mount
Sion, and with an hundred forty-foure thousand having his fathers name written
in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: And I heard the voice of Harpers,
harping with their Harps. And they sung as it were a new song before the
Throne, and before the four Beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn
that song, but the one hundred forty-foure thousand, which were redeemed from
the earth; these are they which were not defiled with women; for they are
Virgins: These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; These
were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb:
and in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the
Throne of God. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed, ye Judges of
the earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: Kiss the
Son, least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled
but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. And I saw
another Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and
Tongue, and People: Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him;
for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and
earth, and the Sea, and the fountains of waters.

In the Psalm the Holy Ghost shows us, the spetiall and peculiar posture, the
Son of God shall stand in at that Time, upon Sion the hill of Gods Holiness,
with the work he will then do in his Sion; Declare the Decree to them: In the
Revelation, the same Spirit tells us, the particular qualifications of this
hill of Holiness, on which the father has set his Son, with the work the one
hundred forty-foure thousand being so qualified fall to among themselves; after
the example of their Lord, they sing a new song.

Again, In the Psalm, the spirit of God describes the Preaching of the Gospel
of the Kingdom; in a special and peculiar manner to the Kings and Rulers of
the earth: In the Revelation the Holy Ghost deciphers to us the Preaching of
the same Gospel, in relation to the whole world in general; The Exhortation to
the Kings and Rulers, and the Gospel Preached to them that dwell on the earth,
is one and the same: These two Scriptures thus compared together, are an exact
Comment upon each other.

The Psalm closes with an Exhortation, the preaching this Everlasting Gospel:
This 14th of the Revelation, goes on, she was us the work the Son does being
seated on Syon, having his 144000 about him; after he has declared his fathers
Decree, after the everlasting Gospel is preached; he destroys Babylon, lays
that proud and lofty one in the dust; pronounces them cursed, and subjects of
his fathers eternal wrath, that worship the Beast and his Image, and receive
his Mark in their forehead and hand, blesses them (according to the last clause
in the Psalm) that dye in the Lord: Yea, proceeds to show us his completing
Acts, his Reaping the harvest, and Treading the Wine Press of his fathers
wrath.

Now if any should be desirous to know further of the Time, when God will set
his King upon Sion the hill of his holiness, and when the Lamb will stand on
Mount Sion with his 144000 about him; I judge, the father will do that for his
Son, in that space of Time between the pouring out of the third and fourth
Vialls; and the declaration of the Decree, with the Exhortation annexed; and
the preaching the Everlasting Gospel, will end (if not before, yet) with the
finishing Time of the fourth Vial: My Reason is:

Because, The declaration of the Decree, with the Exhortation to the Kings and
Judges of the earth, is the product of the Sons being set on Sion as King; and
the preaching the Everlasting Gospel, is the fruit of the Lambs standing on
Mount Sion with his 144000 singing their new song; now the end of all being to
bring men to repentance, exhorting them to turn to the true God, worship him
only, and submit to the Son that they may be blessed by him; and this being a
real act in God, intending the salvation of men, it cannot be but all this
must be done before the day of repentance and salvation is finish^ and gone;
when the night comes no man can work; and if so, then it must of necessity be
granted also, that these things must be done before the fourth Vial is powered
out; for, after that Vial is once gone forth, there remains no place for
repentance, the day of repentance and salvation is spent and gone; for the Text
expressly says, that men blasphemed the name of God, and repented not to give
him glory.

When the two Witnesses rise (which we have good ground to believe will be at
or before the pouring out of the fourth Vial) and execute some part of the
wrath and judgments of God, the day of repentance and salvation being not yet
past over and gone, it is recorded, ( Rev. 11.13.) that the remnant of men left
gave glory to the God of heaven, a true and excellent fruit of true repentance;
but here, the day of repentance and salvation being finished, and men's hearts
hardened, that is recorded also, that men blasphemed and repented not to give
him glory.

And in this 14th of the Revelation, immediately upon the preaching of this
Gospel, Babylon (Rome) falls; and suddenly upon the neck of that, God by the
mouth of an Angel, pronounces them cursed (without remedy) that then worship
the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark; and the Son of man follows
with his sharp sickle, reaps his harvest, and gathers the Vine of the earth,
treads the wine press of the wrath of God: What God may do in a more than
ordinary way, with any particular soul, I leave it, but there is no general
Time of repentance and salvation, interveening these executions of the wrath of
God, when once the fourth Vial is powered out: Not being able to answer these
Reasons, I am fully persuaded to believe the truth of this Assertion. And
whether Daniels little stone's smiting, and the rise of the two Witnesses, be
not contemporary with David's hill of Sion, and John's Mount Sion, Christ being
seated on it; whether all these Prophecies will not be fulfilled at one and the
same time; yea, whether they signify not to us one and the same thing, only,
one, one part of the work of God at that day, another, another part of it, I
leave to the serious consideration and narrow scrutiny of the godly wise at
this day.

And let none be discouraged from believing these things, because of the
unlikelinesse of them to come to pass in our days; for, the flood of Gods
wrath upon the old world, was as unlikely to that worlds understanding, to
overflow when it did, as these things can be to this, and the Scripture says,
the coming of the Son of man shall be like unto those days. Again, the
Scripture says, He shall come at midnight, a time when men (asleep) least
expect him: And again, When they that dwell upon the earth shall be in the
height of their mirth and jollity. FVLL OF PEACE, rejoicing and sending gifts
one to another, then the spirit of life from God enters into the two Witnesses,
and fills those rejoicing earthen souls with great fear, brings an
Earthquake, slayes a part of the world, and affrights the remnant that are
left, extorting from them glory to the God of heaven: Yet again, though the
whorish woman Babylon, may come to such prosperity, as to say in her heart, I
sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, her plagues shall come
in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt
with fire, for strong is the Lord who judges her: Let our hearts ponder these
things, and we shall tremble as the word of God, for judgment is at the door.

In the second place, I am to give my judgment how far we are come at this
day, or rather, how near the great God in his providence is come to us, at
what part of this Psalm thus expounded, we may lay our finger, and say, this
is our state and condition, this is the work God would have us to do in this
our day; To do this is a great work, but to do it with demonstration to
convince the understandings of men, and stop the mouth of the gain-sayer, is a
far greater work, which I despair to perform; yet, according to the measure
of light the Lord has given me, I shall make an Essay toward a clear
evidencing of the Truth.

I conceive We are come to the dawning of that day, wherein God will in wrath
to the worlds Rulers, set his King upon Sion the hill of his holiness; and the
Lamb will stand on Mount Sion with his 144000 (his chosen ones) about him;
wherein the Son will declare the Decree, and the 144000 will be singing their
new song before the Throne of God, according to the import of that Command of
the father to his Son in this second Psalm, ASK OF ME? And that the present
Kings and Rulers of the world (but especially the Rulers who are the head of
this gathering together against the Lord and his anointed) are those against
whom the father will engage in this day of his wrath and jealousy for his Son,
speaking to them in wrath, and vexing them in his sore displeasure, even with
this, his setting his King upon Sion the hill of his holiness.

The Reasons for this my Assertion, are

1 Because we are already gotten under (if not toward the latter end of) the
third Vial; to prove this, that it may be as valid a reason to you, as it is
to me, I entreat thee Courteous Reader, let thine eyes, accompanied with thy
mind, take a journey through Mr. Tillinghast's Treatise upon the Vialls, where
you will find so much Reason, and such strong Arguments for this assertion, as
I presume will be so satisfactory, as it will not be expected I should say any
thing more to the point: And if so, then upon my former proof, it appears, the
dawning of this day of blessedness to the Saints, and of wrath to the world
with its Rulers, has ceazed upon us: But, 2 The first fruits of the
qualifications of Gods hill of holiness, Christ's 144000; the sprinklings of
the spirit of that day; the beginnings of Christ's being received as King in
Sion, are to be found in the midst of a despised people among us in this our
day. Let us view over the Qualifications of Christ's 144000, consider them, and
put on a pair of those excellent spectacles made of pure love, and our dim
eyes will not behold men like Trees, but, like the purchased inheritance of the
Son, qualified according to the Decree, to such and such a work, at such a
time; I say, the first fruits, the beginnings of these (though yet imperfect)
will appear plainly to our view: And let us with simplicity and singleness of
heart, look out at the Casements of our souls, and we shall behold the
sprinklings of the spirit of that glorious day; The work of the day shows us
the spirit of the day; The Saints in that day sing a new song before the Throne
of God, etc. which is such a song as is so uncouth, so strange to, so contrary
and above the nature, Principles, and reason of the world, as they cannot
learn it; no man without this hill of holiness, none but the 144000 can
learn to sing this song: What is this strange song that is so hard to be
learnt? Why, consider it, and you will find it to be the Decree, the Son in the
second Psalm undertakes to declare: If we consider this particular also, we
shall find plainly to appear in this our day, some sprinklings, the beginnings
of the mighty workings of this spirit. Let us yet make a stand, and consider
the temper and spirit of the Lords people in this our day, and we shall find
Christ to have a little footing on Sion already; his 144000 begin to look upon
him, to consider him as their King, and their hearts are cleaving to him apace:
If we consider these things, we shall behold an Emblem of a glorious fabric to
be erected in its due season; which cannot be far off, for when the singing of
Birds is heard, they fly chirping from bough to bough, it is a sign the winter
is past, and the spring is come: Now is the Time, in which Christ will (or
does) call to his beloved, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away: Follow
me. O my Dove! that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret place of the
stairs (Gods hiding place for his people in a day of wrath) Let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice: For sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes (those that are
less discernable, and least mistrusted to do mischief) that spoil the Vines,
for our Vines have tender Grapes, Cant. 2.10, 11, 12.
What though this Kingdom of Heaven be now but as a grain of Mustard Seed,
the smallest of grains, yet it is watered with the dewes of the spirit, and it
will, it shall grow up to a Tree able to give shelter to the Fowls of Heaven.
Elijah's Cloud of blessings, although at first it appear but as the little
hand of a man, yet in a short time it spreads over the whole Heavens. When we
fee the day begin to break, can we be so stupid as not to believe the Sun makes
have in his course to arise upon our Horizon? When these things appear, such
signs of the Times are given to us, what wilful sins of ignorance shall we
be guilty of, if we not minding them, believe not what is a coming? We can tell
by the signs thereof, whether it will be fair weather, or soul, to day; And
why are we ignorant of the signs of the Times? Surely it is a token of a
hypocritical spirit, whose damnation will be very great.

Let none say, that which I seem to plead for, is encompassed about with such
infirmities, so much of the spirit of man, such contrarieties to some Gospel
rules, as we cannot believe it to be of God: For this plea will be found no
good plea at the Sons Tribunal, it is but a fond excuse at best, lay what
stresse you will upon it, it will not hold; This day, is a day of wrath, and
the word spoken, is spoken in wrath, and except we dive into its glory, through
the vailes of wrath upon it, and hearken to it, and embrace it, giving
obedience to it, we shall perish from the way of blessedness.

Again, let us consider the signs of this day of Christ's coming to his Sion,
that other Scriptures afford; and we shall find them to be such, as will
signify no such thing to any, but to those who have the most precious faith of
this Gospel, waiting for the consolation of Israel; the Holy Ghost will be upon
them, and let them see the blessed fruit of their expectation: There shall come
in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where
is the Promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all things
continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation, 2 Pet. 3.3. In heart
saying, our Lord delays his coming, smiting fellow servants; eating and
drinking with the drunken, Mat. 24.48, 49. And though the Son of God has told
us, that his father will avenge his own Elect speedily, which cry day and
night unto him, nevertheless, When he comes, shall he find faith on earth?
Luke 18.7, 8. yet, The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise 2 Pet. 3.9. But
is it not to this end? That the Trial of your faith (the faith of Gods chosen)
being much more precious then of gold that perishes, though it be tried with
fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. If these things be so, how ought we with all
diligence, to walk with fear and trembling, least we stumble and fall upon
those stumbling blocks of wrath God throws in the worlds way, and perish upon
them together with the world.

And my Reasons why I conceive the present Rulers of this world, are those
enemies of Christ, God will speak to in wrath, and vex in his sore
displeasure, are 1 Because I find the Scripture expressly says, That those who
shall be the Rulers of the world at this day of Gods setting his Son upon Sion,
will oppose, and take counsel together against the Lord and his anointed;
Therefore has he said, He will speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure, with setting his King upon Sion the hill of his holiness:
And seeing it is a truth, that we are come to the dawning of the day, wherein
the father will set his Son on his Sion; it must follow, that these are the
Rulers that will be the subjects of the direful displeasure and wrath of the
Great GOD. 2 Because I perceive the Rulers are already taking Counsel together
to make their hands strong against the Lord and his anointed, and to break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from them; And the faithful
Almighty God has said, He will then speak to them in his wrath; and vex them
in his sore displeasure; and if they hearken not to the Gospel of the Kingdom
preached to them, they shall without remedy perish from the way of
blessedness; speedy and swife destruction will be their portion. To prove this
to the vulgar understanding is very hard; yet, if we will but consider these
few things, we may learn somewhat of the business. 1 That the
Characteristicall work of these Rulers, is not their acting, but TAKING
COUNCIL against the Lord and his anointed; (for, as it has been already
proved, God will not permit them to act their Counsels, but while they are in
Counsel, he will speak to them in his wrath.) Now, Counsel being a
close-cabinet act, though day may be discerned through a little cranny, yet,
it is a hard work at present to prove it clearly to the understandings of
others; but when they come to this height, have brought their Counsels (as
they think) ready to put in execution, crying out for action, LET US, etc. then
this will appear to be a truth, to those that will not believe it now; and
those who now are counted the fools, uncharitable, rash spirits of the Times,
will be found guided by a spirit of wisdom and truth. 2 That these Rulers,
not being tied up by Satan or their own consciences and principles to any
Rules of practice (all is left to their wisdom and counsel) they will act
suitable to the present interest of their state and condition; Their bounds (in
that respect) are larger to range in then ever any of the worlds Rulers had
given them before; they will turn themselves into any shape or form, to please
men, to keep them within the bounds of their Rule and Dominion; all this and
much more, is couched under that significant COUNCIL in the first Verse of the
Psalm; they are well skilled in the turnings and windings of the wily
Serpent, which practice of theirs makes things so dubious, and hardly
discernable by the understandings of men. 3 The present actings of these Rulers
against some of the most endeared servants of our Lord Jesus, signifies not a
little to us concerning this matter: Consider seriously (for it concerns us
not a little ^o to do) the true ground and reason of their so unworthy
dealings with, and rough sinful handling of them: It weighs nothing, that
these Rulers put an ugly Vizzard on their face, representing them to the world,
as cloven-footed (Devils) evil doers; for this has been the course of Sarans
instruments ever since the world began, thereby to depr^sse the truth, that
their falsehood and error might take place: Herein these Rulers resemble their
predecessors, the Heathens and Kings of the earth; for which, they shall
together with them and their Companions, be called to account ere long, when
things will appear as indeed and in truth they are, not, as these Rulers would
now have them: I say, let our hearts ponder the true reason of present actings,
and we shall be sensible of the truth of the Assertion. 4 Let us consider
daily, and make a narrow and through search into the actions of these Rulers,
with the natural tendency of them; and get a Serpents wisdom, with the
innoceny of the Dove, and we shall not need that any man should teach us in
this matter.


I shall close up this discourse with one word to the Saints, the followers of
the Lamb in these evil days.

To you, the followers of your dear Lord Jesus in this evil day of Apostasy:
You have here, something set before you of your work, God the father has
commanded you to do, and your Lord (the Son) expects should be done by you for
him in this your day; also, the Qualifications hinted at, that will enable you
to perform this work, according to the will and mind of your God and father.
Further, you have it also hinted to you, that you are already entered into the
confines of the work of this day; the Lord has drawn over you to the view of
the world (if they shut their eyes and will not see, the greater will their
condemnation be) an Emblem of that strange and glorious work, he is now about
to perform, and bring to pass in the world: The waters of this Sanctuary are
risen almost to your ankles; Now give me leave to exhort you the bosom friends
of our Lord Jesus, Follow your Leader, the spirit of your Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, pass through and through the waters of the Sanctuary, that they
may not only wash you to your ankles and knees, but to your loins, all over;
stay not your course till you come to the unpassable overflowings of the
spirit, that you cannot pass till you are taught to swim in that River of God,
or after the example of your Lord to walk upon those holy waters, doing the
will of your God and father, and keep in the way of the promise and these
things also shall be given you: Consider your work, and get an exact and
distinct knowledge of that work your Lord and Master has cut out for you to
do in this day of his Controversy with the world and its professing Rulers;
and mind the Qualifications ordained to be bestowed upon you to enable you to
perform that great work to the praise and glory of grace.

Let me (who am less then the least of all Saints, yet let me) beg of you
these few things.

1 Flee all flashinesse and flagings of spirit; let not the predominancy of
such infirmities over you, give the world occasion to conceit; the sword of the
Lord in your mouths and hands signifies but a vain flourish, is grounded on
nothing but the airey fancies of men; but by a holy and steady perseverance in
taking up your Cross daily, and following your Lord, give the world good
ground to fear, that it is the sword of the great God, wherewith he will plead
with all flesh, and the rod of his mouth, wherewith he will smite the earth,
and the breath of his lips wherewith he will slay the wicked, Isa. 11.4. Having
put your hand to the Plow, look not back; having entered into the work, make not
the least retreat, now you are running out of her, over whom the Lords
judgments and wrath are impending, which he will put in execution ere long,
let not your hearts backslide, Remember Lots wife, least you also be turned
into pillars of salt, made a savoury example of the judgment and wrath of the
great and jealous God, to work in those that shall come after you a savoury
spirit fit for the work you perish from.

2 Get clear of this world; make a seasonable and timely retreat into your
Chambers (Gods hiding place) into the clefts of the Rock, that you may be hid
from the wrath of God which is coming upon the world: Behold, the spirit of God
himself makes this Exhortation to you, Isa. 26.20, 21. Come my people, enter
thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as it
were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For behold, the
Lord comes out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her
slain. The Lord having told us what great changes and destructions he will
bring upon the earth, gives us in these two verses a loving invitation (with
prevalent Motives) to hide our selves while that his great wrath be over-past:
I say, Get clear of this world; our Lord tells us, It Is impossible for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven; for one whose heart is touched with
and cleaves to the present evil world, to be an inheriter of the world to
come, which God has promised as a reward to the faithful followers of the
Lamb: True, in this day you must ask a world, Heathens for an inheritance, and
utmost parts of the earth for a possession, but not this present world for your
selves, but another for the Son, your Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; yet, for
your comfort, know, you are not under an exclusion, for you must ask a world
for Christ as he is your head, your King, that from him you may receive
(according to the Decree of God) what your portion is, Of his fulness you may
and shall receive grace for grace: He that has in this old world been
faithful over a few things, which the Lord has given him in charge, shall in
the (new) world to come, be made Ruler over many things, and enter into the joy
of his Lord, Mat. 25.21. And every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life, Mat.
19.29. But he that does not by the exercise of a faithful spirit, make such a
retreat out of the world, shall perish in the ruins of this world. If our
spirits be right, the counterpaine of the spirit of our Lord in this day, our
prayer to our God and father will be for the utter dissolution of this old
world, and the bringing forth the new Heavens and new Earth promised; for the
performance of those glorious and admirable Promises, which the God and father
of our Lord Jesus has made concerning this matter: Now if our hearts be not
wholly taken off this present evil world, that voice, Come out of her my
people, will seem to us (as the speech of righteous Lot to his Sons in Law) as
the speech of one that mocketh, and not hearkening to it, we shall perish with
the world; at best, if any such tempered soul be saved, it will be as by fire,
he will suffer great loss: What advantage then can the enjoyment of this
present evil world be unto us?

3 Take not up your rest in any attainment; though you may have taken many a
step in following your Lord, and gotten on high above the world, and (it may
be) the rest of your brethren, yet take not up your rest there, but keep on
your pace (endeavoring daily to mend it) in following the Lamb; be not
contented nor satisfied with any thing below the sitting down together with
your Lord and Savior at the right hand of glory, in those Mansions of the
fathers house, which your Lord is gone before to prepare for you, and has
promised to come again to receive you, that where he is you may be also; Rest
not until you see your Lord (the Son of man) sit in the Throne of his glory,
and then shall you sit upon Thrones also, Mat. 19.28. I say, take not up your
rest in any attainment, otherwise, you will be of the number of those first
which shall be last, in verse. 30. Those that are lag now, will get before you
to your great regret of spirit; and (as in the next Chapter) a part of those
many which be called, but not chosen to the work of the day, and so you will
run a great hazard of missing that glorious reward, the gift of your Lord, To
reign together with him.

4 Remember this, That in this day, in the carrying on the work your Lord has
put into your hands, there must be no guile found in your mouth, you must be
without fault before the Throne of God: Your Lord expects you should exercise
such sincerity of spirit in your following him in this work, as that you be not
defiled with any of that guile (that hypocrifie and doubleness of heart and
tongue) the worlds mouth has always been filled with: In the matters of the
Kingdom of your Lord, and his outgoings against the world in this day, you
must be without guile, and without fault, so clear, as that God sitting on his
Judgment Throne may see no fault in you, without fault before the Throne of
God: Let it be so, and when your Lord comes, you will hear his blessed voice
calling unto you, Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord.

5 Would you be such, as God will teach knowledge, and make known his mind to,
in such a day of wrath as this is, Then (it is not my counsel but the Lords) be
weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts. Isa. 28.9. Whom shall be
teach knowledge? and whom shall be make to understand doctrine? (or the
stammeringe of lips (as the margent has it) at this day) them that are weaned
from the milk, and drawn from the breasts? Be ye weaned from the milk of the
worldly carnal professing Church, be drawn from the breasts of her
consolation, and the Lord will teach you knowledge, and make you to understand
doctrine; there shall not be a stammering of the lip, in the things of God, in
this your day, but the Lord will make you acquainted with it, to the
understanding of it. Instead of her milk and her adulterous breasts, he will
give you the teachings of his good spirit, making you intimately acquainted
with his blessed everlasting Gospel: Though, he withdraw from the worldly
professing Church, that his word is but here a little, and there a little among
them (as he formerly dealt with the carnal, yet professing Church of Ephraim)
though his word has been among them, precept upon precept, precept upon
precept, and line upon line, line upon line, but now, it is but here a little,
and there a little, the Lord is gotten to the threshold off their house, and is
departing quite away from them; I say notwithstanding this, he will manifest
himself to you, if you be weaned from their milk, and drawn from their
breasts; separate your selves from, have nothing to do with the worldly
(though professing) Church, he that has made this Promise, will perform it,
for he is faithful; let who can, charge him in the least with the breach of
any tittle of his word and promise.

6 Be upon your watch, that you let not slip the nick of time God gives you to
(and he expects you should) do your work in. The time when God expects you
should receive his Son, and exalt him among you as your King, is then, when he
is rejected by the worlds (refined) Rulers, and they enter into Associations
and Combinations against him, to break his bands asunder, and cast away his
cords; this is the time for you to stand up and declare for the Decree of God
the father on the behalf of your Lord and Savior; and, the very nick of time,
which you are not upon your peril to let slip, (as you will answer before his
father and your father) is then, when these wicked (yet professing) Rulers are
going about to execute their abominable Counsels, crying LET US, let us do
it, break his bands, and cast away his cords, then, it is your work and duty to
stand up and cleave to your King, follow him whithersoever he will lead you: I
say, slip not your time, for it concerns you, if you will not own him now
before the world (you will run a desperate hazard that) he will not own you
before his father, and then, what misery and unhappiness will betide you? Let
your own enlightened consciences judge.

Lastly, Beware of unbelief, the mother of all evil and misery; though you
should get to the very borders of the land of Promise, and the providence (the
voice) of God call you to encounter with your enemies, to remove every let and
obstruction in the way to your full possession, yet unbelief is able to drive
you back into the wilderness again, if you take not great heed; would you not
return to your wilderness Companions, the Briars, and the Brambles? would you
not have that mournful ditty heard in your mouths again? Woe is me that I
sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar, then flee all unbelief
that mortal enemy of your happiness: unbelief of the truths and mysteries of
the Sons Kingdom, is the Characteristicall sin of the times immediately before
the coming of Christ, When he comes shall he find faith on earth? This
interrogation is a strong affirmation of the truth of the negative, He shall
not find faith on earth. The Son had in the preceding words asserted the
faithfulness of God in the certainty of his avenging his Elect which cry day
and night unto him; yet, says he, Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes,
shall be find faith ou earth? In that time when God is about to spread abroad
his faithfulness in making bare his arm, to answer all the cries and prayers
of his people, to avenge them of their enemies, yea, even when the Son of man
is a coming to make good the word of his blessed father, Shall be find faith on
earth? That is, He shall not find faith on earth: Men will not believe that
it is the time of Gods performing his Promises; the face of things appear so
(through the counter-working of the evil one, the man of sin and his
instruments) to the merely rational eye, that in this very time when the Son
of man is coming to avenge the Elect of God which cry day and night unto him,
the men of the world become mockers, saying, Where is the Promise of his
coming, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation?
And others that would be esteemed the better sort, they cry out, The time is
not come, The time is not come; They believe not the word of the Kingdom.
Beware of this unbelief, least you loose the comfort of this coming of the Son,
when other faces shine with the joys of the Spirit, yours be bedewed with
tears, the sad fruit of this defiling unbelief.

THE END.

