Christ's Valedictions: OR SACRED OBSERVATIONS On the LAST WORDS Of our SAVIOR
delivered on the CROSS.

By JENKIN LLOYD, Minister of the Gospel, and Rector of Llandissil in Cardigan
shire

LONDON, Printed by D. M. son D. Pakeman at the Rainbow in Flee^^^^^et, 1658.

To the READER.
I Here present thee with such Pious and Plain Observations, as I could collect
on what our Savior uttered on Mount Calvary, where he consummated the grand
Work of man's salvation through the blood of his Cross. Those precedent
sufferings of his life, were but introductions to his last great Passion; nor
did he ever produce more and greater miracles, then even in his extreme
weakness, and when death seemed to be his conqueror. Miracles on earth were too
low to attend a business of so high concernment, signs from heaven must descend
to seal the infinite merit of his Passion, which before the Jews did most
importunately desire; but that transcended all other wonders, that when he was
enthralled to the black confines of death, he most triumphantly returned from
the furies of hell, and by an inexpressible power, re-enlivened his bemangled
and wounded body, and adorned it with the glorious dresses of an eternal life.

And now in the heat of his great sufferings, he so pierced the hearts of his
persecutors with such pithy and feeling sentences, that many of them at length
returned through an infusive knowledge of their own guiltiness, striking their
breasts; and had they not so relented at those cruelties, the very rocks would
have stood up in condemnation of their injustice.

The Words are in number seven, whereof three were spoken about the sixth hour,
before the obscuration of the sun, which we shall first consider, and then the
other four that were delivered about the ninth hour, when God had withdrawn
those dismal curtains, and reenlightened that great Luminarie of heaven. For
methods sake, I use first an explanation of each word, that the true sense of
the holy Ghost may be rightly apprehended, and therein I do endeavor to hold
forth such a construction, as may be most conducible to the glory of God, to
the Analogy of Faith, the exaltation of Devotion, and the conservation of peace
and union among us; so that if happly I may in some things differ from others,
I desire their charity, to leave me to my liberty, if I do but differ from
them, and not from fundamental truths. After that I have labored to satisfy
thy judgment with the true meaning of the words, my next work is, to stir up
thy affections by laying down the consequent duties, with proper motives to
induce us to the performance of them: so that you want not those Doctrines and
Uses that naturally flow from each Text. But because in vain does Paul plant
and Apollo water, unless God gives the increase, I do therefore conclude each
part with certain Ejaculatory Prayers, pertinent to the precedent discourse,
that by the influence of Gods grace, the whole may be fruitful and salvifical
to our souls, for indeed that is the chief end for which it is exposed to
public view, neither, as I believe, shall I miss of my aim, if fear and
reverence attend the perusal of the Treatise. Thus have you the Occasion,
Method and Scope of the Work; all that is desired of thee, is, That having the
Idaea of Christ's charity before thy thoughts (as thou shall track it in each
page of this Book) thou would in some measure endeavor to parallel so divine
a pattern, and judge charitably of me the unworthy Author.

JEN. LLOYD.

ERRATA.
Page 9 line 9 read reason, p 10 r cloud, p 22 r by, p 51 r deliciousness, p 74
r that, p 77 r solved, p 104 r 1652, p 119 r of God, p 134 r we p 145 r
Euripus, p 147 r woman, p 149 r nourishes, p 159 r seem, p 170 r hear, p 174 r
accurately, ibid. r nefarious, p 180 r Sun, p 190 r occurres; p 191 r loquitur,
p 204 r an Almighty* p 211 r mactatur.

Christ's Valedictions: OR, SACRED OBSERVATIONS On the Last Words of our
Savior delivered on the CROSS.
The First Word.
LUKE 23.34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.


ALl Nations did ever in Nature acknowledge, not only a guiltiness of sin, but
some means of Reconciliation to their gods in the remission of sins: For they
had al some formal and Ceremonial Sacrifices and Expiations by which they
thought their sins to be purged and washed away; and the people of Israel were
prescribed by God himself, what, and how to offer their religious Victims: But
the proper and true Propitiatory Sacrifice to take away the sins of the world,
was only Jesus Christ, the Incarnate Word of the Eternal Father, who much
Coveting that Ineffable work of man's Salvation, thought it not only enough to
suffer, but before he submits himself to those great undertakings, deemed it
also expedient to win the hearts of the people as well by Doctrine as Miracles.
His whole Life was a continued Lecture and Method of teaching, and because the
words of a dying man works commonly a great impression on the affections and
judgments of the hearers, therefore being now to seal the Lease of that
inestimable purchase with his own blood on the Cross, he delivered such divine
Legacies, such Soul-livening words, as ought to survive in the hearts and
actions of all true Christians. The first whereof was this, Father forgive
them, etc.

The Explication.
He called him [Father,] not God or Lord, because he well knew in this condition
to be needful the Benignity of a Father, not the Severity of a Judge; the
Smiles of Compassion, not the Frowns of Justice. And because to bend God to a
Lenity (who was without doubt much incensed for such grand iniquities) it was
convenient to present the amiable title of a Father: the words seem to imply
thus much, I who am thy suffering Son do pardon them, pardon thou also, O
Father, their impieties, and forgive me (thy Son) this offense, though they
deserve it not. Take it to thy compassionate Remembrance, that thou art their
Father by Creation and Preservation, O then let thy Paternal favor shine upon
them, for though they are evil, yet they are thy sons; though they are sinners,
thou art merciful.

The word [Forgive] which is the sum of the Petition, may as well be referred
to the Punishment as the Fault; if to the Punishment, this Prayer was heard,
whilst the Jews for this present iniquity deserved instant revenge, yet was it
deferred for forty years; and if in that interim they had repented, they had
remained safe and untouched: but because they did not, God permitted an Army of
Romans ( Vespasian then Governing) to come against them, who overthrew their
Head City, and destroyed the Jewish Nation, some by the Sword, some by Famine,
some sold, the rest Exiled into diverse places of the earth, as foretold by the
Parable of the Vineyard, and of the Kings inviting of guests to the marriage of
his son, Mat. 20.1
and by the similitude of the unfruitful Figtree. Mat. 22.2
If it be referred to the Fault, Luke 13.6
the Prayer was also heard in that relation, for by the powerful efficacy
thereof was given to many Repentance and Compunction of heart, in which number
was the Centurion, Mat. 27 54 Luke 23 48
and those who returned striking their guilty breasts, confessing him to be the
Son of God.

The Persons prayed for, are either h^s Manual Executioners, those who divided
his garments, or those who were the effectual causes of his Passion, as Pilate
who gave the sentence, the people who cried out, Crucify, crucify him, the
Scribes who falsely accused him; or, as we may ascend higher, the first man
Adam and his posterity. All were involved in the Sin, all are included in the
Prayer. And thou, (O my soul) before thou had a being, the Lord foresaw thee
also to be ranckt sometimes amongst his enemies, and thy self not capable of
petitioning, he prays the Father for thee, that thy foolishness be not imputed
to thee.

And that his intercession might be acceptable, he seems to guild the offenses
of his enemies with compassionate extenuations, as far as it might stand with
his omnipotent Sovereignty, by adding, For they know not what they do. For
certainly he could not palliate that injustice in Pilate nor that cruelty in
the Soldiers, nor that envy in the High Priest, nor that foolishness and
ingratitude in the People, nor false Testimonies in the Perjurers, this only
remained, that he might in all excuse their ignorance; for as the Apostle
says, If they had known it, 1 Cor. 2.8
they had not crucified the Lord of Glory.

The Schools have made so many divisions and sub-divisions of Ignorance, that
there goes as much learning to understand Ignorance as Knowledge; but their
ignorance in condemning the Lord of life was of a very strange and transcendent
nature* The people knew him to be innocently condemned, and Pilate himself
sealed it with a public voice, Luke 23.14 Mat. 27.24
I find no fault in this man, etc. and, I am innocent of the blood of this just
man. The Integrity of his Life declared him to be Immaculate. and sin-less, the
greatness of his Miracles proclaimed him a God, and the whole current of the
Prophets testified him to be the Messiah, and yet they would not acknowledge him
to be the Christ, the Lord of Glory: The reason whereof is delivered by S. John,
Joh. 12.37
and the Prophet Isaias, because their eyes were blinded, and thoir hearts
hardened, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
hearts and be converted and healed.

But that blindness proceeded from an Ignorance which does not excuse, because
it was voluntary and concomitant, not precedent. After the same manner are
those who sin out of malice, they are always infected with some Ignorance
which is hatched with the sin. The Philosopher said, Every Evil man, is an
Ignorant man: And truly it may be spoken of all sinners, They know not what
they do: For no man covets evil as it is evil, because the Object of the Will
is a thing not good or ill, but only (really or apparently) Good. Therefore
they that make choice of evil, do choose it as it represents the Species and
forms of goodness; yea, they apprehend it as the chiefest good: The cause of
this is a perturbation of the inferior part, which does so clod and darken
reason that it cannot rightly discern the Atoms of goodness in things coveted;
for he who commits Adultery or Theft, would never affect either, were it not
for the false good of delectation or gain which couches under Adultery or
Theft, not perceiving the evil of turpitude and injustice which likewise
harbor there. So, that whosoever sins, is like the man, who desirous from a
high Turret to throw himself headlong into some fierce River, shuts first his
eyes, and then commits himself to the mercy of the Waters. He that is the Actor
of evil, hates the light and labors under a pretended darkness, which being
vincible and voluntary does no way clear the Action.

But wherefore then serves the prayer? I answer, If the words be understood of
those executioners that performed only their commanded duties, and probably
were ignorant as well of his Inocency as of his Divinity; or of us who were not
then existent, or of such sinners who knew not what was then in agitation at
Jerusalem: the Lord might most truly then Ejaculate these sweet tones of his
Compassion; but if they be applied to those grand contrivers and actors of that
horrible treason, and well knew him to be the Missias, and an innocent man;
then it is to be confessed that Christ's purpose thereby was only to extenuate the
sins of his adversaries in the best manner he could; for although their
Ignorance could not simply excuse, yet it may have the colorable reason of an
excuse for if they had wanted all ignorance their offense had been more
grievous; and certainly if a better and more probable plea could have been
found, he had willingly presented it even for Caiphas and Pilate the worst of
all his enemies.

1. Hence may we first learn Christ's charity to be so Supereminent, that we
may with the Apostle conclude, It passes all knowledge. Ephesians. 3.19.
Neither are our tongues able to express, nor our understandings to conceive
the height of it. If any of us labor under any cross of grief, as the pains of
our teeth, our eyes, or any other member, we are so possessed with a sense of any
of these sufferings, that we think on nothing else, nor will scarce admit any
negotiations or visits of friends; whereas crucified Christ wore on his head a
Crown of thorns, not being able to move without excessive grief, nails pierced
his hands and feet, from whose borings he drew most bitter pains; his naked
body wearied with unmerciful whippings, publicly exposed to ignominy and cold,
throwing on him new sorrows and new torments; yet as though he contemned those
cruelties and suffered nothing being only solicitous for the salvation of his
enemies, and desiring to avert from them an impendant danger, he presents to
his Father this mournful Obsecration, Father, forgive them, etc. If those
wicked men had suffered an unjust persecution, what would he do? if friends, if
kindred had suffered, not enemies, not traitors, not Paracides? His heart
amongst so many storms of injurious sufferings (as a Rock in the midst of the
Sea beaten with unruly waves) stood quiet and immovable: after the infliction
of so many deadly wounds, they deride his patience; and triumph at their evil
doings; he speaks not as an enemy striving with his fierce adversaries, but as
a Father bemoaning his infants, or a Physician his patients struggling with a
grievous disease, and presents them to an omnipotent hand to cure their odious
infirmities. This is the force of an upright charity, not when one is reputed
to have no enemies and have peace with all men, but to live peaceably with
those that are haters of peace. And this is that Love the Wise man speaks of,
that many waters cannot extinguish, Cant. 8.7
nor the floods drown it.

O duri, durati and obdurati nimis, quos tunta flamma non emolliat. Bern.
As that deluge of sufferings could not quench the flaming charity of our
Savior, so the rivers of persecution should not overwhelm Christian Love in
his members. A whiles after there issued out an imitating clemency, flaming in
the breast of S. Stephen the Proto-martyr, which those showrs of stones could
not quench, but made him break forth into that sweet prayer, Act. 7.60
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. After him this divine virtue was
propagated to diverse holy Martyrs, who burned with wonderful flames of charity,
notwithstanding the many torrents of sufferings and persecutions to overflow
them.

I may ascend here from Christ's Humanity to his Divinity; great was his charity
as man to his executioners, but greater it was and is as God toward men, who
would war with him, and, if if they could, pluck him from heaven and Crucify
him again. Who can conceive the exceeding Love of God to men altogether wicked
and unthankful? God spared not the Angels in their offenses, 2. Pet. 2.4
neither was he so indulgent to them as to suffer them to repent, but men
sinning, and blaspheming and being deficient in their services to him, he often
suffers, and not only suffers them, but in the mean time he feeds, cherishes
and supports them; ( For in him we live, Act. 17.28
move, and have our being) nay, he accumulates many benefits upon them, he
adorns them with wit, fattens them with riches, prefers them to honors, and
sublimes them to Kingdoms, and in the mean while he patiently expects their
return from their ways of wickedness and perdition. Infinite are the
presidents of Gods charity toward the wicked, and enemies of his most Sacred
Majesty.

2. By this we are further taught to forgive received Injuries, and to make our
enemies our friends: This remarkable example of Christ should be a persuasive
argument to draw us to it. If he as well Pardoned as Prayed for his
persecutors, why should not a Christian do the same? If God, the Creator, who
is able, both as Lord and a Judge to take a sudden revenge on sinners, yet is
pleased to invite them to favor, and to offer them a free Pardon, why should
not a creature do the same? But you will say, It seems adverse to the rights of
Nature, that a man should suffer himself to be unjustly trampled and violated
in words or deeds, for we see brutish creatures, who are led only by an
Instinct of Nature, sharply on the first sight to encounter and destroy their
enemies: And we have it experienced in our selves when by chance we espy an
adversary, our choler kindles, our blood boyles, and there naturally arises in
us a thirst of revenge. But he is altogether deceived who does thus reason and
he confounds a just defense with an unjust vindication. For, to oppose an
offered injury, no man forbids, but to revenge it being done, the Divine Law
gain-saies, for that appertains not to private men, but to the public
Magistrate; and because God is the King of Kings, Deuteronomy. 32 35 Romans 12 19
therefore he proclaims it, Vengeance is mine, I will repay.

Beasts which naturally rush upon their enemies, cannot distinguish between
Nature, and the viciousness of Nature; but man, which is beautified with
Reason, should separate the Nature or Person which God created good, from the
Vice or Sin, which is evil, and an Abortive merely proceeding from the Devil.
Love the Person, but detest the injury; imitate the Physic an, who loves the
Sick, but loathes the Disease; which that most holy Aesculapius of all souls
has taught us in the Gospel, Mat. 5.44
Love your enemies, do good to them that hurt you, bless them that curse you,
etc. pray for them that hate you and persecute you. The reason why men stomach
their enemies, is because they are brutish, and have a Community with Beasts:
But those that are Spiritual, and can disband the Passions of the Soul, will
rather compassionate their enemies, and by a Christian Affability win them to
peace, then plot their destruction: To them the yoke of Christ is sweet, and
his burden feather-light, and his commands not heavy; but to the carnal and
natural man they seem difficult and weighty through reason of the predominancy
of their own corruptions, and because the love of God is not in them; for
nothing is impossible to Charity, It bears all things, believes all things,
1 Cor. 13.7
hops all things, endures all things.

In holy Writ, we find how the Patriarch Joseph in those times before the Law,
Genesis 45 and 37
marvellously loved his brethren, who (as enemies) fold him to the Midianites.
And how patiently David took the enmity of Saul who did much covet his
destruction; 1 King 4
yet when it was in his power to have killed him he would not. And in the law
of Grace S. Paul speaks of himself and Co-Apostles, Being reviled, 1 Cor. 4 12
we bless; being persecuted, we suffer; being defamed, we pray and entreat.
There is a known Story not impertinent to this purpose in Petrus Damianus, of a
man whom another most traitorously had pulled out his eyes, and this Accident
had confined him to a Monastry, where he lived a pure and unspotted life,
yielding all offices of charity, according to the ability of his person. It
fell out this cruel creature who had done this mischievous act, sickned of a
languishing malady, and found himself enforced to be carried to that same place
where he was whom he had bereaved of sight: His heart gave him, He would never
endure him, but for revenge put out his eyes: But contrariwise, the blind man
being better instructed, upon his earnest suit was deputed to the service of
the sick man, and he most willingly dedicated to him all the functions of his
body, but the eyes, which the other had pulled out; and you would think him all
eyes, all hands, all heart to attend this sick man, so much consideration,
vigor, diligence and affection he used. And what should they here say, who upon
the least affront burn with a revengful spirit?

But it may be the objection of some, If we return a benefit for an injury, a
benediction for a curse, the wicked would wax insolent, and the robbers of Gods
glory would become much bolder, the just would be oppressed, and virtue
contemned: But the case will prove otherwise, for often times a soft answer
breaks the jaws of anger, Prove. 15
and the patience of a good man begets an admiration in the persecutor, and by
a religious Alchymy converts an enemy to a friend; neither are there wanting on
the earth Political Magistrates, whose care it is according to the severe cords
of the Laws, to bind and enforce the wicked to such an obedience, that the just
may lead a quiet and peaceable life. But if Humane Justice should sometimes
sleep, yet the Providential eyes of God are still open, who never suffers the
evil to go unpunished, nor the good unrewarded, and through an admirable way,
when the wicked think they vex and torment the good, he makes these the more
famous, the more illustrious: Saevisti persecutor in Martyrem, Leo. Ser. de S.
Laur.
saevisti, and auxisti palmam, dum aggeras Poenam. The Rage of a Tyrant adds to
the Glory of a Martyr; nothing made Joseph so renowned as the persecutions of
his brethren. Genesis 40


Some, to avoid the shadow of a little disreputation among men, and to preserve
the smoke of honor, will rather persecute then forgive their enemies, thereby
displaying themselves to be void of true wisdom, when as they to shun a less
evil, fall into a far greater. It is an undeniable axiom pronounced by the
Apostle, Romans 3.^
Evil things may not be done, that good may come. He that receives an injury
falls into the evil of punishment, he that revengeth falls into the evil of the
fault; betwixt which two there is no Symmetrical proportion, for the punishment
makes a man but miserable, the guilt and fault makes a man as well evil as
miserable; the first deprives a man of Temporal felicity, the other robs him as
well of Eternal as Temporal. Besides, it is generally held an argument of a
noble mind to pardon, and a sign of a mean, and Pusillanimous spirit to
revenge. Julius Caesar, that victorious Emperor of Rome, excelled more in
Pardoning then Conquering his enemies, of whom Cicero gives this high Eulogie,
That he forgot nothing but injuries. O, let not a Heathen under the Law of
Nature surpass us in clemency and charity under the Law of Grace!

But that which makes men most averse from doing good and praying for their
enemies, is, their difference about holy things. Religion, which should be the
grand motive to Peace and Unity, is now become the main occasion of such rents
and divisions among us, as our Ancients never heard of, and Posterity will
scarce believe. The Jews were so infatuated in their counsels that they knew
not what they did, and many of the Christians are in such a confusion they know
not what to hold: some for Paul, some for Apollo, some for they know not whom.
And that which is most to be lamented is, that for some diversities in opinion,
they should pronounce such an heavy sentence upon one another, as is that of
Damnation. If God should censure us as we censure one another, I know not who
should be saved. But my hope and prayer is, That the Lord will be more merciful
to all dissenters, then they are to one another.

The seven Churches of Asia were all the Churches of Christ, he walked in the
midst of them, Rev. 1.13. Chap. 2.1.
even in that Lukewarm Laodicean, he held the seven Stars in his right hand,
and though some were more perfect then others, yet has he a particular charge
against the best of them. Chap. 2.4 14.
Let the Romanists tell us never so much of their unerring Chair and
Infallibility, and let the Cartharists tell us never so much of their Purities,
yet there is no Congregation so spotless but Christ may find a blemish in her,
no Church so blameless, but that he has few things to urge against her. Let us
not then judge of others, but learn to reform our own errors; nor study how to
dispute, but to live well: to that purpose the Apostle's counsel is very
pertinent, Put on (as the elect of God, Col. 3.12 13. 14. 15.
holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another: If any man have
a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, even so also do ye: And
above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfection, and let the
peace of God rule in your hearts.

Ejaculations.
1. THou God of Love and Peace! we are in such blindness and distractions that
we know not what we think, speak or do: we are at such deadly few'd among our
selves, that, like Herod and Pilate, we join together and muster up our forces
against thee, and all friends to Peace. Profaneness, Hypocrisy and Ingratitude
toward thee, Malice, Hatred and Revenge toward one another, are the reigning
vices of our Times: Pardon thou those against thee, and give us grace to
forgive these against our selves.

2. We are taught (Lord) there is one fin irremissible, Mat. 12.31 1 John 5.16
and incapable of mercy, and therefore not to be prayed for, but being we know
not who that sinner is, and hope to find him no where, therefore we make
prayers and supplications for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1
even for our enemies: We have Thee for a President, and thy Word for a Precept.

3. Thou prayest their pardon that are shedding thy blood, shall not we forgive
those that do us injuries? Thou art merciful to thy Enemies, shall we be cruel
to our Brethren? How grievously do we provoke thee every day to thy face! one
of our offenses against thy infinite Majesty is more then we are capable to
receive from all our enemies on earth; yet how silently do thou pass by all
our heinous affronts, and bidst thy Sun to shine, and thy rain to fall as well
upon our grounds as thy holiest owners? Thou do graciously invite us to thee
with new mercies, and do we call our selves the sons of that Father whom we
will not imitate? Do we daily pray to thee, To forgive us as we forgive others,
whiles we resolve to forgive none whom we can plague with revenge?

4. Shall we hear a Cato say, That he could and did pardon all offenders but
himself? and shall we pardon none but our selves? Shall a Pagan without God
have such rule over his Passion? and shall a Christian, who professes a more
divine Philosophy give the reins to the wild and unruly erruptions of his rage?

5. And what (Lord) though we differ in Judgments, yet let us not vary in
Affections? What though our Brains be diverse, yet let our Hearts be one?

6. We all believe in thee (O God) and in the same Christ, and are all Baptized
into him, and look to be saved by his sufferings. We agree in that one and only
Foundation; we all embrace the two Testaments, and as I hope, the three Creeds,
and many other very material points; why should we vary about the
superstructures and circumstantials of Religion?

7. We believe thy mercy to be of that extent, Act. 2.21 Romans 10.13
that whosoever shall call upon thy Name shall be saved; why should we then be
so uncharitable as to exclude so many millions of weak, but true believers out
of the Church below, or out of heaven above, for no other reason but because
they are not of our judgments in all things?

8. While we thus censure and assault each other, what advantages we give to
our common adversary, who takes pleasure to see us bickering with our selves?
And how far are we from that. Legacy of thy Son, that true. Love he recommended
to his Disciples? Lord, then, we pray thee, glue our hearts together by the
grace of thy holy Spirit, and purge our of them all the dross and dregs of
hatred, malice, schism and heresy.

9. If it must be with us as with those two famous Rivers of the East, the Sava
and the Danuby, that run together threescore miles in one channel with their
waters divided in very color from each other, yet let it be (as it is in them)
without noise, without violence.

10. Keep us from Satan, the Spirit of Division, grant that we may live as
Children of thy family, Doves of thy flock, and Lambs of thy fold, by
forgetting and forgiving all that is spoke or done against us. Make us all
(Lord) the sons of Peace, even for his sake who is the Prince of Peace, Jesus
Christ our Lord! Amen!

The Second Word.
LUKE 23.43. Verily, I say unto thee, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.


The Explication.
THe occasion of the Word, is this, When two Thieves were Crucified with our
Savior, one on the right hand, the other on the left; the one aggravating his
former sins did blaspheme Christ, and objected unto him an Imbecility, Ver. 39.
If thou be the Christ, save thy self and us; the other defended him, and gives
this modest check to the blasphemer, Fear thou not God, Ver. 40
being thou art in the same condemnation.

But the other Evangelists seem to affirm the two thieves to be guilty of
blasphemy, Mat. 27.44 Mar. 15.3^
how then does Luke speak but of one? Aug. l 3 de Consensu Evang. c. 16.
Augustine resolves the doubt thus, Matthew and Mark do take there the number
of multitude, for the number singular, as it is frequent in holy Writ: And so
the Apostle speaks of the Prophets, Heb. 11.33, 37
how they silenced the mouth of Lions, how they were stoned, they were hewn
asunder, how they wandered up and down in Sheep skins, and in Goats skins. And
notwithstanding, he which stopped the mouth of Lions was only Daniel, and he that
was stoned was only Jeremiah, and he that was hewn asunder was only Isaias.
Some think the good thief to have changed his opinion upon the hearing of
Christ presenting those compassionate speeches to his Father, Father, forgive
them, etc. But Luke does evidently declare those words to be delivered before
the wicked thief began to blaspheme; and this also is consonant to the judgment
of another Father of the Church, Ambros. in Luc. 23
who says, One only to have blasphemed, the other to have as well praised as
defended Christ, and therefore rebukes the sausiness of his companion, Fear
thou not God? etc.

Happy thief! as well in regard of his fellowship in suffering with a Savior,
as of that divine light which began to open it self thus unto him; he was no
sooner converted himself, but he begins to make a Proselite of his brother. And
then proceeding in a good work, and those sparkles of grace increasing in his
now happy Soul, he confesses his own sins, Ver. 41.
and preaches the innocence of Christ; And we, truly, are justly condemned to
the death of the Cross, for we receive things worthy of what we have done, but
this man has done nothing amiss. Afterward the Sun of illuminating Glory
shining more brightly on him, his Soul breaks forth into thi^ holy Ejaculation,
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

Behold, with what an holy confidence he presents his Petition! He whom Peter
thrice denied, this poor Penitent openly confessed, and called him Lord. Thomas
the Apostle denies to believe unless he could feel Christ; the thief but
beholding him miserably tortured on the Cross, proclaims him boldly (and in the
face of his adversaries) an heir apparent to a Kingdom. He confessed him a Lord
whom he beholds naked, wounded, grieved and openly derided; and he styles him a
King when there was no probability of reigning in him; for Kings only reign
while they live, (and some scarce so long) but when they leave off their weed
of Mortality, they part with their robe of Majesty.

Neither does he petition for any thing in particular, but only to Remember
him..i. If Christ did but cast a thought on him, and glance but the gracious
eye of his favor toward him, it were a plenary consummation of all his
desires, because he was fully assured of his power, goodness and charity.

But what Kingdom is here understood? Not that temporal Kingdom on earth which
the Jews expected, and yet he had a title to reign over them, and was of the
blood Royal of Israel, and therefore the Wisemen after his Nativity made this
enquiry Where is he that is born King of the Jews? Matthew. 2
And himself told Pilate, Joh. 18.37
Thou say that I am a King, for this cause am I born, and for this cause came
I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. But though he was
a King in the world, yet was he not pleased to exercise his Sovereignty, but
lived as a Pilgrim among enemies, and received, instead of honors due to a
Royal person, contempt and reproach. But the Kingdom here meant, is that
Spiritual and Eternal one in the heavens; that, where there is a perfect
Beatitude of the soul, by which man is free from all servitude, and the
subjection of things created, and subject only to God, whom to serve is to
reign: And that which is intimated in the Parable of a certain noble man, Lu's.
19.12.
that went into a strange Country to receive for himself a Kingdom, and so to
come again. That is, Christ was to pass by the wearisom steps of a bitter death
to another life, there to receive a glorious Diadem, and then to return in the
day of Judgment, to render every man according to his works.

And that Kingdom, as much as appertained to the Beatitude of the soul, Christ
indeed had from his very Conception, but what belonged to his body he had it
not de facto, or in a glorious actualitie (but de jure and in an honorable
inheritance) until after his Resurrection; for while he sojourned on earth he
was subject to all humane infirmities (sin only excepted) yea, to death it
self; but there belonged to him a true glorious body, which after death he was
to enjoy: for so he testifies of himself, It behoved Christ first to suffer,
Luke 24.26
and then to enter into his Glory.

And so it is for this Kingdom of Glory that this Thief prays for; his
cravings are not temporal or carnal, but his divine and new-fashioned soul aims
at things Sempiternal and sublime, which makes Christ more compliable to his
desires, for he had no sooner ended his humble and short Petition, but behold a
gracious return and grant; Verily, I say unto thee, etc.

He begins his answer with a solemn word [ Amen, or Verily] a word which our
Savior used in any thing which tended to a serious concernment; Aug. Tract 41
in Joan
it has the propriety of an oath: and the reasons why he uses this importunate
manner of speaking is, because the thief might well doubt of the promise, were
it not for this earnest asseveration. 1. In regard of his own person, which
could not seem any way worthy of so blessed a reward, or so rich a blessing.
For who could imagine so bad a liver to pass so speedily from the Cross to a
Kingdom? 2. In regard of Christ's present condition, for then he was the
miserable Character of poverty, weakness, and all sorts of humane Calamities.
And he might thus argue, If he be not able whilst he lives to perform good
offices for his friends, how can he bestow them being dead? This might have
been his carnal reasoning. 3. And then in regard of the thing promised,
Paradise, which was then known to belong to the body only, not to the soul.
So is the Etymology of it according to the Hebrew, An earthly Paradise. It
had been more credible if Christ had said, To day thou shall be with me in the
place of Joy, with Abraham, Jsaac and Jacob. Therefore being so many scruples
might occur unto this new convert, Christ, to remove them all, confirms the the
verity of his answer with this serious Protestation.

And his passage to Paradise was but short, not a days journey: He does not
say, In the day of Judgment thou shall be placed on the right hand with the
Just; nor does he say, (with the Millenarians) after a thousand years sleep thy
soul shall enjoy the pleasures of heaven; nor does he say, Thou must first be
refined in the Romish Purgatory; or after some months or days be beatified
(and that had been a happiness beyond his expectation or merit) but, this day,
this very hour, thou shall transmigrate with me from the Tree of the Cross, to
the Joys of Paradise.

Though it be Controverted by some, what is here meant by Paradise, yet it is
the opinion of very Orthodox Divines, That Christ the day after his death, was
with his Body in the grave, and with his Soul triumphing on the infernal
Spirits in hell: but to neither of these can the name of Paradise be assigned;
the grave being but a gloomy receptacle for dead bodies; (where Christ's body
only could be laid.) and under hell is intimated a place of torments. But
Paradise signifies a Garden of delight; in the Terrestrial one there were
flourishing Trees, fruitful Waters, Salubrietie of air, and all the variety of
deliousness that Adam could enjoy: And in the Celestial one there are glorious
and immortal Joys, frnitions of endless Beatitude, an inaccessible light,
Seats and Mansions for the blessed. The first was Local and Transient, this is
Spiritual and Eternal: The joys of the other were Corporal; the Soul is
Beatified in the latter by virtue of the Beatifical vision of God. And this
heavenly Paradise Christ promised the thief, and that he would be with him; and
so he was according to his Divinity. According to his Humane nature, he was
partly in the grave and partly in hell, until the third day, upon which he
ascended in a glorious and triumphant manner into heaven. But according to the
Divine (as he was God) he had an Ubiquitary Being, he was then and always in
Heaven, Paradise, and all places. Ioh. 3.13


Therefore very proper were the words of our Savior when he says not, This
day thou shall be with me in my Kingdom, because that day Christ was not to
receive his Kingdom, that is, a perfect felicity of Body and Soul, till after
his Resurrection, when he was to have a body glorious, immortal, impassible,
subject to no servitude or infirmity: (neither was the thief to enjoy this
fellowship until the general day of Judgment) but in Paradise, because that day
there was a community of glory to his soul, and those of all true Saints. And
this is the perfect and essential felicity belonging to the Heavenly Paradise.
Neither does Christ say, We shall be there, for he was then, and before that
time there, according to the superior portion of his soul; but thou shall be
with me there, that is, even thy Soul shall also really be, where now actually
my divine Soul is;.i. In the blessed joys of Heaven. Learn hence, O man!

1. How great and admirable is the mercy and liberality of Christ toward all
his servants? He, being oppressed with sorrows might not have heard the Religious
thief; but his charity had rather be insensible of his own torments, then not
to give ear to a miserable sinner, confessing his delinquencies. He was silent
altogether at the maledictions and revilings of the Priests and Soldiers, but
to the humble clamours of a poor penitent, he could not choose but give a
gracious Audience. He was silent at their Execrations, because he was Patient,
and he was open-cared to the thief's Petition, because he was Merciful.

Those that serve Temporal Lords do labor much, but the rewards of their
services are commonly far short of their expectations; and we might observe
many who have spun out their times in the Courts of Princes, return home in
their declining age either mere Mendicants, or unregarded: But this Holy
Prince, and President of true Liberality, received nothing from this
Penitential servant, but a few good words, and desires of serving him; and
behold, what a Boon he confers upon him? that very day he granted him a free
pardon of all the sins he had committed in the whole course of his wicked life.
Then he prefers him to Abraham's ^^som, to a Quire of Saints an^ Angels;
Patriarchs and Prophets were made his Associats, and he himself made partaker
of that Heavenly happiness which is Undefinable and Eternal. We read that the
Roman Emperors gave vast treasures, sometimes whole Provinces and Kingdoms to
their Minions, but this Prince bestowed on his new favorite more then they
could either reach or conceive. Neither was this goodness of Christ peculiar to
this poor delinquent; his Apostles deserted their small vessels, their nets and
cottages to serve him, and then he appointed them Princes over the earth, he
subjected to their commands Devils, Serpents, Psalm. 44.2, 3 Mat. 10 8
Principalities and Powers, and all sorts of Diseases. And he promises to all
that shall leave their nearest relations for his sake, and part with their
dearest enjoyments for his service, a hundred fold, that is, a reward
incomparably greater then those particulars, to wit, Spiritual joys and
blessings in this world, and life Eternal in that to come. We might reflect our
thoughts on what great things the Lord wrought for Martyrs and Confessors of
former ages, how they came to honor by ignominy, to riches by poverty, to
greatness by the infamous punishment of the Cross, to immortality by a bloody
death; and how he would still honor them that honor him. What fools then are
those who relinquish Christ, the giver of all goodness, and sacrifice to
Mammon, the author of all evil?

2. We have here also represented unto us the power of Gods Grace, and the
Imbecility of the Humane Will; This good thief was a remarkable sinner, and
persevered so even to the punishment of the Cross, and in so eminent danger of
Damnation, there was none present that could afford him either the solace of
advice or assistance: For though he was most near the Savior of the world, yet
he heard the high Priests and Pharisees affirming him to be a seducer,
ambitious, and an usurper of another Kingdom; and he heard his fellow thief
(as it were) barking at him, and there was none that bestowed a word of comfort
on him or Christ; but behold the prevalency of Divine Grace! when he was thus
bereft of all humane aid, and seemed to have no hope of Salvation, being on the
next step to perdition, the Spirit of God shined on him in a miraculous manner,
and in an instant so beautified and changed his heart, that upon a sudden he
confessed Christ to be an innocent sufferer, and the King of the world to come;
and checked his presumptuous companion and persuaded him to repentance, and
before the staring multitude committed himself to the protection of a dying
Savior. Whereas the other Malefactor (in whom is expressed to life humane
infirmity) was not at all moved at the strangeness of those accidents; not at
the charity of Christ, who prayed for his persecutors, nor at his extreme
sufferings, nor at the admonition and example of his fellow thief, nor at the
unwonted darkness, nor at the cleaving of the Rocks asunder, nor at those who
through just astonishment returned home striking their breasts (all which happened
after the conversion of the good thief) yet was he not at all changed though he
had the helps of so many persuading arguments.

Obj. But why was the one inspired at that instant with saving Grace, the other
not? both were equally great sinners before that time, and but one now a Saint?

Sol. No other reason can be assigned, then why God loved Jacob and hated Esau?
but because it was the will of God: we must be satisfied with that. All other
reasons are shut up in the secret Ark of God, which we must rather admire in a
divine honor and humble silence, then endeavor to unlock or touch. Shall the
thing formed ask the Potter, Romans 9.80.
Why have thou thus fashioned me? Shall not the Creator of all, make some
vessels of honor, some vessels of dishonor, yet all to his glory? which is as
much manifested in the condemnation of the bad, as the salvation of the good.
There can be no iniquity with him, for though his judgments are occult, yet are
they not unjust.

3. But this Caution we are farther taught by the words: Though we must embrace
the example of the holy thief in our Consolation* yet not in our Imitation. It
may minister this comfort to a sad and despairing Soul, That God has and can
pardon a true penitent be his sins never so great; but it must not lead us to
defer our repentance until the utmost period of our lives. The conversion of
Saul the persecutor, and this thief upon the Cross, is become Proverbium
Peccatorum, the Sinners Proverb, and serves him, Gregor.
and satisfies him in all cases. But thou presumptuous sinner that put off
thy amendment upon confidence of these examples, do but delude thine own
Soul: It is not safe concluding out of single instances, there is much
disparity between thy case and this thief's.

1. Thy time is not the same: When thou can find such another day, look for
such another mercy; A day that cleft the grave-stones of dead men; A day that
rent the Temple it self; A day that the Sun durst not see; A day that saw the
Soul of Christ depart from his body; there shall be no more such days,
therefore presume not of that.

2. Besides, thou may look at the thief as on a Turk or Heathen newly entered
into Christianity, Baptized from sin, Confirmed by Christ, so dying and saved;
but how often have thou broke thy Baptismal vows? and with Copronimus defiled
thy Font, Eccl. Hist.
by rejecting those means which God has given thee to secure thy interest and
hopes of heaven.

3. The thief was not converted at last but at first; Cyril. Non in fine sed in
prineipio conversus latro.
as soon as God afforded him any Call he came. But to how many calls have thou
stopped thine ears? O sinful man! How often has God called thee with a voice of
Terror? by Thunder and Lightning, by Wars, Plagues, Famine and other Judgments?
How often has he sweetly called thee by the pleasant promises of the Gospel,
by the motions of his Spirit, and by the temporal blessings of peace and
plenty? Thou shall find here that although it happened to one to receive Grace in
his very last gasp (which was a Miracle of Mercy, a Prodigy of Providence) yet
the other found his judgment; the one Blessed, the other Blasphemed; so the one
was Saved, the other was lost. And whosoever shall peruse Histories, Sacred or
Humane, and observe Quotidian events, shall find very few to end their days
well, that have loosly ran the whole course of their lives. And as they can
hardly escape the fury of a Divine Justice that have acted a negligent and a
vicious life, so there are but few after a life well spun, but die in Gods fear
and are made partakers of his Glory.

Begin then betimes, O man, to become a new man! n="*" Omn^m creed diem, ^ibi
deluxisse supremum. Hor.
make every day thy last day, that thy last may be happy. The Indian
Gymnosophists caused their graves to be made before their gates, that at their
ingress and regress they might be put in mind of their last day; and happy were
we if in the days of our youth and vanity we spent some time in the meditation
of our Mortality, and of the account we are to make at the day our Souls and
Bodies are divorced: For that day may be sudden, and give us no time; or
distracted, and take away our senses; or cursed, and keep away Grace.
Chrysologus, Gregor.
a man as full of sin as he was of wealth, being on his deathbed in a bitter
Agony cried out, Inducius velusque mane, truce but till the morning! and with
those very words breathed his last. It Is not a tear or a groan then can expiate
the sins of a whole life, nor every one that says, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.21.
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of our
Father which is in heaven. Let these Reasons then move thee further to avoid
all delays in preparing thy self against the last day:

1. The uncertainty of its time: It was the policy of Julius Caesar never to
acquaint his Army aforehand with the time of their march, that they might be
ready on all occasions; and such is the wisdom of our God that he has
concealed this day from us, that we might always stand upon our guard and be
ready.

2 No time is secure: As no place, no Sanctuary can exempt us from deaths
approach (it may come to us in the Church, in the Street, in our beds, etc.) so
no time can privilege from its arrest; in the night as well as in the day, in
youth as well as in old age.

3. Sometimes when men least think of it it comes: Whilst the Crocodile sleeps
the n="*" A kind of a Rat.
^cknewmon gets in and ^eateth his bowels; whilst the Theban Sentinel was
nodding, Genesis Epi^ninondas came and thrust him through.

4. All the time allotted before that day is little enough for so great a work:
We have scarce time to learn how to live well, says the Philosopher, but we
are straightened with time to learn the art of dying well, says the Divine.

5. Thy Preparation for, will be no Acceleration of the day: Our death will not
be the nearer but sweeter, the blow will not come the sooner foreseen,
Premeditati mali malis ictas.
but it will be the easier; thy life and death will be the more comfortable.

6. That day will be most dismal and Exitial to all unprepared persons; like
that of the man, whom when the King came in found without a wedding garment,
who was bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness. Mat. 22.13
Oh! that any, or all of these Considerations might awaken our security, and
keep us from sleeping in those sins which will deprive us of Eternal life.

LORD, We admire the deepness of the riches of thy mercy and goodness, who
would condescend to be thus ignominiously tortured between two grand
Malefactors for our sakes: How thou did abase thy self for our pride, and
humble thy self on earth to advance us to glory?

Teach us, Lord, who are but dust and ashes to be lowlyminded, and never to
exalt our selves before or against thee, least by our pride we be excluded
(with the Angels) out of Heaven, or (with Man) out of Paradise.

But among all thy Attributes we most extol thy Mercy, which was so
transcendent to this poor penitent thief, whom thou did rescue from the jaws
of hell through thy infinite Merits.

It had been enough (O God) if thou had but promised him to be with thee: for
where had been ill with thee? or where had it been well without thee? but thou
have crowned him with bliss and glory in the highest heavens.

By this we are taught (Lord) not to despair of thy Clemency, for though
Cherubins keep thy Paradise, and thy gate of Mercy be guarded by Angels, yet
thou have opened the door of it to as very sinners as our selves.

Though we have sins more numerous then the sands of the sea, or the stars of
the firmament, yet is thy mercy more and above measure. No stains or guilts can
make us so vile but thy Sons blood can wash them off: David, Peter, Magdalen,
Paul and this good thief were cured by the power of that mercy, and virtue of
that blood.

But because (Lord) we are too prone to presume of thy mercy, which is so
eminent over al thy works, we therefore entreat thee to keep us from carnal
security, from a Lethargy in sin, and the delays of all religious duties.

When ever we fall into sin, do thou (Lord) by thy Grace raise us up to a
newness of life, to a true and timely repentance, lest we sleep and lie in our
iniquities until we feel the horror of eternal death. Raise us with David from
the sin of wilfulness, with Peter from those of infirmity, and with Paul from
those of ignorance.

Thou calledst this penitent but once and he obeyed thy voice, repented, and
was saved, but (Lord) how often are we called? how often would thou have
gathered us (as a hen does her chickings) under thy wings, but we would not!

O grant then, that me may be either allured by thy mercies, or terrified by
thy judgments, or converted by thy Word, or won by thy Spirit, that we may hate
sin and forsake it, love thee and never leave thee until thou have brought us
to that heavenly Paradise where thy Saints and Angels sing daily Halalujahs to
thy blessed Name. Grant this, Father of Mercies and God of Grace, even for his
sake who suffered with sinners, and dyed for our sins, Jesus Christ.

The Third Word.
JOHN 19.26, 27 He says unto his mother, Woman, behold thy Son, and to the
Disciple, Behold thy Mother.


A Question is here to be discust, Why S. John did affirm the three women to
have stood near the Cross of the Lord, when S. Mark 15.40. and S. Luke 23.49.
write they stood afar off? But this is soon salved; S. Aug. lib. 3 de Consen.
Evang.
they may be said to have stood afar off in relation of the guard and soldiers
who did even touch the Cross; near, because they could easily hear Christ. Or
they may be said to have stood afar off at the instant of Crucifixion, the
multitude hindering them, but when his suffering began to be completed, many
giving way, they might make a nearer approach.

The sum of the words is this, Being I am now to pass from this loathsome world
to my glorious Father, and knowing thee to be destitute of all humane
assistances, I commend thee to my most loving Disciple John, he shall be to
thee a Son, and thou shall be to him a Mother. The command was most pleasing to
them both, and S. John speaks of himself in the following words, and from that
hour the Disciple took her home.

But S. John was one of them who by his Masters mandate had relinquished father
and mother, all relations and possessions to follow Christ, how comes he now,
having forsaken his own, to take the charge of another mother? Mat. 4.22
The resolve is easy; The Apostles that they might follow Christ, dismissed
father and mother as they were a hindrance to the preaching of the Gospel,
either in regard of carnal affection, or worldly commodity, but in what
concerned their care and solemn duty they left them not; and upon that account
the Virgin Mary was committed to him, having no other visible worldly support.
God, without man's assistance, could by the administration of Angels have
procured her a livelihood and protection, but it was our Saviors pleasure to
have it done by John, as well in regard of an honor to him, as a love to her.
God sent Elias to be fed by a widow, not that he could no longer feed him by
Crows as formerly, but by this action he seemed to vouchsafe a blessing to the
widow; so it pleased the Lord to recommend his mother to this Disciple, S. Aug:
Sermon. 26 de Verb. Domini.
to demonstrate it was both a remarkable blessing to him, and that he loved him
above the rest; and the exchange was happy, when in lieu of a mother, the wife
of a Fisher, he took the mother of a Savior, the best of women, full of grace,
and blessed in her Sex.

But,

1. He that diligently observes may gather hence, Christ's desires to suffer for
our salvation to be infinite and inexpressible, that thereby our redemption
might be most full and copious. Other men think it an augmentation to their
sorrows to have their kindred, friends and alliances spectators of their death,
especially of that which is violent and infamous; but Christ not contented with
his own real passion, which was most cruel and full of dishonor, would have
his Mother and this Disciple to be also present, that the Sympathetical sorrows
of his dearest might add to, and reduplicate his own personal sufferings. Three
Mary's and a Disciple stood near the place of his sufferings, that as four
Fountains of blood issued from his body on the Cross, so from their mournful
eyes might spring four Fountains of tears; so that it is questionable, whether
he felt more sorrow for the effusion of his own blood, or their tears. Methinks
I hear Christ bemoaning himself, The sorsows of death have compassed me, Psalm.
17.9
but the sword foretold by Simeon which should pierce the soul of my innocent
Luke 2.35
mother, does as much Lacerate and wound my heart. Most bitter death! that
separate not only the soul from the body, but also a Mother, and such a Mother
from such a Son!

God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son for the Redemption
of it, and he so loved the Father, that for his honor Rivelets of blood
streamed from him, that we should not perish but have everlasting life: Yet we
give such a disobedient resistencie to his goodness, that we had rather be
confounded in the just fury of an omnipotent God, then taste the sweetness of
his compassion. One drop of his most precious blood might have been a
sufficient Ransom for the Redemption of more worlds, and yet he would
sacrifice all for this one, thereby as well to endear us, as fully to satisfy
the justice of his Father.

2. But there are many considerations that arise from a mystery of the three
women that stood near the Cross. Some out of a petulancy of wit, to maintain
Paradoxes and such singularities, have called in question the abilities and
faculties of women, in the Root thereof, in the Reasonable and Immortal Soul;
but no man of Piety and conversation in Scripture can admit such a doubt. Here
are women that were sedulous and constant in their religious offices to our
Savior to the last gasp: Mat. 28.6
and after that he was interred, they came with a pious intention to see the
Sepulcher, and out of a civil respect to embalm his body in the Monument where
they thought to find it. When others (even his own Disciples) through timer
ousnesse and infidelity had deserted their Master, these (like inseparable
friends) followed him to his grave, and would not rest there till an Angel of
heaven had assured them of his Resurrection. The zeal and piety of women have
equalled, if not surpassed the best of men; S. Paul testifies in their behalf,
that they were great instruments for the advancing of true Religion. At
Thessalonica, Act. 17.4.
of the chief women not a few; great, and many. Neither do we read of any woman
in the Gospel that assisted the persecutors of Christ, or furthered his
afflictions, even Pilats wife dissuaded it. Jerome writ many letters to diverse
holy Ladies, for the most part all of one Stock and kindred, and all so
Religious, as that he says, If Jupiter were their Cousin and of their kindred,
he believes Jupiter would be a Christian; he would leave being such a god, as
he was, to be their fellow servant to the true God. Woman, as well as Man was
made after the image of God in the Creation; and in the Resurrection her sex
shall not diminish her glory. Of which she receives one fair beam and
inchoation at the Passion of Christ, that women continued in their attendance
on him to the last, and that by the ministry of Angels the glad tidings of his
Resurrection was communicated to them before any other.

3. And because they were worthy to be known, the Holy Ghost celebrates them by
their names and qualities; we will therefore consider who they were and what
they were, their Names first; and then their Conditions. There is an Historical
relation and observation, Badin de Repub. l. 6 c. 4
That in diverse Kingdoms in Europe the Crown did fall at one time upon women of
one name, Mary. It was so in England, Scotland, Denmark, and Hungaria, all four
Mary's. Here we have but three, Mary Magdalen, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and
Mary the Virgin, and yet such three as wear now Immortal Crowns in Heaven.
Indeed it is a Noble and a Comprehensive Name, Mary. It is the Name of woman in
general, according to some of the Learned; Genesis 2.23
for when Adam says of Eve, She shall be called Woman, in the Arabic
Translation, there is this name, She shall be called Mary; and the Arabic is
perchance a Dialect of the Hebrew. But in pure and Original Hebrew the word
signifies Exaltation, and whatsoever is best in the kind thereof; and worthily
are they to be ever exalted for their diligence and perseverance in their
devotion. This is also like, if not the same, as Miriam, the sister of Aaron
and Moses, that with her Quire of women assisted at that Eucharistical
Sacrifice, that triumphant Song of thanksgiving upon the destruction and
subversion of Egypt in the red Sea. Exo. 15.20
As Joshua and Jesus is the same to men, so Miriam and Mary is the same name in
women according to some. The word denotes Greatness, not only in Power but in
Wisdom. And great are they in the eyes of God, and to be magnified by men to
all Posterity.

4. But we intend not to dwell upon this circumstance, but pass to another
considerable that springs from the Quality of the women, in relation to their
Spiritual state. We find Mary Magdalen personates the penitent or incipient,
the other Mary, the proficient, the Virgin Mary, those who are perfect. All
three had need of Christ, and to stand near the banner of the Cross. The
Incipients that are to war with many sins and concupiscences, want the guidance
and assistance of so great a General as Christ, that beholding him struggling
with so subtle and malicious an enemy as the old serpent, and openly triumphing
over him, they might be animated to fight the Lords battle against all the
assaults of the devil, and not to desist until they have obtained an
honorable victory. The Proficients (who are represented by Mary of Cleophas,
who was a married woman, and a mother of sons) had need of him too, least the
cares and troublesomeness of this world should choke the good seed sown in
their hearts. Christ not content with good works (many and great) which he had
formerly done, ascends by the Cross to higher, and descends not from thence,
till he beholds a vanquished enemy prostrate at his feet. Nothing more hurts a
Proficient, then when he languisheth in his course, and stifles his
proceedings; according to that old Moral. In the way of Virtue, not to go on,
is to go backward, Bern. ad Ganinum.
as Bernard does rightly exemplify in an Epistle, in which he produces an
instance of Jacobs Ladder, where all do either ascend or descend, none keeps a
fixed station. Those also who are Perfect and Virgins, as Mary and John were
(and for that cause the more beloved of our Savior) I say those do much need
the assistances of Christ's sufferings; for they are in an higher condition,
and ought much to fear the tympanies and swellings of pride and self-conceit,
which can no better way be assuaged and taken down, then by looking into the
glass of the Cross. There they may find an admirable president of true
humility, even Omnipotency it self yielding to most contemptible sufferings:
He, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col 2.3
permits himself to be illuded and reputed may by Herod and his army: He that
sits between the Cherubims, and can blast a star with a breath, Psalm. 99.1
and melt a Church with a look, and molder a world with a touch, even he
suffers himself to be crucified in the midst of thieves, and to die the most
ignominious death, the death of the Cross. Learn hence, O man! not to be proud
of thine honor, wealth, learning no, nor of thy Piety it self, but lay them all
down at the feet of Christ, and learn to be meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29.
for so was he.

5. And lastly we may observe hence the Reciprocal love of Parents to their
Children, and of children to their parents.

1. The Virgin Mother did most accurately demonstrate this, when she stood near
the Cross with much sorrow and constancy; and how could she choose but bestow on
him her choicest love, whilst he was not only her son, but also the Son of
glory? a Son, that according to his Divine generation had a Father without a
Mother, and according to his Humane generation had a Mother without a Father,
and therefore may be styled unigenite, her only begotten Son: A Son that was
qualified with most special endowments, as well of body as soul, far excelling
both men and Angels. And yet even for this Son, she had no inordinate, no
impatient grief; but though his Passion was violent and unparalleled, yet she
beholds him with a holy and a Religious Courage, humbly subjecting her self,
her son and all to the Divine will and dispose of the highest: Thereby giving
us this instruction, That we look not upon any natural relations, but with a
love subordinate to the love of God, for he has told us, He that loves son or
daughter above me, Mat. 10.37
it not worthy of me. And that whenever he calls us to part with them we must
not unmeasurably grieve for them, but cheerfully resign even our dearest
comforts to that God that has given them unto us.

2. Neither was there a mutual retribution of love wanting on our Savior his
part toward his parent, when notwithstanding he was then in the midst of most
distracting torments, he forgot not to recommend her to the care of his bosom
friend and dearest Disciple.

It is a saying among the Heathens, Diis, Parentibus, and Magistris nunquam
redditur aequivalens, The Gods, Parents, and Teachers are never sufficiently
gratified. I need not enlarge my self upon this point, even nature it self
dictates unto us what love, respect, obedience and assistance is owing to those
that begat us, and did for us when we could do nothing for our selves. They
are therefore to be recompensed by performing these duties to them, Ephesians. 6.1
Heb. 12.9
1. To obey them in all things in the Lord. 2 To bear their corrections with
submission. 3. To reverence them, Mal. 1.9
in giving them all outward submission, and fearing to offend them. 1 Timothy 5 16.
4. To cherish and maintain them in time of need.
This the Apostle clearly teaches, If any faithful man or woman have widows
(that is, to their mothers or aunts) let them minister unto them, and let not
the Church (that is, other Christians) be charged.

1. O Most glorious God and gracious Father, that sentest thy Son in no sort to
assume the shape of Angels, but the nature of a woman, the seed of Abraham; and
did glorify that substance with the bright robe of immortality, and place it
at thy right hand: We hope and pray that every one of us may have a portion in
that sacred body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Make us partakers of his Divine nature, as he was of our Humane; make us
free from sin, as he was, holy, as he was holy, and in the end glorify both
our souls and bodies (with his) in thy heavenly Kingdom.

3. O thou Savior of the world, that were pleased on thy Cross to cast an
affectionate thought on thy dear Mother, and (amidst all thy sorrows) to choose
her a Guardian, to have her in his cares; teach us never to forget those duties
we owe them that are (under thee) the makers and preservers of our lives. Give
us grace to love, serve, obey and cherish them, that so we may be as children
of their love, so heirs of their blessing, the blessing which thou have
promised to loving and obedient children.

4. And we beseech thee (Lord) to teach all parents by her example (who loved
thee to the last) to be constant in their affection and care of their children,
and to bring them up in thy fear. Let them know that thou art the Father of
their spirits, they but of their bodies; Heb. 12.9
let them then put all confidence in thee for them as their best Father, and
make their daily supplications to thee for all goodness to them.

5. Thou that did favorably look at thy dear Disciple, and adopt him of thy
servant, thy mothers son; we pray, that the light of thy countenance may shine
on all us that profess thy Name, make us who are by nature, the children of
wrath, by thy grace, inheritors of heaven.

6. Teach us, with Magdalen, to repent, with the wife of Cleophas to proceed in
all good and pious works, and with the Virgin Mary to attain to a good measure
of perfection. Let us be ashamed that the weaker Sex should excel us, in the
acts of piety, or religion, yet power forth thy grace upon all Sexes and all
degrees of people, that they may all know, and serve thee the only true God,
and Jesus Chist whom thou have sent, Joh. 17
for that is eternal life

The Fourth Word.
MATTHEW. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?


The Explication.
WE have Expounded formerly the three first Words which our Savior uttered on
the Cross about the sixth hour. We will proceed in the following part of this
Treatise to unfold four other Words which he spoke after the Eclipse and
silence of three hours. But it seems very material to declare first what that
darkness was, and from whence and to what end it was caused: Our Evangelist
says, Ver. 45
From the sixth hour was there darkness over all the earth unto the ninth hour,
and then he cried with a loud voice, ELI, ELI, LAMASABACH THANI, i. My God, my
God, etc. And that this darkness was produced by the defect of the Sun, is
elsewhere expressly noted, Luke 23.45
And the Sun was darkened.

But here are some difficulties to be solved; 1. For the Sun was wont to be
deficient in the new Moon, when betwixt the Sun and the earth, there was an
interposition of the Moon, which at the death of Christ could not happen,
whilst the Moon was not joined with the Sun, which is usual in the new Moon,
but was opposite to the Sun, and in its fullness, for then was the Passover of
the Jews, which according to the Law began the fourt eenth day of the first
month: 2. Besides, if the Moon was joined with the Sun at the passion of our
Lord that darkness could not continue for three hours; for the eclipse of the
Sun cannot last long, especially if it be a plenarie Eclipse, and abscond the
whole Sun; for the Moon moves swifter then the Sun according to its proper
motion, and according to this it could not shadow the whole Sun, unless it were
for a very short Space, for beginning to recede, forthwith it leaves the Sun
free, that it might illuminate the earth with its accustomed fulgour, as you
might observe by the last greatest Eclipse that happened in our Horrizon in the
year 16.
And lastly there could never be an Universal darkeness occasioned through any
conjunction of the Sun with the Moon; for the Moon according to the judgment of
all Astronomers is less then the Sun, or the earth, and therefore cannot by
the interposition of its body, so mantle the Sun, that the whole earth should
be darkened.

But if some do object, That the evangelists meant this darkness to extend to
the whole land of Palestina only; and not absolutely to the universal earth:
That opinion might be easily refelled, through the testimony of Dionysius
Arecpagita, who in his Epistle to Polycarpus witnesses himself to have seen
that defection of the Sun, and that horrible darkness in the City of
Heliopolis which is in Egypt. And Phl^gon, a Greek Historian, and an Heathen,
does remember this Eclipse, in these words, Quarto anno ducentisimae secundae
Olympiadis, Lib. 2
magna and excellent inter omnes quae antea acciderant, defectio Solis est
facta, dies hora sexta ita in tenebrosam noctem versus est, ut stellae in caeto
visae sunt. Among those great and famous things which fell out in the Annalls
of the Olympiads, there was such an Eclipse of the Sun, that the day about the
sixth hour was turned into darknight, that the Stars were seen, And this
Historian writ not in Judea. Of this Author look Origin against Celsus, Eus.
Chron ad annun Christ. 30.3.
and Eusebius in his Chronicle, the same is testified by Lucian Martyr, saying,
* search the Annalls, and you shall find that in the times of Pilate the Sun
being fled, the day was interrupted with darkness; these words of Lucian are
quoted by Russiarus, in his translation of the Ecclesiastical History of
Eusebius into Latin Tertullian also in his Apolegetick, and Osorius in his
History, with others, lib. 7. c. 4
do speak not only of Judea, but of other parts of the world.

These things being premised, we may conclude, that though the Eclipse when it
is natural, is wont to happen in the new Moon, and not in the full, but that at
the death of Christ was singular and Prodigious, and caused only by him, who
made Sun, Moon and earth: it proceeded not from any natural causes, but from
the hand of an omnipotent God; who, as he was able to bring the Moon after an
insolite manner from the East by a most swift course to the Sun, and after
three hours be reduced to its place again, so he could effect that the Moon
should (as it were) stand unmoved under the Sun for that space* so that it
should not move flower, nor swifter then the Sun. And whereas it is said, that
this deficiency of the Sun could not be universal over the whole world, by
reason the Moon is lesser then the earth, and much lesser then the Sun; it is
granted, that what the Moon could not do, the Creator of Sun and Moon did
supply, only by not cooperating with the Sun, in its illustration; for without
his aid and influence, things Created have no power of themselves to be more;
Neither was this darkness occasioned from some extraordinary black and thick
mists, as some have imagined; for the Ancients affirm that the stars were then
seen in their proper Spheres, whereas thick clouds would not only have obscurd
the Sun, but also those orbs of lesser luster, as the Moon and the stars.

Why God would have this darkness to be so Remarkable, diverse reasons are
given, but two especially: the first was to signify the mavelous excaecation
of the Jews, Leo in Ser. 10. de^ passion^ Them.
which does to this day, and shall endure according to the vaticinations of
Esaias, who speaks thus of the beginning of the Gospel; Arise, O Jerusalem, be
bright, for thy sight is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee;
for behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: the
other cause was to demonstrate the greatness of the Jews offense, as Jerome
teaches. Heretofore (says he) evil men did persecute, Jerome Comentar. in
Matthew.
vex, and kill the good, now, God himself descending to be clothed in Humane
flesh, they dare persecute and Crucify. Heretofore Citizens had discords with
Citizens, and from discords fell to chidings, from chidings to wounds, from
wounds at length to murderous executions, but now servants and slaves have
risen against the King of Men and Angels, and with an incredible audacity have
nailed him to a Cross; Therefore the whole world did tremble, and the Sun it
self drew back it is beams, and hid its face, as detesting so fowl, so
facinorous an Act, as to put the Lord of Life to death, and the darkness then
was so terrible, that it made a Pagan Philosopher cry out, Aut deus naturae
patitur, aut mundi machina dissolvitur. Dion. Areop.
either the God of Nature suffers, or the whole World is at an end.

And this was formerly typified in the day; of Pharaoh, when there was a great
darkness over the land of Egypt for three days, Exodus 10.21.
which was a signification of their superstitious blindness and ignorance of
the true knowledge of God, and the obstinacy and disobedience to Gods
Commandment; And as then Meses brought the Israelites from the Egyptian bondage
they were in, under Pharaoh; so the true Moses here, Jesus Christ, brings all
that believe in him from the bondage of Satan unto everlasting happiness.

Let us now come unto the words themselves, ( My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1.
) and these we find to be taken out of the Psalmist, and in them Christ
complains, in a voice more then ordinary, that he was relinquished of God the
Father, at that instant.

For the better clearing of the sense* we must observe, that Christ's
derelictions of the Father, may be understood five several ways, whereof one
only is true and here meant: there were five conjunctions or unions in the Son
of God, The first is that of Essence between the first and second Person of the
Glorious Trinity, and that as it is natural and eternal, so it is perpetual and
inseparable; of which Christ himself speaks, I and my Father are one, and
therefore he said, not My Father, Joh. 8.16.
but My God, why have thou forsaken me? For the Father is not called God of the
Son, till after, and by reason of the Incarnation. 2. The second is the
Conjunction of the Divine and Humane nature in the second Person, and this can
never be dissolved, for what he once took, he never puts off; And the Apostle
says, Christ, (that is God and Man) suffered for us. 1 Pet. 2.21.
The third is the union of Grace; Joh. 1.14.
For Christ was a Man full of Grace and truth, and this does and shall remain:
The just dyed for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18
the death of Christ had nothing profited us, if there had been a separation of
Grace; The fourth is the union of Glory, for the soul of Christ saw God from
its very conception, Joh. 1.14.
and according to its superior part was already truly blessed, Aquin. 3. p.
q. 46. ar. 8.
and therefore this conjunction could not be dissolved, because a soul once
truly blessed is always blessed; blessedness being the sum and compendium
of all goodness: There remains a fifth union, which is that of Protection,
whereof he speaks: He that sent me is with me, Joh. 8.29.
and has not left me alone. And this for a short time was suspended, and
dissolved, that the oblation of a bloody sacrifice might take place for the
Redemption of mankind.

God was able diverse ways to have protected Christ, and to have withstood his
Passion, according to that prayer of his in the Garden. Marck. 14.36.
Father all things are possible to thee, take away this cup from me,
nevertheless not what I will, but what thou will. Nay, Christ could have
defended himself, and commanded Legions of Angels to have guarded his Person.
Mat. 26.53.
No man could take his life from him: but he laid it down himself; Joh. 10.18.
and he might as well bestowed on his body the gift of impassibility, as that
of incorruption: But it pleased the Father, it pleased the Son, it pleased the
Holy Ghost to permit the common decree, that humane cruelty should prevail
against him then; he told his bebetrayers the hour was come, Mark. 14.41.
in which the Son of man should be delivered into the hands of sinners, God
then so left and forsook his Son, that he suffered his humanity for that Space
to be without any consolation, and to endure (for our sins) most bitter
sorrows, yea the torments of hell it self.

And he put himself to those unspeakable sufferings by reason of the greatness
of man's sin, which he took on his body to expiate for us, that we being
delivered from sin, 1 Pet. 2.24
should live in righteouseness by whose stripes we are healed And as this sin
was infinite as being against a person of an infinite value, the Lord God, so
the person Satisfying, was to be of an incomprehensible dignity and
excellency. And though one drop of his precious blood had been an ampler ansom
for all mankind; yet that his passion might be esteemed by us the more
meritorious, and gain more Souls, he shed all; because he did undertake for the
sins of the whole world, therefore it pleased him to suffer a world of
torments, when he labored under that Dereliction of his father.

1. Learn hence (O man) how infinite and inexpresible was the love of Christ to
thee, when he suffered with so much patience and humility such wonderful
torments for thy sins. His soul was very heavy unto death. Man 26.3
There is no Christian but will acknowledge that our Savior was ten thousand
times more able to suffer then the most Constant Martyr that has suffered for
his Name, and if he were more able to bear whence could it happen that he was
pressed with such sorrow, such heaviness and such fear? but that he alone
suffered more then all the martyrs ever since righteous Abel to this day: this
should work an imitation in us to love the bitter cup of repentance, and to
reject the cups of Consolation and Secular delights, to rejoice in afflictions,
and to trample on the seeming felicities of this world. Does God visit our land
with Plague, Famine, War or other judgments? O! remember that these Calamities
are but as a drop to that vast Ocean of sorrows, the Son Gof od suffered for
us, and that they are far less then our sins deserved; for they are but
temporal and reach no further then our bodies, but by his sufferings we are
exempted from those miseries which might justly fall on our souls and bodies
eternally. We then are as prisoners, once condemned for capital crimes, but
released again with our lives, and only chastized with some few stripes; have
we not then great cause to rejoice, that we have escaped greater judgments?

2. But though God seems for a while to forsake his friends, and leave them in
durances, and to withdraw his grace and favor from them; yet his indignation
cannot last for ever, in the end he will return unto them, and show them the
light of his gracious Countenance, and be merciful unto them, if they call upon
his glorious name in their distresses. Christ upon the Cross suffered a great
dereliction, his Glory was obscured, his divinity seemed to be hid, the light
of heaven was subtracted from him, in stead of a Diadem, he wore a Crown of
thorns, in stead of a Scepter a Reed, in stead of a statelyretinue belonging to
a King, they afforded him the ignominious fellowship of two thieves, thus was
he dejected, and scorned, and exposed to all imaginable crosses, but, behold,
upon his humble expostulation, and prayer to God, the sense was altered, and a
speedy Period put to all these calamities, the heavens were unmantled, the
light appeared, his last and worst enemy (Death) was conquered, his body and
soul were received in a glorious and triumphant manner into the highest
heavens, where now he reigns King for evermore.

And the reasons why God sometimes withdrawes his presence from his People, and
deferres their deliverance from afflictions, are to humble them thoroughly, to
bring them to an utter denial of themselves: to learn patience, that they might
acknowledge whence their deliverance and all benefits they enjoy do proceed
namely, not from themselves, nor any creature, but from the All-merciful God,
and that accordingly they might learn to value and prize his gifts at their
deserved excellency, (for we find this generally verified, that benefits easily
obtained, are lightly regarded and soon forgotten) the children of Israel were
in captivity about four hundred and thirty years in Egypt, but after they had
expected the salvation of the Lord, they were brought safely through the Red
sea, Exodus 12.
by the conduct of Moses. David had a promise to be King of Jerusalem and
Judea, but the Lord exercised him by many and grievous afflictions before he
came to the Crown, Psalm. 119.82.
in so much that (he says) his eyes failed with waiting upon his God; Zachary
and Elizabeth desired of God, both of them in their youth, and many years
after, for issue, but their request was not granted until they were old; Luke
1.18.
the Church Militant for some hundreds of years after Christ's Resurrection,
seemed to be forsaken and rejected of him, when she was so battered by Tyrants,
and so undermined by Heretics, that she was like to be crushed and stifled in
her very cradle, she was tried ten times in the fire, by ten several and
distinct persecutions, wherein God seemed to equal the ten plagues of Egypt,
and to lay as much on his people for their probation, as he had laid upon
others on their behalf; More Christian blood effused, then in the Sacrifices
of the old Law, for so we read many a hundred, many a thousand made Martyrs in
one day, a whole City, a whole Army destroyed at one time for the Gospels sake,
so that as the Israelites formerly went through the red Sea toward the land of
Canaan, these through an Ocean of blood past to a Kingdom of bliss. And when
the Church had prayed and fasted, and suffered so many years, God in the end
hearkened to the voice of her lamentation, took her in his Arms, wiped all
tears from her eyes, took away all occasion of complaint, made Kings and
Queens to be her Nurses, and so made her Glorious in the eyes of man,
acceptable in his, and cheerful in her own sight; This ought to work a
confidence in all Gods afflicted servants, that he will not quite desert them;
their deliverance will be seasonable enough, if they will wait and depend upon
him: a cloud on the sky may for a while eclipse the light of heaven, but that
will soon be dissipated, and the Sun will appear.

3. We are further taught by this desertion of our Savior to fear to sin, and
to bewail our offenses, the only cause of his great sufferings.

What Stoic is so void of motion, but will be sensible to see a friend suffer
for him, what he was himself was justly guilty of? what Christian so
flint-hearted, that will dare commit a sin, if he does but cast a serious
thought on him, who suffered so much, not for his own, but our sins? The
Passion of Christ if rightly considered may be styled a School, where all
Martyrs and Saints are made: who would complain of doing too much, of suffering
too much, of being too much abased or despised, if he do but behold his Savior
delivered over, and abandoned for him, to such horrible confusions, such
insupportable torments? (O my God, my wounded God! as long as I shall see thy
wounds, Nolo vive te fine vulnere cum te video vulneratum. Bonaventum.
I will never live without a wound) who will be clothed with purple and costly
silks, and used to softness and delicacy, and see his Redeemer crowned with
thorns, and fixed to the Cross? who will not withhold his hands from violences,
and rapines, and see Christ's arms distended on the Cross? who will not fetter
his feet, and hinder them from running after the unbridled desires of his
heart, if he but viewes Christ's feet pierced through with nails? who will not
make bitter his tongue, in subduing the pleasures of the taste, and see Christ
have nothing but gall and vinegar to drink? who will not contemn the ayerie
honors of the world, when he beholds him that is able to walk upon the wings
of Cherubims; take upon him the form of a servant, and creep among us like a
little worm of the Earth? who can delight in any sinful joy, and behold him so
sad, so pained, so dejected? this then is a sovereign antidote against the
venom of our sins, to have our Saviors Image daily in our hearts, and to
reflect our thoughts upon him Crucified in all our actions; When the forty
Martyrs were in the frozen lake, Basil. or^t. in 40 mar.
thirty nine of them had their minds wholly bent upon the future Crown, and
one of them unhappily thought of nothing but of his punishment, All of them
remained victorious, except this wretched creature, who soiling the glory of
his patience, came out of the poole to dye presently after in his infidelity.
So if our suffering Savior, be before our eyes, in all our tribulations and
temptations; we shall be more then Conquerours, Romans 8.
but if pleasure or profit be our objects, we turn our backs to Christ, and
shall have no share in the benefits of his Cross.

MY God, My God! in what an ecstasy is my soul, when it contemplates what thou
did, in those three hours silence, when horror and darkness involved the
universe? when thou were not in a chair of State, but on thy Cross, full of
sorrows, full of sufferings!

Thou (Lord) who only know the extremities of thy own Passion, teach thy
servants, how much they owe to thee, and in a religious dejection of themselves
to give thee only the glory of their salvation.

We know not (Lord) whether we shall more admire the greatness of thy love, or
the greatness of thy Passion, both exceed our merits, both surpass our
apprehensions: but since thy goodness has thus acted for us, we should be
unthankful, if we did not spend some of those hours which thou have given us,
in a sweet recordation of those thy blessings, and not only so, but imprint
them in our actions.

Thou did not so expostulate with thy Father for relinquishing of thee, as
not knowing the Cause; for of what can thou be ignorant, who know all
things, and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge? but that
thou might exhort us to seek and learn things necessary and profitable for
our souls.

There was no separation between thee and thy God in matter of Essence, or
grace, or affection, but only in the point of present Protection.

Thy Father left thee (O Son of God) in that sad Agony, that thou might the
more gloriously triumph; he left thee to struggle with Death, that thou
might unsting Death, and having overcome the sharpness of it, open the
Kingdom of heaven to all believers.

Thou might have had a numerous Army of Saints and Angels for thy defense
against thy enemies, and death it self; (for all Power in heaven and earth was
given unto thee O Lord) but thou were pleased to permit that Divine decree
between thee and thy Father, and thy Spirit, that thou should first suffer
all these things, and then to enter into thy Glory.

But tell us we pray thee (Thou Lever of Men) whether or no did the vehemence
of thy sorrows in that space, silence thine heart from thine accustomary
devotion? for we when we are but touched with any affliction, can scarce lift up
a thought to thee, or speak of thy praises.

But (O our Savior) it was not so with thee; for though thy flesh was weak,
yet thou did bear a Spirit prompt to all holy exercises. We know that though
thy tongue moved not; yet with the mouth of thine heart thou did send
implicit ejaculations to thy Father for us; neither did thou only pray in
heart, but in wounds and blood; And as many wounds as were in thy Sacred body,
so many supplicants there were for us to thy heavenly Father; and as many drops
of blood, so many tongues petitioning mercy for us.

O our God! we are justly confounded in the Abyss of thy love and mercy to the
sons of men. O were our sins so great that no sacrifice could at tone thine
Anger but the blood of thy Son, thy only begotten Son, in whom alone thou art
well pleased! O superabundant love! O prodigious Mercy!

But (Lord) teach us by his example not to cast cur affections on the pleasures
and vanities of this world, but to delight in the cup of affliction whereof he
drank in an overflowing measure.

Make us fear to sin for his sake who sinned not and yet so highly suffered for
our sins, and when me fall under the rod of thy displeasure for them, correct
us not in thy fury, lest we should be consumed and brought to nothing.

Though thou do eclipse thy savours sometimes from thy dea^est ones, yet we
are confident thou will not totally and finally forsake those who do not (so)
forsake thee.

Therefore we pray thee be not far from us (O God) and though we attribute to
thy Justice the glory of our deserved sufferings, yet let thy mercy have the
glory of our deliverance from them, for the Passion of thy son's sake. Amen.

The fifth Word.
JOHN 19.28. 1 Thirst.


FOr the better explanation of This, it is necessary to add the precedent and
subsequent words of the Evangelist: After this, Jesus knowing that all things
were now accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst;
now there was set a vessel full of vinegar, and they filled a sponge with
vinegar, and put it upon hyssop and put it to his mouth. The Lord would have a
full Consummation of all the Prophetical predictions of his life and death,
this only remained according to the Psalmist; Psalm. 69.21.
They gave me vinegar to drink; Our Lord said, I thirst. The Prophet foretold
it, because he foresaw it; the prediction or prevision is not the cause of a
thing to Come, but the thing to come is the ground of either. The emission of
so much blood, could not choose but provoke an extremity of thirst, (as I knew a
man grievously wounded, who called for nothing but drink) which notwithstanding
he entertained with a patient silence from the beginning of his Crucifixion:
His flesh had been long unacquainted with any moisture; his veins, his tongue,
his Palate, and all his Interiours did labor under a miserable dryness, but, O
sad refreshment! in stead of giving him Cordials, or pleasant drinks, they
offer him that which might either increase his torments, or hasten his
dissolution. The sum of all is this: As a little before his affixction to the
Cross, they offered him Wine mingled with Gall, Mat. 27.
so in the last period of his life, they brought him Vinegar, that from the
beginning to the end he might have a continued Passion, not mixed with any
solace or refreshment.

The new Testament is for the most part an explanation of the Old, but in this
mystery of the Lords Thirst, the words of the Psalmist may be styled a
Commentary on these words of Christ, I looked for some to sorrow with me, Psalm.
69.
but there was none, and for Comforters, and I found none, they gave me gall to
eat, and vinegar to drink, And of such the Lord here complains, and says, I
thirst: Hence learn first, O Man!

1. To possess thy soul in patience in thy afflictions after the great example
of our Lord and Master Christ; though in the fourth word there shined his
humility joined with his Patience, yet here it appears in its proper place.
This is it which sets a seal upon all virtues, even the first in the list,
and last in the triumph. It is the Crowned Pomegranate which hangs among
bells in the lowest border of the high Priests robe of the old Law, all was
imperfect without the Crown of Patience; it is the Salt of the Prophet
Elisaeus, which purifieth the polluted waters, and sweetneth all the bitterness
of life, it is the School of Christianity. So learned are we, as we have
Patience, Ambross in Prove. 19
so much do we participate with God, as we can endure by his example, he has
taken a body, to be able to suffer, and to make himself the mirror and reward
of sufferours. But we must distinguish true Patience from false. True patience
is that, which commands us to suffer the evils of punishment, that it may not
enforce us to commit the evils of sin, such was the patience of true Martyrs,
who would rather undergo the torments of villainous executions, then deny the
saving faith of Christ; and would rather tolerate the loss of all they had,
then adhibit any adoration to false Gods, false patience is that which
persuades us to suffer all evil things, that we may obey the law of lust, and
to loose eternal things, to conserve the Temporal, such is the patience of the
Devils Martyrs, who will easily suffer hunger, thirst, cold, heat, the loss of
a good name, (and which is to be admired) of the kingdom of heaven, that they
might augment their riches, satisfy carnal concupiscence, and ascend to the
slippery mount of honors.

It is the innate property of true Patience to continue in a good cause to the
end, till by working it has polished us, Ja^^. 1.1.
and made us perfect men; and that is it which the Apostle declares in the
Encomiums of it: other virtues cannot long subsist without it, in regard of
some difficulties which are found in their actuations, which by her assistance,
are conquered with much facility; Cyprian ser de patieut.
Charity which is the Queen of virtues, the ground of peace, the link of unity,
and greater then either faith, or hope, or Martyrdom, take from it Patience and
it remains desolate, take from it the substance of suffering, and it has no
root, no strength to persevere: without this the chaste man cannot resist
uncleanness, the just cannot be free from corruption, nor the peaceable, from a
desire of Revenge. The Psalmist says, Psalm 9.18.
the expectation (or Patience) of the Poor (or humble) shall not perish for
ever, but the fruit of it shall be perpetually verdant; the husbandman loses
not the sweats of his brow, when he beholds his seed flourishing in the ear;
And the patient soldier deserves as great trophies as the greatest Conqueror,
when by the sweetness of his sufferings, he does, as it were trampled on the
victories of his enemies; he that endures to the end shall receive a Crown of
Glory. Ja. 1.12.


We need no other Motive to induce us to this Royal virtue, then the King of
sufferings; Christ Jesus thirsting on the Cross, for not to speak of all his
afflictions and miseries, which continued from his cradle to his grave; this
his tedious and vehement thirst is sufficient to inflame our souls with a
religious patience in all our tribulations. But, least we should mistake the
practice of it with (the Romish Saint) Macarius, who having killed a gnat which
pricked him, Vitae P. P.
(as if he had committed a great act of impatience) went for the space of six
months, exposing his naked body to all the flies, gnats, and wasps of the
wilderness, to be revenged upon himself; let us take these few directions. 1. To
bear a little with our selves, and be content with those conditions and
callings wherein we are placed: it is the property of imprudent persons to be
weary with the present and ever gaping for the future. 2. To be full of
mildness and lenity toward others, bearing with their infirmities: some has
more disturbances then the winding Eruipus has waves, but what
unreasonableness is it, that a man full of rebellions against God, should
desire that men and beasts serve him, according to all his humors. 3. 2 Samuel
16, 10, 11.
To suffer calumny, and slanderous words, as David did those of Shemei. 4. To
endure all humane accidents, as sicknesses, loss of goods, hunger and thirst,
imprisonments, banishments, death of friends and near Relations, and whatsoever
has sadness and horror in nature, ever acknowledging that they are but
scourges for our sins (which deserves greater) and that none of them happen
without the permission of the divine power, to which we must all submit, that
so, the incensed God, being appeased, may vouchsafe us his benedictions, and
enbosom us as his sons, by his paternal favor.


2. But besides this corporal thirst, the Lord seems to me to intend a
spiritual one, and to have spoken these words in the same sense, as those to
the women of Samaria, Give me to drink. Afterward, unlocking the mystery of
his speech, he adjoynes this, if thou knew the gift of God, Io. 4.7, 10.
and who it is that says to thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he will give thee the water of life. When I behold Christ upon the
Cross as it were upon the high Mount, looking on so many millions, languishing
through the inflammations of their sins, I behold the same Lord commiserating
their sad conditions, and saying, though I truly thirst for the exhausted and
dried humor of my body, yet I more thirst and covet that man at length may by
faith acknoledg me to be the true fountain of that living water, and that they
may come to me and drink, and so they shall not thirst eternally.

To this purpose are the words of the Prophet. Ho, Everyone that thirsts come
to the waters, Isa. 55.1.
and he that has no money, come buy and eat; come I say, buy wine and milk
without money, without price. That you may conceive they are not screwed to too
high a value, he invites you with a second call; these waters are said to be
bought, because they are not to be had without some labor and industry, but
they are had without any commutation, because they are given freely, neither
can there be any price found to parallel the greatness of their worth; what he
first called Water, he afterward calls Wine and Milk, thereby to display unto
us the excellency and perfection of the gift; what is called Water, is divine
Wisdom, which quenches the flames and lusts of Concupiscence; by Wine is meant
that celestial calefaction which does warm and brisk the soul, making it to
covet things heavenly and sublime; and it is called Milk, because it sweetly
nourished the Infants in Christ with eternal food. 1 Pet. 2.1.


Some thirst, with a most flaming desire, and insatiable greediness after the
transitories of this world, (which the vulgar call blessings) as honors,
wealth, and pleasures, but our desires must mount higher, and have these three
Objects, the glory of God, the honor of Christ, and the salvation of our
souls, that these were the vehement desires of Christ, all his works, all his
preachings, all his sufferings, and all his miracles do voice and speak it. The
Prophet cries out. As the heart brayeth for the rivers of water, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
so pants my Soul, after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? Behold,
how this King, who was clad with the rags of mortality, and soyled with the
vileness of carnal vanities, thirsts after Gods honor and service here, and to
enjoy the beatifical vision of him hereafter: Romans ^.3.
Paul's zeal toward Gods Glory, was such, that he would redeem the rejection of
the Jews, with his own damnation; to testify his great desire for their
Salvation, he wished to be anathematized from Christ. He had rather be deprived
of the heavenly Glory then that Christ should be deprived of so great a fault
of his passion, which would have appeared in the conversion of so many thousand
Israelites. Now, if Christ, if Paul and others so eagerly thirsted for our
salvation, why do we our selves neglect it? Why do we so vehemently covet these
temporals, which are weightless and momentaneous, and not place our whole
effections on that happiness, which is glorious and eternal? The reason
peradventure is, because everlasting Glory is not empaled within the dominion
of sense: we have not that external experiment of it, as of corporal felicity,
which makes us earnestly covet this, slightly desire the other; and therefore
the natural man (who sees not beyond the Region of sense) perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14
for they are foolishness to him. But he that is spiritual discerns all
things. There must be a spiritual wisdom in us, before we can long for the
things above, and this is not to be found in the Athens of the world, but in
the most Divine Academie of Gods Spirit, Jam. 1.5.
the Treasure and fountain of all true knowledge, who gives liberally to all,
and reproacheth none. Thither only we must make our humble addresses for this
holy Gemme, and not desist in our Prayers, until we have by our tears, and
cries, undeafed the ears of the Almighty.

1 ANd now, O God, of all pity and Patience, we are confounded to consider thy
great goodness, in suffering that extremity of thirst, and pain, for us on the
Cross; enable us to bear patiently all afflictions, Corporal or spiritual, and
to submit our wills to thine, in sickness as in health, in woe as in wealth, in
death as in life.

2. Make us to thirst after the Kingdom of heaven and its righteousness; teach
us to prize the salvation of our souls above all earthly possessions, for they
are spiritual, immortal, and precious, these but transitory, and subservient,
if we seek thee in the first place, (who art All in All) no bl^ssings whether
corporal, spiritual, or eternal can be wanting to us, for every good and
perfect gift proceeds from thee above, Iam. 1.17.
O Father of lights.

The sixth Word.
JOHN 19.30. It is finished.


THIS implies no more in sound construction, then that the wonderful work of
the Passion is now consummated and completed; for the Father enjoined the Son,
two weighty offices or works, one of preaching the Gospel, the other of
suffering for man; of the first the Lord formerly said, That he had finished
the work which he gave him, Joh. 17.5, 6.
and manifested his name unto men. The other injunction is intimated in these
words, O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me, Mat. 26 42.
except I drink it, thy will be done. Now he had fully exhausted that bitter
cup of his Passion, nothing remained but his dissolution, and so with an
inclining head he gave up the Ghost.

But being neither our Savior, nor S. John explained what was Finished,
occasion is given us to make such mystical applications of the Word, as may be
fruitful to our souls; Aug. ^om. in ^cum.
One of the Fathers affirms, That in this place is meant, an impletion of the
Prophecies foretold of Christ, Esaias 7. Mick. 2.
and that all those predictions were true; as his conception of a Virgin, his
Nativity in Bethlehem, Numb. 23.
the apparatition of a new Starr, Psalm. 71.
the Adoration of Kings, the Preaching of the Gospel, Isay 61.
His Miracles, his riding upon an ass, Esaias 35. Psalm. 21.68 Esa. 53. Jer. 11.
Zach. 12.
And his whole Passion is described by parts, by David in his Psalms, Esaias,
Jeremy, Zachary, and others; and this the Lord himself being to pass to his
sufferings, spoke, Behold, Luck. 18.
we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the Prophets
concerning the Son of Man, shall be accomplished, which is also here averred,
that their Testimonies might he verrified, and received as the dictates of the
Holy Ghost.

2. Another of the Fathers understands here, Chrysostom.
that the power which was permitted to Men and Angels against Christ, was now
consummated at his Death; and to this effect he speaks to the Chief Priests and
Captains of the Temple, and the elders that were with him, this is your hour,
Lu. 22.53.
and the power of darkness; now his laborious peregrination, now the condition
of his mortal life according to which he hungered and thirsted, and was weary,
and obnoxious to injuries, wounds, and to death it self, is fully ended and
determined.

3. Another makes this Construction, Now the chiefest Sacrifice was
Consummated, that, in which all the Sacrifices of the old Law, as it were,
types and shadows did rest, and into which they run, as Rivolets into the main
Ocean: or as the stars, when the Sun appears with his glorious rays, see no
stars at all, so those typical oblations all vanished, at the presence of this
Son of Glory, when he was to be immolated. Concerning these prefigurations one
speaks thus. Lord, thou have attracted all things to thy self; Leo Sermon. 8. de
possion dom.
for the veil of the Temple being rent, the holy things of the most holy
departed from the unworthy Priests, that the figure might be turned into the
truth, Prophecy into manifestation, and the law into the Gospel, (and a little
after) the variety of carnal sacrifices now ceasing the oblation of thy body,
and blood have made one perfect and entire sacrifice: For in this Sacrifice the
Priest is God-man, according to his Hypostatical union. Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchizedeck; Psalm. 109.4
The Altar was the Cross, which, by how much the more base it was before, by so
much the more illustrious and noble it was made after Christ's death, the
Sacrifice was the Lamb of God, innocent, and immaculate, of whom the Prophet
said, That he was brought as a sheep to the slaughter, Isa. 53.7.
and as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. The
fire of the Holocaust was his immense charity, Cant. 1.8
which did so flame in his breast, that the floods of persecutions could not
extinguish it; the fruit of the Sacrifice was the redemption of Mankind, the
expiation of the sins of all the sons of Adam; for, Isa. 1.29.
behold he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: But here
is the difference between the sacrifices under the Law, and this of the Gospel,
there it was the Office of the Priest to kill, and to prepare the Sacrifice,
but here Christ was both Priest and Sacrifice, not that he laid violent hands
on himself, but because he willingly yielded to the slaughter, for Gods glory
and the propitiation of our sins, their reconciliation was obtained by the
blood of beasts, Col. 1.20.
here peace is made through the sacred blood of Christ Jesus, not his, as he
claims all the beasts of the forest, all the cattle upon a thousand hills,
Psa. 50.10.
and all the fowls of the Mountains to be his; not his, as he is Lord and
proprietary of all by Creation, so all blood in his; no, nor his, as the blood
of all the Martyrs was his, (which is a near relation and Consanguinity) but
his so, as it was the blood of his Cross, the precious blood of his body, the
seat of his soul, the matter of his Spirits, and the knot of his dear life.

4. We may further understand in this place, that at the death of Christ a
great battle was finished between him and the Prince of this world; of which
he intimates in those words: Now is the judgment of this world, Jo. 12.31.
now shall the Prince of it be cast out: but this battle was judicial, not
military, the encounters were in litigations, not arms, for the devil did
strive with the Son of God, about the possession of the world, that is, of
humane kind, the Devil had for a long time usurped a dominion over man,
because he conquered the first man, and enslaved him, and his whole posterity,
and therefore he is styled the Principalities and Powers of the world, Ephesians.
6.12.
and the Prince of darkness; Neither was he only so called, Psalm. 96.5.
but also termed the Gods of the heathen, for he was publicly adored with
sacrifices among them, as their only God: but on the other part, Christ, as the
true and lawful heir of the universe, claimed to himself the Principalities
of the world, so that at length the battle was decided on the Cross, and
sentence was given in favor of our Savior, where he obtained the Trophies of
an absolute Conquest, for there he gave a plenary satisfaction to the Divine
Justice for the transgressions of all mankind, for there is returned a greater
obedience from the Son to the Father, then was the inobedience of the servant
to the Lord; the Son of God was more humbled even to death for the honor of
the father, then man was lifted to pride, to the dishonor of God; so God was
reconciled to man through the merits of his Son, when he rescued him from the
claws of the Devil, Col. 1.
and translated him into the Kingdom of his beloved son.

5. And lastly, these words may rightly be applied to the building of Christ 's
Church, which was not perfected and finished until his passion, though
inchoated in his Baptism. Thus Epiphanius in his third book against Heresies,
and that learned and holy Augustine, Lib. 3. haere. 78.
in his last book of the City of God affirm and teach, Lib. 22. c^^.
that Eve being built and founded on the rib of Adam, he being a sleep, was a
type of the Church, which was raised from Christ's side, when he began to sleep
through the heaviness of death, and so the Scriptures do notify, (not without
a mystery) Eve to have been built, not formed. And that the Church began to be
edified from the Baptism of Christ, the said Father proves out of the
Psalmist. His dominion shall be from sea to sea, Psalm. 71.8.
and from the river to the ends of the world; for the Kingdom of Christ which
is the Church, began to be built from the water of his Baptism, in which he
receiving the Baptism of John, consecrated the waters, and instituted his own,
which is the gate of the Church, and this he was made manifest through that
voice of his Father heard from heaven; this is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased hear him; from that time the Lord began to preach and to Congregate
Disciples, who were the first that came to the Church, and although there was
made an apersion of Christ's side after death, from whence issued forth water
and blood, which signified those two principal Sacraments of the Church,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, yet all ordinances had their full
qualifications from his meritorious passion; so that the flowing of water and
blood from his side, was rather a declaration of the mysteries, rather then an
institution most rightly, therefore it is said, that the building of the Church
was then consummated; when he said, It is finished, for there remained nothing
then but a dissolution, which speedily following, the price of a blessed
redemption for man was completed.

1. Learn hence, O man, that as thou art certain those things by their events
to have been true, which the holy Prophets predicted, so thou ought to be
fully assured, that those future things which are foretold by the same
Prophets, shall come to pass, though not as yet fulfilled, for they spoke not
from humane fancies, but from an inspiring Spirit of God, which is ever
infallible. Sicut usque ad hodiernam diem, omnia evenerunt; Aug. in Psalm. 76.
sic et quae restant, eventura sunt, etc. Even as to this day all things have
rightly followed, so the things which remain will undoubtedly follow. Let us
fear then the day of judgment; the Lord is coming, he that came once in
poverty, will next come in Glory. And that there be no haesitation in our
says, we have stronger arguments on our sides then ever our Ancestors had:
they who preceded the times of Christ, without any performances, or external
impletions were tied to believe many things; we, who have had an experimental
knowledge of diverse things already accomplished, should be induced to credit
the rest with the more facility: who lived in the days of Noah, did here that
the general deluge was to come, and it was demonstrated unto them, not only by
his preaching, but also by his building of an Ark, notwithstanding they would
not believe because they had never seen such a deluge, and therefore a divine
fury fell suddenly on them, now we who know, that to be impleted which the
Prophet foretold, may easily believe that he, at whose beck are all the
elements, may as well destroy the world by fire, the second time, as he has
done first, by water: And we that find it verified, that Christ raised many
from death, and his own body from the grave, may be fully confirmed that by
virtue of his Resurrection our souls and bodies also shall be translated to a
state of glory and immortality in the world to come.

2. Observe that though the journey of our Saviors peregrination here was
laborious, and sharp above measure, yet it received an honorable compensation,
it ended in triumph and Glory; it lasted thirty three years, but what was the
labor of those years in comparison of Eternal happiness? he was humbled and
made a scorn of men, and an abject of the people, for a short time, but God
has highly exalted him, Phil. 2.9, 10.
and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth:
But his adversaries exulted to the period of his Passion; Pilate rejoiced till
the instant of his sufferings, because he had preserved his friendship with
Caesar, and was then reconciled to King Herod, but now he and the perfidious
Jews justly suffer in hell-flames for their sacrilegious impieties. Here then
the humble, and patient men, may see how good, how propitious a thing it is; to
take up the Cross in this life, and to follow Christ, their afflictions are but
light and transcient, and not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall
be revealed to them; for when they dye, they pass from a veil of sorrows to a
Paradise of joys, Rev. 7.16.
where all tears shall be wiped from their eyes: but with the ungodly it is
not so, the end of their miseries (if they have any) in this world, is but an
entrance and beginning of greater in the other, where is endless weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

3. Another benefit may be reaped from the third acceptance of the words; for
if we mean that the Sacrifices of the chiefest Priest is now finished on the
Cross, it follows, that all his disciples in imitation of their Master,
according to their several talents should offer likewise Sacrifices to their
God; in this sense all Christians are Priests to offer Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.9.
not such as were in the old Testament, i Pet. 2.9
but Spiritual Priests, to offer mystical sacrifices, which may be presented
from all men, as praises, and prayers, and other services of piety; the same is
most occurately taught us in the Epistle to the Romans, Heb. i3.i5, 16.
in resemblance of the sacrifices of the ancient Law; Romans 12.1
for there was in them. 1. The hallowed to God, which to convert to profane
use, was held a nafarious Crime. 2. It was to be a thing living, as a sheep, or
goat, or the like. 3. It was to be holy, that is, clean; for there were among
the Hebrews, animals clean and unclean, 4. And then the thing hallowed to God,
was to be burned, that it might send forth an odor of sweetness: The like
properties must be found in our spiritual Sacrifices, 1. Our bodies ought to be
hallowed to God, that we may use them to his honor, not as our own, but his,
to whom they are consecrated by Baptism, and who has purchased them by his
blood. 2. They ought to be living sacrifices, enlivened with the life of Grace,
and of the holy Spirit: for whosoever are dead by sin, are not fit Victimes for
God, but for the devils; our God, who is always living, and the everlasting
fountain of life, abhors the stinking oblations of dead carcasses, who are
profitable for nothing, unless for dogs and fowls of the Air. We must then
enbalm and preserve the life of the soul, with our best and most religious
actions, that we may give a reasonable sacrifice to our God* 3. We must be holy
and clean; for none shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, Psalm. 24.3, 4
or stand in his holy place, but he that has clean hands, and a pure heart,
who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. 4. And then
we must be well pleasing, and send up a sweet savor to our God, to that
purpose in the old Law, they used to kill and burn the sacrifie; and this is
rightly performed in the spiritual Sacrifice, when carnal concupiscence is
truly mortified, and burned with the coals of charity; nothing can sooner or
more effectually destroy it, then a sincere love to God, for he is Lord and
King of all the affections of the heart, and rules them all, whether Fear,
Hope, Desire, Hatred, Anger, or any other perturbation of the soul; and love
does not yield but to a greater, so that when divine love does possess, and
bear dominion over the inmost corners of the heart; then carnal concupiscence
gives place, and being mortified, it vanishes to nothing.

Thence flaming desires, and most pure prayers ascend to heaven, like
aromatical perfumes of precious spices: this then is that perfect and
acceptable sacrifice which God requires; and the Apostle here exhorts with a
most persuasive argument. I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you present
your bodies, etc. By his mercy, that is, as if he had said, by him, that
created you something, when you were nothing: By him that made you his
servants, and needed not your service, and when your merits were unavaileable,
blessed you with his own; by him that made you to his own similitude, and by
this, capable of his love and knowledge; by him that made you his adoptive sons,
and coheirs with his unigenit; by him that made you members of his body,
whereof he was the head; by him that offered himself a full and propitiatory
sacrifice on the Cross, to redeem you from servitude, and wash you from all
spots and wrinkles; by him, I beseech you, to give to God in stead of dead
beasts, lively sacrifice; in stead of their blood, which was but a shadow, and
pleased not God of it self, the acceptable sacrifice of the spiritual man,
framed by faith, to godliness and charity.

4. And then we are here further taught, that we shall be crowned with Laurels,
and Diademes of eternal happiness if we fight courageously under the banner of
Christ, against our spiritual enemies, and never desist until we have obtained
the Victory. Christ gave not over until all was finished: If God had given over
at his second days work, we had had no sin, no seasons; if at the fifth, we
had no being; if at the sixth, no sabbath, but by proceeding to the seventh, we
are all, we have all; So Christ, if he had stayed at his Circumcision, or his
Agony, or his scourgings, our redemption had been imperfect, but by continuing
to his crowning and his nayling, and the piercing of his side on the Cross, all
was completed that was necessary for man's salvation. 2 King. 5.24
Naaman could not be cured of his leprosy, but by washing in Jordan seven
times, less could not do it; it is not enough for a man to begin, or do some
few acts of piety or religion, unless he make; a constant progress therein. Are
the Angels weary of looking on that face of God, which they looked upon
yesterday? or are the Saints weary of singing of that Allelujah, which they
sung to Gods glory yesterday? Is not that song which is their morning and
evening sacrifice; and which shall be their song world without end, called
still, A new song? Oh! then never be weary, never give over performing thy
duties to that God that never cease to bless thee; for he (and he only) that
continues unto the end, shall receive a Crown of life.

In vain did the perfidious Jews cry, if he be King of Israel, let him come
down from the Cross, and we will believe in him; Nay, rather, because he was
so, he would not desert his place; for by his perseverance, his interest to the
Kingdom was confirmed, and the work of redemption was consummated in such a
glorious manner, that nothing could be deficient, to the greatness of its
merit, or to enduce us to follow so noble a president; to proceed in those
actions, that are pleasant and suitable to our temper is facil, and not praise
worthy; but to persevere in laborious Agonies and sorrows, and in such things
as are against the dictates of our own natural and carnal affections is indeed
difficult, but very laudable. Christ was so enamoured with his divine Father,
and longed so earnestly for the redemption of man, that all intervening Crosses
seemed Cordials to him, and all pains, pleasures: After his Example we find
that Paul enumerating his own sufferings with those of his Co-Apostles breaks
thus forth; who is able to separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.
shall tribulation or distress? shall anguish, persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, for thy sake we are killed,
all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter, Nay; in all these
things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved us. From these holy
presidents we may learn how to master our afflictions, and to sweeten our
persecutions, and to deem them as the embrioes of eternal life: We may bear
them with all spiritual joy, if we look not on them, but on him, that imposed
them on us, who without doubt was the Father Almighty, without whose
Providence, not a hair can fall from our heads, and therefore let us with Moses
esteem his rebukes greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. ii. 26.
having respect unto the recompense of the reward.

1. ANd now, (O Savior of the world!) how great a compass wentst thou in this
act of our redemption, before thou did bring it to this happy Period, from
thy swathing to thy shrowding, from thy cold lying in a manger, to thy cold
dying upon the Cross, what did thou do and suffer? Nay, what did thou not
do and suffer for us.

The work of our Creation was great, but this far greater. That was done with a
Fiat, with the breath of thy mouth, thou speak the Word and all was done;
here was a miraculous conjunction of God and man in one person, maid and mother
in another, when it was but begun, thy omnipotency indeed appeared in the
first, but thy mercy and justice in the latter; such a work did thou finish
here, that neither Man, nor Angels, or thy deity alone could well accomplish.

Oh! Thou that did so much for us, teach us to do somewhat for thee. Thou
that made thy self a perfect victime for our sins, grant that we may
sacrifice our sins, and mortify all carnal concupiscences, that so our souls
and bodies may be offerings of a sweet smelling Savior in thy Nostrils.

Thou that did conquer the Prince of this world, and all the enemies upon the
Cross, assist us against the conflicts and temptations of our spiritual
adversaries; save us from the roaring Lion, that he may never prevail; O thou,
that art the Lion of the tribe of Judah.

But because we are ignorant of our selves, what to do aright, 1 Cor. 12.6.
we pray thee guide us with thy Spirit; thou, Isa. 28.21.
who workest all in all, work thy work in us, and bring to pass thy act, thy
strange act, whatever it be.

Let us perform what thou requirest of us, and that is, let us do justly, show
mercy, and walk humbly with thee, Mic. 6.8.
and walk humbly with thee, our God.

Preserve thy Church, that issued from thy side on thy Cross; thou art her
husband, (O Christ) save thy spouse, thou art her head, save thy body; protect
her, as thine from infidels, heretics and schismatics; from bad men and
Devils, from all errors and dangers.

Make her (unto thy self) glorious, without spot or wrinkle; holy and without
sin; Ephesians. 5.7.
And though (like thee) she sorrows and suffers often, while militant here;
yet make her triumphant (with thee) in the world to come.

Let every member of her, profess thy name to the end with courage, and
constancy, after thy glorious Examples: let us not be carried away from our
duties to thee, with the vanities of the world, or the enticements of the
flesh, or the suggestions of Satan.

O thou that art immutable, without shadow of change Yesterday, to day and the
same for ever; fix our fickle thoughts on thy fear, and establish thy holy
Spirit within us, that we may always praise thee, who never ceasest to bless
us.

By the grace and merits of him, who finished the grand works of eternal
redemption for us, living and dying, to save us, Lord, make us live and dye thy
servants, that we may be partakers of that happiness, which by his blood he
has purchased for us, in the Kingdom of Bliss. Amen.

The seventh and last Word.
LUKE 23.43. Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit.


ANd well might he call him Father, because he had merited the name of an
obedient Son, to the last minute of his life; and therefore most worthy to gain
attention. But here a doubt occures, what we are to understand by the hands of
God? are we with the Anthropomorphites to ascribe the form and lineaments of
man unto God, Theod. l. 4. c. 10.
as if he had eyes and ears, and hands, and other parts and faculties like unto
us? far be it, for God is a spiritual substance, of an invisible and
indivisible nature, without body, parts or passions, of infinite power, wisdom
and goodness: but for the better explanation of this, and the like expression
in holy Writ, we must make use of that known adage of the Hebrew Doctors, Lex
loquitor linguam filiorum hominum. That is, the holy Ghost in the Scripture
descends to the capacity of man, speaks man's language, that is, so, as he
would be understood by man; and therefore presents him in the faculties of the
mind of man, and in the lineament of the body of man, not that he has really
either of them, for he is a most pure and a most simple entitie without any
corpority, or composition. And so, the hands of God, do denote unto us, his
wisdom and power, or which falls into one meaning, his intellect knowing all
things, and his will enabling all things, for with these two, as it were two
hands, God did all things. The will of God is his power; for all things
whatsoever he would, he did in heaven and earth.

My Spirit, There are diverse significations of this word Spirit, in Scripture,
which if not rightly apprehended, may occasion diverse errors; it is spoken of
God, or of Angels, or of men, or of inferior creatures. Of God, it is spoken
sometimes Essentially, sometimes Personally. God is a Spirit, Jo. 4.24.
and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and truth. So also,
Isai. 31.3.
So also, The Egyptians are men, and not Gods, and their Horses flesh and not
spirit; for if they were God, they were Spirit; so, God altogether, and
considered in his essence, is a Spirit: but when the word Spirit is spoken not
essentially of all, but personally of one, then that word designeth the holy
Ghost. Matthew. 28, 19.
Go and baptize all in the Name of the Father, and Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Romans 8^.6.
And the Spirit it self bears witness, etc. And as of God, so of Angels also
it is spoken in two respects of good Angels, sent forth to minister for them
that shall be heirs of Salvation. And evil Angels, Heb. 1.14.
The lying Spirit that would deceive the King by the Prophet. 1 Kin. 22.22.
Hosea 4.8.
The spirit of whoredom, when the people asked counsel of their stocks: And
spiritus virtiginis, the spirit of giddiness, or perversities which the Lord
does mingle amongst the people in his judgment. Of man also, is this word
Spirit spoken two ways; sometimes for the Soul, sometime for those animal
spirits which conserve us in strength and vigor, Job 6.4.
The poison of Gods arrows drinks up my spirit; and also for the superior
faculties of the soul, in a regenerate man, as there, My Soul does magnify the
Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Luke 1.47.
And then lastly, of inferior creatures, it is taken two ways too, of living
creatures, The God of the Spirits of all flesh; Number. 16.22.
and of creatures without life (other then a metaphorical life) as of the wind
often: Ez^k. 1.21.
And of Ezekiels wheels; the spirit of life was in the wheels.

Now in this place, the Spirit of Christ may be taken either for his soul,
which is the substantial form of the body, or for life it self; because
spiration is a sign of life; and they that breath, live, and when the leave off
to breath, they leave off to live. If by the spirit, we understand his soul,
this caveat must be had; we must not imagine that danger impending to it, by
leaving the body, as is usual to dying men, who commend their souls in pensive
supplications, because they go to the Tribunal of the Great Judge, to receive
glory, or punishment. Such a commend his soul needed not, because it was blessed
from its creation, as well in regard of its personal conjunction to the Son of
God, as because it left the body in a glorious triumph, being a terror to
whole Legions of devils. So that in this sense, the words imply no more, then
that his soul which was formerly in the body, as in a Tabernacle, should be
deposited in the hands of his father, until he be restored, when the time of
restoring should come; but it is more credible, that by the spirit, is here
understood the corporal life, as the meaning may be this; I do now deliver the
spirit of life, by which I do leave off to breath, and leave off to live, and
this spirit, this life, Father I commend to thee, that thou may shortly
regive it to my body; for with thee nothing perishes, but all things live, who
by calling those things which are not, give them a being, and those things
which do not live, give them a life.

And this construction is most agreeable to the Psalmist: Pull me out of the
net, Psalm. 31.4.
that they have laid privily for me; for thou art my strength, into thy hands I
commend my spirit. Where by spirit is meant life, for he humbly beseeches the
Almighty, not to suffer him to perish by the malice of his enemies, but that he
would preserve his life; the like is evidenced out of those Apostolical words.
Heb 5.7.
Who, in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared. These words cannot be referred to
his prayer in the garden, as some interpret, for these, Mark 14.
the Lord prayed not with a loud voice, neither was he, nor would he be heard,
that he might be safe from death, but to show that he had a natural desire not
to die, thereby demonstrating himself to be a true man, whose nature abhors
death; but they rather signify that he desired not to be swallowed up by
death, and that he might only taste of it, and so return to life. And in that
he was heard; for he was not long detained in the black vaults of the grave,
but had a speedy and a glorious resurrection; So, that here the Lord was not
troubled for his soul, for he knew that to be safe, as being beatified from its
creation, by a vision of God face to face, but he was solicit ous concerning
his body, which seemed by the sting of death, to be disappointed of life, and
therefore prays that it might not long remain under its tyranny, and in that
his request was fully obtained.

Here then we may satisfy those Heretics (such as the Cerdonites, the
Euticheans, and the Manicheans were) which brought Christ upon the stage to
play a part, and say he was born, and lived, and dyed in Phantasmate, in
appearance only, and representation, and not really. For if he dyed not, where
is the contract between him and his father, that Christ ought to suffer all
this, and so enter into his Glory? is that contract void, and of none effect?
where is the ratification of that contract in all the Prophets? wherefore does
Esaias say, Esaias. 5 3.4 9
Surely he has born our sorrows, and he made his grave with the wicked in his
death: where is the consummation, and the testification of all this? does not
the Gospel here say, And he bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost, immediately
after this his last prayer? is that fabulous? God forbid; in vain had we all
been created, if we had not a regeneration in his true death. Christ truly dyed
so as was contracted, so as was prophesied, so as was related. But this I may
boldly affirm, that he did not die so, as other natural men dye; for there is
this distinction between them. Christ dyed because he would dye; other men
admitted to the dignity of Martyrdom are willing to dye, but they dye by the
torment of the executioners, they cannot bid their souls go out, and say I will
dye, as he did: I lay down my life for my sheep, (...). 10.15, 17, 18.
says he: No man takes it from me, I lay it down of my self: And De facto, he
did lay it down, he diddye, before thetorments could have extorted it from him:
Many crucified men lived many days upon the Cross: the thieves were alive,
long after Christ was dead; and therefore Pilate wondered that he was already
dead: his soul did not leave his body by force, Mar. 15 44.
but because he would, when and how he pleased. Besides Christ was not subject
to the law of death, which appertained only to them, who were derived from
Adam, by carnal and sinful generation, he being miraculously conceived of a
virgin, by the overshadowing of the holy Ghost, and being he was not involved
in a general rebellion, and so had not incurred Gods displeasure, it follows,
that he was not involved in the general penalty, and so needed not to have dyed
by the rigor of any law, as we must. And then when out of his own pleasure;
and to advance our salvation, he would dye, yet he dyed so, as that though
there were a disunion of body and soul (which is truly death) yet there
remained a nobler and faster Union, the Hypostatical Union of the Godhead, to
his body and soul: to this I add death has that dominion over men, that they
have no power to raise themselves from it; Christ had, for even in spite of
death he retained in Almighty power, and delivered his body and soul by a
Victorious and Triumphant Resurrection. So then, as it is true, Christ Jesus
dyed, else none of us could live; so he dyed not as others dye: not by the
necessity of any law, not by the violence of any executioner, nor by the
separation of his best soul, (if I may so call it) the Godhead, nor by such a
separation of his natural and humane soul, as that he would not, or could not,
nor did not resume it again From what has been premised, thou may learn, O
man, First, How that Christ showed his Power, his Wisdom, and his Charity even
then, when he seemed to be infirm and void of all consolation. They who
naturally dye, do by degrees loose their voice and strength, but he in the last
passage of his dissolution, used a louder acclamation then formerly. And not
only that, but as arguments of his further power, he caused the basis of the
universe to tremble, the stones to be cleft, the Sepulchers to be opened, and
the vail of the Temple to be disjoynted. All which want not their several
mysteries; as the earthquake and the Scision of the Rocks, signifies that by
the passion and death of Christ, men should be moved to repentance, and the
obdurate hearts of the obstinate should be cut in pieces, as it appeared by
those who went from this sad spectacle, Luke 23.
striking their breasts; the apertion of the sepulchers, denote the glorious
resurrection of the dead bodies, which were to be raised by virtue of his: The
renting of the vail of the Temple, whereby the Sanctum Sanctorum did appear,
did imply, that for the merits of Christ's death, the Caelestial sanctuary
should be opened, and that the holy should be admitted to enjoy the beatifical
vision.

Neither did he show his wisdom only, in these shadowy Mysteries, but also in
that he produced life out of death, which was typified by Moses, when he made
the water flow from the flinty rock: And Christ for the same cause compared
himself to a grain of wheat, Numb. 20.8, 9.
that dying fructifieth abundantly, Jo. 12.24.
for, as from the corruption of that grain sprouts a living stalk and ear, so
from his death on the Cross issued a life of grace to many nations; as the
first man being gulled with the sweet apple, infected his whole posterity with
death, so the second man swallowing the most bitter apple of death, brought
all, who were in him reborn, to eternal life. And what shall we say of his
charity, which was diverse ways wonderfully demonstrated at the instant of his
death: His life, which was the most precious of all lives, the life of a King,
the most powerful of all, the life of the wisest, and best of all, the life of
Godman, he voluntarily laid down for his enemies, for the wicked, for the
unthankful. From the flames of hell he frees them, that he might make them his
brethren, and Coheirs, and empale them within the blessed territories of
heaven. Is there any then so transported with cruelty to himself, and so
insensible of his own good, as not to enbosome Christ with a thankful love? Is
there any so negligent of his own eternity, as not to embrace him with a sweet
recordation of his mercies? Lord melt our stony hearts, that they may take the
impressions of such divine and unspeakable favors.

2. Here offers it self also to our consideration the great obedience of our
Savior to his heavenly father, in this recommendation of his spirit, to his
paternal protection, whereby is verified, what the Apostle says, Phil. 2.8.
That he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross. It was so admirable, that it had its imitation from his very conception,
and without intermission (like an indivisible line) lasted to his very death.
Neither was it determinated to one kind of work, but extended to all those
things, which it pleased his Father to command; to this do those expression of
his tend, Jo. 4.34. Jo. 6.
It is my meat to do his will that sent me, and to finish his work. I came
down from heaven not to do my own will, but his that sent me. And because (
Quia per victimas aliena Caro, per obedientiam propria voluntas muctatur.
Gregor. mor. l. 35. c. 11.) Obedience is the best of sacrifices, therefore as
many works as he did, during his peregrination on earth, so many most pleasing
sacrifices he offered to God Almighty. Hence such varieties of them; that
sometimes we find him fasting in the desert, and lodging with wild beasts;
sometimes in the frequency of men, eating and drinking; sometimes at home
obscure, and silent, and that not for few years; sometimes glorious, as well in
wisdom. as eloquence; and unclapsing his power of doing miracles; sometimes
with great indignation, throwing the buyers and sellers out of the Temple:
sometimes (as it were) weak, declining from the company of the multitude; all
which did require the noble qualities of an excellent soul, which showed him no
way subject to the swayes of any passionate will of his own. And as he
practiced, so he taught the rule of perfect Obedience. He that will follow me,
Mat. 16.24.
let him deny himself. Man must renounce his own, before he can submit to the
will of Christ. The Celestial orbs do not resist the Angels that move them,
whether they be driven to the East, or to the West, because they have no proper
propensitie, either to one part of the heavens, or to the other, and the Angels
themselves are at Gods beck, to observe all his mandates, because there is no
repugnancy between their wills and his but seem to be so happily consolidated to
him, as if they and he were but one spirit. And certainly if we will become
Christ's true disciples, we must disband our own desires, and natural
affections, and wholly resign our selves to his dispose, and so become one with
him.

3. And lastly, We may make this benefit of this last prayer of the Lord, to
use it, as a holy Ejaculation upon all emergencies, more especially at the hour
of death; for if the soul, then leaving the body, falls into the clutches of the
Devil, Ab inferis nulla redemptio.
there is no possibility of its redemption (for as the felicity of the Saints,
so the torments of the damned are eternal) but if it happily comes into the
paternal hands of God, the potency of enemies is not to be feared; but it will
be reunited to the body, and (both of them) shall in the end enjoy a blessed
and a glorious resurrection; And herein lies an ocean of comfort to all
believers, for as Christ the head did rise, so shall every member of his
mystical body be raised from corruption to incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.
from dishonor to glory. It is storied of an Indian King, that when he had
been Catechized so far in the articles of our Christian Religion, as to come to
the suffered, and crucified, and dead, and buried, impatient of proceeding any
father, asked only, is your God dead, and buried? then let me return to the
worship of the Sun, for I am sure, that will not die, whereas if he had but the
patience to learn the following Article, he might hear of his Triumphant
Ascension into heaven, and sitting there in Majesty and power on Gods right
hand, all the consolation of a Christian consists in this principally, that
after a troublesome warfare here, he shall be carried to Abraham's bosom, the
Celestial Paradise, to the durable Jerusalem to his Masters joy, to an
inheritance immortal, undefiled, reserved in the heavens, to a rest from his
labors, and to behold the glory of God. O how it behooves each man then, to
secure his interest in those felicities, and daily and hourly commend his soul
to that God that made it. We are all careful enough when death approaches, to
put our houses in order, and dispose of our temporals, but few take a thought
for that which is spiritual. We had rather with King Asa seek to the Physician,
then to the Lord, 2 Chr. 16.
when seized with sickness; or with the Pharisees tithe mint and cummin, and
leave the weighty Matters of the Law undone; but so we do but present God with
maim, not perfect, with dead, not living sacrifices: Nothing can enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but what is pure and immaculate, and therefore our chiefest
care should be, if we desire to have admission there, to prepare our souls by
true faith, and timely repentance, without which our prayers and tears will
nothing avail; for without holiness no man shall see the face of God. He made
our souls spirits, let us not then make them carnal, by feeding on corrupt
lust: He made them immortal, let us not murder them with our sins, and deprive
them of eternal life. He made them noble and after his own image, let us not
make them brutish and earthly, by doting on the pleasures, and vanities of this
transitory world. For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and
lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

TO thee therefore, O thou Father of our Spirits, do we make our humble
addresses, that thou would be pleased to be a Protector of our souls and
bodies, both here and to all eternity.

Thou art our Rock, and our Fortress, therefore for thy Names sake defend and
guide us.

We have no confidence in saints or Angels, for thou have charged the best of
them with folly, but in the multitude of thy mercies, for thou alone have
redeemed us, O Lord God of truth.

Thou that did show thy power in weakness, and shake the foundations of the
earth, when suffering on thy Cross, make us to tremble through the horror of
our sins, and to fear thy judgments for them, which we justly merit.

As thou did then cleave the Rocks, and rend the vail of thy sanctuary, so
melt our stony hearts with the beams of thy grace, that they may receive the
impressions of thy favors, and that we may enter into the Holy of Holies above,
which thou have prepared for thy chosen.

The height of our love is but to lay down our lives for our dearest relations,
but thou did depose thy precious life for thy enemies that rebelled against
thee.

Lord who by thy active and passive obedience, would leave nothing undone or
unsuffered for our salvation, O teach us to obey thy word, to embrace thy
metions and to practice what thou command

Let our wills be wholly resolved into thine, and make us conformable to thee;
as thy saints and angels in heaven are.

We confess, Lord, that the wages of sin is deaeth, and that we justly deserve
to be reduced to our first nothing, but O let not death, which is the work of
the devil, have dominion over thy creatures, who are the work of thine own
hands.

Before we receive a summens to our end, we pray thee furnish us with all
requisite graces, that we may be clothed with the wedding garment of holiness
and righteousness, to meet thee the sweet Bridegroom of our souls.

Let us not commend unto thee foul and sinful spouses, but clean and sorrowful
spirits; for thou despisest not, Lord, humble and contrite hearts.

At the hour of death, Lord, speak comfortably to our souls, and seal in our
hearts by thy holy Spirit, the pardon of all our sins.

Assist us with thy presence against all the assaults of our spiritual
adversaries for if thou will be with us, we shall neither fear nor feel any
evil, though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death.

And grant, that though our souls and bodies be separated by death for a short
space, they may be reunited at thy great day, and by virtue of thy
Resurrection, be raised to live in thy ever blessed eternity.

Grant this for his sake who lived and dyed, and rose again for our salvation,
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

