AN ALARVM TO WAR: PROCLAIMED By our Royal SOVEREIGN, AND His Loyal
PARLIAMENT.

To Subiugate the Savage cruelties, and inhumane Massacres Acted by the Nocent
Papists; AND To vindicate the barbarous bloodshed, and impious insolences
suffered by the Innocent Protestants of IRELAND.

To which is annexed An Encouragement to all his Majesty's true-hearted, and
valiantly disposed subjects, here in England, who are already, or shall be
hereafter engaged in this present Expedition against those Romish Rebels, and
all that are confederate with that malignant Party, there in Ireland.

By J. L. Acad: Cant: in art: mag:

LONDON, Printed by H. I. 1642.

AN Alarm to War.
THough the countenance of War be horrid and formidable to all Nations, in
regard of the inevitable ruin, and certain destruction which it carries along
with it (for nulla salus bello, there is no safety, but all vastation and
desolation in the time of War) yet when the matchless tyranny of Popish
Rebels shall exalt it self over the liberties, consciences, and lives of our
dear brethren in Ireland, who profess the Protestant Religion, when their
horrible outrages have been there committed, are still perpetrated and
continued, to the stupifying even of Amazement it self, to the hazard of that
Kingdom, and peril of this; in such a case, the aspect of War is both
amiable and acceptable.

De nobis narratur, The case is our own. Those nefarious miscreants, have not
only unlawfully surprised many Towns and Cities in that Island, but their
cursed rage has been so implacably bent against the poor Protestants (their
selves being violently transported beyond all bounds of nature and humanity)
that they have most unmercifully and unchristianly fired diverse places which
they have invaded, and savagely sacrificed the inhabitants to their mischievous
malice, and insatiate insolency. Never were Tartars, Turks and Mahumetans so
bloodily minded, as these villains have been. Those Monsters of nature (for
men I will ^ot term them) have not only sacked and pillaged wheresoever they
have come, but they have taken delight to torture the Protestants without any
bowels of compassion. They have ravished, and deflowred chaste women, and
virgins, thrown small children into R^^ers with Pitchforkes; they stripped
1500 stark-naked, driving them (like Dogs) toward Dublin, drowned and killed
many of them by the way, cutting off Pious, Protestant Ministers and their
wives in pieces. I tremble to speak it, they have searched Women's privities for
money, and in a most horrid and stupendous manner, they have ripped up their
wombes great with child, and slain with the sword, both them and their
infants.

Quis talia fando,
Temperet a lachrymis?
The Cruel enemy (whose very mercies have been cruelties) has powered out
their blood in every street, and there has been no friend to help them: but
in much mercy of late, it has pleased the Almighty to consider their
distress. He will not suffer the rod of the wicked always to lie upon the
back of the righteous. Vengeance (though slow) is sure: And God will be avenged
for the blood of his Saints, their blood being in conspectu Domini, in the
sight of the Lord, as precious as their death.

Sin has a crying voice, and the effusion of innocent blood is of all other
sins peccatum clamans: It cries alowd from the bortome of the earth, to the
top of heaven. As the sins of Sodom were great, and the cry of them came up
before the Almighty; So the Sanguinean sin of cursed Caine cried unto heaven,
to the God of Heaven for vengeanc. In like manner, the blood of those poor
Protestants, so undeservedly and lamentably spilt, has made such a clamor in
the All-hearing ears of the Almighty, that he has been graciously pleased
in pity and compassion of their manifold miseries, and most grievous
massacres, by a celestial voice, to speak to the heart of his dear
Anointed, our dread Sovereign, and to his heavenly-minded Parliament, to
commiserate their deplorable calamities, and forthwith relieve them with a
powerful (heaven-prospering) Army.

Hereupon the voice of War is proclaimed, a statute for it by the King, and
the high and Honorable Assembly of Parliament, has been enacted, the
Commission to his Majesty's Officers to press both land and Seamen, has
issued forth.

The Lord of Hosts go along with our hosts, guide and direct them in all their
ways, prosper their cause, grant them a propitious success, and glorious
victory over his and their blood-thirsty enemies: And I pray God send more
auxiliary Forces to them who are already there arrived, that in so just a
quarrel they may be the better co^solated, and animated, that the Rebels may
with more facility be quelled and conquered, and that the Kingdom of Ireland
may be the sooner reduced to their due subjection, and awful obedience to the
Crown of England, and to the law and ordinances made by his Majesty, and his
States of both Kindomes.

There was never any King that had more just and weighty cause to war against
a people at any time, then his Majesty has against the Rebels at this time.
And as the cause is urgent, so the expedition of it is as important. There was
never a more requisite necessity of a speedy supply, then at this present; For
the Rebellion there is so general, that it is not the force of a small Army
from hence that can suppres them. Though there are no spiders in the Kingdom of
Ireland (as many have averred and maintained) yet the Romish Spider has spun
so fowl a web in that fair Island, that it has need of a great beesome to
sweep it out again. And for the better confirmation hereof, It is not only
publicly rumor'd, but credibly reported, that neighboring Princes have taken
up Arms, the one of Spain, and the other of France, both of them at this
present very potent at Sea; and it is generally supposed, that they are
intended for Ireland, to assist these Assassinates against the Protestants.

Thus the Hydra of the Romish Faction does daily multiply, their Army does
increase, yet God be thanked, some of their Men and Ammunition have been of
late intercepted and prevented; and I pray God, in this particular, continue
his goodness still unto us. Their Forces are very strong, their Assistants and
adherents for the present being potent, their insolences are grown to the
utmost height of impious impudence and impudent impiety: They are resolved, no
more to be subject to the Crown of England, and the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom; but their unreasonable demand is, to have such a Viceroy, or
Gubernator, as may be well accepted of by them, and no other.

Thus as they have cast out of their hearts Christian compassion to the K.
subjects, so they have cast off from their necks the yoke of due subjection to
the King himself. Rebels they have proclaimed themselves to the whole world,
and that in summo gradu, in the highest degree, of as high a nature, as ever
Histories have recorded, or age of man can co^memorate. Never did the wildfire
of their hideous Conspiracies so circumvolve it self into one violent flame,
the actors thereof being so unanimous in their Diabolical designs, (that
Hellish Gunpowder-Plot of Treason only excepted) as this last year has bin
attempted by them.

It Is not long since a Roman Priest was sent from the Pope, who was landed here
in England, and has cunningly and closely wrought with diverse English
Catholics amongst us, to prepare themselves to put in execution such
determinations and resolutions as shall be propounded to them, for the defense
of their Religion, and ruin of our Brotestants: which Priest (as we are really
informed) h^th had frequent access to an expert Romanist, who is very skillful
in making Gra^^does, and all forns of Fireworks; with whom the aforesaid
Priest has privately dealt, and constantly persuaded to practice his Art, and
to put the same into execution against the chiefest Cities of England, for the
better overcomming them, so soon as those dissolute and resolute Rebels had
conquered Ireland, and landed their Forces here in England. Thus you may
evidently see, that their exorbitant offenses have bin so heinous and,
facinorous, and their crimes are still so capi^all, that that saying of the
Lyrick Poet (one word inverted) is verified of them:

-- Audax omnia perpeti,
Gens Romana ruit per vetitum nefas.
But what mean ye, O ye besotted sons of Insurrection? Will ye, through your
Rebellion, desperately perish? Fools and mad men as ye are, Quae vos dementia
cepit? How long will ye abuse the divine Patience? What, or who has deluded
and bewitched you? for Rebellion is as the sin of Witchraft. Has Ambition,
the Pope, or the Devil instigated, and seduced you thereunto? Or rather, have
not all these three bin Agents (though one of them were sufficient) for your
confusion? To these three, take three more to your consideration; which if they
do not work in your hearts an impression of contrition, they will serve for
an addition of horror and astonishment to your wretched souls. Is there not a
severe Judge above you, that can condemn you? Is there not a gnawing
Conscience within you, that will terrify you? And lastly, Is there not a
tormenting Tophet below you, that gapes for your obstinate Rebellion? Know thus
much (ye unfortunate sons of mischief) that as soon as ye have made up the
full measure of your iniquities, as the Amorites did then the Sicle of Gods
Judgment will cut you all off. For God is righteous, the Truth of God is
eternal, Hell is where it was, and your damnation without contrition, will be
just.

And now brave Soldiers, that have already encounter^d with these Rebels,
your and our enemies, and ye valiant spirits that are preparing to meet them,
Sun Theo, in Gods Name, for Gods cause, go on, and prosper: undantedly stand,
and courageously fight the battles of the Lord, for the defense of his people,
the propagation of his Gospel, and preservation of his Religion. If there were
no other argument, but the effusion of the poor Protestants blood, who were
worried to death by these Wolvish Rebels, it were sufficient to animate you;
blood requires blood: but there are many more mo^ives to induce you to this
War: Piety to God (whose honor and Gospel are enteressed therein) Allegiance to
the King, whereby ye express your loyal hearts to his Majesty's honor,
peace, crown, and dignity; Love to your native Country; for the safety of
our persons, and security of our present and future estates depends upon the
happy success of this war. There Is no assurance of peace or tranquillity,
without the rebels be reduced. Remember it is for Religion, your King and
Country that you fight. Besides all these, Providence and Prudence for your
selves: If ye live, ye shall be sure not to loose, but to get what will be
worth the keeping; and if ye dye, yet ye have no cause to be disheartened, but
rather great ground to be consolated: For as there is no blessedness in this
life, so there is all happiness after death. 'Twas the saying of a Heathen,
Dignum and decorum est pro p^tria mori. It Is a worthy and comely thing to dye
for a man's Country: And the Roman Orator was of this opinion, that there
cannot come an evi^l death to a valiant man, nor an untimely death to a wife
man. To conclude all, whether ye stand or fall, ye are certain of a famous
victory, or a renowned death; so that come what will come, conquest, or the
loss of life, an Eternity of Fame attends you on earth, an immortality of
glory expects you in heaven.

FINIS.

