A LETTER FROM The Lord Lambert And other Officers To General Monck, Inviting
the Officers under his Command to subscribe the Representation and Petition
presented to the Parliament the day before.

With a Modest and Christian Answer thereunto by General Monck, (deserving
perpetual honor) Importing their refusal to Join in that Design, as being a
breach of Trust, and of danger to the Commonwealth.

London, Printed, An. Dom* 1659.

A Letter from the Lord Lambert, and Other Officers, to General Monck, Inviting
the Officers under his Command, to Subscribe the Representation and Petition,
Presented to the Parliament the day before.
Right Honorable,
WE do by command from the General Council of Officers of the Army, now in
London, transmit the Enclosed to You, being a true Copy of the Representation
and Petition, which was this day by them Humbly Presented to the Parliament,
and the Votes of the House Passed thereupon; and are further to signify their
Desires, That the same may be Communicated to all Commissioned Officers of that
Part of the Army under Your Command,: and that the Subscriptions of all may be
taken, to the Representation and Petition, that are free to Sign the same;
Which being so Signed, It is desired, You will be pleased to cause them to be
close Sealed up, and Returned to Thomas Sandford, Esquire Secretary to His
Excellency the Lord Fleetwood, who is to give an Account thereof. As we have
thus fulfilled the General Councils Pleasure, we are well assured you will be
pleased to Comply with Their Requests, which is all at present from

White Hall, 5. October. 1659. Your Humble Servants, Lambert. John Disborowe.
William Packer. John Mason. Richard Creed. Robert Barrow.

For the Right Honorable General Monck at Dalkeith, Scotland.



General Monck's Answer to the foregoing Letter, Directed as follows,
For the Right Honorable, the Lord Lambert, To be Communicated to the Council
of Officers.
Right Honorable,
I Received a Letter Directed from Your self and others, of the 5th of this
Instant, with the enclosed Papers, In Pursuance of an Order of the General
Council of Officers, as You are pleased to intimate: I must humbly beg Your
Excuse, that I am not able to satisfy Your Commands in that particular. Indeed
Our Force is very small, and Our Enemy very great; and I shall be unwilling to
set any thing on foot, that may breed Jealousy amongst Us; And finding many
Officers decline the Signing all Papers of that Nature, and rather propense to
declare their Testimony to the Parliaments Authority, and their absolute
adherence thereunto, I have thought it My Duty to suspend the Execution of Your
Desires, least it may make a breach of Affections amongst Us. And I further
humbly offer to Your thoughts, That the Petition having been already Presented,
and in Part Answered by the Parliament, Our Concurrence therein cannot be any
ways advantageous. I shall not interpose Mine own Judgment concerning it, but
do earnestly desire that Matters of such great weight may not be imposed upon
us, who are not present at the Debates, nor Privy to the Councils by which
Your Resolutions may be Governed and led to such Actions. I shall not further
trouble You, but only Represent to Your thoughts the great necessity We have to
labor for Unity, in this day of Our fears. I shall not need to tell You, That
mis-understandings between the Parliament and Army are the great hopes of Our
Adversaries, and there is no other way to gratify their designs. I bless the
Lord for those evidences that I see, of a Peaceable Spirit, in Your Address. I
do, and I shall always endeavor, and pray, That God would not break the staff
of Our Beauty, or staff of Bands, That he would make all good men (though of
different Judgments) one in his Hand, that We may arrive at that blessed
Settlement, for which We have expended so much blood and Treasure: And as I
have always endeavored to express My Obedience, in acquiescing in the wisdom
of those that God places over me, so I shall continue and ever be,

Dalkeith, 13. October. 1659. Your Lorpps. very Humble Servant, George Monck.

For the Right Honorable, the Lord Lambert, To be Communicated to the Council
of Officers.

