THE LAMENTATION OF The Safe Committee.

OR, Fleetwood's Tears, Hewson's Last, Desborough's Cart, Met together at
Hangmans-FAYRE. WITH Their Neck-verses, and several Discourses thereon.

LONDON, Printed for William Gilbertson. 1660.

Enter Fleetwood. F. YOur most humble servant Col. Hewson.


Hew. A poor Cobbler thanks you sir: but I have been your servant too long for
my profit as it falls out now.


F. Why Col. Hewson what mischief soever you have done for me and my brethren I
believe you have had your deserts fort


H. No not so neither Sir, for if I had I Would been hanged at Wallingford House a
twelvemonth a go.


F. Why? I hope you never lost by me Coll. Hewson?


H. I am sure I never got by ye, except it was shame, reproach, and ignominy.


F. Truly Coll. Hewson 'twas even such as I had my self, therefore be content,
for what the Divil sent me, even such take you and be thankful.


H. Thankful! for what Mr. Fleetwood?


F. For the Commission you took of me at Wallingford House last winter, when
you went into the City and killed a prentice boy, whereby you got your honor.


H. Took a Commission of you then, the Divil pick your bones; I would I had
took a Cobblers stalle at that time, 'twould have saved me the price of my Neck
I am sure on it.


F. No, no Coll. Hewson the old proverb ses, it is craft un the catching; and
you are safe yet.


H. Oh las Mr. Fleetwood you talk, know ye not the Fox is craftier then all
Beasts, yet he is hunted by the scent of his sizling Tail, that through his
loathsomenesse he is caught at last.


F. What, then you think the odiousness of our action, will cause all people
to hunt after us?


H. Aye, and all the world will endeavor to take us.


F. But how will they know us Brother Hewson?


H. O too well Brother Fleetwood, I by my blind eye, which now might wish I
never had any at all. And you by your long spare neck, I would a had been
hanged twenty years ago, then we had quit all these calamities,


F. Aye, aye, I could say so to Brother Hewson, and wish as the Scripture
says; That a Millstone had been hanged about my Neck and that I had been cast
in the bottom of the Sea, before I had been plunged in all these sorrows; and
the Scripture says, Yet they are but the beginning of Sorows.


H. Aye, aye, Brother Fleetwood, you were ever prone so to Scripture Language,
that the Divil a good word proceeded fron your mouth at last.


F. Why Brother Hewson, I thought you to be a downright destroyer, Translator
of Religion, as you were formerly of Boots and Shoes.


H. Aye Brother Fleetwood, 'twas better then go through stitch, then now
through Treason, I was termed then an honest Cobbler, now called an arrand
Traitor; but the Divil bewitched you to stir up smoke from quenched flames, in
sending me with my poor reprobates many wanting Hose and Shoes, into the
awakned City, where we seemed unto them like so many Sprights, or as a wodden
packsaddle on a galld horse bach, spurning, kicking, and spitting at us; so
these wrought our destruction.


F. Nay but Brother Hewson, I thought to Reform Religion, and promote the
An^baptists, which promised me great sums of Money.


H. O you should have took the Money, by all means in the world; and let them
been hanged.


F. Faith that had been the best way Brother Hewson, but now I fear we shall be
hanged, therefore prepare your self.


H. Prepare my self brother Fleetwood, truly I believe the whole Kingdom can
testify, that we were ready for it a Dozen Years ago.


H. But I told you often times and severally, not to plunge your soft brain
of destruction, in the ruins of Religion, but rest quietly in your den of
sedition, eating up the fat of the Land, and reaping the fruits of other men's
benefits; and was not this a brave, sweet, Jewish, heritical life for us two
to a lived in?


E. Aye truly brother, but in those days I did not much listen to ye, for my
heart was waxed gross, and my ears were dull of hearing, my tongue was full
of deceit, and my hands were full of cheating, and truly I thought to
administer and execute injustice and Destruction impartially, throughout the
whole Kingdom, till my seditions began to depart from me, and that Sea Monster
appeared out of Scotland.


H. Out of Scotland do ye say? you know very well that we had as active
Idolizing hipocrites, in Scotland and Ireland, both for fraud and confusion as
we our selves were, had they but obeyed our Special Commands.


F. Well brother Hewson, we had Divilish failings in altering our Church
Government.


H: Aye brother Fleetwood so we had, but for good sums of money we would have
endeavored too, to have altered the foundation of England.


F. Why, would you have ventured the other eye for it?


H. Aye Faith brother that I would, both body and soul, I love Money so well.


F. But what Churches would you have had then?


H. Churches, none at all, did not I forewarn you always not to meddle with
Church government.


F: Why brother Hewson, did you see me meddle with the government to promote
it? Indeed I must confess, the Churches I would have pulled down as fast as I
dould; But for worship, I did in my Den, like a Hog in his stye, you know very
well I never stirred a foot out of doors.


F. But did you think of no Religion then Brother Hewson?


H. No as god judge my Soul brother Fleetwood, no more then I did of my dying
day.


F. What, were you led by the Spirit altogether?


H: Yes truly, but I had Divlish faylings.


F. But what makes that terrible shaking in your head, and your left hand?


H. Why truly that come of a Dream two years ago, for I thought the King was
coming home, and with the affright the very horror of my conscience fumed up
into my head, whereby it continued ever since.


F. But what Action were you employed in brother Hewson, when you lost that eye?


H. O brother Fleetwood when I lost that eye, wod both yours had dropped out,
then the Nation had been a great dale the better for it, and we might have kept
our heads on, which now lies in a dangerous quere:


F. Why, will they head us de'e think?


H. Head us, or Hang us, it is all one to them.


F. Aye but Dun will not do it I am sure out. Oh brother it is sorry trusting
him, for he has hanged many a one for less cause, I Will warrant ye.


Neck-Verse.
THen come thou noble handed Blade,
Show thy de^erity;
Since fortune proved, such a jade;
I must submit to thee.
Though once I thought I never should
Be subject to a King,
When like to Nero I did rule,
I was more Lord then him.
I thought I was the best of Men
And all the people knew,
An Oracle I seemed then,
To my seditious crew.
My actions base and infinite
And to the world is known,
But all the joys I have in it
I shall not die alone.
H. Dye alone brother Fleetwood, no, no, there is a hundred, and a hundred, will
be hanged bisides you and I.


F. O it may be you do mean the Rump, but they were not above fourscore.


H. Aye, but when they and we come together, we make a Divelish number.


F. Why then the Divil was in them as well as we?


H. Aye brother that ye may be sure on, for he was no respecter of persons.


F. I would he had run us into the middle of the Sea then, as he did the Heard
of Swine.


H. Nay brother Fleetwood, he had rather run us to be hanged first I doubt, he
owed us a shame and we shall fully be paid it.


F. Oh but alas, here comes my brother Desborough; your most humble servant
Coll. Desborough.


Des. A Colonel, a Hangman.


F. Why a Hangman brother Desbrough?


D. It Is better be a hangman, then to be hanged my self.


F. Come, come, brother Desbrough, lets bear good Cheer as long as we are
alive.


D. Aye and that is impossible it should be long.


F. Then let us go to prayers a little.


D. Aye as little as you please, for I could never pray in all my life.


F. What say you brother Hewson?


H. Why truly I say thus, I have no more patience to pray, then I have to be
hanged.


F. Alas dear brethren I cannot blame ye.


D. Truly brother, a great many do, though they do not.


F. Why, what is the news, in those parts you have been?


D. Nothing but noise over all the Countries roaring in the valleys, like hunts
men after wolves, and all their Cry is, Fleetwood, Desbrough, and Hewson.


F: Why, do they know that we are in the Country?


D. Aye, as well as you your selves do.


F. O sad news, sad news, but what do they call us?


D. Call us, they term us to be Vagabonds, Runagades, and Fugatives, bearing
the mark of the beast, and the curse of Cain; threatening every one that meet,
us to slay us,


F. Alas a day, and how come you so safe hither?


D. Truly with much ado, a greater hazard then I was in at the taking of
Tredath in Ireland.


F. Why, did they ever atttempt upon ye?


D. O several times, and once I was feign to leap into a house of office, and
there I kept my office above a quarter of an hour; receiving such a scent,
enough to Ravish any Carre Horse in London, but being but counterfeit attempt,
I retired to the house again, thinking to shift my all scented garment; the
woman of the house bid me be gone for a stinking knave or else she would fetch the
Constable, which I had rather a heard talk of the Divil at that time, and so I
tript over the plain, with all the dogs in the town after me.


F. Alas dear brother, thou have been persecuted as well as I: Pray what is
yours? Truly when I forsook London, I was dressed in a poor gray suit, and I
went into Surry, where near unto Darkin, as I was going over a Style an
unmannerly Spill caught me by the poor conditioned Breetches and ripped them up
to the waste, which made me tripp two miles out of my way to have them repaired.


D. But whether was the Spirit leading you then?


F. My intended place was to Hampshire, to meet with some of my brother
Traitors, but fortune not much favoring us, I designed my purpose, hither to
Lanceston.


D. O brother Fleetwood, I cannot choose but think what a Divlish fate have
hanged over our heads, ever since our Grand Sire Nol took's leave.


F. O aye brother Desbrough in his days we behaved our selves like three
stout, valiant Divils, which caused us still to have Divilish fortune, but now
let us sit down and say on this manner.

O Fortune why have thou beguiled me?
Which in thy bosom always did me Nurse,
Could thou not find no other plagues for me
but this to make me only be accursed;
Which is in Scripture written plain you see,
Cur'st is the man that hangs on a tree.
I poor blind Hewson, Cobbler am by Trade,
A Coll: once though now have got a fall,
My actions are rechoded good and bad,
Which will appears in public to you all.
And in the lines you plainly there might read,
A prentice boy in London Murdered.
I Coll. Desbrough formerly a Lord,
Which Title seemed to me most unfit;
Created by the Devil and the Sword,
And in high courts of Justice I did sit,
Nor does my bloody acts make me despair
For in the Gallows I do claim my share.

FINIS.

