A LETTER Sent from Col. Will. Lockhart, Dated at Dunkirk, December. 31. 1659.
Superscribed, For the Right Honorable, William Lenthall, Esquire Speaker of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

Read in Parliament, January 3. 1659.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

A LETTER Sent from Colonel William Lockhart.
May it Please Your Honor,
THis day by Private Letters I have received the Joyful, and Acceptable News of
the Parliaments Reentering upon the Exercise of Their Authority; Which I
thought it my Duty to Communicate Immediately to the Officers and Soldiers of
Your Garrison in this Place; and accordingly began with those of my own
Regiment, Proceeding afterward to the rest, and Endeavoring to set it upon
all their Hearts, how Extraordinary, and almost Miraculous the Workings of GOD
have been, in bringing to pass this Your Last Return; and how happily
Advantageous it is likely to prove to all the Three Nations, and to each
Particular Concerned therein. I can give Testimony of the General
Acclamations, and all outward Signs that could be rendered of absolute
Satisfaction in every man here; neither do I in the leastwise Question the
Consent of their Hearts, with the sensible Demonstrations of their Tongues, and
Countenances; especially when I Declared to them the many and singular
Encouragements they have formerly received from the Parliament; and that they
cannot expect the like, from any other Authority whatsoever; besides the
Consideration of their Respective Membership, and Incorporation with the Bodies
both Civil and Military under Your Command.

We have (GOD be praised) during the late Interval, continued Faithful Servants
to the Honor and Interest of our Country, and are at present in such a
posture, as to fear nothing from abroad, being so well fortified at home.

I was recalled from the Prosecution of Your Commands at St Jean de Luz, by the
same Power that Ordered me thither; but finding the face of things changed at
my Return; and my self at a loss what to do, I was at last advised by some
Persons, to discharge my self to those who took upon them the Mannagement of
Affairs at that time, and did accordingly give them the best Lights I could,
whereby to discern the Interest of the Commonwealth, in Relation both to
France, and Spain; after which I forthwith betook my self to this Place, to Act
here according to that Trust, which You had formerly Reposed in me: and I hope
my presence has not been unserviceable. But if it shall be thought Requisite,
That I come over again to render You a more full Account of my late
Negotiations abroad, I shall most willingly and cheerfully do it: In the mean
time, till Your farther Directions, I shall Proceed to use all care and
diligence here, both for the orderly disposing of the Garrison, and the
vigorous opposing of the Enemy, if occasion require; hoping, That in a short
time I shall Receive the Honor of Your commands, which shall always find a
ready and exact Obedience in me, and all that are under my Charge.

I thought the great Importance of this happy day, would have its effect upon
the Spirits of our Enemies round about us, as well as upon our own, though in a
different manner: And therefore to express our Joy, and to intimate unto them
the just cause of their Sadness, I have this night ordered all our Great Guns,
both by Sea and Land, to Proclaim our Exaltation, and their disappointment.

I shall daily Pray, That God would crown Your Counsels and Endeavors with
Success, answerable to the Honest and Peaceable Expectation of the Nations
under You; and do for my own part give my self up entirely to be disposed by
you, as becomes him who is so really and without Reserve,

May it Please Your Honor, Your Honors Most Humble, Faithful, and Obedient
Servant, William Lockhart.
Dunkirk, Dec. 31. 1659.

