THE ANSWER OF THE Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council assembled.

TO A LETTER SENT Unto them from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and other
of the Chief Officers in that ARMY.

With the Answer of the Commons in Parliament assembled, to the Committee of
Aldermen and Common-councell-men appointed to present the said Answer unto them.

As also an Act of Common Council authorizing the said Committee to present
the Answer of the said Letter to his Excellency.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable, City of LONDON, 1647.

For his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight General of the Forces raised by
the Parliament, and the rest of the Worthy Commanders.
Right Honorable and Worthy Commanders,
YOur Letter dated at Royston the 10. of this instant June, we the Major,
Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, have seriously perused, and
presented a Copy thereof to each House of Parliament, and for your, and our
farther satisfaction we have sent a Committee of Aldermen and Commons with this
our answer thereunto; and to prevent all misunderstanding betwixt that so
wel-deserving Army and this City: we take notice by that Letter, of your
drawing near this City with your Army, for the obtaining your desires as
Soldiers, and as English men, and of what you do, and do not intend thereby;
more especially that you come not to do any Act to prejudice the being of
Parliaments, or to the hurt of this in order to the present settlement of the
Kingdom, and of your Declaration, that if we appear not against you in those
your just desires to assist those that would imbroyle you and the Kingdom in a
new War, that you intend no evil toward this City, nor that you or your
Soldiers shall give it the least offense. But we desire that in regard your
approach may, contrary to your intentions be an occasion to increase the price
of victual, and to discontented persons to make some ill use thereof in
raising of tumults, that you will be pleased to take it into your further
consideration, and in order to your own resolution concerning this Cities
safety, to forbear quartering within thirty miles thereof, which we shall
look upon as a special evidence of the sincerity of your intentions expressed
in your Letter. We cannot pass by that expression of yours, to hazard your
own blood for our preservation, nor can we return you more real thanks for
it then this, to declare our resolutions that the very thought of engaging this
Kingdom in a new War, we do unanimously detest, and that we intend no
evil to you, but only to defend the Parliament and our selves against any
unlawful violence; for prevention whereof, least it should happen (though you
never intended it) we have by the direction of Parliament and for our own
safety put our selves in a posture of defense; but not with the least intention
to do any prejudice to that Army, whom God has made so eminent an instrument
of our deliverance and safety. And we do disavow the raising any forces, or
taking up of Arms in opposition to, or with intent to hinder the obtaining of
your just demands; yea, so far have we been and shall be from that, that both
before, and since the receipt of your Letter, we have made our humble addresses
to the Parliament for the obtaining thereof, which we shall not fail to
prosecute as occasion shall present; only this request we earnestly make in the
name of this City, that you will be careful when you descend to particulars, to
desire no more than what shall be just and reasonable, and in such a way as
may consist with the honor, power and privilege of Parliament, liberty of the
Subject, and safety of this City and Kingdom; and we shall appeal to God and
to the present and future generations, to judge of your and our performance
according to the several engagements.

London 12. Junii 1647. By command of the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of London in Common-Counsell assembled. Michel.

Die Sabbathi, 12. Junii, 1647.
THE House being informed that diverse Aldermen, and Citizens of the City of
London were at the door they were called in, and Mr. Alderman Fowke acquainted
the House, That they were commanded by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council assembled, to present unto this House their sense upon a matter
of very great importance.

They have again considered of the Generals Letter unto them, and have made an
Answer to it, which they have thought fit to acquaint this House with, and to
desire their approbation of sending it to the Army.

The Aldermen and the Gentlemen of the City being withdrawn, the Letter was
read.

Resolved, etc.
That this House does approve of the Cities sending this Letter to the Army in
the way they propose.

The Aldermen and Citizens were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by the
command of the House, acquainted them, that the House had considered of their
desires, and of the Letter presented by them, and are very sensible of their
good affections to the Peace and good of the Kingdom, and Honor of the
Parliament, for which he was commanded to give them Thanks.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


Commune Concililum tentum in Camera Guild Hall Civitatis London, duodecimo die
Junii, 1647.
ACcording to an Order of this Court, made this day the Committee therein
appointed, viz. Mr. Alderman Warner, Mr. Alderman Fowke, Mr. Alderman Gibbs,
Mr. Alderman Viner, Christopher Pack, Major Chamberlin, Thomas Noel, Col. Tho.
Player, Major Hitchcock, Robert Louder, Richard Waring, and Walter Pell, did
present the draught of an Answer to the Letter received from his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax and other Commanders of the Army, which was here openly read,
and after debate upon every particular clause therein, the same was approved of
by this Court. And thereupon it is ordered that the said Committee shall make
their addresses forthwith to both Houses of Parliament, and acquaint them with
the Common-Councells intention, to send the said Answer unto the said Army by
the said Committee, thereby to prevent all misunderstanding and further
effusion of blood; And that they will vouchsafe to take into their speedy and
serious consideration, the just desires of the Army, and give such fit remedies
thereunto as in their wisdoms shall be thought fit. And this Court does
hereby give power and authority to the said Committee to repair with all
expedition unto the Army, and present the said Answer unto his Excellency; and
to give and receive such further satisfaction concerning the matter contained
in the said Answer as occasion shall require, and to present the desire of this
Court, that his Excellency and other the Commanders of the said Army will have
a special care for the preservation of his Majesty's royal person whilst he
remains with them.

Michel.


