TEN SEVERAL ORDERS TO Be put in execution by the Lord Major and Aldermen of
London, for the price and sale of Meal, Flesh, Bu^ter, and other Commodities;
and to prevent Disorders in the Markets: with the penalties to be inflicted
upon every person or persons, which shall not obey the same.

ALSO, The coming in of twenty thousand Quarters of Corn and Grain. And a
List of the particulars thereof, as it is entered at the Custom House.

And care is also taken, that every one may buy at the cheapest rate, and that
there be no regrating or forestalling the Markets.

NOVEMBER, 5. 1647.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.

LONDON, Printed by Brrnard Alsop, dwelling near Caipple-Gate, 1647.

Ten several ORDERS OF THE Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, for
regulating the price of Meal, and other Commodities.
THE general dearth which of late has been on all sorts of commodities, both
rich and poor are very sensible of, especially on the price of corn and chiefly
of that which makes bread (the staff of man life) which has not only
afflicted the needy but occasioned sunday queries from whence the cause should
arise in the richest there appearing little visible cause for the same, the
earth yielding a plentiful increase in all parts, and to excuse the matter
some are pleased to aive their opinions, 1. That the store of the Kingdom in
the time of the late war is exhausted, 2ly. That the quartering of the Army
near this populous City was an em^ent cause thereof, And thirdly the great
abuse of regrating and forestalling the markets was not of the least; which was
chiefly done by those which would fain have woven themselves into a nearer
Corporation who not only forestalled the market and keep back the Country
people for coming in, but set up meal shops in every corner (a new trade out
of the standing of two Apprentishipps) which being lately taken into
consideration by the present Lord Major and Court of Aldermen they found
apparent abuse thereby and therefore thought good to order that no meal shopps
should be kept in the City of London and Liberties thereof after the third day
of this instant November and no meal should be sold but in open market the
market days on forfeiture of such penalties as are inflicted on regraters and
forestallers by several good and wholesome laws and statutes in that case
provided.

There be also several orders for the market ordered by the Lord Major and
Court of Aldermen to be observed.

The Laws or orders of the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen to be observed in
every market within the City of London.
FIrst in all the markets of this City no victual shall be sold but by the
price set by the Mayor of the City.

Secondly No man shall forestall any victual coming to the market as for to
buy in any June or other privy place, or yet coming to the market, whether it
be found in the hands of the buyer or of the seller, under pain of forfeiture
of the same, and no Inholder shall suffer any thing to be sold in his house
upon pain of forty shillings.

Thirdly No man shall regrate any victual which is in the market, or buy any
victual to Ingrate in the market, so that the Commons can or may have any part
of of such victual, as in special such as be known for Hucksters or other
people occupying their living by such victual as they would so ingrosse under
pain of such victual so regrated, provided always that any steward for any
noble feast may buy or in grate such victual as is convenient ior the same
feast.

Fourthly No butter shall be sold but according to the time of the year
allowed.

Fifthly No Poulterers shall deceivably occupy the mark to sell any stale
victual or such as the Poulters of this City, for to stand in strange
clothing so to do under Pain of forty shillings and forfeiture of such
victual.

6ly No Hucksters shall stand or sit in the market but in Lower places and ends
of the market to the intent they may be perfectly known and the stranger
market-people have the pre-eminence of the market under pain of three shillings
four pence, if the Hucksters disobey the same.

Seventhly No unwholesome or stale victual shall be sold under pain of forty
shillings four pence and forfeiture of the same victual.

Eighthly No Butcher or his servant shall use to drive any ox or oxen a trot
in the streets, but peaceably, and if any ox happen to be let go, when he is
prepared to slaughter, the Butcher shall forfeit two shillings besides
recompense, if any person be hurt thereby.

Ninthly No Butcher shall sell any Measell Hog, or unwholesome flesh under pain
os ten pounds.

Tenthly No Butcher shall sell any old stale victual, that is to say, about
the slaughter of three days in the winter and two in the Summer under pain of
ten pound.

No victules of ehe City shall give any rude or unfitting language or make any
clamor upon any man or woman in the, open market for cheapning of victual
under pain of three shillings four pence.

Memorandum, that every offense, found in this City It is accustomed that the
office, a free man finding it, which is called Primm Inventor, has half the
penalty by the grace of the Court.

Having here given you the good orders of the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen
for the well ordering of victvall that the prises of Commodities may not be
inhumane nor the City and Country abused, It will not be amiss in the next
place to give you a brief account of the great penalty of wheat Rice, Barley,
Malt, Oats, Beans and pease was brought into the City by water of late in
doing whea^ of for better satisfaction I shall in the next place communicate to
you a perfect List of all such corn and Grain as has been entered in the
custom house of London from the first of October last to the thirtieth of the
same as follows.

Entered in the Customs Book of Entries.
Of Wheat 1587 quarters. Of Rice. 6845, quarters, Of Barley 965 quarters. Of
Malt, 1048 quarters. Of Oats 2275 quarters. Of Beans and pease 1435
quarters, which in all amounts to 14175. quarters.

In which may likewise take notice that it is not the usual course to certify
the whole quantity of the Lading at the first entry for sometimes near a
fourth part more is brought in for a post entry which together with what has
been brought in since it thought cannot amount to less the twenty thousand
quarters (in a matter of a month or five weeks) at the least which with the
remainder that is expected and comes in daily, with the care and well ordering
thereof by the Governors of this City (who daily communicate to the poor out
of the store laid every Companies the price of corn will probably be abated of
which theac begins to appear some earnest of our hopes though not so much
informed might be for we have heard some affirm that wheat may be afforded at
this time as in the bushel cheaper then it could within this fortnight.

A perfect List or Note of all such Corn and Grain, as have been entered in the
Custom House of London. From the first of October last to the 30. of the same.
Wheat 1587 quarters. Rye 6845 quarters. Barley 0965 quarters. Malt 1048
quarters. Oats 2295 quarters. Beans and Pease 1435 quarters. In the whole
14175

FINIS.

