September 29. 1642. The Persons to whom the MILITIA of the City of LONDON is
Committed, for the safety of the said City, have thought fit, and hereby
Declare.
THat no Soldier or any other person shall discharge any Piece, great or
small, betwixt the hours of nine of the clock in the night, and six in the
morning, except in case of necessity.

That if any Alarm be in the night time; that then, all the Inhabitants of the
said City and Liberties, shall forthwith hang out lights, at the doors of
their several Houses.

That none of the Officers belonging to the Trained Bands, do lodge out of the
City, dureing these times of imminent Danger.

That upon any general Alarm by night or day, the Colonels, other Field
Officers and Captains, with the several companies of the Trained Bands of the
said City, (completely Armed and well furnished with Ammunition) are forthwith
to repair to their several Alarm places, herein after mentioned, and there
to attend, until they shall receive further order.

Companies. Allarum-Places. Collonell Atkins. at The Pump within Algate.
Lieutenant Collonell Rawden. Billings-gate. Serjant Major Manwaring.
London-stone. Captain William Tucker. Tower Dock. Captain William Tomson. The
Bars without Algate. Captain Edmund Hooker. Crutched Friars. Captain Heriot
Washorne. Bridge end by Magnis Church. Collonell Pen^ington. Bevis Marks.
Lieutenant Collonell Langham. Bishops-gate within. Serjant Major Davis.
Grace-C^u. by Lumberstreet end. Captain Thomas Chamberlin. The north end of
Broad street. Captain Thomas Player. The Cundit in Leadenhall street. Captain
Edmund Harvie. The Royal Exchange. Captain Christopher Whichcot. The Spittle
within the Bars. Collonell Wollaston. The West end of Cheapside. Lieutenant
Collonell Venn. Newgate within. Serjant Major Geere. Ludgate within. Captain
Richard Turner. Puddle-wharfe. Captain Ralph Harrison. Aldersgate-str. by
Long-lane end Captain Richard Cutbert. Austins gate in Paul's Chis. yard.
Captain Robert Tichburn. Aldersgate within. Collonell Adams. The Poultry.
Lieutenant Col. Edmund Foster. Great Alhallows Church. Serjant Major Carleton.
Watlinstreet by Bow lane end. Captain Francis West. The South end of
Bred-street. Captain John Bla^kwell. Queen Hith. Captain Richard Hacket.
Whittington-colledge hill. Captain William Underwood. The lower end of
Wal-brook. Collonell Warner. Alderman-bury. Lieutenant Col. Matthew. Forster.
Old-Iury end by Coleman-street. Serjant Major Owen Row. Mooregate within.
Captain Matthew Sheppard. Criplegate within. Captain Francis Row. The north
end of great W^^dstr. Captain Robert Manwaring. The Cundit without Criplegate.
Colonel Towse. Fleet Cundit. Lieutenant Collonell Wilson. The north end of the
Old Bailey. Serjant Major Buxton. Smithfi^ld. Captain Richard Brown.
Temple-Barre, Captain Nathaniel Camfield, Holburne Cundit. Captain Thomas
Gower. The Bars in Holborne.

And it is desired, that the Captains of Middlesex and Surry, who have
Companies lying in the Suburbs, will upon all such Alarums, draw their
Companies to the Several passages leading thereunto.


