To the Honorable the House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Answer of Nicholas Loftus Esquire to the Petition of Christopher Syms.
HE says that there was such a Warrant as is set forth in the Petition
directed to Sir Adam Loftus Knight, then and now Treasurer at Wars for Ireland,
for the payment of 603 l. 13 s. 0 d. to part of the Train of Artillery,
belonging to the Army, of 8000 Irish raised in the year 1640. then intended
against the Scots: of which sum there was no part thereof mentioned, or
intended to be due to the Petitioner, who was only then appointed a servant
and Agent, to receive there moneys for them: Upon which Warrant this Respondent
being then Deputy to Sir Adam Loftus, did at several times pay unto the
Petitioner, and others for the said Train of Artillery: and by directions of
the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland: the sum of 500 l. or
there-abouts, for which the said Sir Adam Loftus has several Acquittances to
produce: unto whom this Respondent has lately given up a full Account of all
matters then committed to his trust and charge: And as for the remain of the
said Warrant: neither could the said Sir Adam Loftus, nor the Respondent his
Deputy, pay the same to the Train of Artillery, as was intended; as likewise
diverse other Warrants for great sums: for want then of Moneys in the Kings
Exchequor, the Treasure being so exhausted by the foresaid Irish Army; and that
Army being then to be disbanded, there wanted Moneys for that purpose: so that
Sir Adam Loftus, to prevent the dangerous consequence that might arise, by
those rude and barbarous Soldiers, in their disbanding: Did then engage
himself, his eldest Son, Sir Arthur Loftus, and diverse others of his Friends,
with this Respondent: and took up great sums of Moneys upon their credits, to
help to disband them with quietness: which great sums his Majesty is to make
satisfaction for hereafter, and for which the said Sir Adam Loftus his Friends,
and this Respondent are still engaged, by reason the Rebellion there, breaking
out so suddenly, there came in no part of the Kings Revenues of Ireland, to
discharge their foresaid engagements, nor many other great sums of Moneys,
disbursed then, and before for the King. This Respondent further says, that
upon payment of part of the foresaid sum of 603 l. 13 s. 0 d. to the
Petitioner, as is abovesaid, he the said Petitioner did at that time deliver up
the foresaid warrant to this Respondent, being necessary so to do: that it
might be produced before the Commissioners of Accounts, to pass so much as
this Respondent had truly paid thereof, and no more, which Warrant does remain
on Record, in the Office of the Auditor-Generall of Ireland, by which the whole
truth of this Answer may fully appear: And this Respondent does believe, that
either himself or his Servant, did then give the Petitioner a note in writing,
declaring what sums were then paid to the Petitioner, on the foresaid
Warrant, and what did then rest unpaid thereof: This Respondent also says, and
is able to make it evidently for to appear, by authentic Records, that he
has not passed any more of the said Warrant on his Accounts, than truly, and
Re-vera, he has paid thereof, and for which he has Acquittances to produce:
Nor has this Respondent taken poundage for any more of the said Warrant, then
he has truly paid and passed in his Accounts, as of right he ought to do,
and which was just and lawful for him to take: neither did this Respondent
ever desire, or intend, or if he were willing so to do; was it in his power to
make use, advantage, or profit, of the remain of the foresaid Warrant, which
rests yet unpaid, as is suggested by the Petitioner: And further, this
Respondent says, that if the Petitioner have any such Certificate from the
Clerk of the Pells, (as he alleges he has) it is apparently false, or the
Clerk is therein very much mistaken; for that the Petitioner alleges his
Certificate to be made about four or five years since, in July 1641. at which
time the foresaid Warrant was not past on any Account, until May last, 1646.
Since which time the Petitioner cannot say, that he had any Certificate
thereof from the Clerk of the Pells: And therefore this Respondent humbly
prays, that he may be dismissed with such reparations as this Honorable
House shall think fit.

NICHOLAS LOFTVS.

Printed at London, by John De^^ and Robert Ibbitson. 1646.


