blazon or coat of arms of the City of London An Act of Common Council, for
the prohibiting of all persons whatsoever, from crying or putting to sale
about the streets within this City, and Liberties, any Pamphlets, Books, or
Papers whatsoever, by way of Hawking, to be sold, and for the punishment of the
offenders therein, according to the Custom and Law of this CITY.
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guild Hall Civitatis London, nono die
Octobris, 1643. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli, nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
decimo nono, coram Isaac Pennington Majore (secundo tempore) Civitatis London,
Johan. Wollaston Milite, and Aldermanno, Majore Civitatis Londini electo,
Johan. Glyn, Armiger. ejusdem Civitatis Recordatore, Thoma Atkin, Johan.
Warner, Johan. Langham, Willi. Gibbs, Will. Barkley, ejusdem Civitatis
Aldermannis, and Johan. Fowke and Jacobo Bunce, Aldermannis and Vicecomit'
ejusdem Civitatis, Necnon majore part Communariorum de Communi Concilio
ejusdem Civitatis tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
THis Common Council taking into their serious consideration, a complaint made
by the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Commonalty of the Stationers, London,
against a multitude of vagrant persons, men, women and children, which after
the manner of Hawkers, do openly cry about the streets, Pamphlets, and other
Books, and under color thereof are found to disperse all sorts of dangerous
Libels, to the intolerable dishonor of the Kings Majesty, and of the high
Court of Parliament, and the whole Government of this Realm, and this City in
particular. And conceiving it very necessary by all due means to suppress the
evils growing by such unlawful selling of such Pamphlets and Libels, have
thought fit, and do Ordain, that from henceforth the Laws and Custom of
this City, which make a forfeiture of the goods, that are carried about the
streets, by way of Hawking to be sold; And also the Statutes made against
Rogues, and Vagabonds, shall be strictly put in execution against such vagrant
persons, selling as aforesaid, being petty Chapmen within the said Statutes:
And for the more sure execution of the said Custom^ and Laws, It is by this
Court further Ordered, that the Officers of the Chamber, for the offenses
against the Custom and Law of Hawking, and Marshals of the City, and the
Constables of every Precinct within this City, are hereby straightly charged to
do their utmost duties in their several places and Offices, in apprehending
and bringing before some of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within this
City, all and every such person or persons which shall offend in crying,
offering, or putting to sale by way of Hawking, any Pamphlets, Books, or
Papers whatsoever as aforesaid; whereby they may receive such punishments, as
by the Custom and Laws aforesaid ought to be inflicted upon them. And that
for neglect of the said Officers, Constables, and Marshals in their duties and
places as aforesaid, informations or indictments, as the case shall require,
shall be preferred against them, that they may be punished for their neglect
therein according to the Law.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable Ci^^ (...) LONDON


