A Further Account of EAST-NEW-JARSEY By a LETTER Write to One of the
PROPRIETORS Thereof, by a Countryman, who has a great Plantation there.

TOGETHER With the Description of the said Province, as it is in OGILBIES
Atlas, Printed in the year, 1671.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. 1683.

LONDON, June the 2d. 1683. For ROBERT BARKLEY, etc. Sir,
BEing credibly informed, that your self, with some other Gentlemen of
Scotland, have purchased an Interest in East-New-Jersey, (my being a Scots-man,
and Wellwisher to that Nation) puts me upon giving you this short Narrative, or
account of it in general, (having lived there many years, which gave me full
knowledge and experience of the same) lest you may be discouraged from the
prosecution of your Intention of Settlement, as many others of your
Contrymen in like nature have been; (after a seeming Resolution to effect
their Designs) to our great dishonor and detriment, and to enthraldom, and
perpetual Slavery of some thousands of our poor Laborers; who, if they could
be made sensible of the difference between their present State or Condition,
and the hight of good Living, which in a few years (by GODS Blessing and their
own Industry) they may accomplish with half the Labor, many of them use in
their own Country, (the Soil being so Rich and Fertile, and rendering Increase
beyond Imagination, and surpassing ours) would use all means possible, for
their speedy Transportation thither.

The Country is in general as follows,

Impr. As to the Climate, it is Moderate and Healthy, having Winter and Summer
as Britain, the Summers there being a little shorter, and in the Winters their
days longer.

Item. As to the Soil, it is Rich and Fertile, endued with much good Timber,
and great quantities of Fresh and Salt Meadows; as also, much Meadow-ground,
which is Arrable, and so Rich and Deep of Black-mould, that it is never to be
worn out; well accommodated with Salt and Fresh Rivers, good Fishing, great
plenty of Deers, and wild Fowl; Produces all sort of English-grain, with great
Increass, besides Indian-corn, upon which is unexpressible Increase.

Item. There is great stocks of Cattle, Sheep, and Hogs, good Oxen, and plenty
of Horses, all sort of Dunghil-fowl, and all to be purchased at very reasonable
rates.

Item. There is settled upon the same very good Towns, and many
out-Plantations, and good Buildings, good Orchards; and affords much Syder.

Item. The Country is vast and large, and wants nothing, so much as People
which would certainly be supplied in a little time were this Description
published, and the truth of it so well known to many, as to my self, who am not
capable at present (in respect of time, and this being only general) to
describe half of what may be for your and their encouragement. Only this, that
the difference is unspeakable (as I appeal to every Man's reason) between
settling a Country remote from your Plantations (where cannot be expected any
speedy Supplies of Provisions, Milk, Cattle, and many other things; and that
wherein is plenty of every thing already) I shall desist from giving you
further trouble at present, and take leave to subscribe,

Sir, Your Friend and Servant, GEO: LOCKHART.

The Description of AMERICA, By JOHN OGILBIE, Printed in the Year 1671. In his
Book, Fol. 168.181.182.
WEstward of After-skull-River before mentioned, about 18. or 20. miles, runs
in Rariton-River Northward, into the Country some scores of miles, both sides
of which River are adorned with spacious Meadows, enough to feed thousands of
Cattle. The Wood-land is very good for Corn, and stored with wild Beasts, as
Deer, Elks, and an innumerable multitude of Fowl, as in other parts of the
Country. This River is thought very capable for the erecting of several Towns,
and Villages on each side of it; no place in the North of America having better
convenience for the maintaining of all sorts of Cattle for Winter and Summer
food.

Upon this River is no Town settled, only one at the mouth of it; but next to
it, Westward, is a place called Hewasons, where are 2. or 3. Towns and Villages
settled upon the Seaside, but none betwixt that and Delawar-Bay, which is
about 60. miles, all which is a Rich Champain Country, free from Stones, and
indifferent level, having store of excellent good Timber, and very well
Watered, having Brooks, or Rivers, ordinarily, one or more in every miles
travel. This Country is Peopled only with wild Beasts, as Deers, Elks, Bears,
and other Creatures; so that in a whole days journey, you shall meet with no
Inhabitants, except a few Indians. It is also full of stately Oaks, whose
broad-branch-tops serve for no other use, but to keep off the Suns heat from
the wild Beasts of the Wilderness, where is grass as high as a Man's middle,
which serves for no other end, except to maintain the Elks and Deers, who never
devour a hundred part of it, than to be burnt every Spring to make way for new.
How many poor People in the World would think themselves happy, had they 1.
Acre or 2. of Land? whilst there is hundred, nay thousands of Acres that would
invite Inhabitants, etc.

We shall conclude our Discourse of this Country, with a notable Character
given hereof by a late Writer, as to the great Advantage of Happy living in all
respects, for whosoever shall be pleased to betake himself thither to live.

If there be any Terrestical Happiness (said he) to be had by any People,
especially of an inferior Rank, it must certainly be here. Here any one may
furnish himself with Land, and live Rent-free; yea, with such a quantity of
land, that he may weary himself with walking over his Fields of Corn, and all
sorts of Grain; and let his stock amount to some hundreds, he needs not fear
their want of Pasture in the Summer, and Fodder in the Winter; the Woods
affording sufficient Supply, where you have Grass as high as a Man's Knees; nay,
as high as his Weast, interlaced with Pea-vines, and other weeds, that Cattle
much delight in, as much as a Man can pass through. And these Woods also every
mile, or half mile, are furnished with Fresh Ponds, Brooks, or Rivers, where
all sorts of Cattle, during the heat of the day, do quench their thirst and
cool themselves. These Brooks and Rivers being Environed of each side with
several sorts of Trees, and Grape-Vines, Arbor-like interchanging places, and
crossing these Rivers, do shade, and shelter them from the scorching beams of
the Sun. Such as by their utmost labors can scarcely get a living, may here
procure Inheritances of Lands and Possessions, stock themselves with all sorts
of Cattle, enjoy the benefit of them whilst they live, and leave them their
Children, when they die. Here you need not trouble the Shambles for meat, nor
Bakers, and Brewers for Bear and Bread, nor run to a Linnen-draper for a
supply; every one making their own Linen, and a great part of their Woollen
Cloth for their ordinary wearing. And how prodigal (if I may so say) has
Nature been to furnish this Country with all sort of wild Beasts and Foul,
which every one has an interest in; and may hunt at his pleasure; where,
besides the pleasure in hunting, he may furnish his house, with excellent fat
Venison, Turkies, Geese, Heath-Hens, Crans, Swans, Dukes, Pigeons, and the
like, and wearied with that, he may go a Fishing, where the Rivers are so
furnished, that he may supply himself with Fish, before he can leave of the
Recreation. Here one may travel by land upon the same continent hundreds of
miles, and pass through Towns, and Villages, and never hear the least complaint
for want, nor hear any ask him for a farthing. Here one may lodge in the
Fields, and Woods, ^travel from one end of the country to another, with as
much security as if he were locked within his own Chamber. And if one chance to
meet with an Indian-town, they shall give him the best entertainment they have,
and upon his desire direct him on his way. But that which adds happinnss to all
the rest, is the healthfulness of the place, where many people in twenty years
time never knew what sickness is, where they look upon it as a great mortality
if two or threee die out of a Town in one years time. Besides the sweetness of
the air, the country it self sends forth such a fragrant smell, that it may be
perceived at Sea, before they can make to land; no evil Fog or Vapor does any
sonner appear, but a North-West, or Westerly wind immediately desolve it away.
Moreover, you shall scarce see a house, but the South Side is begirt with hyves
of Bees, which increase after an incredible manner. So that, if there be any
Terrestical Canaan, it is surely here, where the land flows with Milk and
Honey.

FINIS.

