Die Mercurii 28. Octobr. 1646.
ORdered by the COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, That Mr Bosevile do from this
House give Thanks to Mr Lockyer, for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he preached this day at the entreaty of this House at Margarets Westminster,
(it being the day of Public Humiliation) and desire him to print his Sermon,
and he is to have the like privilege in printing of it, as others of the like
kind usually have had.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. dom. Com.

I appoint John Rothwell, and Hannah Allen to print my Sermon.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS assembled in
PARLIAMENT:

At their late solemn Fast, October. 28. 1646.In Margarets Westminster.

By NICHOLAS LOCKYER, M. A.

And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which has devoured her fruit,
so that she has no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule: this is a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation, Ezekiel. 19.14.

And in that day will I wake Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people, all
that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of
the earth be gathered together against it, Zech. 12.3.

And he stayed yet other seven days, and again he sent forth, and the Dove
came in to him [in the evening] and lo in her mouth was an Olive leaf plucked
off, Genesis 8.10, 11.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for John Rothwell, at the Sun and
Fountain, in Pauls-Church-yard, and Han. Allen, at the Bible in Pope's Head
Alley. 1646.

THE EPISTLE Dedicatory.
Honorable Worthies,
WHen the Prophet was to be plain Ezeck. 3.23.27.
, God set him upon a plain, and spoke to him. When you called, bowels bid me
visit the sick and weak, and truly these alone stirred, all other parts of
body and mind were utterly against it; and as I went, Christ and Conscience, in
such a case, bid me be faithful, lest I brought in two hours, the blood of
two Nations upon mine head. Jerusalem was pourtrayed to one of the Prophets
upon a Tile, and (some thought) was England to me in you when I was before
you; and truly I had a good desire, to bring forth a Nation of a day to Christ.
I want ability to give milk to babes, much more to give strong meat to such
strong men as you; and 'twere well if friends would indeed believe it, and pray
for me more. Legs are precious limbs to the lame: mine own weakness makes
the power of God still the more admirable to me. When I left you Jeremies
rapture took hold on me, Jer. 18.3.
Behold he wrought a work on the wheels. Our acceptance with you, was in
word and deed, for which I account my self much obliged to the Lord and you.
Your way is much in the dark, so many persons and things are before your eyes;
I was willing to get as many prayers for you, to set as many dried cheeks and
bowels a blessing of you, as I could, these will make such great wheels go
safely and swiftly, when wit nor wealth nor any thing else will. One Prophet
felt in so many days, what all the people of Israel should feel in so many
years; Ezekiel. 4.
if I had any degree of such an advantage spiritually, I should be a better
servant to you and my native Country then I am, both in praying and preaching.
My petition to Christ often is, that he will make impresse upon my spirit,
suitable to all his purposes toward this poor bleeding Land; I get as near
him as I can, and as much out of al noise, to hearken and hear distinctly what
he will speak, peace or war, life or death; and if in this Gospel way God
will but grant me that Prophets favor Ezekiel. 12.3.
, to remove in my sight, and to dig through the wall of Englands welfare in my
view, I hope through the strength of Christ I shall be faithful to tell her of
it, though it should cost me much. Would I knew how in this shaking time, to
eat my bread with confidence, and yet with quaking: If the pleasure of the Lord
were dearer to us 'twould ease much, the many hard things which are yet before
us. I came, Honorable Worthies, very trembling to you, and so truly departed
from you, to think how little service I had done, for persons and employments
of so great consequence as yours. At what time I feared I believed, which was
Christ laying his right hand upon me, like that upon John, saying, Fear not,
I am the first and the last Rev. 1.17.
. If God be found first or last wherever I come, or in what ever I undertake, I
and all with me will be blessed; and so will it be with you, and those many
thousands for whom you act. I would people would be patient, and think lower
thoughts of their own wisdom, and higher of Christ's and yours, as an
Ordinance of God for their good, and in all your travels, travel with you, and
cry out for a man midwife from heaven for you, when you are like to miscarrie,
and not fill City and Country with unnatural and unchristian clamor. I judge
a free Parliament, the most natural Ordinance (and the nearest that Divine
government which once was) for the true good of a Nation that would not be
slaves to sin and man's will, of any yet known, or in use in the world; and
if my Judgment were of any weight in a business of this nature, I would
think those the more unnatural to themselves and others, who otherwise speak
and act amongst us. Our lusts would be Laws and Judges of them too, and may,
as well one as the other; it is thus with us, it is thus with you; it is so in
Divinity, it is so in morality, it is so in the first Table, it is so in the
second. Christ meant civil Government really, when he bade us submit to it,
and pray for it, and practiced it himself by giving to Caesar the things which
were Caesar's; if in these last and worst days we need it less then then, I do
not yet understand it. Wild beasts love no bound, but if this should be, then
all the world would be a wilderness, and where should we live without tearing
in pieces? I think just Government in a Turk to be a beam of God, and we
admire it abroad, and trample upon it at home. Violence is risen up into a rod
of wickedness. Men are so violent, Ezekiel. 6.11.
and yet so void of reason, that they are a rod to themselves and many sober
men; complain of obstructions and yet make them, by mad motion a this side
truth and their place: Christ bears all this about his Kingdom and
government, and so must you about yours. Ezekiel. 6.5.13, 14.
Christ will lay the carcasses of men before their Idols; men's persons in
preposterous courses fall, or their esteem, and then is man a moving carcass
before his Idol pride. Purity is indeed of Majesty: Ezekiel. 1.22.
we read of terrible crystal; Let your course be patient and pious before men
who are not so, and this will keep God and good men with you, and all others
below your peace, if not below their own. He is not so fit to advise you, as
to pray for you, that you may be in the secret of his people, who is and shall
be still theirs and

Yours, at the Throne of Grace, NICHOLAS LOCKYER.

A SERMON PREACHED at the late FAST, before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
ISAIAH 53.10. Yet it pleases the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to
grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see seed,
he shall prolong days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.


THe great works of mankind, for soul and body, bear heard upon Christ: to
Jew and Gentile, does this text relate; both which in a very sad condition, and
yet Christ here affirmed unto them a full relief. The Jew, waste chapter
foregoing verse 9. Choreb dried up: Mount Choreb, so called from hence because
a dry dead thing, and so all the rest of the wilderness Choreb, a land of
drought, great drought, wherein there was no water, and this one reason why
called a terrible wilderness Deuteronomy. 8.15. The wisdom of God is glorious, he
led our Fathers in such a way external, as all along in every step thereof
spoke unto them their internal state; they were Choreb to God, a land of
drought, their souls withered and dead, no one scarce of any sap. Who has
believed our report? chapter contaning my text, ver. 1. And yet the bravest
root that ever was, must spring out of this dry ground; and when at driest,
(as in deed it was very dry when Chrst sprang up amongst them) and by virtue
of it, all made fruitful. He shall spring up before me as a tender plant, and
as a root out of a dry ground, verse 2. The fruitfulness of this root, in
very dry ground, read ver. the 4. Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried
our sorrows. A full relation of this precious fruit, is continued verse after
verse, to the very text I am to stand upon.

The Jew, Choreb, and the Gentile, Coreb, both dry and barren, and yet this
latter also (which was as given up of all) to be made fruitful, and by the
same hand, and therefore called upon to sing; Sems Redeemer, Iapheths Redeemer.
Her Redeemer the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be
called. Chapter following the text verse the 5. The misery of both these barren
ones is largely expressed in the Scriptures foregoing and following that we are
to stand upon, under the metaphor of barrenness; and this metaphor divinely
carried out to note all manner of bondage both outward and inward, captivity
to sin and for sin, and one infolded in another; Yea, so divinely carried out,
as to set forth both Jew and Gentile, wrapped up totally under the power of sin,
Satan and men, and yet both to be brought out of the hand of all these, all
which wonderful indeed. The greatness of the work, makes the fullness and
the solemness of the assertion here. And the apt situation of the words,
between both, as equally respecting either, casts more vigor and luster upon
the design. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief:
when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see seed, he shall
prolong days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

The text is a full affirmation of all good, to Jew and Gentile, not
withstanding all opposition; it speaks deliverance from all sorts of slavery
and bondage whatsoever. Not ashamed, nor put to shame, is the expression proper
to both, chapter following my text, ver. the 4. the one expression noting all
natural internal weakness, the other all extrinsecall coercive powers.

The text has two branches: the action of the Father toward the Son; and
the issue of this action toward the sons of men. The action of the Father
toward the Son is sad, and expressed exaggerately, some expressions pointing
more properly at the body of Christ, though the soul not excluded, others
pointing more properly at the soul of Christ, though the body not excluded:
those expressions which point at the body of Christ are the beginning words of
my text, the Father bruised the Son, Dacha, tore him in pieces, so is the
word rendered Psalm. 94.5. They break in pieces thy people O Lord. Not a bone of
Christ was broken, Exodus 12.46. John 19.36. But the flesh of Christ was. He
gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that plucked off the
hairs Esa. 50.6. plucked etc. Marat, scratcht or rooted up radicitus evulsit
pilos; scalpsit, excoriavit.
. What that Prophet there speaks of his back, and his cheeks, that another
Prophet speaks of his eyes and his belly. Mine eyes are consumed with grief,
my soul and my belly, Psalm. 31.9. consumed, gnashash, gnawed and fretted, as a
moth frets and gnaw's a thing; from thence is gash which signifies a moth, and
used Esa. the 50.9. the moth shall eat them up. The wrath of God like a moth
did gnaw, tear, and eat up the flesh of Christ; the flesh of his back and
cheeks, the flesh of his eyes and belly, (i.) all his body from head to foot.
The wrath of God did so gnaw and tear the flesh of Christ, that one might tell
all his bones, Psalm. 22.17. It did so tear and rend, that it made him sick,
which is the next expression in the text, amplifying the action of the Father
upon him. He did put him to grief, Chalah, which signifies to make sick, so
rendered, Isa. 38. the 1. Hezekiah was sick unto death. It may be Chizk ^^^ak
from Chazak strong: and then very strong was very weak; so was Christ.


Now lest any should think, that the sufferings of Christ were but skin deep,
that the Father did but only touch and tear the flesh of the Son, all that
was said is resumed and souled, as I may say: When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, asham, peccatum (i.) peccatum and pretii peccatum, to bear
and present our sin, to stand with our filthy garments upon him, covering him
from head to foot body and soul; and withal, paying the price thereof, that
these may be taken off. Body and soul suffered; Christ was a whole burnt
offering, which the Hebrews call Chalil from Chalal, perficere, to perfect, he
did perfectly suffer, that is, in all, and so did perfectly satisfy, that is,
for all our sins. Their chalil, or whole burnt-offering, was their most
complete and prime offering, and did above all other offerings set out what an
offering Christ was to the Father, and what an offering we should be to the
Son: See the dignity of it above other offerings in Deutoronomie, upon the
faithful carriage of Levi, whom God did prove at Massah and Mertbah, who in
the execution of that sin, knew neither Father nor Mother, and therefore
says God, He shall offer upon mine Altar chastil, a whole burnt-offering,
Deuteronomy. 33.10.

Though this action of the Father toward the Son was terrible, yet pleasant to
himself; it pleased the Father to bruise him: Chaphets.
the word notes the highest content that may be, to wit, delight: which is the
intention and strength of affection: the emphasis of this word is best reached,
by another word out of the same mouth in the New Testament, This is my beloved
Son in whom I rest.
(...). If the Lord delight in us he will bring us into the good Land, Numbers
14.8. To the Saints in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16.3. In both those
places is this word Chaphets used. That so very sad action upon Christ, should
be so exceeding content full to the Father, is wonderful: The sad action of
the Earlier upon the Son, may be considered formerly, or finally; precisely
in it self, or in order to such an end: in that former sense, not joyous in
the least, because a conversation about sin and punishment, two of the
undelightfullest things to God in all one world; but considered in order to
such an end, that is, his own glory, and man's eternal good, so 'twas very
pleasant to the Father to bruise, and to grief, and to Christ to be bruised
and grieved. A skillful physician, in some cases delights to contrive art so as
to tag nature, not simply, but in order to such an end, to wit, the removal of
some deep malignity, and so the ^^^^th of the patient. Christ is a patient in
the person of mankind, and it pleases that great Physician to contrive art so,
and Justice so, as to tug Christ extremely, and our corrupt nature in him, not
simply, but in order to his own glory and our salvation. The end of the
Fathers action is in his eye, and the certainty of this end, which is another
circumstance, which causes such content in the performance of it: if a
physician be in any degree certain of the good event of strong physic upon
his patient, this makes him with much content and delight to prescribe such and
such ingredients, though he knows they will tug and gripe much; when thou
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he [shall see] seed, [he shall]
prolong days,] etc. Drugges shall not lie in him to kill him, that is, to make
an utter end; not an utter end of the person, but of all evil that assailes
it. I know as if the Father had said, when my Son shall be completely
passive, he will be completely active, when he has fully borne my wrath, he
will fully and yet legally command and reveal my love, to creatures that
otherwise can upon no ground pretend to it, though their only happiness.

The issue of the Fathers action upon the Son, toward the Sons of men, is
mentioned two ways, particularly, and generally: particularly, and so two
things are mentioned, he shall see seed, he shall prolong days. [He shall see]
curiose inspicere, Raah, it does not only signify to see, but to see
plainly, and to see wonderfully. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen,
Genesis 22.14. that is, plainly, there the word is used: this word notes more then
Nabat, which signifies properly and simply to see, or to look, and therefore
the Kings Translators set forth the emphasis of this word above the other,
rendering it stare, Psalm. 22.17. They look and stare upon me; staring is a
kind of ocular appetite, that is, such a state wherein the eye is like the
stomach sometimes, mighty greedy, and takes in species by thousands, and yet
cannot tell how to take off it self, things that are taken in, are so taking,
that is, so great and so sweet, so incomprehensible in all excellency. Staring
notes a beholding unto wonderment, all faculties at once looking out at window,
and utterly unwilling to shut the casement, in the least, that a full hold may
be taken of what fully affects it; thus shall Christ see seed, plainly,
wonderfully, he shall stand and stare upon the glorious births of all his
travels; he shall behold unto wonderment, unto ravishment. Thou have ravished
my heart my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes, with one chain of thy neck, Cant. 4.9. and yet Christ but personating us
in this, as in the former passivenesse: we shall see plainly and wonderfully
with him; we shall stand and stare with open eye, and with open face,
beholding the glory of God, and his good will to man, even unto ravishment,
which is their Heaven above, and ours here below.

He shall prolong days, or stretch out days, Arach, the word is used about
the cloud which waited upon the Tabernacle, Numb. 9 19.
which did stretch out it self every way, and covered over the Tabernacle, by
which was shadowed the providence of God that stretches out its wings and
feathers, and covers us all over, as a hen her young. Man that was for life a
beam of eternity, his time is now shrunk, a creature short-breathed, his
days so short, as not to be measured by length, but by breadth, and by the
least of that dimension, to wit, a hand. Behold, thou have made my days as a
[hand breadth] mine age is nothing, Psalm. 39.5. Hence it is that man is put
upon it, to do all his work of a day, To day if you will hear his voice, to
day if you will be for Christ. Yea hence it is, that man is put upon it, to do
all his work in one hour, in a moment, his time is so shrunk up. Now is the
accepted time; Christ stretches out man's time and days again to their full
length, and this is one of the wonders that he stands and stares upon; this is
one of those things which he looks upon and admires, to see Adam in Paradise
again living for ever, which is admirable indeed. He asked life of thee and
thou gave him long life, even life for evermore. And in this also personating
us, we shall stand and wonder with him, to behold our very glorious, and never
dying condition, we shall be ravished to behold our selves, not as the flowers
of the field, which in the morning are, and in the evening are not, but as the
herbs of Eden, that garden enclosed semper vivens, ever living, who were ever
dying. Thus you have the particular expressions of the issue of Christ's
sufferings.

The general follows, which is the last expression in the text, and indeed
the sum of all, and because so, I shall sit down here, to give out from the
Lord what I have to say. The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.
The pleasure, chephoets A derivative from the same root in the front of the
text.
, will of the Lord (i.) all the will of the Lord. Compare with this the type,
Act. 13.22. To whom also he gave testimony and said, I have found David the Son
of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will; which
is spoken in opposition to Saul, who did fulfill but a part. Christ did not
baulke one title, Heaven and Earth shall pass, Matthew. 5.
but one title of the Law shall in no wise pass till all be fulfilled: such
parts of Divine will, as were most debasing of Christ, were fulfilled, as well
as other parts which were dignifying; he stoopt to men, who were not worthy to
stoop to his shoe latchet. Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes to
fulfill all righteousness, Matthew 3.15. as if Christ had said, the will of
the Lord shall prosper in my hand, though I lie at any ones foot. Take the next
word in the text, and it will carry it to this sense, the pleasure of the Lord
shall [prosper.] Tsalach, it signifies the carrying on, or the carrying
thorough of a thing against all difficulty, a breaking through, or a cutting
through with the foot. As if God had said, My will will be much opposed by
Devils and men, yet he into whose hand I have put it, will break through all.
The word is used, 1 Samuel the 10. the 6. And the Spirit of the Lord will come
upon thee, and thou shall prophecy. The Spirit of the Lord will come upon
thee; Tsalach, will break in upon thee, and thou shall prophecy whether thou will or no. It Is used in the 2 Samuel 19.17. There went a thousand men of
Benjamin over Jordan before the King. Tsalach, brake through before the King.
Thus shall he into whose hand Gods will is put, break open the everlasting
doors, and break in upon dead souls, and break down whatsoever hinders
their eternal life.

Consider the word in its simple signification, or, consider it in the time in
which it is here put. [Shall prosper] by his hand. Which future tense carries
us not so much to the futuritie of the work, as to the certainty of it, as
noting upon what strong bottom it bears, to wit, the Justice of God, and this
in a double respect. Gods voluntary choosing Christ, and owning him to be his
servant. It Is a matter of justice, that whom I voluntarily take and own to any
business of mine, I should cleave to him, and assist him as I am able. This I
take to be the emphasis and life of those words, Psalm the 89.20. I have found
David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him, with whom my hands
shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him, the enemy shall not
exact upon him, and I will beat down his foes before his face, etc. I have
[found] David my servant, etc. Matsa, I have laid hands upon him, or, taken
hold of him, so the word is rendered, Psalm. 116.3. The pains of hell took hold
upon me; I have laid hands upon my Son, and therefore it is but Justice I should
keep hold of him, and that these hands which I have laid upon him, should be
every way vertuall to him, and they shall be so; the enemies shall not exact
upon him. The word used for exact is Nasha, seducere, decipere, and signifies
to seduce, cheat, and deceive, and so is rendered, Jer. 29.8. Let not your
Prophets deceive you, etc. As if God had said, the times through which my Son
shall pass will be full of craft, and if it were possible to deceive mine
elect; but it is not possibe, because he is mine elect; he is my servant, and
because my servant he shall deal prudently, not the subtlest wit in the world
shall put a trick or cheat upon him, in order to any punctum of my will. The
word Nasha, has no affinity with Nasag, which signifies to be overtaken and
caught as huntsmen do their prey. Christ is the Hind of the morning, hunted
from Sunrise to Sunset, but having Hindes feet, he cannot be taken. Thou have
made my feet like hindes feet, says Christ often in the Old Testament. Christ
cannot be taken nor overtaken, hunt, and catch, and lay snares who will; Saul,
Judas, or all the violent crafty hypocrites in the world. A bow of steel is
broken by his hand. Hell is naked before him: not only open, but naked as a
thing without all strength or force to hurt, because one walking in this
furnace with him, the support of the Godhead. You have the Father telling all
the world, that he goes upon this ground along with the Son, to wit, that he
is his chosen servant. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect, etc. I have
put my Spirit upon him, my mantle and livery as my servant, he shall not fail,
nor be discouraged, not darkened or broken, till he has set Judgment in the
earth, (i.) accomplished all my will, Isa. 43.1, 2, 3, 4. Upon this ground God
sticks close to us, because his chosen servants, see it largely and comfortably
set forth by the same Prophet, Isa. 48.8, 9, etc. and therefore bid again and
again, though worms, yet not to fear, because worms upon such a ground.

Shall prosper] the futurity of the word, points at When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see the issue thereof, etc. There be many
difficulties about the creature, but may be all infolded in one, to wit, sin.
Man would have the heart of God, were it not for sin, and he that has the
heart of God, has his hand, and can do any thing: Now Christ has paid the
price of sin fully, and presents in our person a primitive state, and so has
bought the ear, the hand, and the heart of God, that is, a full concurrence of
the Father, for all executions and accomplishments in order to the creature:
which is the reason of that strong language of Peter, in his converting Sermon.
Whom God has raised up, He (...) demanded life of thee, etc. Psalm. 21.
having losed the pains of death, because it was not possible that he shorld
be holden of it, Acts 2.24. Not possible? why? the reason is rendered, verse 27.
Thou will not suffer thy holy One to see corruption, Christ is a holy one, that
is, legally holy; thou have made his soul an offering for sin, bought the
soul with a soul, an eye with an eye, a tooth with a tooth; he has purchased
all the fullness of the Godhead to concurie with him, and therefore I should
be unholy to a holy one, if I should leave his soul in grave, etc. Compare
with this place, Isaiah 50.6, 7, 8, 9. verses, I gave my back to the smiters,
and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not my face from shame
and spitting; The inference necessary.
and my Lord God will help me, therefore I shall not be confounded, therefore
have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is
near that justifies me, who will contend with me? Let us stand together, who
is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold, the Lord God will help me,
(again he repeats) who is he that shall condemn me? the Moth shall eat them
up. If any one could condemn Christ for any thing, that he had not done all
things well, in order to his Fathers will, then something might be said, why
things should not prosper in his hand, why he should not have a full
concurrence of divine power, to carry him through al in order to the creature,
but none can say this, no not the Father himself, He will justify me, and He
is near, that is, ready to do it: and therefore I am sure, as I have been a
holy One to my Father, so He will be a holy One to me, and will not suffer me
to see corruption, not be overcome by any adversary: who will contend with me?
compare with this Psalm. 45.7. Thou love righteousness and hate
wickedness, therefore God [thy God] has anointed thee with oil of gladness
above thy fellows, where Christ's legal righteousness is mentioned, he did
perform all things for the matter exactly, and for the manner exactly, with
such a degree of affection He did do righteously and love the doing of it: his
affection was as complete as his action, though the work very sad.
that he did buy all the oil of his lamp, which might accomplish him for the
creature; therefore God called his God, as by purchase: thou love
righteousness, therefore God [thy God.] Compare with this that type, Deuteronomy.
33.8, 9, 10. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy
One, whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom thou did strive at the
waters of Meribah: who said unto his Father, and to his Mother, I have not seen
him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children, for
they have observed thy word and kept thy Covenant; they shall put incense
before thee, and a whole burnt-offering upon thine altar. The exactness of
Levi's righteousness in that point of great trial, is made a type of Christ's
exact righteousness, whereby he purchased not only Or lux, but Urim lights,
that is, all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge: And so not only thamam
integrity or perfection, but Thummim, perfections (i.) all righteousness. Use.


This point may exhort us, to be patient; patience has two things in it, a
spirit free from perturbation, and pure in' expectation, and both these, would
I distinctly enforce, Contentation.
from the truth in hand. It Is a very shaking time of all sorts, bodies, souls,
persons, Kingdoms; and when trialls are strong, passions are so too for the
most part, and men forget themselves as men, much more as Christians, and play
the beast. One would not have thought there had been so many unreasonable
creatures in this land, until the hand of God appeared amongst us. Ier. 18.20.
Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved. Every wheel
breaks, and then the heart breaks too, when 't has forgot the truth in hand,
that the pleasure of the Lord prospers in Christ's hand. No wheel moves fast
enough, nor well enough, when the heart makes haste: no body is wise, nor
faithful, none has brains nor hands to do any thing; it is strange to see how
all is carried, stranger to think what all will come to. No body wise nor
faithful? Yes, Christ is, and it should be enough to every one in any
straight, that he is and will be a succesfull agent. When many are about a
business, oftt-imes no body is, one jostles so against another, til all be in
danger to jostle against Christ, and the very principles of sober men. When
wheels have much weaight upon them, they oft-times make a very unpleasant
noise. Is God amongst us? Israel wants water, Amalek waits to give battle,
and this great straight, made that great State fall a chiding of God and one
another. Is God amoungst us? The place was called for this, Massah, Meribah
(i.) striving and chiding. The bigger bodies are, with the greater difficulties
they move; now when great difficulties, make great impatience, toward God and
toward one another, this and not our straights indangers all, as you may see
in the example forementioned. Straights simply considered, Exodus 17.
though never so great, can undo none, neither a person nor a Kingdom, but how
either behave themselves in them. When we retort temptation upon God, this
overturnes all: that is, when he tempts us, then we fall a tempting of him.
Water is wanting, money wanting, enemies not wanting, Amalekites in abundance
ready to combine, yet as long as Christ is, there is enough for the prosperity
of any good work; and then not enough for the quiet and tranquillity of thy
spirit? What though mountains move, yet should we be still: so long as Christ
is, there is a stream that will refresh the City of God, in the greatest
drought.

Impatience is very excogitous: a man had need have more natural strength then
ten men, or else he will fall into a consumption, the soul is so uncessantly
hammering it self, and other folks, about its own devices and divine events.
Jer. 10.14.
Every founder is confounded. If every founder, then an impatient man, for he
is one founder; he is heating and melting his brains night and day, casting
this and casting that, till he has no more metal to cast, and then quite
confounded: when he cannot cast the Idol he would, then quite casts off the
true God. Is God amongst us? What and things so hard? and so cross and
confused? Action may be in our hand, but success is in Christ's, this the
founder does not see, (I mean the impatient man) and therefore is confounded.
Impatience is spiced with pride and ignorance, though possibly neither
discerned by the subject in which it is. What if the will of the Lord whilst in
our hand, be nothing but straights, and difficulties, blood and death? will thou therefore rage and fret against God, his people and will? this is to make
a God of thy self, to be angry because the success of things is not placed in
thy hands, and under thy cognizance, whereas God has said it shall be only in
Christ's hand.

As impatience is spiced with pride, so with ignorance. Great storms bring
great darkness with them you know; God usually is so much hid in such times
from man, that nothing but his hand is seen, and this too, rather felt then
seen; and in such cases, Solomon tells us how ordinarily, poor blind man goes
to work. Say not thou what is the cause, that former days were better then
these, for thou do not inquire wisely concerning this, Ecclesiastes 7.10. An
impatient man thinks, that the revolution of all times, should be of the same
aspect; that present times, should be as full of trade, as full of friends, as
full of peace, and plenty, as former times, or else that former times were
better then these: Men do not inquire wisely as the wise man says. Times and
conditions are to be called good, or better, not as our own will, but as the
will of the Lord prospers in them: I may be more poor, more contemptible then
I was in time past, yet if Christ be made more rich, and more glorious hereby,
I am bound to say, that this time is better then the days past. Possibly the
will of the Lord, in order to the men of this generation, may be, to put them
to it in all that is dear, that our work shall be to labor as it were in the
fire, to bast and waste our selves out, about the refining furnace, to bring
out the next age more pure and holy then this; we may sow and others after us
reap, as they did before us, in order to many mercies then which now we have;
and if Christ make such a noble work to succeed and take by us, we are bound
to say, that these are very happy times Luke 9.30.31.
; and this Christ will, 'twas sealed in that apparition, two appeared in glory
and spoke of Christ's decease. There is a communication of this in a degree, and
'twas done for our sakes, as it is said of other cariages. Messengers appear
to our souls in glory, when about the hardest parts of the will of God, a
spirit of glory, and of God visits us, which is the hand of Christ prospering
his Fathers will. Impatient men are blind, they can see no glory, but that
which is external: all that ever God has said about the glory of times, is
only this in my text, that his pleasure should prosper by the hand of Christ;
and this indeed is the glory of times and persons in every age. Does the will
of God by the hand of Christ prosper? within thee without thee? in the world,
in thine own heart? then it is a glorious time, that wherein thou should
content and solace thy self Every time is best to its best improvers.
. The still breathing of every age should be, the will of the Lord be done.

Patience has two things in it, as I formerly told you, perturbation removed,
and expectation seated in the place of it, and the Doctrine in hand inforceth
both. Be still and know that I am God, Psalm 46.10. The one expression notes
passion allaied and the other expectation raised; Know that I am God, that is,
that I will accomplish my will, so it follows, I will be exalted among the
Heathen, etc. Let your expectation be pure, to such a height the point in hand
lifts, Weeds creep up by every flower, and in every ground, unless very well
looked to. Confidence becomes carnal, and then dies as instruments die, and
swells and flants as they live and prosper; millions of such men are not worth a
straw in a storm, they are the great bubbles of boisterous weather, which
break as fast as they swell. The Nations shall bless themselves in him, and in
him shall they glory, or shine, Halal, what ever has been done for us, has
been done by him, what ever is to be done for us, or for others, is to be done
by him: if ever England shine, or any instrument in England, 'twill be as in
his hand, by whom alone all shall prosper. Expectation pure, the spirit is
solid, very high, and yet very low, never at a loss, let times and things go
how they will, but when 'twould speak of the virtue and excellence of that
hand, by which the pleasure of the Lord is fulfilled, and truly there one may
pardonably lose ones soul. It Is not an easy thing to be pure in expectation:
one is like a child that has been used to be carried, that when set down to
go alone, catches at every thing next it, and there hangs and will not let
go, and yet falls at last with its props in his hands. God has spoken once,
twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God, Psalm 62.11.12. The
speech of God in providence, is of great echo, especially in some more
remarkable works: God speaks in providence so wonderfully sometimes, to a
person or to a Nation, that it sounds often in a man's soul, once, twice, that
is, frequently, that God alone does all, and a man is ready to say so often, and
yet in a renewed distress, old unbelief revives and the soul dies. The
Psalmist in the context, bids not to trust in poor or rich, one is vanity,
t'other's a lie, says he; but trust in the Lord at all times; and then renders
the reason in the words forecited, Power belongs to the Lord. Which is no more
then the enforement of my text, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand. The word of the Lord is very pure, so should our building upon it be,
'twas very gloriously taught in that significant providence to Abraham, The Ram
caught behind him, Genesis 22.13. I heard behind me a voice of a great rushin
blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place, Ezekiel. 3.12. Gods glorious
place is behind us.
The pleasure of the Lord does prosper at his pleasure, and as his pleasure;
sometimes before us, that is, in ways which we can reach, and serve Gods
providence in; sometimes again, behind us, that is, in such ways as we cannot
reach, to lend him the least concurrence in, to teach that our expectation
should be purely placed upon his word, and that we should say to our souls in
all straights, The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Abraham had
no hands behind him, neither do men ordinarily go that way to catch things,
yet there was the Ram caught.

Hitherto I have exhorted to contentation, Imitation.
now I shall exhort you to imitation, and so close up the point and the day. Be
followers of Christ as dear children; what shall prosper in his hand, let that
prosper in yours, according as you are able to give prosperity to things: and
in the pursuit of this particular, give me leave (Honorable Worthies) to apply
my self more particularly to you. Be valiant for the truth upon the earth; be
so in heart, be so in tongue and hand; give not the Prophets and people of the
Lord cause to mourn over you, as Jeremy did over the generation of his time.
They bend their tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not valiant for
the truth upon the earth, Jeremie 9.2, 3. It Is a gallant thing, to lay hearts
and hands upon all that which Christ does, and say, let this prosper though I
dye; if it will not grow without warring with my blood, yet I cannot hand off
nor heart off: the will of the Lord be done; you have many things to look
after and yet but one, the pleasure of God in all that comes before you; be
true to this, and you and we shall do well. I cannot give more for truth then
it is worth; I cannot give more for truth then Christ, though I give all my
blood: that soul is alive and brave, that thus breaths. Conversation in all
callings, is the glory and welfare of persons and Kingdoms: in private
callings it is so, in public callings it is so, in our most public calling, I
mean our general calling, it is so. It Is not called persons simply, whether to
this or that, which are the safety of a Land; neither is their calling simply,
their own welfare, but as they walk answerably to their calling, whether
Civil, or Divine. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, they shall
walk after the Lord, Hosea 11.9, 10. Some give a kind of a dry sense upon this
place, but I take the meaning to be this, that a holy and brave conversation,
is any ones vigor and life, to his own or a general welfare; for by fierce
anger is there meant, as in other places is plentifully explained, the
destroying of all, righteous and wicked; which God does, when the righteous are
wicked, that is, lying in common pollutions, together with the rest of the
world. I may truly tell you, Honorable Worthies, Slay utterly old and young,
etc. and begin at my Sanctuary.

Ezekiel. 9.6. The wood of the Vine if it bear not, is it good for any work,
Ezekiel. 15.


that a Saint is a cipher, in order to his own or a general welfare, when he
walks unworthy of his holy calling; but not so in order to the hurt of either:
One Jonah, that is froward and unfaithful, is more numerous and ponderous to
toss and overset the ship, then all the brutish Mariners in it. There is a
great loss amongst the godly, of persons, that is sad; and of graces, that is a
thousand times more sad; carnality takes much hold of the spiritual, which is
the blackest presage I see in the Land, and that which we have this day to
spread before the Lord: if this loss, Honorable Worthies, should be sound
amongst you, 'twere death at the heart, and the whole Kingdom a Patient of
little hope: then that would run right upon us, which the Prophet has,
Jeremy 6.13. From the least to the greatest every one is so and so, etc. Much
wisdom and faithfulness has hitherto appeared amongst you, to the great
refreshing of all the faithful in the Land; let these abide and increase,
according to all the calls of a desperate condition.

In the desperatest National condition that ever was, when the bravest State
under Heaven lay just as we do now, looking when to give up, and breath out
their last, it is observable what counsel the Prophet gives, Jeremy 6. the 13.
verse: he says they were all naught, small and great; at the 16. verse he
delivers you his counsel, viz. Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls: but they said, We will not walk therein. Which Vote, was
their ruin without remedy. Two things I gather by this place, are necessary in
a desperate condition: a diligent inquitie after the will of God, and then a
faithful pursuit of it. Diligent and acute inquiries are behovefull,
especially about such matters of weight as you are upon, but then all our time
must not be only ravelled out here: to be always whetting is very dull. It Is
the heaviest curse that I read, in all the book of God, which Jeremy wishes to
himself, Jer. 20.17.
viz. That his mothers womb had been always bearing of him. Disputes and
debates, they are but media, and subordinata, to dwell always upon media, and
subordinata, speaks the brain very critical, and the heart (I doubt) very
hypocritical. Some cannot bear iniquities about truth at all, at least not
strict and acute inquiries, but all must be swallowed by present times, which
former times have practiced, without any more stir; this is a great
temptation upon men, and God I trust will remove it by little and little:
others can bear as long, and as acute inquiries as you will, but cannot come
on to practice; this I take to be a greater temptation, by how much the less
simplicity in it, and by how much the more men's own wisdom and will are
Idolized. Know honorable Worthies, that the maturity of all results and
debates, whether divine or civil, are to be looked upon by us, as the answer
of many prayers, as the price of much blood, much precious blood, to wit, the
blood of Christ, and of many gallant men, and so indeed as a birth from Heaven,
if ever any was: strangle not such a birth when borne, nor leave it unswathed,
to shift for it self, in the hands of a few poor despised ones, but let it
have your hearts and hands, as nursing Fathers to it, and be leaders in Israel,
and practically precedentiall to all the Land, as Christ, a glorious beam of
whom you are, as chief Magistrates under him amongst us. If the poor rude
multitude shall say as they in the place forecited, we will not walk therein,
yet o let there never be one such a vote amongst you.

Will ye hunt the souls of my people, Ezekiel. 13.18.
or any other such like poor creature as I am; that is, against our persons,
and liberties, and external welfare amongst men, but you cannot carry it
against the will of God which we pursue; that will prosper in Christ's hands,
what ever your hands do with us. Nay, you cannot carry it against the will of
Christ, let what person will be the pursuer of it, suppose the person be not so
worthy in conversation as could be wished: that place is worthy indeed of the
consideration of any State to this purpose, 2 Chronicles. 35.20, 21, 22. The story
is of good Josiah, who reformed the things of God, and kept such a passover, as
not the like kept from the days of Samuel the Prophet ver. 18. and yet after
all, split himself upon a Heathen, that had but the advantage of a parcel of
civil truth and justice upon him. After all this, when Josiah had prepared the
Temple, Necho King of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates,
and Josiah went out against him: but he sent Ambassadors to him saying, What
have I to do with thee thou King of Judah? I come not against thee this day,
but against the houses wherewith I have war, for God commanded me to make
haste: forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he destroy
thee not. Nevertheless Josiah would not, and so was shot to death in that bout
by God indeed. It Is observable here, how this Heathen speaks to a Christian, as
twere in his own dialect, to divert him from doing unlike a Christian.
Forbear thee from meddling [with God who is with me] that he destroy thee not.
Here may I ground such a distinction as this, A man may have God with him,
which has not God in him; as a man may have God in him, which oft-times and in
many things, has not God with him. There be many poor creatures in the Land,
whose lives possibly, nor discretion, can by no means be pleaded for, as being
very unworthy of their calling, as Christians, and yet possibly these may have
God with them, though not God in them: that is, they may, as that Heathen, have
the advantage of some parcel of truth, against those that come forth to war
against them, and so stand capable of divine assistance under that notion, from
him who is ready to own every beam of his, and to look upon it and love it,
though the Orb in which it shines be not, not move not so sutably as we
would; and so it may be dangerous and deadly, to set voluntarily upon them; and
persons and States of great account, may split themselves upon persons and
States of none, and then our shipwreck will be much at one for misery,
whether it be upon this rock or that; whether we split our selves upon them
that have God in them, or them that have God only with them, and not in them.

Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What have thou done to us, that
thou have brought on me and on my Kingdom a great sin? and yet Abimalech only
the actor; his place spread and spattered his sin, over all the Kingdom, and so
will yours. You should think how strong your breath is, and how many you kill
or save, every time you go to speak: The speech of Samuel to the people, is
seasonable here to be considered. Come let us Go to Gilgall and renew the
Kingdom there, 1. Sam. 11.14. this was spoken upon the unction of Saul. The
whole Kingdom was at Gilgall, because such men were there, and about such State
business. So I may say to you, honorable Worthies, the whole Kingdom is at
Westminster, because such men as you are there together, and upon such State
employments; and therefore I beseech you be noble in spirit, In terraque
patris, cur telum perpetiuntur.
and say like those, Come let us go to Gilgall and renew the Kingdom there:
call upon one another, and stir up life in one another: Come let us go down
to Westminster and renew the Kingdom there: let us go and be valiant for God,
his people and this poor dying Land That the Kingdom may not be base and
unable (as the Prophet speaks in another case) to lift up it self, Ezekiel. 17.14.
. The word for renew is Chadash, and does not note a naked alteration of a
thing, but such an alteration, as has in it a restoration; to renew as the
Eagle does her bill, and there is the word used Psalm. 103.5. and that it notes
a restoration, read Isa. 61.4. where it is so rendered.

You cannot I know, as times and things now stand with us, I will accomplish my
wrath upon the walls, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered mortar,
and will say unto you, the wall is no more neither they that daubed it. Ezekiel.
13.15.
want temptations of all sorts to the contrary. Some may flatter: but of such I
will say unto you as the Prophet, When thou art spoiled what will thou do? thy
lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life, Jer. 4.30. When the Kingdom
is destroyed, by harkening to flatterers and selfe-seekers, what will ye do?
If you shall to please fawning men, or froward men, displease God, and betray
all into the hands of his wrath, what will these unworthy persons advantage
you? when the guilt of the blood of thousands, lies upon your consciences, will
you send then for those Clergy men, or States men, which mislead you? why, you
may, and miesrable comforters will they be: the Holy Ghost has told you here
what such will then be unto you, upon such a disadvantage of time; they will
despise you, spit in your face; I, they will be the first, that will seek your
lives. Wherefore honorable Worthies, be followers of Christ as dear children,
and of no body else, but as they are followers of him, and let the pleasure of
the Lord prosper in your hands: be valiant and faithful for that, for all
that, and then let smile or frown who will, and I am persuaded you will save
your selves, and a sinking Kingdom [I say for all that,] because truly, when I
read that place, 1 Samuel 28.18. I tremble, it is God speaking by the Devil to
Saul, Because thou obey-cast not the voice of the Lord, nor executed'st his
fierce wrath upon Amalck, therefore has the Lord done this thing unto thee
this day; He did in part, but not in full, execute the will of God: he spared
the fat, and this made him lean, a man without a Kingdom, a man without the
Spirit of God, and such a one is a lean creature indeed: all the will of the
Lord did not prosper in his hand, and therefore neither he nor his Kingdom,
ever prospered afterward. Take heed of this, and the rather, because flatterers
and fleshly spirits are for abatments even upon truth it self; if you run to
the end of the line say they, you will run your selves out of breath, and
destroy all. What if it be the golden line that we run by? such persons and
Counsels I doubt indeed, outrun conscience, and too fast for such an honorable
body as you to follow, our ruins come not by being faithful, but by being
base; I speak not of fidelity here, in opposition to wisdom, nor any other
grace, for all the virtues of Christ are consistent, and like Ladies go hand
in hand, unto their Lord and husband Jesus Christ. All our ruins at this day,
are for ought I know, the fruits of such counsels and practices, as before
mentioned.

Nothing makes the way of a man's spirit so wide and sweet within him, as
fidelity to God and to his Conscience: it is so in bigger bodies, nothing makes
the way of a Kingdom more quiet and prosperous within itself, then faithful
dealing with God, and the advantages it has by his hand. And as for straightes
and difficulties which come in this way, read that place, Isaiah 48.20, 21,
22. and it will set you above them all, or any man else, that has any thing of
the Spirit of God in him. Go ye forth of Babylon, flee from the Chaldeans
with a voice of singing, etc. verse 20. But they might object, Lord, we are
poor and few in Babylon, that have any hearts to this, and we are to go a
long Journey, and by many potent enemies, and alas! we shall be eaten all up
ere we come there, what with our own wants and weaknesses, and others
violence. Observe what a secret answer God gives to this, in the verse that
follows, And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts, he caused
the waters to flow out of the rock for them, he clave the rock also and the
waters gushed out: there is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked. As if
the Lord had said, it is not a harder task for me, to provide for you all, in
your journey from Babylon to Jerusalem, then for your Fathers in their journey
from Egypt to Canaan; whilst they obeyed my will, did they or could they want?
water, bread, protection, or provision whither soever they went, but when
nothing would draw them, and keep them on to this, then I pronounced them
wicked, and there was no peace to them. Propose my pleasure and to this submit,
and talk not of wilderness, Serpents, Scorpions, or any thing else; nothing
will undo you, but disobedience to my will. Let this place be thought on by
all, when I am gone to mine. You are, Honorable Worthies, going out of
Babylon, according to the call of God, which has been long upon us by his
faithful servants; many of which are scattered, and many fallen asleep, whose
echo at this day to you am I. Go out, and leave not a hoof: Egypt, and
Babylon, and Rome, are one spiritually, and answerably should be departed from.
And do not carnally object, 'twill worse become you, then any of our Fathers
heretofore, having seen what you have seen. In your wilderness, in your
greatest straights, God will still appear, and carry you through, so much is
shadowed and sealed in this Scripture; and such persons and Nations, as cannot
receive this, have their doom also sealed, No peace shall be unto the wicked,
says the Lord.

Hitherto I have spoken to direct your carriage to God, I have only a word more
to direct your carriage to men, and so I shall shut up all. Be faithful to God,
of which I have at large spoken; and toward men, be wise, and humble. Gallant
things will now every day come into your hand, if you be followers of Christ,
and faithful to your God as he was; and as they shall still come into your
hand, choose such instruments still to be employed about them, as most suite the
pleasure of God, these and these only, will be the prosperous agents. Upon one
stone shall be seven eyes: Zach 3.9. Be every one of you like that stone.
Saul immediately after his unction, was much surely endowed with wisdom, and
observe, whilst so, whom he takes next to him; men whose hearts God had
touched. Saul went home to Gibea, and there went with him a band of men whose
hearts God had touched; but the children of Beliall said, How shall this man
save us? And they despised him and brought him no presents, but he was as
though he had been deaf, which was heavenly wisdom indeed. Charash which
signifies much attention, and per antiphrasin, no attention at all. Surduit,
siluit. 1 Samuel 10.27. To take persons next you whose hearts God has touched,
will render you disregarded at least, if not scorned: but by whom? by sons of
Belial. Can such a Parliament, and such an Army, that consists of such
Sectaries, and strange spirits, save us? you must diligently hear now, that
is, not at all: you must be deaf, this will be your wisdom. Because God has
given the Judgment of the Whore under the whole Heaven to the Saints of the
most High, Dan. 7. And the battle-axe of Babylon is the rod of Gods
inheritance, Jer. 51.19. Upon my mountains will I tread him under foot, says
the Lord of the Assyrian: And this is the purpose, that is purposed upon the
whole earth, Isa. 14.25, 26. Whom God has said shall be his battle-axe, those
do you thoose: and to whom he has given this Judgment of the Whore, to them
do you; let his pleasure prosper in your hand. You may lose honor and
presents from sons of Belial this way, but you will have honor from the Lord.
Neither will the clamor of ignorant unworthie persons always last; Adoniah
kept a great stir a while about his title to the Kingdom, but at last when
he saw how manifestly God was with Solomon, he comes with other language to his
mother, -- and indeed, says he, the Kingdom was my brothers from the Lord 1
King. 1.16. So when these shall see the pleasure of the Lord prosper in the
hands of his people, they will change their note, and say, the work was theirs
from the Lord; and the Parliament did but appoint such as God appointed long
ago.

Deuteronomy 17.15, 16, 17.
They were by no means to set a stranger over them, which was not their
brother, neither was he when set up, to multiply horses nor wives, nor silver,
nor gold, but to have the word of God diligently opened and applied to him,
that he might fear the Lord, and keep all the words of his Law, and that [his
heart might not be lifted up above his Brethren,] etc. Disparity of place, must
not take off a brotherly parity of spirit, let the place be never so high; you
cannot want temptation to exalt your selves above what is here written. Jesabel
said unto Ahab, Do not thou govern the Kingdom? Arise and eat bread, and
let thine heart be merry, I will give thee the Vineyard of Naboth, the
Iezreelite, 1 Kings 21.7. Pride is that Jesabel, which is apt to creep into the
bosom of the best men when in high places. What? do not we govern the
Kingdom? is not all now in out hands? May not we do what we list, give and
take, smile and slight, as we please? I beseech you Honorable Worthies, He
covers the faces of the Judges of the earth, if not where and who is he? Job
9.24.
every time you go through Westminster Hall, and every time you enter in at
the Parliament-dores, cast your eyes upon both hands, possibly of one side or
other, you may see Christ sit in a poor oppressed condition, unpitied by all
passers-by. Many a poor widow stands with a Petition in her hand, written with
the heart-bloud of her husband, and subscribed with a thousand thousand tears,
because she can get no eye to read it, no hand to prefer it, nor no bowels
to dispatch it; Sir, sir, I beseech you read this, it is a very legible
lamentable character within, and without lamentation, mourning, and woe, like
Ezekiels roll, and yet every one passes by and over-lookes her: As you may
eat up the sins of the people, by winking at them, so you may do their
miseries. How sad is this may you conceive, to such a poor soul, and how
sadning to the Spirit of the Lord that is in you, that can so void of bowels,
go by? The tith possibly of some trifling time that is spent by you, O what
service might it do to put bread into the mouths of many that are ready to
starve? Alas poor creatures, of which this Kingdom is now but too full,
whither should they come but to you? The widow has no husband but you, the
fatherless has no Father but you, the cripple has no legs but you, the
wounded have no money to buy plasters but from you, all the oppressed are bid
by God to call you Gods, Fathers, and if you cast them off too, when they have
cast off all for you, or if you shall while them off, when they tell you, Sir,
this, is our last meal in the barrel, and this our last oil in the cruse, I
must go home and eat this and dye, if you do not help me. The Lord Jesus be
merciful to us, these living rafters of the house, will cry out against us
all. I beseech you, I beseech you, Neither did she strengthen the hand of the
poor and needy, therefore I took them away as I saw good. Ezekiel. 16.49 50.
Honorable Worthies, let as little guilt lie at your doors, as possible may
be, I assure you, Judgment lies not far off it: I know your necessities are
great, and yet I profess my heart I fear, there be some cases, if not more
pitied, will make your necessities greater. Remember it is but a Kingdom of men
which you rule, and that the most High also rules in these Kingdoms of men.
Seven times shall pass over thee, said God to that great and lofty Prince,
till thou know that the most High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it
to whom he will, Daniel, 4.32. Misery enough attends that greatness, that
cannot stoop to hand and heart, the condition of the distressed. Honorable
Worthies, I have said, and with much simplicity of heart, have I delivered the
message of my Master, all these things which I have spoken, I humbly judge to
be the pleasure of the Lord, which if they may prosper in your hands, I will
say of your Kingdom as Daniel speaks of Nebuchadnezars, Dan. 4.15.
that let the Lord humble us as he pleases, and make seven times pass over
us, till there be nothing but a stump left (as truly now it is not far from it)
yet this stump shall be with a band of iron and brass.

Errata.
FOr patients page 13. line 28. read patience. For art p. 13. l. ult. read
(...). for pretii peccatum p. 4. l. 22. read peccati pretium.

FINIS.

