The Lamentation of a Bad Market: OR, The Disbanded Soldier.
IN Red-coat Rags attired,
I wander up and down,
Since Fate and Foes conspired,
thus to array me,
or betray me,
to the harsh censure of the Town;
My Buffe does make me Boots, my Velvet-coat and Scarlet
Which used to do me credit, with many a Sodom Harlot,
Have bid me all adieu most despicable Valvet:
Alas poor Soldier, whither will thou march?
I Have been in France and Holland,
guided by my stars,
I Have been in Spain and Poland,
I Have been in Hungaria,
in Greece and Italy.
and served them in all their Wars;
Britain these 18 years has known my desperate slaughter,
I Have killed ten at one blow, even in a fit of laughter,
Cone home again and smiled, and kissed my Landlords Daughter.
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
My valor so prevailed,
meeting with my Foes,
Which strongly me assailed;
Oh! strange I wondered,
they were a hundred,
yet I routed them with few blows;
This Fauchion by my side, has killed more men I Will swear it,
Then Ajax ever did, alas he never came near it,
Yea more then Priams Boy, or all that ere did hear it:
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
For King and Parliament,
I was a Praester John,
Devout was my intent;
I haunted Meetings,
used zealous greetings,
crept full of Devotion;
Smect^m^s won me first, then holy Nigh prevail,
Then Captain Kifin flops me with John of Leydons Tail,
Then Fox and Naylo^ bangs me with Jacob Beamonds flail:
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
I did about this Nation,
hold forth my gifts and teach,
Maintained the tolleration;
the common story,
and Directory*
I Damnd with the word ( Preach)
Time was when all Trades f^i^ed men counterfeitly zealous,
Turned Whining Snievling Pr^ters, or kept a country Alehouse,
Gat handsome Wives turned Cuckolds however were very jealous:
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
The World does know me well,
I never did peace desire,
Because I could not tell,
of what behavior,
I should savor,
in a Field of Thundering fire;
When we had murdered King, confounded Church and State,
Divided Parks and Forests, Houses, Money, Plate,
We then did Peace desire to keep what we had gat:
Alas poor Soldier, whither will thou march?
Surplice was surplisage,
we Voted right or wrong,
Within that furious Age
of the Painted Glass,
oh Pictured Brass,
and Liturgy we made a Song.
Bishops and Bishops Lands were superstitious words,
Until in Soldiers hands, and so were Kings and Lords;
But in fashion now again in spite of all our Swords:
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
Some say I am forsaken
by the great men of these times,
And they are no whit mistaken,
it is my Fate
to be out of date*
my Masters most are guilty of such crimes;
Like an old Almanac I now but represent,
How long since Edgehill fight, or the Rising was in Kent.
Or since the dissolution of the first Long-Parliament.
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
Good Sirs what shall I fancy,
amidst these gloomy days?
Shall I go Court brown Nancy,
in a Country Town,
they will call me Clown,
If I sing them my Outlandish Plays;
Let me in inform their Nodle with my Heroic Spirit,
My Language and worth besides, transcend unto merit,
They Will not believe one word, what mortal flesh can bear it?
Alas poor Soldier, etc.
Into the Country places,
I resolve to go,
Amongst those Sun burut Faces,
I Will go to Plough,
or keep a Cow;
it is that my Masters now again must do:
Soldiers ye see will be of each Religion,
They Are but like Stars, which when the true Sun rise they are gone;
I Will to the Country go, and there I Will serve Sir John:
I, I, it is thither, and thither will I go.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Charles Gustavus, 1660.


