THE CHARACTER OF A Time-serving Saint: OR, The Hypocrite anatomized, and
thoroughly dissected.
To the Tune of the three Cheaters.
THe Heavens do frown, the earth does groan,
To hear the poor man make his moan:
The God of love does hear the cry
Of the poor Widows misery;
And eke the fatherless complaint
Which they make of the formal Saint:
For they advance themselves in pride,
And care not what to the poor betide,
And all that hold community,
By them as Ranters counted be.
But mark me well, and then you will say,
No greater Ranters live then they.
To feed the hungry, and naked cloth,
It is a work they much do loath.
They deck themselves in brave attire,
Whilst poor go wetshod in the mire.
With laces brave themselves they paint,
An ornament fit for a Saint.
Fine Holland under Cipresse black
About their neck and down their back:
Whether it be for warmth or pride,
I know it is easy to decide.
But all this while the poor do want
That which is wasted by the Saint.
You gentle Tailors, that would see
The newest fashions which there be;
Do but the meeting place frequent,
And then you shall have full content.
For of new fashions there is no want,
They are so looked for by the Saint.
You Shoe-makers, which are complete,
And fain would fit a foot most neat,
Unto the Saints assembly go,
For a high heel, and a long toe,
Although the poor man's foot go bare,
New fashioned shoes the Saints will wear.
Next unto you I shall repeat
Their superfluity at meat,
How they must have roast, bake'd and sod,
As if their belly were their God.
Preserves and sweetmeats they will not want;
O blessed thing to be a Saint!
Their Jack must run, their Pot must boil,
Their Cook-maid she must sweat and broyl;
On their Lord's Day she is made a slave,
That they their dainty cheer may have,
Whilst fatherless and hunger faint,
Such care is had to feed a Saint.
Whilst they are in the Church, and pray,
The poor man in the porch does lay;
Having no house to hide his head,
Nothing but straw to make his bed;
And he in vain does make complaint;
For there is no pity in the Saint.
Now all that know what Ranting means,
Must needs confess it is those sins,
When one riotously has spent
That which his fellow creatures want;
But this the Saints are freqeunt in,
And guilty of that Ranting sin.
Now if you think me much too blame,
I shall not spare to write my name;
I will not bring my self in thrall;
Men do me Lionel Lockier call;
Others by the name of Rant,
Such holy words flow from the Saint.
FINIS.

