THE ANSWER OF The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London, to his Majesty's gracious Letter and
Declaration, sent by the Lord Mordant; and a Present of ten thousand pounds
from the City to the King; With their Declaration to submit to his Majesty's
Government, and an Order for taking down the States Arms, and setting up of the
Kings. The names of the Earls, Lords, and Gentlemen, appointed to go to the
King; the rich and glorious Crown and Scepter, preparing for the Day-tryumphant
of his Royal Majesty's Coronation; and one hundred thousand pound a year to be
settled upon the King, in lieu of the Court of Wards and Liveries, to the great
joy of all loyal subjects.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

London, Printed for Samuel Styles, living in Fleet Street.

Long live KING CHARLES The SECOND: Or the Order of the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, for taking down the ^tates Arms, and setting up of His Royal
Majesty's.
IN the days of Queen Elizabeth and King James, this Kingdom was in a
peaceable posture both in Church and State, being then sound within her self,
so that she was able, by the Powerful Hand of God, to go out in Battle and
foil all her enemies; the secret practices that then were on foot against her,
returned on the Heads of the Contrivers; so that then she was a terror to all
the Nations round about her, no one daring to lift up his hand to disturb her
peace and settlement: Thus did she continue till the Martyr Charles was cut off
by the Butchering hand of his own Subjects, but by the Papistical instigation,
that was the last night of Englands luster, ever since which time, she has
been covered with a black and thick dark Cloud, nothing but gloomy Chances,
Changes, Revolutions, and Turnings, which have tormented her like a
Weather-beaten Shipwrackt Vessel, hurried and tossed upon the Regions of
Neptune by the enmity and competion between him and the Porcan puffs; first
here, then there, never grounded upon any firm Basses! How many Rivers of
innocent Blood within these 20 years have been spii^ in the Fields? Whom think
you must answer for these things? The Father has risen up in rage against the
Son of his Loins, and the Son against those who gave him light. The Daughters
and Wives that have been ravished and defloured by the cruel en^m^es, your
Brethren that have perished with bitter Oaths in their mouths, the loss you
have suffered by Plunders, Rapes, Murders, Goods, Estates, Wives, and Selves,
is of great concernment; the Oaths upon Oaths, Leagues, Vows, Covenants,
Protestations, Remonstrances, and Engagements you have made both to Nobles and
Commons, to defend the Kings, Queens, Princes, and Royal Families Persons in
their Rights and Privileges, Honor and Dignities: And that yet you should
murder your King! -- Nay, Banish his virtuous Wife and Children; not only
Princes, but English Freeborn Princes from their Lawful and Undoub^ed
Birthrights, spoil his houses, and put to sale his goods, and part the spoil
of their Lands, Properties, and Revenues, etc.

Where is now the Government that Peace has Crowned our Nations under? We had
a King as a Legacy, and that the best our Fore fathers could leave us of
Temporal things; but we have played the Prodigal Son with him; and how many now
would be glad to feed with the Swine for a contenting sustentation. We had then
a full enjoyment of all the mercies that could be in a Kingdom, We had a
Government in the Church, Religion was countenanced, we had pious and able
Divines, Justice ran down our streets like a mighty stream and friends and
neighbors would say one to another, Whether go you, Why to Church (said they
presently) then we were happy then we made good the Old Proverb, Content with
Godliness is happy gain. The Nurseries of learning from whence has sprung all
the Pillars of the Gospel, in those days, we countenanced, cherished, upheld,
and encouraged; then was Youth Trained up in the fear of God, evil doers were
discouraged, and well doers countenanced, honesty and plain dealing was used
much then among us. What equity was therein Courts of Judicature, the King
himself not being exempted from the Comencement of a suit against him by the
meanest of his Subjects. When there was one lawful single person and a King
ruled these Nations, then we were filled with Trade, and the Kingdom richly
flourished, and we were the terror of all the Nations round about us, no one
daring to disturb our peace.

Now let us enter upon a serious r^flection of the other part of our miseries
in the Kingdom of England.
FIrst, here sits your Headless King Beheaded, with Blood all over! Are these
the garments you array your Princes in? Next, behold his Children turned out of
Doors, and left to the mercy of strangers; the Children of your Martyred King,
the Children of your Innocent suffering King, your Lawful King and his
Brethren; not only Princes, but English Free born Princes: In another place
lies his Houses and Palaces turned to a heap of ruins! His Furnitures and
Household stuff consumed and destroyed, the Crown rent by Wild Bores amongst
themselves, whilst you stand gazing upon them. You may see now what all their
fair pretenses are come too: Let me ask you one Question; What was your reason
in shedding so much blood? For what end did you do it? To set up Usurping
Beggars to Tyrannize over you! They pretended to Peace, the Lord knows what
Liberty for you, and I think they have done it; but how have they done it? They
have taken and Usurped liberties to make you their Bondmen. First, they Voted
Kingly Office to be heavy and burdensome to the Commonwealth; and good reason
too, for had they not done so, their cause, their glorious cause had been quite
slipped and laid as low as the Dust of the Earth. It is now eleven years since
you lived in Peace, in hope of this Idea, Vtopian, or Farie Commonwealth, that
they have flamed and fool d you withal, and will as many years more, if you
will suffer them; but I hope suffering has taught you wisdom.

Thus much for the Reader, by way of Paraphrase, upon Englands lamentable ruin
and confusions; we shall in the next place present you with the most
universally satisfactory, and the most welcome News that ever came to these
three Kingdoms since that 29 of May, which was the Birthday of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles the second, whom God preserve.
OUr long-suffering Prince, and gracious Majesty, in consideration of the many
miseries which these poor Nations have bin so long exercised with, cannot think
of a more natural and proper remedy, then to resort to those for advice, who
are entrusted to repair the breaches that have been made. Upon which, ground,
his majesty sent a Letter and Declaration to the House of Lords another to the
House of Commons; and his gracious letter with a declaration enclosed to his
Excellency, and his gracious letter and declaration to the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common council, who out of their respects they owe to his
excellent Majesty while it was reading stood all bare.

The Common Council upon reading his majesty's gracious letter, ordered that
the right honorable the Lord mayor do acquaint the Lord Viscount Mordant and
Sir John Greenvile, who brought the said letter and declaration, That this
Court do return most humble and hearty thanks for his gracious owning of this
court and city, and declare their readiness to be under His majesty's
government; in testimony whereof, they have taken down the Commonwealths Arms,
and ordered the Kings Arms to be set up. And further that this Court do beg the
favor of the Lord Mordant to return with an Answer in Writing to his Majesty
from this Court: And also, that this Court do intend very speedily to send
members of their own to wait on his Majesty.

Since which time, the Honorable Court have ordered, That Alderman Adams,
Alderman Robinson, Alderman Bateman, and William Wild Esquire Recorder of London,
together with col. Broomfield Major Chamberlain, Alderman Vincent, Mr.
Bloudworth, Mr. Ford, and Mr. Bateman Esquires, are to attend his Majesty with
a Letter from the City of London, with their Present of ten thousand pounds.

The House of Peers have made choice of the Earls of Oxford, Warwick, and
Middlesex, with the Lords Berkley Brooks, and Hereford, to carry their Answer
to his Majesty. The House of Commons have also agreed upon their Answer, and
have appointed a proportionable number of their members likewise to attend his
Majesty.

The Lord General and his Officers having agreed upon a ^etter in answer to the
Message which they received from the King, Dr. Clergies was ordered to attend
his Majesty with the said Letter, and began his journey for Breda, Friday May
the 4th.

Mr Speakers Speech to Sir John Greenvile, upon presenting of his Majesty's
Letter and Declaration.
Sir John Greenvile,
I Need not tell you with what grateful and hearty thanks the Commons now
Assembled in Parliament have received His majesty's gracious letter, res ipsa
loquitur: You your self have been Auricularis and occularis testis de rei
veritate. Our Bells and our Bonfires have already begun the Proclamation of His
majesty's goodness, and of our Joys. We have told the People that the King is
coming home again; and they have resounded it back again to us, that they are
ready, and th ir hearts are open to receive him. Both Parliament and People
have cried aloud in their prayers to God above, long live King Charles the
Second. And I am to tell you, that this House does not think it fit that you
should return to Our Sovereign, without some testimony of their respects to
your self. They have ordered that 500 l. shall be delivered unto you, to buy a
Jewel, as a badge of honor which is due to a person whom the King has
honored to be the messenger of so gracious a message: And I am commanded in
the name of the House to return you their very hearty thanks.


The Parliament have Ordered, That a Committee do consider of the Court of
Wards and Liveries, and all Tenures thereunto belonging, and to prepare
something for the consideration of the House, for the settlement of 100000 l by
the year, upon his Majesty in lieu thereof.

The day of the Kings Coronation is supposed will be celebrated on the 29th of
this instant, his Majesty's Birthday; the Kings Arms are to be set up
forthwith in all Churches, market towns, and other usuaal places, throughout
England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, and all the Territories and Dominions
thereunto belonging, and the States Arms are to be taken down: This glorious
Work is already begun in several parts of the city of London; and the Princely
Statue of Charles the first, of ever blessed and never dying memory, and the
Statue of our Sovereign Lord K. Charles the second, are to be set up in the
Royal Exchange London. The Crown and Scepter is also preparing in a most
magnificent manner; and the People begin with voices of loyalty, and allegiance
to sing.

God save Charles our lawful KING.
FINIS.

