blazon or coat of arms
By the Major.
FOrasmuch as it is conceived and apprehended by the Court of Common Council,
that the City at the present is in great danger; And that the same does
require more then ordinary care for the preventing thereof: And for that
purpose the said Court of Common Council has entered into consideration of
what may conduce to the safety of the City; and in pursuance thereof, These
are in His Majesty's name straightly to charge and command you, and every of you,
That some of your selves in your own persons, with some of your Constables, do
presently upon sight hereof repair to every Householder within your Ward, and
give them strict charge and command (as they will answer the contrary) that
during this Night, to Morrow, to morrow at Night, Monday next, and Monday at
night next, they do not suffer any of their Children, Servants, or others under
their command, to go abroad out of their Houses, but only to morrow in their
own company to Church. And further, that this Night, and to Morrow at night,
some of your selves, with some of your Constables do make diligent search in
all places within your Ward, where you shall think fitting, for all persons
that do now lodge within the same; And that you cause their Names to be taken,
and to enquire of them the cause of their lodging there: And such as you shall
find to be Soldiers, to know of them where their Quarters are, and to require
them presently to repair thither according to their duties: And such as are
dangerous people, to secure their persons, and cause them the next morning to
be carried before some of the Justices of the Peace within the City, to be
examined and disposed of according to Law; and that you return the Names of all
you shall so find. And further that during the time aforesaid, you cause all
the Gates and Posterns within your Ward to be kept shut; And that some of the
Common-councel-men of the Ward within and without the Gate, may attend at the
same, and have the Keys of the Gate, and give directions for the opening of the
same, as occasion shall require, and not otherwise. And further, that you do
appoint one or more that you may trust, to see the Chains within your Ward,
during the said Three nights, to be put up and locked at Eleven of the clock in
the night; and opened at Five of the clock in the morning: And that some be
appointed to guard the same Chains, that may be able to maintain them against
any violence that may be offered. And lastly, That you take special Order,
that during the time aforesaid, you cause a good and substantial double Watch
and Ward, to be constantly kept, of good and substantial Householders of your
Ward within the same; and especially at the Gates and Landing-places within
your Ward: And that they so order themselves, that the one Watch and Ward may
continue until the other be set. And that they be careful to see the Peace
and safety of the City preserved: And that you be careful that all these
things be put in execution and duly observed, as you will answer the contrary
at your Peril.

Dated this 29. of April, 1648. To the Alderman, Deputy, and
Common-Councell-men, in the Ward of Michel.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1648.


