ENGLAND Faithfully watched with, In her Wounds: OR, Christ as a Father sitting
up with his Children in their swooning state: Which is the sum of several
Lectures, painfully preached upon COLOSSIANS 1.

By Nicho. Lockyer, M. A.

(...) LXX

I will stand upon my watch, and abide upon the tower, and intensely fix my
meditation, to perceive what he will speak in me, and what I shall answer, when
upon my argumentation,

Hab. 2.1. But watch thou in all things, bear evils, fulfill thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4.5. Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard, and Ben. Allen, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, 1646.

To the distressed DOMINIONS OF ENGLAND.
EVery Creature since the fall, is very unruly, Paerae Adam: all the earth is
wild: it is the Scriptures Motto upon the creation.
and of the more magnitude any way, the more unruly; the bigger in bulk or
brain, the bigger bent upon it to destroy all, neither God nor self excepted.
The misery of the creatures, is distinguished in this point by Solomon often,
into folly and madness. there is a kind of madness in all inferior
creatures, and as such are cast into prison: Job, out of the grate of his own
prison, saw such a truth, and instanceth some of the creatures below him,
instead of all the rest, though not so meekly (I think) as should have been,
considering whom he spoke to. Job. 7.12.
Am I a Sea, or a Whale, that thou putt'st, gnalai mishmar, a prison upon me?
Job grants madness in creatures below him, and their imprisonment, upon this
ground to be just, but saw not his own strong distemper, by which he did so
criminate Christ, which neither the Whale, nor the Sea, nor any creature else
below man, does; which was not only madness, but folly and madness, (i.) reason
forced into more then unreasonablenesse. Kingdoms and Nations may for their
magnitude be fitly compared to Whales and Seas, and the one as easily as the
other, does the great God cast into prison when mad; and truly, thus have the
Dominions of England for the generality, been a great while, and it is well if
all our bleeding has any whit asswag'd it; and therefore though we have
suffered much, and yet may much more, we cannot look out at the grate of our
prison, and criminate him that cast us in. A contented person cannot be
miserable, no more can a contented Kingdom. Contentedness has much, when she
has but a house over her head. A prisonhouse is a house, Yea, a pit is a
house, beth habbor, Jer. 37.16.
although not all-out so well furnished and accommodated as other houses; there
is something harder fare, lodging, and usage, but yet some shelter, and some
nourishment to keep life, beside opportunities to cry out at prison-windows, to
enlarge short allowance, and many a refreshment comes in at windows, when doors
are shut, and the man still a prisoner. The prisonhouse of the Whale is its
own element, which lessens much his bondage: so I may say to these Nations, our
prisonhouse has been our own Land, which considering how small it is, how
wasting and desolating our trial, and how near many big mouths which gape
after us, is the unexpressible love of Christ: this mercy is more then all our
misery. Besides, we have not been close prisoners, we have had the liberty to
cry out at our prison windows, and have got many refreshments from Heaven this
way, in our greatest straits and hardships, which indeed also adds much to the
magnitude of our mercies. Some stars which seem but small, and scarce to
twinkle with any visible rays at first looking upon, yet biggen much both in
magnitude and luster by a fixed eye upon them: So truly will all the mercies of
Christ to England, in those Christians eyes, who can seriously fix upon them.
Misery looked upon as mixed with mercy, is as course earth inlaid with precious
Ore, very delightful and gainful; but otherwise looked on, it imbitters and
worsens those on whom it is; of which great evil, England, take heed. Many now
complain much of bad times, which should amongst Christians, have a Christian
construction: but to speak properly in this point, times are bad only to bad
hearts, and unto them indeed they are very bad. Sinners have worsen'd very much
(I grant) in these few years of Gods heavy hand upon us, more, I think, then
in many years before; thousands look now very black in the face, as near death,
wrath, and cutting off, which looked but a little while ago, as Cedars in
Lebanon, and as if they would have lived a long life, even life for evermore.
From marad, which signifies to rebel, comes marud, which signifies poor,
afflicted, cast out. They which rebel under the hand of God, against the will
and ways of God, may talk and vaunt of impoverishing, afflicting, and casting
out others, but Christ will bring all these upon them. The trialls which were
upon England in the Bishops time, occasioned many apostates, so have those
which have been lately upon us, between the King and Parliament, which
generation of men, are the sharpest swords to kill a Land: When changes in a
kingdom, make changelings (i.) from Christ, so the Hebrews call an Apostate.
Deuteronomy. 21.18.
Moreh signifies, says Mr. Ainsworth, one that turns inwardly to the worse;
and such a one I may call Morah, novacula, a Razor: If there be any Razors in a
Kingdom to cut the throat on it, these are they. The Eastern parts of the world
had a prison, which they called Maphecheth, from Haphach vertit, to turn,
because evertuntur sontium corpora, the limbs and bodies of men were wrested
and turned out of joint. But though these prisons were bad, yet those are far
worse which wrest and turn the souls of men out of joint, (i.) further off
from Christ and his will, then they were before; and yet so has thy prison,
poor England, done to many. Such sad events of Gods hand, call every heart in
his place, to be a faithful watchman; to be more then vigilantes, to be
(...), as the Shepherds which gave tidings of Christ, were called, Sub dio
degere.
Livers in the field. One may be vigilans in his bed, as the Critic speaks,
though he stir not out of his house: but our condition calls every one in his
place, (...), to watch at home and abroad, in the city, and in the field; to
lay out, and lie out, to know no canopy so glorious as the open heavens; my
meaning is, we should so intend the good of Church and State, public and
private, so watch over all, as to give out all in the work. At this height for
thy welfare, England, and the glory of Christ, I have sincerely aimed and
endeavored, and shall do in the few days and little strength I have left. An
acceptable testimony of what I have done, let this labor of love be to thee:
what I shall further do, beside setting mine own weak house and heart in order,
to go home, I know not, more then breath out my dying breath in the bosom of
Christ for thee, that thou and all thy Worthies in thee, may do well and
worthily, from generation to generation, till Christ come.

Nicho. Lockyer.

To the READER.
It Was a very Christian expression, that once a very Learned and worthy friend
(of another Nation, and of another judgment to mine own) wrote unto me: Sir,
though there be two opinions between us, yet I desire there may be but one
heart; to which my desire does so concur, that my requests to Christ are, that
this Spirit may be powered out amongst all his people, in all the world. There
are many, and (I think) too many opinions amongst the godly already, but if
there were as many more, I hope I should be one in heart with them all, which
are in Christ, and walk in him. Variety of faces is not an affliction, but
matter of much admiration to behold, to such as are but humanely ingenious: So
truly, variety of judgments, simply considered, is not a grief, but a glory to
me to behold, when one Spirit of grace and heavenlinesse is in them all; for I
account it a glass of Gods own making, wherein to behold his manifold Wisdom;
and I further think, that he is setting many nobler spirits then mine own at
work, to dig up some pearl and precious truth for me, which yet I have not. I
differ, Reader, with none, but them that differ with Christ. As for them that
vary in judgment from me, whose lives are holy, I am jealous that they are
better acquainted with Christ then I, and so I lay my hand on my mouth, and
leave them alone to their Master and mine, believing that we are as Laban said
to Jacob, Chinissather ish meregnehu. Because we are hid, a man from his
friend. Genesis 31.49.
but hid from one another, neither hid from Christ. Our light is so dark, that
a man, a Christian man is hid from his Christian friend, in matter of
judgment, but there is a Mitspah, one God watching between us both, which will
bring us to see one another, and himself plainly in heaven. Let this be my
Apology for my spirit and opinion, to thee, Christian Reader, and to all the
people of God, that so Satan by no spirit of prejudice hinder the profitable
participation of this work, which speaks of no controversy between Christian
and Christian, betweeen King and Parliament, or between man and man, but of
that controversy which is between God and (I fear) all men in these Dominions
under which we are; and how this controversy will end, give him that loves
Christ and thee, leave longer yet to study and pray ere he give thee in an
answer under his hand. As for errata's, the Author, Scribe, and Press, are too
full, there need the less in the Reader, or else things will be too bad. A
child wrote from Christ's mouth, and another from mine, which truly I had
hardly ease or life to overlook; and then, when to be printed, as hasty in this
(by other hands, I cannot say by other ends then mine own, for the undertaker I
take to be truly godly) as slow in the finishing of it: three Presses were
employed at once, two in the City, one in the Country, and he hardly one, that
should review them; so that doubtless, many things will displease others more
then my self, who expect to suffer much in preaching and printing, by them
that have little in them; and as for others, they will be candid, noble, and do
like themselves, take in good part, parts and fragments of him whom they honor
more then I

NICHO. LOCKYER.

COLOS. 1.13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.


Fitness for heaven is generally acknowledged in the foregoing verse, and
particularly and fully explained in this and that which follows, and put into
two branches, Deliverance from the power of darkness, and translation into the
kingdom of Christ: Who has made us meet for the inheritance of saints in
light, etc. What is that meetnesse? He has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son.

Deliverance undergoes a double acceptance; it means temporal deliverance
sometimes: Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low: deliver me from my
persecutours, for they are stronger then I, Psalm. 142.6. Sometimes it means
eternal deliverance, soul-salvation, deliverance from sin it self and the
dominion of it, and not barely from such domineering evils as sin sets up to
make this life miserable: Deliver me from all my transgressions, Psalm. 39.8.
Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, Psalm. 51.14. These expressions speak
soul-deliverance, eternal deliverance; and of this nature is that deliverance
here mentioned in my Text, as the words themselves explain.

Man now is in soul-misery, our eternal estate is undone, our eternal life
slain, the blood of our souls is spilt upon the earth. There is death, and
death with Emphasis; Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Soul-death is here meant* man is spiritually slain, stabbed at heart, undone
inwardly; he needs a deliverance from this death: So there is wrath, and wrath
to come; wrath that works hereafter upon spirits, when then they have laid
aside the bodies of flesh, in which they dwelt here. Even Jesus who has
delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. That deliverance and this
in my Text mean one thing, soul-deliverance, which every soul stands in need
of, but some only enjoy; Who has delivered us from the power of darkness.

Naturally.
Man is in soul-misery naturally; we are children of wrath by nature; wrath
works against us in the very womb: Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, and
this ere they had seen the world. Corruption is got into the blood, generation
is marred, man the noblest creature cannot beget a happy creature; when he goes
about this work, he lays the first foundation in sin. In sin was I
conceived, etc. David was marred from the beginning, and made miserable as soon
as crudled in the womb, as soon as any matter was laid together for such a
form. Treason stains the blood; the first man proves a traitor, and never
since any otherwise, but one. The first man poisoned his nature, and then begat
as he made himself, and not as God made him, and so does all the posterity to
this hour; and this makes so many men, so many worms and no men; so many base
miserable things, and not one worthy of the name of a blessed creature, but the
name of an uncreated thing, a piece of mere putrefaction, a worm, so in body,
and so in soul, mere putrefaction in all.

Judiciarily
Man is in soul-misery judiciarily. Justice has traced sin to its rise, and
plagued it at the fountain head. Man first abused his soul* and then his body;
he swelled within, pride puffed up his spirit, the man would be God; pride is
spiritual wickedness, which had suitable justice; man is made naked within as
well as without, body and soul stripped of God, and he that would be a God, is no
man, but a beast: Man that was in honor, became as the beast that perishes,
that is, perishing all over, for you know so is the state of a beast, soul and
body perishing. Justice works like justice, she makes suitable revenge; to cut
off a finger when the man deserves to have his neck cut off, humane justice
does not go forth so unsuitably, neither does divine. Man abused his glory, his
soul, and therefore God turned this glory into shame; man defiled this with
sin, and therefore this is subjected to wrath, and made to need deliverance
most, and therefore is this deliverance here from sin noted as the grand
deliverance, Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, etc.

Man is in soul-misery universally. Wrath, death, soul-death, Universally*
is passed over all men. The whole world is a great field of slain souls, not a
man in the world but lies under a deadly soul-wound. Unbelief has shut up all,
and that is a soul-plague, and yet the plague of all (says the Apostle) Jews
and Gentiles. The whole world is shut up in sin and misery, and needs a
deliverance: what a great goal is one sin become! a gangrene keeps not at one
part, it runs over all: There were many lepers in Israel, (says the prophet)
and he also says, there were many widows; but I cannot say of this world, that
there are many lepers and many widows, but all are lepers and widows, unmarried
creatures to Christ, not one good: Who can say his heart is clean? Prove. 20.9.
There is a plague of the body, but that is not every ones plague; but there is
a plague of the heart, and that is every ones plague: there are mortal
diseases upon the immortal souls of all, and the expression in the Text here
speaks it plain, Who has delivered [us] from the power of darkness, who has
taken us out of the common deluge.

bring them to see their state; but when this will not do, the sun sets, and
darkness comes in the place thereof, that is, misery and calamity, to beat
open these doors which love could not unlock. Look about thee England, thy last
remedy is upon thee to make thee good, to make thee know thy lukewarmnesse,
thy settlednesse upon thy lees, thy soul-misery. Thou beginnest to grow very
poor in temporalls, do thou yet begin to see that thou art poor in
spiritualls? Thou beginnest to be made naked in body, do thou yet begin to
see thy soul-nakednesse; what a poor, blind, wretched, and naked Church thou
art? what a pitiful soul thou have? Bishops may be, and Common Prayer book may
be, and this and that unwarranted thing may be in Gods worship; such language
as this speaks how soul-miserable thou art still.

But I will not be so general in the application of this point, I will speak
particularly to you. In the night owls eyes are open, and they see: It Is night
now in England, and very dark; ye blind creatures are your eyes open? do you
yet see any thing that belongs to your souls? does sin revive now things
without are killed? your iniquity has found ye out, have you found out it? Can
you lay your hand on your heart, and say, Here Is that iniquity that has made a
kingdom bleed, my family desolate, undone me and mine? Paul when the Law was
preached to him, sin revived and he died, in the consideration of his
wretched condition. God preaches Law now all the kingdom over, because Gospel
will do no good; does sin revive now, and can you see the wretched state of
your souls? When the sons of Jacob were cast into bodily misery, then their
soul-misery came to sight, what they had done to their brother Joseph, and they
could lay their hand distinctly upon that within which brought so much misery
without upon them. When ponds are stirred, and water let out, then frogs and
toads appear, and we see what uggly things they are: Thus has God dealt with
many of you Londoners; you had great estates like great deep ponds, and now God
has let out all almost, that you may see what mud, toads and frogs are at the
bottom of it in your souls, with what hearts ye got and kept your wealth: do
you see any uggly creatures yet stir in your souls? ye are almost, I think,
some of you, in Joseph's brethrens case, ready to starve for want of bread: Can
you now like them tell that within, which has made such clean work without,
which has cleaned your teeth and your states? Sensibility of soul-misery is
the thing that is driven at in all this.

The man that complains not of soul-misery amongst all other miseries he
undergoes, I am afraid is not sensible of the main evil upon him. Where there
is a new man and an old in one heart, there is a perpetual war, and this
very sensible, I find a law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind.
That which will be death to the soul, is death to it, and the soul groans under
it as in the pangs of death: Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Corruption according to its quality, and according to its quantity, a soul
sensible of its state, is sensible of both; what corrupt blood is in him, and
how much, and how it runs up and down in every vein, and pricks as it goes; and
no Physician like him that can do good to this diseased body, Who shall deliver
me from this body of death? What a burden corruption is to you, in the body of
it, and in the branches of it, and what a death it makes to your life; what a
blessing desired is Christ, and what pantings daily about these things you
know: there is no way like this to find out what soul-sensibilitie is in you.

Consider these things, and as you find your selves indeed sensible of
soul-misery; show it every one of you, by seeking deliverance from it, it
should be all your work, what else in this world have you to do? It Is an
employment for life, for all, to get our souls out of sin, and into Christ;
and yet some of you make it a work by starts, and mar all, sink your souls
lower, whilst you give but a half lift, that is, lift and let fall again: the
devil a little stirred, and not cast out, takes stronger hold.

Know your work, and know your time; know this time; You are not like to die
the common death of all men, Gods sore judgments are abroad: you may have your
throats cut quickly, in your beds, and how sad will it be when blood shall
touch blood, a body in blood touch a soul in blood: this will be a bloody sight
indeed. Sinners, me thinks you do not stir as if justice were near you, there
is killing and slaying round about us, and we in the midst of all are asleep:
is not your bloody cloud gathering too? There is a great cry of peace, and I
think God means no such thing yet: sinners, take heed justice does not seize on
your souls, ere you know them, or it. You are making bulworks and forts to
deliver your bodies, but what do you do to deliver your souls? You would not
have your bodies killed, and your souls are slain already, and stink so that God
cannot endure them: do you think that your bulworks will be any defense for
such bodies, as have such souls in them? Will not the justice of God beat down
all, to take her prey and seize upon malignants? You have more malignants in
the city then you are aware of: you have a great deal of malignancy in your
souls, and this will betray you all if you look not to it; there are many of
you desperate malignants to God, which yet are not so to the Parliament. What
souls you have, and what the condition of them is, look to it, and work out
salvation for them with fear and trembling, I will not give a rush else for all
your forts to defend you; justice will break through stone-walls, and
mud-walls, and through all, through your flesh and through your bones, till it
come into the very spring of sin, which is your souls, and there it will lie
burning for ever, as things when they are at their center, there rest. The soul
is the center of sin and wrath, and wrath will to its center do what you can,
and make what fortifications you can, if your souls be not delivered and saved
from that wretched condition wherein naturally they are.

Colossians 1.13. Who has ((...)) caught us out of the power of darkness.
I Have been more general in former attempts upon this verse, I shall now be
more particular, and undertake each term as the holy Ghost has here laid them:
in which undertaking I still beg your prayers: you can tell when you miss
Christ in my labors, and I can tell when you miss me in your prayers. Oil our
chariot wheels well, or else we shall drive heavily, the weight of Christ's
words and your souls is so great.

Salvation as accomplished and the author of it, noted in these two terms,
Who has delivered, etc. I purpose not to stand on; but the manner of Christ's
going forth to miserable man, noted in the next word, Who has snatched us (or
catched us) out of the power of darkness.

Christ snatcheth souls out of hell fire: the metaphor is used highly to adorn
the love of Christ, in his motion toward miserable man, and it does it indeed
gloriously, as it may be I may set forth to you in several particulars, and
all within the compass of the metaphor.

1. Christ moves strongly to save; Snatching speaks an act of force; Christ
overturns all that stands in his way when he puts forth to deliver a soul:
omnipotence stretches forth his arm in this work, devils tremble, iniquity is
subdued, captivity carried captive, the soul in the midst of violence,
violently rescued. The Lion of the tribe of Judah moves to save as a lion
strongly, terribly, none can resist his will, sinners, devils, nor men, Who
has resisted his will? Which way the will of God moves, power irresistible
seconds, he drives all before him, and takes his prey, to wit, the poor soul
that is preyd upon. Two Lions contend about the soul of man, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, and that roaring Lion you read of in Peter. The Lion of the
tribe of Judah is too strong for that Lion, and snatcheth the prey out of the
devils mouth, Who has snatched us out of the power of darkness.

2. Christ moves swiftly to save: Snatching notes swift motion. Power puts
forth in order to misery, there is but a step between hell and that soul that
is under the power of darkness, what therefore is done must be done speedily,
or the soul is lost. Christ is a present help, he moves as a Roe, as a young
Roe, very swiftly to apply remedy to miserable man. My beloved is like a Roe
or a young heart, behold he stands behind our wall, showing himself through
the lattice, Canticles 2.9. When the devil has the soul in his arms, Christ is
behind him, as the spouse speaks, he is behind our walls, at hand when Satan
assaults, and makes him let go his hold. The devil does not bite gently, nor
pull weakly; remedy therefore must be swift in this case, or else no remedy;
the soul quickly dies with deep wounds. Poison is of differing strength, some
kills suddenly and insencibly* all the devils poison does so, if not overruled
in working; an antidote is answerably applied; and upon this ground the Church
so prays, Make haste my beloved, and be like to a Roe, the companions hearken
to thy voice, make me to hear it. Some creatures take their game gently:
Spannels take a duck and bite not deadly, but the devil is not such a dog, when
he bites he bites deadly quickly, and therefore does Christ snatch out of his
mouth before all be desperate and past remedy.

3. Christ moves thoroughly to save. Snatching out of the power of darkness,
it is an expression that speaks a full and total assuming that which was fully
and wholly another; it notes a taking out of the devils arms into Christ's
arms, a personal surprise. Christ fights for his wife, as Samson and David
did, he catches his spouse out of the devils arms, and then she becomes entire
his. Christ's spouse is no harlot, she does not lie embraced between two, the
soul lies not in the bosom of sin which Christ has catched. Snatching from
another varies not the propriety with us, but such a catching of a thing as is
made in and by war, does; what I snatch or catch from my enemy in war is
wholly mine own. Christ gets every soul by the sword, by the sword of the
spirit, what he takes out of the devils kingdom, he takes by war, and the
propriety is varied. What was not his is his, they that were not his people
now are, they are his in the quality and property of the thing. They are
catched by the heart whom Christ catches, that catched and all is catched; the
captive now acknowledges the arms that overcame him, and stirs not from the
power of these arms, neither can be taken again. Christ takes often out of the
devils hand but the devil nor no instrument of his can snatch out of Christ's
hand; Christ keeps all he catches as wholly his. Whatsoever lies wrapped up in
this term (us) says the Apostle the devil has lost, and Christ has catched.
Who has catched us out of the power of darkness.

4. Christ moves preventingly in the salvation of man; catching speaks an act
unthought of, force surprising, the surprised dreaming nothing. Christ catches
sinners asleep in a dead sleep; soldiers are sometimes so catched, the devils
soldiers are all so catched. Corruption was another life in Saul, he did
breath out slaughter, he did move in sin in foul sin with no more pain then
you breathe, so secure and senseless; and in this condition catched,
surprised, and knocked down utterly unawares. Many a sinner has confessed this
way of Christ; I went to hear such a one and thought nothing, and was catched,
my heart convinced and overcome, which before never cared for the word of God.
Christ comes behind sinners, and ere they are aware seiseth upon them: Ye shall
hear a voice behind ye, says God. I was found of them that sought me not.
Christ comes to every carnal soul before sent for, but brings his stool with
him, and makes his own welcome; he catches no soul, but that soul is as much
caught with him ere he leaves him, Salvation is come to thine house, said
Christ. Christ comes before sent for, he takes every sinner before up, and
before ready, and helps him up, and makes him ready; washes him face and hands
and heart, and puts on clean raiment. The devils soldiers are all sleepie, and
keep no watch: Yet a little more folding the hands, this is every sinners tone
when Christ comes. No says Christ, no more sleeping now O soul, the voice of
the turtle is heard, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my
honycomb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk. Come away dear soul,
come away: unaware such a sweet voice is heard behind a man, and the man is
catched, and cannot withstand it.

5. Christ moves ravishingly: Caught sounds so much in my ear. Christ's way of
salvation is a ravishing way: nakedness is discovered, and glory is apparel
presented, with this sweet language, Sinner will thou wear it? I freely give it
to thee. This is love smiling, and the soul is taken: Sin made burdensome,
and shoulders presented, an able porter to bear it: this is the manner of
Christ's motion toward miserable man, and it is taking and ravishing; Know thy
nakedness, and buy of me: great deformity is discovered, and absolute beauty
presented, souls fall sick of love upon this, and are they not catched now
indeed out of the power of sin which did so please? Light appears to him that
saw none, and it is so glorious, so transcendently pleasant, that the soul can
endure darkness no more, and is not this soul catched out of the power of
darkness? Catching speaks a double power, active or passive, by the motion of a
thing, or by the quality of a thing, and Christ takes both ways. The
sweetness of Christ overcomes froward souls. There be fingers put out to
sinners, and these fingers drop myrrh, and that takes souls; Christ does
bemyrrhe his motion: naked motion would not take: his ointments have their
odor: Because of the odor of thy ointments, therefore the virgins love thee.

lead them captive at his will, rend and tear them, and yet the devil is no
tyrant with you; not a petition preferred in point of soul-slavery (I doubt)
all this Parliament time, to the great State above.

Sinners have you no souls? Yes. Where be they? who has them? Christ or the
devil? Christ. This should be experienced to us to do well. Whom Christ has
snatched out of the devils power, they admire him; the person is very
beautiful that redeems the soul. How beautiful was David as a Redeemer of
Israel from Goliath! Heaven and earth rang what a man he was. Much more
beautiful is a soul-redeemer; Who is this that comes from Edom, with died
garments from Bozra? this that is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the
greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save,
Esa. 63.1. Great things unlooked for amaze, Who is this that comes from Edom?
Did I ever employ Christ to take me out of the hands of the devil, and yet he
came and did it? Was I not his enemy and yet he became my friend! Was not my
soul an abstract of evil, enmity, dirt, and not dirtie, and yet in a sink he
came and poured out love! Here the soul dwells and admires. Glorious in
apparel, etc. Inside and outside of him that redeems, are glorious to the
redeemed. Christ's spirit is first admired that he would come, and then his
outside admired; all that that he brings with him to manage such a spirit and
pleasure, the apparrelling of his will, is red and glorious: heart, hand, head
of the redeemer, all is glorious in the eye of the redeemed. That Christ would
die his outside red with his inside, his skin scarlet-colored with his
heartbloud for me, what glorious apparel is this! That a Lamb would encounter
with a Lion, and surfeit him with his own blood for a prey, to make him let me
go out of his paws; who is that Lamb, and what is my soul that such a deadly
fieght should be made to save it! O my soul is not the price of blood upon
thee? is not thy nakedness covered with scarlet of such price as puts a God in
debt?

The redeemed adore the redeemer: this is in the text, Giving thanks to the
Father who has delivered us from the power of death, etc. a redeemed soul
feeds two with every mercy, himself and God; he admires love, this is feeding
himself; and then he praises God, and this is feeding of God too. Paul could
not speak about soul-deliverance, but he must make a breaking off and a
breaking out, Who shall deliver me? I thank God, Christ. The soul is naturally
active, but as it is freed by Christ it is much more active and ascending, it
sends to God all that is done upon it: The soul blesses necessarily as it is
blessed. Soul-blessings make their quality in us suitable to themselves, and
to their own nature; so much of God as they bring with them, so much of God
they leave in the soul, and the soul necessarily carries as much of God to
Heaven as it has of God from Heaven in any mercy. In the Devils arms there is
singing; drunkkards sing, and worldlings sing. In Christ's arms there is
singing too, there is singing of halelujahs, here the redeemed lift up the
Redeemer; every soul in Christ's arms sings to him: all Christ's children can
sing sweetly: there are songs of Sion, songs of deliverance. Divine love makes
gladness of heart, a heart gladded gets into that bosom that made it so, to
dilate it self, and that makes more gladness. A redeemed soul is every day
more admiring and more praising him that redeemed him then other. So many souls
snatched out of hell, so many sweet instruments of melody has Christ in this
world. Christ glorifies to be glorified; not a soul that Christ pulls out of
the devils mouth but he is like Jonah when he came out of the belly of hell, a
humble relater of wonderful things to God and man. All that Christ takes out
of the devils bosom and sets in his own, stroke him and kiss him.

3. The redeemed obey their redeemer. Not a lamb taken out of the power of the
wolf but follows the shepherd, Your obedience is come abroad unto all, says
the Apostle. Whom Christ takes, they become followers of him in the sight of
all. Redemption from the power of Satan and the power of sin are the same;
redeemed souls are out of both, and obey neither, they only observe him that
has taken them; I will run the ways of thy commandments when thou have set my
heart at liberty, says the Psalmist. He speaks as a captive set at liberty
that was glad of his legs, and observe what ways he takes to run in, I will
run the ways of thy commandments. The soul still is in behavior as the
power under which it is; if under the power of sin, it walks sinnefully; if
under the power of Christ, it walks holily in his commandments. The soul is
still according to the hand in which it is: would you know in whose hand and
power you are? observe well then of what behavior your souls are. Sinners you
wallow in your lusts, and live according to the power of your corruption, and
yet many of you plead and glory in your redemption by Christ. Your heart gives
your tongue the lie, and your life speaks you slaves to the devil and your
lusts. Is it a small thing to you to belie Christ and belie your souls? to
distract and make void divine redemption? Are your souls redeemed, and yet are
they in slavery to sin?

Acknowledge truth that discovers you, and confess your sad state, this would
better become you. A bad state is remediless whilst it is plead for as good:
the wicked may justify themselves, but God justifies none; it will be double
death to justify that which God and conscience condemn. Sinners, you cut off
your souls from grace by wicked confidence; God does nothing for the man that
thinks all is well, but prepare double misery for calling evil good. As
corruption is in strength, let every soul complain, O wretched man that I am,
etc. Corruption makes wretchedness, according to its strength, in every soul,
for as lust lives it misleads; sin will bear sway where it is not thrust out;
the old man is not as some old men that sit still and do nothing, but is very
stirring; corruption as it lives is imperious, all must be her servants, gifts,
parts, yea the very heart. Lust as it lives will bewitch your affection,
adulterate your judgment, creep into your bosom, and become your full
delight, then are you wretched souls indeed, then are you galley-slaves.
Sinners consider this point; corruption as it is in strength, keeps its
property in all, the best of you all will find the devils heaven a hell, Ah
Lord, what will his hell be then? You will be weary of your lives, as lust
lives in you, it is such a bondage, make what sweet out of it you can; the more
artificial you become in acting and managing corruption, the more power it
has in you, and the sooner will it kill all your felicity dead; you will
suddenly in the flame of lust cry out, as that Martyr in a flame of fire, in an
other case, Hell is come, is come, Satan is come, is come, as he cried out,
Christ is come, is come.

We may relieve our selves from this point too, respecting this land. If power
work irrisistablie to save the soul, the salvation of the body is much more
easy to it. One devil is more strong then all the wicked men in England, and
yet the power which opposes him about the soul, which he most looks at, and
contends for, is too hard for him. Fearful souls, be strong, you will see
irresistible power snatch poor England, as a brand out of the fire. Power it
self, as irresistible, should relieve, and as it has such a property, and so
works, snatching creatures when almost ready to be destroyed; this should much
more relieve and raise the heart. Were we much lower then we are, yet
irresistible power can put forth of a sudden, and snatch us out of the mouth of
lions, and it is its property so to do. You are left now to fetch in your
relief from God only, strike in to do it, as you behold any property of any
divine attribute to put forth it self. Now you hear that this is the property
of divine power, to work irresistably, Redemptio a nihilo que dam creatio est.
Means are still enough to that power which is absolute.
and to work so of a sudden, to snatch out of misery when all is ready to be
swallowed up; feed your weak souls with this, and move at the throne of grace
upon it, and surely you will hear of God, and England will be raised from the
dust, and have beauty for ashes: Before your pots can feel the thorns he shall
take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath: And the
righteous shall see this and joy, etc. Psalm 58.9.10. Both living, and in his
wrath, as living as his wrath, is the original; like that expression used of
Chora and his company, who went down quick into the pit, as living as the wrath
of God that took them off. There is snatching of wicked into hell, as well as
snatching of believers into Heaven.

1. Coloss. 13. Power of darkness.
I Do approve this translation, and possibly might join issue with it, and do
well; but give me leave rather a little to touch a more strict translation
according to the original. The word which is here translated power, is (...),
which signifies licentia, a general leave, such a kind of liberty wherein one
is freed to do what he will, of one hand or the other. So the Apostle uses the
word to the Corinthians: If a man eat or not eat, he offends not, only (says
he) use not your (...), license, in this case to offense. As this may be a
genuine signification of the word, so I believe it may give here a genuine
sense: Who has delivered us a licentia tenebrarum, from the libertinisme of
darkness and blindness, the lawlesnesse of Gentilisme; for darkness here
notes the rude estate of the Gentiles, their rudeness, in sacred letters, made
them a loose lawless generation.

Ignorance pollutes the will.
That I may have the favor to be heartily received in this reading of the text,
I would note this to you to stand on, That darkness makes loosnesse, ignorance
of the word of God makes a lawless soul, a Gentile. Nature is powerful as
truth is wanting; for corruption puts no yoke upon her self, but does what
seems good in her own eyes, when nothing to contradict. Nature yields up all
to will, soul, body, gifts, parts, and that is the God she sacrifices to of her
self, and to none else when she has no light; As you have yielded your members
servants unto uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6.19. Nature
yields up to will, will yields up to iniquity, one iniquity yields up to
another iniquity, a less to a greater, and this is the progress of fallen
man, till all be yielded up to the devil, and himself to hell. Nature
acknowledges no supreme but Just, lust is a king of her own crowning, to this
though never so base, though never so unclean, all shall serve, and to none
else; As you have yielded up your members servants to uncleanness, etc. Nature
is as licentious as hell, darkness is her supreme, and the prince and power
which only leads her.

The flesh has reasonings, if the spirit cannot answer them, The practice,
understanding.
the soul is overcome by the power of darkness, that is, darkness is put for
light, bitter for sweet, and this in a way of argument; for nature is loose,
and yet a justifier of her self in her way, by some blind mediums or other,
which is the damning power of darkness. If we say we have no sin, says the
Apostle, intimating that nature can argue for it self; the old man has a
tongue in his head, though scarce any brains or eyes, and he will speak for
himself: the grave can open her mouth and speak, as rotten as it is; this is a
voice from the dead, sin says it is no sin; and who can stand up and say
it is, when the soul has no light, when there is no sun in the heavens, but
all powers of the soul in darkness? Darkness calls not it self so, the crow
is beautiful to himself, the blackmoore fair in his own eye; sin says it is
no sin, this is (...), loosnesse,, and lawlesnesse with a witness,
licentiousness protested.

Darkness pollutes conscience, conscience erroneous: The conscience.
the soul is loose indeed, the man will then kill Saints, and call them devils,
the man will kill and slay whom he should not, and think he does God good
service. Conscience polluted, judgment is reprobate; judgment reprobate, the
life is so; judgment misjudging, and Samsons both eyes be out, and all in
thick darkness, and how strong soever other limbs and parts be, yet you may
lead the man whither you will, and set him to grind, or to what slaverie else
you will, till the man has killed himself: this is licentia insana, mad
liberty, bloody loosnesse. Corruption is infecting, and one faculty defiles
another; corruption works unto desperate lewdness, when conscience carries the
man to do wickedly; this person will kill men, and kill Christ in men, Why do
thou persecute me? How long will you resist the holy Ghost.

Ignorance Satan's proper advantage.
Finally, darkness is the devils element, and things are powerful in their own
element: Satan can lead a world of blind souls at once whither he will: Satan
and corruption are the council of State in dark souls, both consulting and
consenting, and they discern neither; and when these two carry all, the soul is
under a full power of darkness, and a general liberty. Satan has a
kingdom, and it is a kingdom of darkness; the devil is in his kingdom in a
dark soul, and a king in his kingdom rules all. Kings give laws in their
kingdom; What Satan and the flesh say, is a law to a blind soul; how loose
then must the life needs be! There is a law in the members, and the execution
of this law is not accounted rebellion, where the eyes be out, and the man in
the dark. Dark souls are as obeying as the devil is commanding; he that follows
the Lamb wherever he goes, is very holy; and so he that follows the wolf, the
devil, whithersoever he leads, you may conclude is very unholy, very
licentious, and under the power of darkness.

believe that their persons and fortunes would not be long behind; toads and
serpents when they are generated must live, who ever be stung and poisoned to
death. Unhappy Prelates! must England bleed and die rather then your pomp? all
her blood yet cries against this generation. Was not this the desire of that
company of men (I would not have them now imitated by any other) to throw down
light every where, and keep the kingdom in darkness, and so in loosnesse,
that every one might rise up one against another to accomplish their will, even
children against father, to cut the throat of purity and Puritans through the
land?

To you more particularly let me speak from this point: See here the spring of
your neutrality, you are dark; you can do any thing because you know nothing.
Truth has the power of God in it; your hearts bend any way, because you cannot
set up God before them: Sinners, how have ye heard? and what have you learned?
Your course speaks you loose to Christ, and to many Christians, what does it to
your own consciences? Have ye light? what, and live loosely? Then you withhold
the truth of God in unrighteousness, and you will suffer doubly, namely for
the abuse of light and conscience. A Libertine against light fights desperately
against conscience, or else has killed it quite. God is very angry with a man
that is a sinner in the day. O that thou had known in this thy day: sinners
in the day provoke God much, and will be beaten with many stripes. The prophet
Esaias speaks of darkning light in the heavens thereof, Esaias 5, 30. Libertines
against light, darken the sun in the heavens thereof; they can snuff out the
sun that shines in their souls, as one snuffs out a candle, they pull the
sun out of heaven, to make pleasure to themselves in the dark, and make as if
they knew nothing, what they do. Your hypocrisy is reigning, and if not looked
to, twill be ruining quickly; these do not perish for want of knowledge, but
for want of conscience.

Coloss. 1.13. And has translated] us into the kingdom, etc.
WE have been at the border of hell, and now we are come to the borders of
heaven: nature is as near hell, as grace is heaven. From nature to grace, and
from grace to glory, is lost man's journey home again; this journey is long and
man's legs weak, and not able to go it, and therefore does God bear him from
one to another, and transfer him along. Transferring notes motion from one
place to another; but upon some bodies shoulders, or in some bodies arms, by
bearing. Observe the road to heaven, and you shall see none going that way, but
in Christ's arms; you will see the way narrow, and full of cripples, carried
along from tithing to tithing, from sin to grace, from one grace to another,
till they come home to glory, which is their kingdom.

Grace is Gods carrying the soul to Heaven. Christ carries souls in his arms
unto eternal blessedness. Fallen man can neither stand nor go, his fall has
killed him, and the dead stir not but as they are carried. When the Angel
stirs the water, I have no body to put me in, said the cripple, if some body
would take me in their arms, or take me upon their backs and carry me in, I
might come to health and happiness. The emblem speaks our state, we are born
from a miserable condition, to a blessed; from sinfulness, which is soul
cripplednesse, to holiness, which is soul soundness and blessedness. Some
can prevail with their wounds and wear them out; but man is not so slightly
wounded; nature is deeply wounded, and lies by it: The Samaritan put the
wounded man upon his own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of
him, says the Evangelist, Luke 10.42. We are born from wounds to health, from
nature to grace; from the kingdom of Satan, to the kingdom of Christ, by
Christ's own power, we are transferred into the kingdom.

must. They will not come to me (says he of some, which is true of all) I must
go to them and fetch them, or they will never come to me else; Christ speaks
all our conditions in these words. There is not bare indisposition, but
opposition resolute, and in cases of this nature, all must be carried by
superior power, or nothing is done. It Is a hell to man to come out of hell,
and they are as devils tormenting before the time, that meddle about this
matter; you chain and carry distracted creatures to means of remedy:
corruption has its destructive haunt. They are a perverse and a crooked
generation, Deuteronomie 32.5. they will not go Gods way, and that they may
not, they wreath up their legs like a Tortoise, contorti, so says the
original, when a Tortoise wreaths in his legs under it, you must carry him,
if you will have him.



in his bosom: Christ is a father, and moves just so to his children; for
every one of his children is a Joseph to him: he takes up a child when
complaining like the Shunamite, and sets him in his lap, and keeps him their
till he die; all Christ's children die in his arms, like the Shunamites son.
If a child of God live an hundred years, his father never sets him down out of
his arms, but carries him unto death, beyond death* as the Psalmist speaks.
Christ wraps us up in his soul, and carries us there always, he is ever
mindful of us. You have that expression in the Scripture; we are but trifles
and yet Christ cannot put these trifles out of his mind; he carries our souls,
as he carries his own thoughts, he minds us, up and down the world, till we
come home. Compassion is, when things are laid to heart, and so carried up and
down; and they are choicely carried indeed, which are so carried. Compassion
carries Christ and us; compassion gathers about his heart, and that gathers his
children about there too, and so they are bound up together in that bundle of
life, and carried through sin and misery, to eternal felicity, into his
kingdom.

Christ saves surely: a father bears over his children, to make sure work, that
they may not fall in. Between nature and grace is a great gulf, and a remove
from one to the other, is not without great danger; soul transaction from
corruption to grace, is with perpetual fierce conflict; the soul cannot put
out a step for heaven, but Satan lets fly at it, and Christ therefore is a
convoy, and he transferres from sin to grace, and from hell to heaven. As
transactions of state removing this and that, have their bloody contests: so
transaction of that great State, for eternity within, pulling down and setting
up, have deadly contest, and the soul will be killed in the way to heaven, if
not born along. When Israel went out of Egypt, not a dog barked, but when a
soul goes out of the bondage of sin, into the liberty of Christ, many dogs
and devils bark and bite: Christ therefore as he does pull out, so he does
carry in, whom he fastens hold on he lets not go, whom he takes into his arms
he keeps there, and still carries them there in all conflicts, to make sure
work; all Christ's children fight in his arms, if the devil can kill them there
so, they all fight upon this advantage every battle; passage to heaven is
secured, the great whale that is master of the deep bellies us, and saves us
from all storms, carries us, and conveyes us to our haven, the kingdom of his
dear son.

The king brought me into his chambers, says the Spouse. Christ's yoke is
easy, easy indeed, because born upon another neck: you yoke creatures so
that their yoke may not pinch, you use art to lessen labor, and make work no
work, and pains pleasures: Christ is excellent at this art, he does so yoke
every one, that he draws with ease, he makes every ones yoke big enough to put
in his own neck together with the man, and so he draws himself and the man too,
and that is an easy yoke indeed, and a little burden: as you put something of
weight sometimes into a child's hand, and you carry the child with that in his
hand: therefore the child easily bears, because he and his burden both, are
born by another.

This is substance according to shadow: this sweet way of salvation was
typified, in Noah. Noah was transferred by an ark from an old world to a new,
and that shadowed out salvation in Christ* and the very manner of it, Christ
transferring the soul from a bad state to a good. So Israel was brought out of
Egypt to Canaan, and the Scripture tells you how, just as an Eagle carries her
young* and as a father carries his children. Have I conceived all this people,
that thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father
carries the sucking children, Numbers 11.12. God was more tender then Moses, it
was tedious to him to bear so many* and so froward, in his bosom to Canaan;
yet so did God, and so would he have had Moses done* and because he had not
patience enough to do it, he died ere he came there; it is dangerous not to be
compassionate, according to express command, though ones burden be never so
great. God took up the burden that Moses would not, and he tells you how he
carried them, As an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreads abroad her wings, takes them, and bears them upon her wings; So the
Lord alone did bear them, and no strange God with him. Deuteronomie 32.11, 12.
God can bear much alone, and will, for a sinners good, and his own glory, that
is, to answer types, and fulfill truth.

winds of Doctrine, the devil is in that wind; when error rules the life,
Satan rules the heart, this soul is born in the arms of an evil spirit. It Is a
light soul that a ly will carry, but his fall will be heavy. Whom Christ
carries, truth carries; the word of God, and the Spirit of God, are the two
wings upon which Christ carries souls to heaven. Upon what wings do ye flee? By
these you may know who carries you, whether Christ or the devil. Christ wraps
up spirits in the word, and so away with them to heaven.

tempest, Satan certainly is in that tempest: souls born by that evil spirit,
are hurried. Tempests are beside rule, and beside resistance; so are souls
carried by Satan; the heart has chosen its own way, and reason must not
stir, nor divinity less; every thing is irksome that opposes, nothing that
contradicts can the man hear; this soul is in the devils chariot, tumbling to
misery apace, if God stop not no man can. The Lord seldom stops souls when they
run apace, till they have fallen and hurt themselves much, if not ruined
themselves quite. Christ drives gently, he goes truths way, and truths pace:
souls carried by Christ, go no faster then truth, such make a stop at every
turning, and look out, they go slowly and surely. Christ kicks at wilful
spirits, but he does not carry them; they are meek souls willing to be carried
only by Christ, whom Christ carries.

the world, to a god which is not God. Carrying away from God is a graduall
thing, some are carried away more then others, and some are carried away quite,
which I will stand upon a little. I see some carried away extremely, which
makes my heart tremble to behold. Men are carried away captive, that is, when
evil is committed against all means used to avoid it, and that case is
afflicting, but not destroying: for it is the case of the best sometimes. The
compass is set to such a haven, and all mariners working that way, and by
force of wind beaten aside.

As the heart stands to Christ, and truth, or not; so is the man more or less
carried away: some plead against their own hearts, as working so, and so
unruly, and side with conscience and Christians as condemning them, and wish
that as they condemn that which is naught, that so they would execute it too,
and bury it quite, that like the body of Moses, neither man nor devil might
find it, to make a resurrection of it again. Others plead for an evil engaged
affection, against Christians, yea against conscience; and all the art lies to
keep along between these two smoothly and well, that sin and the man may
enjoy themselves without being notorious both, and afraid one of another* or
both of hell; this soul is carried very far from God, if he see it, but if
not, the man is in a desperate condition, and yet Christ can bear out of this.

Does God bear souls heaven-wards? load him, let him not want employment, cast
your burdens upon him. Casting our burdens upon God, turning off perplexing
thoughts; making known requests* and resting upon God for answers. One
complains of this, and another of that, but do you complain of all to Christ,
that he would give you with his everlasting arms a lift? Iniquity is too heavy
for the soul, and the soul is too heavy for it self, when it only bears it
self, and makes not to Christ to be born. Every thing cracks under the weight
of sin: our very souls crack under the weight of sin. Sinners thank your
selves: Why is not Christ of more use with you? You would bear all alone, that
will kill you: Christ can carry all alone, your souls and the guilt and filth
that is in them, but none else; he did tread the winepresse alone. There is art
in unloading the soul upon Christ, and it lies in this; in observing
particularly what loads the soul, and what Christ has said particularly to
such a case; no soul miscarries of being born to heaven that thus does.

Christians blesse-God, he takes much pains with you: receive this, and I
conclude this point. Gods arms are as free for you, as yours for your children.
I have often wondered at that expression, They shall run and not be weary: but
now I see how it comes about, we run upon another legs. Christians, that you
keep on the way of God so cheerfully and so resolutely, against all opposition,
it is Gods bearing of you; bless him, you would wax weary and withdraw, to the
perdition of your souls else. Perseverance in grace is a great deal of pains to
Christ, though it be little to us. When you carry children long in your arms,
over this style and over that, do not your arms ache? Then think of Christ, what
bearing your souls and your sins is, and whether it be worth thanks. Let him
have the burden for the bearing, and if it were all gold: You pay porters for
carrying this and that, pay Christ well, let him have your souls for the
carriage of them.

Coloss. 1.13. Into the kingdome] of his dear Son.
CHrist has double honor from above, external and internal, the hand of
God, and the heart of God, and both here one after another to be spoken of:
Preferment, and this as a great favorite: A Kingdom, and this because dear, a
son of love. Into the kingdom of his dear Son, or Son of his love.

There is a general misjudgment of Christ: We judged him forsaken of God. The
Jews generally judge meanly of Christ, and so do we Gentiles; but all without
warrant, for God does not so: Christ is high in Gods esteem* and has honor
suitable, A kingdom here, besides a kingdom to come.

God sits upon the throne of his holiness, Psalm. 47.8. Holiness here speaks
mercy and justice, and the demonstration of these is Christ's throne, that upon
which he sits* Christ has no other seat nor abiding in this world, but as a
dispenser of mercy and justice, God sits upon the throne of his holiness. Man
can sit down upon things without himself, but God cannot, his own holiness is
his throne, the whole world will afford him no rest, nor no seat to stay a
moment upon, but only what himself does in it. Some are condemned already, and
by that rule some are saved already; some broken in heart, and some hardened in
heart, and all these speak out Christ's throne here, in the power that does
these, sits Christ; he sits upon the throne of his holiness. Kingdoms have
thrones, thrones of judicature, and so has Christ: He that rejects my words,
has one that judges him, says Christ. All move as if there did none sit and
judge, but it is the misjudgment of the world; for there is a throne erected
here below, and not an action done, not a word, nor a thought, but he that sits
on the throne judges, he has one that judges him. Christ's throne is invisible,
but not a fancy; and to many insensible, but 'twill be the more terrible. What
is done in the flesh is judged there, and what is done in the spirit is judged
there; within and without you have one that judges you: senses cannot reach
this, and pride will not; but yet this pulls not down Christ's throne, the
work goes on, the judicature of a kingdom; these Colossians found it, they
were self-condemned by truth, and carried out of themselves to Christ: Who has
brought us into the kingdom of his dear son.

Do not abhor us for thy name sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory:
Remember thou break not covenant with us, Jeremy 14.21. Dispensation of Justice
and Truth is Christ's throne of Judicature; and so dispensation of Mercy and
Truth is his throne of glory; by this he sits and abides very glorious, in the
midst of the Christian world, as by the other he sits very terrible in the
midst of the wicked.

Mercy is the most glorious thing that miserable man beholds: the least mercy
gives Christ a seat of glory in the world; every flower in the field, every
star in the heavens, every grace in your hearts, speaks out Christ's glorious
seat here; name a mercy in the world, and there sits Christ in glory: under
this notion is that expression, Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory.
Solomon's throne had steps to it, one higher then another.

Mercy is dispensed by degrees here higher and higher, and the highest are
those which reach the heart and make that glorious, and there is Christ's
highest seat of glory in this world. I may make an external demonstration of
this: such parts of the creation as in which God most manifests himself for the
ordering of all, that is by way of eminence called his throne. His throne is in
the Heavens, says the Psalmist, which is not spoken exclusively, as if God had
his seat no where else, but comparatively, that is, no where so eminently as in
that part of the creation, that orders all the rest. As the most noble part of
the great world is Gods prime seat, so the most noble part of the little world
is his prime throne; his throne is in the heart, in that totum gubernans.
Thrones are erected in chief places; more of Gods state and glory is to be seen
in one soul* then in all the creation: a spirit speaks what God is, and makes
at the very esse of God as it were, whereas all other things speak but what God
does, and so make but at his back parts. Where you can find God most according
to what he is in himself, and according to what similitude he makes to himself
by operation, there is his seat of glory: he seated himself in the hearts of
these Colossians, and showed himself as a God making covenant, which is more
then remembering covenant, as the Prophet before speaks, and therefore by so
much the more fitly may be called, the throne of his glory.

Majesty.
Kingdoms have majesty: a kingdom is the union of many, to hold forth
greatness and dread to its own safety. Solomon had Lions about his throne to
set forth the Majesty of it, to make transaction between that and all other
people with awe. Christ manageth his way in this world with majesty, Heaven and
earth tremble at his presence; he utters his voice to the great world and the
rocks rend: thunder is the voice of God to the great world, and with what
majesty does he express himself to all creatures below in that voice. As there
are thunderings without, so there be thunderings within; in great majesty does
Christ speak to the soul sometimes, ask your consciences else: ask Felix, the
Jailer, and Cain else, yea ask your father Adam else: what a case were all
these in, when Christ did but reason with them! Yea, I ask you (hypocrites if
any here) is not the way of Christ full of majesty? What means those loads that
gather about your hearts, and that fearfulness which surpriseth you else? Thou
do but touch the mountains and they smoke, says the Psalmist, God does but
now and then give a touch within, and the ruddie merry face pales, and sadens
presently: he does but whisper within, and spirits fly up into the head, into
the face, and about every where, and the heart within beats for want of them,
ready to swoune away. Twenty years time not enough to heal the wound of a word
of Gods mouth, O the majesty of that word! Gods word is a sword, has not a
sword dread, especially when ranted against the breast? ask wounded spirits
whether Gods words be not full of majesty. Look upon the whole creation, upon
the earth, upon the sea, upon the heavens, do they not all speak the majesty of
Christ? God is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the mighty
waves of the sea, says the Psalmist: tossings, rollings and roarings of the
sea, do they not speak loudly the majesty of Christ? But ah sinner! the
tossings, rollings and roarings of a troubled soul, speak the majesty of
Christ's words much more. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade
men. Know ye the terror of the Lord? the majesty of God as manifested by his
Word and Spirit? Paul did, Job did, the dread of God fell upon him, these
Colossians did, and were brought out of it into the kingdom of a dear Son, a
Son of love.

Kingdoms have supremacy: one in chief, Supremacy.
and over all such as are Monarchically governed, and so is the kingdom of
Christ. Christ moves, as by a majesticall, so by a superior power to all, and
this is basis majestatis. Christ is a great King over all, as the Psalmist
titles him; he moves here below by a power above men, above the greatest of
men, above Kings, and therefore called the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he
moves by a power above Angels good and bad; his throne is above thrones,
dominions, principalities, that is, those spiritual principalities which by
Angels are expended; he rules, yea he captivates all, which is more. Every knee
bow to him of things in Heaven, of things in earth, and of things under earth,
men and Angels, good and bad. The Sun is supreme and swayes all virtues of
the Heavens and earth: Christ's dominion is from the sea to the worlds end,
there is not a power from one end of the world to the other, but it is under
Christ. The first Adam was over all and so is the second, his motion yet but
darkly speaks this, but 'twill every day now more then other; the kingdoms of
the world will become the kingdoms of Christ; what he yet darkly over rules,
he will take visibly into his hands, and the kingdoms shall become one* and
under one: Israel had one Lord; the Lord thy God is one [Lord. Distance of
place destroys not the Supremacy of Christ's Kingdom, nor the Monarchical
government of it, which will be plain by this demonstration. Talk with
Christians here and talk with Christians in the furthest part of the world, and
you shall find consent of divine motion within and without amongst them all,
which speaks them all under one supremacy, all subjects of one kingdom, though
so far distant: they groan under sin as you do, and extol Christ as you
do; face answers to face, and yet these faces never saw one another: pulse
beat, and spirits work alike, the state is the same, the blood is the same,
though it run in various veins, and some to the extreme parts of the earthen
fabric. As things are in their native power Christ is above them, and supreme;
and as things aspire and exalt themselves, and pretend to something above their
native state; as things strut themselves, and stand a tiptoe, so Christ also is
above them. Low things will stretch and lift up themselves to overtop, and
this may do something amongst men, but 'twill not with God; In that wherein
they dealt proudly, he was above them, said Jethro of Pharaoh and his company.

Order, or laws.
A kingdom has a scepter: Kingdoms are not many together like heaps of
stones, confused, and any one upmost, but many together by rule, and this holds
altogether to the weal of each. Bonds knit many together, every man loose and
to his will, and then many kings but no kingdom; every man to his will, and
public weal makes her will too and dies. Bread is the life of particulars, and
law is the life of generals; bread is the life of persons, and law is the life
of kingdoms; these are they that render one to another, as Joseph to his
brethren, nourishers: I will nourish you, says he to his brethren, fear not,
etc. Christ has a scepter, he rules not by tyranny but by law, which law of
his kingdom you have written, as the Jews had the laws of their kingdom; and
not an action of God about the creature, but is in reference to the written
law; all motion of Christ is according to truth. Christ does not his own
private will, but a joint will consented to by each person, and published,
which is the meaning of that expression, I came not to do mine own will, but
the will of my Father. He came to fulfill one volume, another volume is
written, and he will come and fulfill that too, and then 'twill be well with
us. Christ moves so exactly by the word, that this and not he shall judge men
at the last day. Rule makes actions justice or not justice; where there is no
law, there is no transgression. The shining justice of all Christ's actions,
shall silence every guilty soul at the last day. Christ's course was nothing
else, but a fulfilling what was written; his sayings seemed hard, and yet he
spoke but the written word: Justice is in the worst word or work you wrangle
at: his scepter is a right scepter, a scepter of righteousness; his carriage
is but the written word organized, and made to speak to you still as you are;
the word made flesh, and wrapped up in a mouth of flesh like your own, and made
to talk to you, and to tell you your own, which is the scepter of Christ's
kingdom. The sum of all is this, Christ does manage a public state here, a
kingdom, that is, he puts forth a power to the subduing and ordering of many,
to their felicity and his own glory, and to the destruction of all that oppose
these two.

time of war, how many battles have Satan and your souls fought? you glory
to be quiet men, and Satan likes it well, he is as unwilling to be troubled as
you. Many sinners scarce ever gave their sinful hearts a check, and yet cannot
but judge well of their condition, they so sinfully dote upon themselves, nor
can they judge well of any else, that think not of them as they do.

Satan and I have fought many a time says one, we have had many a hot bout
together; and who is overcome? Satan or thy soul? Satan is expert at his
weapons, able well to defend himself, he is not conquered presently; he has
strong holds, and a strong art to hold them, Know ye his wiles, ignorant souls?
you think you fight with the devil, when you set Satan to cast out Satan, one
lust to cross another. Some men can distinguish between humor and reason, and
can set reason to fight against humor, and both to fight against Christ. Does
truth carry you against humor and reason both, against all that opposes? This
speaks the dominion of Christ. I consulted not with flesh and blood, says the
Apostle; he does not say I consulted not with Satan and sin: flesh and blood
speaks reason, and yet when this opposes Christ, a soul under his dominion
waves it.

Discretion
Some are not far from the kingdom of God, as Christ speaks, and yet never
come there. It Is an observable expression, that of Christ to the scribe, When
Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, says the text, he said unto him, thou
art not far from the kingdom of God, Mark 12.34. Reason seasonably and
forcibly acted is discretion: discretion is a course divinity, and it consists
in squaring action to external applause; and men that can reach this height
usually stick there, which is deadly, and so I fear did that scribe; 'twas
enough that he had so spoken, as to win applause, for I hear no more of him
in that story. Londoners, most of you have knowledge enough, and many of you
can manage it to great applause; you are not far from the kingdom of God,
and yet rest here, and you will never come there. I love discretion dearly, and
yet I have observed many discreet men, the most bitter enemies to the power of
godliness; they can honor nothing above their own sphere: holy zeal is
wildfire with them; their own pace after Christ fast enough, and this often
times loses Christ, soul and all. Discretion is good at measuring virtue, but
bad at measuring grace, 'twill give much to Christ but not all, it lacks still
one thing, as Christ said to the young man, and commonly that one thing is
something which carries the heart with it, which is all: the dominion of Christ
is not in that soul. Men merely discreet, are not yet brought into the kingdom
of Christ.

Some go beyond discretion, and make flanting profession, Profession.
and yet prove not well. There be children of the kingdom, and yet not in the
kingdom, children of the kingdom shut out, children of one kingdom shut out
from another. Christ's kingdom has some externalitie, many called and no more,
few chosen: such as stand within the external call of the Gospel, and make as
if they did hear; boast of the Temple and the name of the Lord, and depart not
from iniquity, these are children of the kingdom, and yet children of that
wicked one. Londoners, look to your selves, you are children of the kingdom,
Christ calls to you, all is glorious, and you all seem gloriously to hearken to
it, but I observe some of your ways, and there I see you wipe off all your
paint, and your life speaks your souls dead, and many friends about you mourn
for the dead. I see their tears in bibles, every Lords day. Sir pray for my
father, pray for my master, they talk and make a show but have nothing in them,
they have a name that they live, but are dead; O Sir, pray that they may not be
twice dead and plucked up by the roots. Persons about you, they see the
unsoundnesse of your profession, and you see nothing. Hypocrisy is a secret
but a very mortal evil, it lives and thrives under all contrary forms.
Children of the kingdom, look about you, and I have done.

If you receive not the kingdom of God, as a little child, you cannot enter
into it. Little infants, parents may carry them where they will: Truth must
carry you whither it will, if you fight against it you cannot kill it, but you
will kill your souls. Rebellious strugglings are soul-stabbings; carry things
by force against all divine resistance, and you run headlong to Hell. Out of
self is the way into the kingdom of Christ: pleasure must be nothing, parts
nothing; nothingnesse is the way to all. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom we speak of. Lay your spirits naked before Christ, and
let him further strip them as he will, and then cloth them, and order them as
he will, and this is the way to a kingdom: it is something painful to get
into Christ's kingdom, but when you are once into it, you would not be out of
it again for all the world.

Coloss. 1.13. Dear son, or son of love.
Christ's honor and thy foundation of it, are the two things which take up this
latter clause: his honor is great, to wit; a kingdom, the rule of all: his
favor is great, and this raisd him so high, he is a dear son, a son of
love, says the original. (...).
The father loves the son, and gave all things into his hand, Joh. 2.35. and
Joh. 5.20. The father loves the son, and shows him all things that himself
does, etc. Love gives forth preferment to all Gods children, not any son but
rises this way; not any adopted son, no not the natural son; he has a
kingdom because a son of love.



Come near my son, etc. God does not cast great blessings he knows not upon
whom, he takes persons very near him, relates them, and indears them, and then
advances them. The Lord did not set his love upon you, and choose you, because
ye are more in number, etc. Gods order in advancing is here set forth; he first
sets his love upon persons, and then chooses them forth for advancement
according to that love; The Lord did not set his love upon you, and choose you,
etc. Love singles out persons, and then singles out preferments suitably, she
culls out and then crowns; so natural and so adopted sons rise to the
kingdom. There are kings in wrath in a temporal sense, but none so in a
spiritual: all spiritual kings are kings in love, and from love set up, and
kept up. Kings of a little spot of earth, and the king of all the earth, all
one in the original of their preferment, all children of love, therefore
children of honor and greatness, and carry away all from all the world
beside. The heart of God is the footstool up to the throne for all.

Who has given unto him first? did the natural son? or do the adopted
sons? All his children have what they have, because beloved; love only is
the womb that brought forth sons, and a kingdom for them. Design makes you
stir, but God cannot be more happy then he is, the advancing of love is all his
design in all he raises; he makes persons great to make great his love, no
son should have had a kingdom, neither adopted son nor natural son, had
it not been to make great his love. Love is the efficient and final cause of
all Gods actions toward all his children; the natural son and the adopted
son are made great of love and for love; set up by love, that love may be set
up by them, and for no other design.

Gods gives solacingly: that is, so as to delight himself in what he gives, so
as to delight the giver as well as those that are given to: all given in love
makes a heaven to God and to man, to the giver, and to the receiver. The motion
of father and children each to other, is by the same spirit: children move
toward their father in love; and that is the heaven of their way; the
advancement and kingdom which they give God in their hearts is in love. Father
moves to all his children in love, and that is the heaven of his way: the fruit
of the spirit is love, so the reward of the spirit is love; the one speaks
that which we give to God, and that is love; and the other speaks that which
God gives to us, and that is love: Gods way within and without to all his, is
in a rapture, he makes a heaven to himself in making one for us. All motions
between father and children make love-meetings; we obey him in love, and he
crowns us in love; adopted sons and the natural son, all Gods children
move in love to their father, and their father meets them in love, and
imbraceth them; so did Christ advance his father, and so did his father advance
him as a dear son.



I am grieved to see what preposterous ways men take for preferment, the love
of this man, and that man is made out after, and not the love of God, as the
only medium to rise by. I view the ways of men, and sigh in secret; I see one
man make a god of another to get up, and he that is indeed God, and the only
giver of honor and worth neglected. Men move according to their principles,
sense undoes all; greatness is neither from East nor West, advancement is by a
very invisible hand, and you only catch hold of hands which you see, to lift
you up to a kingdom, to such a great felicity which you aim at. How low do
most men move to be high! The soul is enslaved which makes humane industry, all
his endeavor to be blessed. The countenance of God sets up, or throws down
man: if all the world did love you, could they make you blessed? could they
raise your eternal estate? Deluded sycophants! men may give you fields and
vineyards; but can they give you a kingdom, an everlasting kingdom? and yet
so does God to his favorites, to adopted sons, and to the natural son.

Know your error, it is ruining, you that look only after the love of men to
rise, which make so much of the love of man, and so little of the love of God.
Both may be pursued, but subordinately and heartily, otherwise a man makes
flesh his arm, and himself liable to the curse of such a condition. A great
many men love me, but what will this do me good when I die, if this be all the
favor I have? Can men's shoulders carry me to the kingdom of heaven? Will the
vapors of many men's mouths make silver wings to carry my soul to heaven? What
will conscience cry out for, think you, when that pale messenger comes to call
you hence? Ah my soul! thou art now to leave every body indeed, thy very own
body in which thou have lived so long: Does God love thee? conscience will ask
this question again and again* O soul, soul. thou art to be gone out of the
body presently, does God love thee? dear soul, art thou dear to God? One spirit
is going to another, two spirits must reason together about all things done in
the flesh, and standers by may not plead a jot, only what is in the breast of
God to plead for thee, or against thee. Sinners, what is in the breast of a God
toward you? love or hatred? So will be your great happiness, or your great
misery, in this world and that to come.

Love speaks it self, and so hatred speaks it self: by Gods dealing with you,
you may know whether he loves or hates you. God is dear to them which are dear
to him, relations are indearing on both sides: God loves all his children
dearly, and they love him dearly. Christ was dear to his father, and his father
dear to him; he would rather die then disobey his will. The spirit of the
natural son, is in all the adopted: if God be your father, where is his
honor? Death is easier then disobedience, to a child of God. Relations have
their proper nature, they that are begotten love him that begat; God has no
unnatural child. Some of you stand upon your sonne-ship, and yet transgress
the will of your father with ease: is he indeed your father which you call so,
and use so? Are relations, the highest relations without bowels? can you use
your father at your pleasure? Do you love God, and fight against him, against
his spirit within, and against his truth and people without? Our war in England
certainly discovers a great many dear children of the devil, as well as a great
many dear children of God. It Is a time of great thoughts of heart, a time of
great-stirring, and it is a brave time to know your hearts, and who is in them;
whether God or the devil; when humors stir much, it is the only time to know
the state of the man, and what is his distemper. God lives in every heart he
loves, and stirs as he lives: how divine are the strings of your hearts now?
how generally divine? how strongly divine? There are not two better things to
demonstrate any ones estate; not any love speaks the love of a father. Christ
looked upon the young man, and loved him; but 'twas not with any indearing
love: so not any love speaks the love of a child, but that love which takes up
the heart, and indears God there: How precious are thy commandments; my soul
loves them, says the Psalmist: and so elsewhere, My soul thirsts after thee*
Psalm. 143.3. Weak souls should warm and comfort themselves in that flame they
feel in their souls toward Christ and his ways.

I am to be general in consolation to all Gods people, from this point: think
how you are to God, very dear, and refresh your souls with it in all sad
conditions. Misery sinks us because we think every humane distress speaks
divine displeasure, or at least an abatement of love. Afflicted Christians!
add not to your load, God is never out with them he loves; all misery speaks
not divine displeasure. Misery speaks divine displeasure only, when it makes
the soul wicked, more adherent to sin, and less to Christ and Christians.
Some men's bitters from God, make them bitter and sour to good; I like not that
state: God would make a bastard a son, and he will not be corrected. Miseries
which make you groan under sin, and groan after Christ, speak you very dear
children to God, how heavy soever they be, and you should account such bitters
sweets. Let such mourners cheer themselves, God is very mindful of your
condition.

As things are dear to us, so we think of them: Is Ephraim my dear son? is he
a pleasant child? Since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still.
Thy folly may be spoken against* and yet thy person very dear, and thy
distresses compassionately carried in mind, when thou think all are
slighted. Christ strikes with one hand, and strokes with the other, it is his
usual carriage to children. Speak against them before men, and speaks for them
at the same time before God his Father: Since I spoke against him, I remember
him still, I do earnestly remember him as yet; recordando recordabor ejus
adhuc, as they read the text, which is very lively. When misery is upon a child
of God, he thinks then he is forgotten, and then he is most remembered, then
it is not recordabor ejus, I will remember him, but it is recordando recordabor,
I will certainly remember him, or I will earnestly remember him; now in that
very time that I have spoken against Ephraim a dear son, notwithstanding all
that I have laid upon him, I do as yet earnestly mind him: as divine love is
toward us, so it works; if it be strong toward a person, it is very earnestly
intent about him for good. Dear hearts in affliction! believe that God
remembers you, and that he remembers you earnestly, your deliverance is shaping
day and night, and thoughts shall never lie still till it be finished, and you
confess what a deal of love is set upon you.

Dear children, your blessedness is above all men's here, let times and
fortunes favor persons as they will, troubles may be great, but yet your mercy
will be certain; many may sink under them, but surely you will not, if the
mercy of a God be enough to keep your head above water. Others have nothing
sure, you have all sure, the mercy of God sure, in which is all. If Ephraim be
a dear son, then my bowels are troubled for him* and I will surely have mercy
upon him, says the Lord. Dear children of God, rejoice in these sad times,
your blessedness has as sure a foundation as truth it self, if God can insure
any thing, you will never miscarry. Your blessedness will be certain, let
times and states turn and overturn as they will; yea, your mercies will be
great. What God is in heart to any, he is in hand; where he loves much, he
gives and forgives much. Dear children of God, I cannot tell exactly how great
you will be, you will all have a kingdom, let this kingdom stand or fall; the
natural son and the adopted sons have all kingdoms, and the one does not
envy the other, but joys in it; the natural son is still moving and
mediating that this wretched world may have as full a demonstration of this as
can be; that the natural son, and the adopted sons may be loved with the
same love, and honored with the same honor, is one passage of Christ's prayer,
and dear children read it often. I in them and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and
have loved them, as thou have loved me* John 17.23. Your mercies will carry
correspondency with Christ, and can you tell what felicity the son has in
the father? And if you can, such a felicity will you have in the son: I in
them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. Dear sons of God,
tell the world your greatness in your meannesse, that you are beloved as
Christ, and shall be as happy as he, let men and devils do their worst. We are
ready to impart to you our own souls, because you are dear unto us, 1 Thessalonians.
2.8. God is ready to impart his own soul to you, because you are dear, the
greatest things are given to the dearest souls.

Coloss. 1.14. In whom we have redemption, etc,
JUstification has here a double expression, proper, and borrowed, and so it is
called redemption: proper, and so it is called forgiveness of sins. The cause
of justification has here likewise a double expression, remote and proximate.
Remote Christ, noted in these words, in whom, etc. Proximate, his blood, which
is not put abstractively, but concretly or comprehensively. In whom we have
redemption through his blood etc.

Redemption, In whom we have redemption, etc. Redemption notes four things, a
person in bondage, a prise paid a release, and a free state; all which it may
be I may little open to you. Redemption notes bondage a destressed state, and
such a distressed state, to wit, one thing under the burdensome and
destructive power of another; so was Israel under Pharaoh. Egypt was a house of
bondage, many together under a burdensome destructive power; and it was to
preach their spiritual condition; and their stubbornness occasioned that
strong way of instruction. God made a fescue of the body, to point to the soul:
fallen man is a soul slave, under the burdensome destructive power of sin,
and wrath; lust carries him captive to sin, sin carries him captive to
wrath, and wrath carries him captive to hell, which is the great house of
bondage for eternity; where many are together, under a tormenting destructive
power as long as God is. Prisons have various rooms; but some more sad then
others, much lower and darker then others; hell is the dungeon of the house of
bondage which fallen man is in; all the rooms are under the same roof, under
the same power and wrath, and doors out of one into another, and but a wall
between room and room, but a wall between a man in sin, and a man in hell:
this is a sad condition, yet universal, not a child of Adam free born. Jews
and Gentiles, all are under sin, so many men, and so men slaves, [I am
carnall] and sold under sin, says the Apostle. As a slave is sold from one
bondage to another, so one sin sells my soul to another, and all sin sells
me to the displeasure of God: me thinks this is the Apostles fancy of the
thing I am upon. Not a man but in misery, and not a misery but in sin;
sin is the great house of bondage here, in which we are all, in which you
are, and I am. I am carnal and sold under sin, and so are you, and this is
the case of all naturally, which is intimated in the text. In whom we have
redemption; the Apostle puts in himself and those to whom he wrote.

Fallen man is under the power of sin, and under the power of wrath; sin
can do what it will with the soul, and so can justice with soul and body, and
yet be just. Sin is Gods enemy, and has made God man's enemy, man is under
the power of the greatest adversary in the world; a punishing power is fallen
man's keeper, and it follows him whithersoever he goes: some dead have a waking
ghost, to tell under whose custody they are; as after a man is brought home to
God and goodness, mercy follows the man to the end of his days wherever he
goes, and the man under the custody of love, and of a friend for ever: so
before brought home to God, man is a prisoner to wrath, and under the custody
of a ruining power, and this follows him up and down the world to the end of
his days, They shall follow close after thee, Jer. 42.16. Or cleave after you.
says God, speaking of sword and famine. Wrath is ordered to follow close
after sinners, as its prisoners, lest they should escape away before
satisfaction be made. This as the other I spoke of ere while, is a general
condition; as all are under the power of sin, so are all under the power of
wrath, and not a man but a captive to divine displeasure naturally; ceased upon
by justice, and under custody for hell, if no redemption come. The house of
bondage has three rooms, sin, wrath, and destruction, and they all lie one
within another. There is a bondage of sin, and a bondage of wrath, and a
bondage of corruption, as the Apostle calls the languishing state of the whole
creation, and all these mutually depending, and a common condition; the earth
perishing every creature upon the earth perishing, man the noblest creature,
under the bondage of sin, wrath, and destruction, and all hinted here in
these words, we have redemption, that is, from sin, wrath, and the fruits of
it.

We are bought with a prise. Power commanding, proposes its will, will
proposes its justice, justice proposes its violation to the delinquent, and
demands it recompense according to this: violation of truth, of the least
truth, is the death of Gods will, and so the death of himself; the death of one
thing, in justice calls for the death of another, and without delay will have
it. In the day thou eatest thou shall die. The death of God, is more then the
death of all the men in the world, and therefore justice demands more for
satisfaction, then mere man-dying, for if man-dying would make God
satisfaction, then when all men are dead, justice would be satisfied, and so
the drowning of the whole world, would have been its ransom, and the burning
of this world its redemption; whereas it is but the breaking forth of justice
unsatisfied, and laying up the debtors which are many in a sure prison: the
death of God is unvaluable with us, and calls in justice for more then the
death of mere man, and therefore God-man dies to redeem. And [for this cause he
is the mediatour] of the new testament; that by means of death, for the
redemptions of the transgressions, that were under the first testament, etc.
Hebr. 6.15. Legal redemptions had this law, to propose worth, to worth, and so
to make satisfaction as exact as might be (E. G.) an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, and blood for blood, and the most precious blood for the
most precious blood, the blood of a man for the blood of a man, and without
blood, yea without sanguine tali such blood, their was no redemption, no
redemption in a humane sense, because no satisfaction, and that pointed to this
in my text, which is exactly noted, redemption through his blood.

Who shall lay any thing to their charge? If ye say God, he justifies, because
satisfied, and can do no otherwise, it is the Apostles strength of reasoning.
Redemption takes off obligation to justice, though not obligation to mercy. We
are not under the law, but under grace. The law can charge no guilt upon a
believer, because grace has satisfied: the law can charge no guilt, but grace
can charge duty, that is, what soever the royal law, and what soever the whole
will of God requires, that grace which has died obliges to. We are under
grace, that is, under all the commands of it, to fulfill all that
righteousness, as far forth as we can, which grace has fulfilled exactly;
we are under grace immediately, and under the law mediately, as love to Christ
sets the soul to the fulfilling of the whole will of God* quantum in se est.
Redemption notes release from guilt, and from rigor; sin does not dame, nor
duty does not discourage, precepts bind graciously, to the utmost of what
imperfect man is able, and not to the utmost of what a perfect rule may
require. Redemption is from a yoke of bondage, and not from all yokes: from a
yoke of bondage to an easy yoke, and a light burden; from legal bondage, to
Gospel bondage, which is perfect liberty: which is a law as James calls it,
but yet a perfect law of liberty. Redemption is from all sin, but from no
service, which the Gospel calls for.

Gospel release is likewise double, in heaven or in earth, their is a loosing
in heaven, and a loosing in earth, a discharge in the person of Christ, and a
discharge in our own person, a general discharge in a general person, and a
particular discharge made out by that general person, to every particular.
There is peace in Jesus Christ, and preaching of peace by Jesus Christ,
deliverance made for captives, and deliverance preached to captives, a
ministerial discharge. Divine discharge has a double administration, one
above, and another below: heaven is made to speak and explain her self out of
earth, and to tell to whom it belongs, and then the redeemed can say, that his
redeemer lives; and this is Gods bearing record in earth. Much love breaking
forth in earthen ordinances, and running out of earthen vessels, to the
sensible apprehension of the beloved; a voice from heaven in earth; in a frail
corrupt state, a distinct artificial voice, Thou art all fair; and yet
understood by none but the party to whom it is spoken; a white stone with a name
fairly engraven in it, and yet none can see it or read it, but he that
receives it. Our discharge in heaven, in what state and glory it is, is peculiar
to those agents, 'tween whom things first pass, and without hint, I think to
us here. Our discharge here, in what state and glory it is carried, within in
the soul, ask not me, but ask your own souls, for it is honor peculiar and
private, to every redeemed soul, and carried with more state or less,
according to the pleasure of God. The sum of all is this, Redemption is a
sinner discharged by the death of Christ from the power of sin and wrath.

We are Abraham's children, and never were in bondage to any, said the Jews; and
yet were never out of bondage to the devil. Senses pleased, conscience asleep,
the man blesses himself in his condition, as the freest man in the world; he
has what he will, he can do what he will, and none within cry out of him; he
can eat what he will, and drink what he will, and nothing tumbles nor wambles
in his stomach in the afternoon; troubled with no bitter regurgitations from
conscience, and what freer condition then this in supposition, and yet what
condition more desperate slavery then this? If these men be free. they are free
among the dead, and therefore if you have any life, look about you. Soul-powers
are dead, and therefore is the soul so free to do what it lists; without
control. Loose souls, you are no freemen, but dead men, and all friends are
dead that should look to you; understanding is dead, affection dead, conscience
dead, and therefore are you so lively in sin, so free to do what you list.
The soul dead in sin, wrath tolls and rings out; but the dead hear nothing.
The dead are buried out of Gods sight, ere they are aware; hell is the grave of
a dead soul, which is farthest out of Gods sight of any place; and that is the
Golgotha for souls, the place of spiritual skulls, where the skulls of the
inward man lie. Prepare mourning, you that have dead in your houses and hearts,
for the dead will be buried quickly and strangely, hell opens of a sudden, and
takes in her dead, which is a strange grave and burial.

Bodily bondage is exactly looked after, but soul-bondage not; parts are
employed much without, but little within, and this fault is very common and
very crying. I am afraid there is many amongst you, that do not know what
spiritual bondage is, and yet it speaks out it self. There is a spirit of
bondage, and a state of bondage, the one is terrible, the other is damnable, I
will touch them each a little* that you may truly know your state and remedy. A
spirit of bondage is a frequent application of the displeasure of God, without
just ground. Wrath is many men's due, but they which should apply it to
themselves do not, and they which should not, do; and the devil is in both, to
destroy all if it were possible. Men which love their sins, and are loath to
leave them, make application of nothing but mercy and these choke themselves
with sweet meats, and surfeit of childrens bread; men which are weary of their
sins* and would gladly leave them, make application of nothing bur justice,
and this is deadly too, if God did not pity it, and cure it. Application of
God is man's prerogative alone, to restore his happiness, but it is rarely used
rightly to this end; it makes bondage still, and not redemption from it, when
not grounded truly upon the word. False application is still from false
principles, with a diabolical power concurring. A man not well enlightened
thinks his life must be perfect, ere his soul must apply Christ; but the one
cannot be, and the want of the other keeps the soul in bondage, in hell here.
Sin felt and loathed, Christ prized and yet unapplyed, is a spirit of
bondage: fear eats out this poor soul, and if there were no dreadful doings
in the land, yet this soul would still be at his wits end, because like Rachel,
a refuser of his own mercy: This is a house of bondage for a time.

We have told you of a spirit of bondage, and now we are to tell you of a state
of bondage, and this the Apostle very exactly sets forth, 2, Pet. 2.19, Whilst
they promised them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for
of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. Man's will
proposed as a rule, and all voluntarily and violently serving this, is a state
of bondage. Corruption is an ill inmate, and a worse landlord; and yet rules
all in the most, and shall do so, and that is a state of bondage. The old man
has his commands, his commands are always congruous to flesh, not to truth,
and obedience to these in love, speaks a servant of corruption. Men little eye
their hearts, yet from thence must be drawn the denomination of your state, and
not from this good action, or that, nor not from this bad action or that: Of
what a man is [overcome] of the same he is brought in bondage. That which is
set up within for a rule of motion, that has overcome the man: they had taken
in false light, and set up this in their souls through love, to to guide their
course. Ah, says the Apostle, you are overcome now, and brought in bondage;
but then there is himself as well as he could, it is but a proverb says he
fulfilled, The dog is returned to his vomit; you were never but dogs; what you
left for a while, you did not dislike it, it only disliked you, and this made
a vomiting like a dog, and therefore are you so apt to return to it again, and
to embrace such doctrines as tend to destroy Christ and grace. What principles
are preferred in the soul for ordering life, you best know, look to these; I
can but demonstrate to you from truth, that of these you are overcome and in
bondage, if bad.

If our discourse discover any in a state of bondage, let God be honored, and
the condition taken to heart, the soul is lost else. His you are to whom you
serve, and Satan will claim his propriety, when you come to die, though he say
little to you now. Gods servants have a jubilee at death, the trumpet sounds,
and the soul which long lived in bondage in the body, is made to go out free,
to a state of freedom and felicity to all eternity. But ah! what a black
jubilee is death to Satan's servants? The trumpet sounds, and bondmen with
their chains gingling come forth to the Judge of all the world, and the Goalour
stands up, These are my prisoners says Satan; that shall be tried says
Christ; Judgment is given upon trial: now they are more mine, for ever mine,
says the devil: and God will not wrong the devil of his own. Now is bondage
sealed, make free who can: What is done at the last judgment, is done as the
acts of the Medes and Persians, that is, not to be recalled. Soul-bondage is a
gendring thing, as the Gospel uses the expression, one degree of bondage
genders another, till at last you be so fast bound, that there will be no
loosing.

Hagarins, lay to heart your condition betime, and enquire after a Redeeemer;
groan under your bondage, and the redeemer will come to you: this is that
turning from transgression, which the prophet speaks of, and to which state a
redeemer is promised: Esa. 59.20. And the redeemer shall come to Sion, and to
them that turn from transgression in Jacob. There is the proper and peculiar
law of the redeemer, which if ye observe not, ye cannot be redeemed. As every
creature has its proper action, so also it has its proper law, and without
the observation of which, it will not so act. It is the proper action of the
spirit to comfort, and this spirit has its law. you must be led by the spirit;
for if you grieve him, he will not comfort you: So the proper action of the
Son is to redeem, and he has his proper law about this work* without the
observation of which, he will not foul his fingers with filthy souls, and
therefore you have him proposing the law of redemption first* to that man which
had lien thirty and eight years at the pool; Will thou be made whole? Whole?
why one would think it a strange question to one that had lien in that
extremity so long. Wonder not at it, for your case is shadowed out in it; you
have lien long under infirmities, and yet have no will to be made whole, that
is, no ardent affection to be redeemed out of them, but content your selves to
rub-along in them as many lumpish persons do in some bodily diseases; you will
never get deliverance in this way. Sinners will you be made whole? will you be
delivered out of the bondage of sin? Do your affections burn, and your hearts
beat to be redeemed? That Is well: then there is but one step more, believe and
you are redeemed out of bondage; and this will be wrought, it will spring and
grow insensibly out of those pantings and breathings which are upon you: I have
seen the bondage of my people, and I have heard their cry, says God. When
bondage makes crying out: O what shall I do, and who shall deliver me! Enemies
are got into a body, and are deadly strong, a body of death besets my soul, and
in the midst of this body shall not I loose my soul? Now the sinner is turned
from iniquity, and now the redeemer comes to Sion.

Let the redeemed admire and adore the redeemer, this one thing I will touch,
and give up the point, and I am the rather induced unto it, because it is the
use made in my text: In whom we have redemption through his blood. Which words
are spoken in way of admiration and thanksgiving, and are but the continuation
of that thanksgiving, which is begun in the verse foregoing. The redemption of
the soul is precious, silver would not reach it, gold would not reach it, only
the precious blood of Christ would do it: precious blood must stir, and
precious spirits leap from this consideration as high as heaven, and spurtle up
in Gods face. Freedom binds man all must be sent to heaven that is saved from
hell. Let the redeemed say this, and say that, says the Psalmist. Redemption
is obligation; who ever hangs by his harp, a redeemed person must not, because
he has his advantage with him above all others, his lesson set and laid before
him, yea his instrument tuned and put into his hand; his lips are opened, as
the Psalmist speaks, it is but stir thy tongue, and matter cannot be wanting,
nor affections be able to lie still. He that died for us must be perfumed and
carried home honorably, and buried in his own country as Jacob was; he that
died for you on earth, must be perfumed by praises, and carried to his own
country, and buried in heaven. You must not bury Christ in his works, but take
him up out of his works and words, and carry him to heaven, and bury him there.
Nature abhorres burying things in their own blood, you must not bury Christ in
his own blood, but take him up out of his blood, and bath him, and perfume him,
and lay him to sleep in the arms of his father.

The redemption we speak of here, and would have you thankful for, respects
your souls, and your bodies; what mercy comes to either, is a blessing from
Christ as a Redeemer. Not a deliverance in these bloody times, but from the
blood of Christ, from that great redeemer that sits in heaven. Bodily
redemption is but the outside of soul-redemption; I hope the blindest sight
will be able to see the outsides of mercy. Blind wretches! look upon temporal
redemptions which now Christ makes, and see if you can bless him for these:
you had not had the lives of your bodies, nor the livelihood of your estates at
this hour, had not your redeemer pleaded for you; had not he pleaded for you
with his blood, you had been all ere this, tumbling in your own blood; you had
had your blood trod under foot by those which have long trod under foot the
blood of Christ: One redeemer works all redemptions for soul and body: one
redeemer pleads in soul-cases, and in bodily cases. See a full plain place,
Prove. 23.18. Enter not into the fields of the fatherless, for their redeemer
is mighty, he shall plead their cause with thee. It is but one redeemer that
pleads for us in spiritual things and in corporal, and therefore in all
mercies both spiritual and corporal, let Christ be honored and praised.

Coloss. 1.14. In whom we have redemption [through his blood.
THe way of grace is here considerable, life comes through death: God comes in
Christ, and Christ comes in blood to save. The choicest mercies come through
the greatest miseries; prime favors come swimming in blood to us.

Through a red sea Israel came to Canaan. Many a man lost his life, and much
blood shed, the very land flowing with milk and honey, made to flow with blood,
ere Israel could inherit the promise: seven nations were destroyed ere the land
of Canaan was divided to the Israelites, Acts 13, 19. Israel came to Canaan
through blood, and kept in Canaan through blood, Samson was strangled in his
own blood, like Christ, to keep blood and life in that blessed people. The
harlot had her life by a scarlet thread, and so had the rest of her faith. As
the promised land, so the promised crown, came swimming to David in blood; how
many men died, and how near was David death many times, ere that promise of his
honor did live. Joseph's garment was dipped in blood, and he dead alive for so
many years, and this was the way to his greatness, and to the saving of the
life of all the holy seed.

I will rain bread from heaven, says God to Moses, and this was an
extraordinary thing then, and yet ordinary to Adam before his fall, spiritually
understood; he had all his provision without cost or toil, his felicity
descended from heaven upon him as dew, heaven and earth opened, and not any
ones sides or veins, and so mercy streamed upon him: he had his felicity with
no more hardship then Angels.

by the pleasure of God, and so is mercy; the will of God bounds it, orders it,
keeps it in, and lets it forth, through what channells it will; life through
death, heaven through hell. The first covenant was sealed with life, the tree
of life was the seal of Adams first grace and favor; the second covenant is
ratified with death; the tree of life must die, or else none could live by
eating of it: it is not life out of life now, as out of the first covenant, but
life out of death, and this necessarily, because according to the will of God
Verily, unless a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alive,
but if it die, it brings forth fruit, John 12.24. God has taken counsel of
his will, and turned the sea of love into a new channel; the first covenant
gave out all favors without blood, but the second through blood, through
Christ's blood and our own, Christ's cup is called Gods will, and our cup is
called Christ's will.
the will of God orders both these, and therefore is Christ's cup, when full of
blood, said to be Gods will, not my will but thine, etc. And our bloody cup
also called Gods will; if any suffer according to his will, etc. Great favors
to come through great hardships, is the will of God.

It shall bruise thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Nature hides her
choice things closest, and bids art use pains suitable to prise, to obtain them;
and so does grace, she hides life in death: our life is hid, says the Apostle,
where? In bleeding dying Christ. Wisdom orders great things, to be obtained
with great pains; grace, and glory, in blood, in Christ's blood and our own.
Christ gets heaven by suffering, and all that will live godly with him shall
suffer too. Means are generally proportioned to their end, so by God to Christ,
and so by Christ to us. This world is thrown upon men; which is providence
disposing, suitable to things disposed: this world is worth nothing, and comes
for nothing; but the world to come is invaluable, and the way to it
proportionable, the blood of Jesus Christ, and the blood of his people, the one
per modum meriti, the other, per modum congrui.

worth with us weak creatures: upon this ground the Scripture when it speaks of
our great fortune, tells the great prise it cost, as eying our weakness, who
look more at what things cost, then at what things are, and as knowing if any
thing will work and take with us, this will. To him that loved us and washed us
from our sins [in his own blood, Rev. 1.5. Man is a legal creature. and
looks much at what is given for a thing, and prises this more then that which
comes for little; he values things more under a notion of prise, then under a
notion of freeness. What did this cost? why it cost Christ's own blood. Fancy
works foolishly in weak brains, color is more then the cloth; and scarlet
color a general taking color, and therefore is Christ's garment dipped in
blood, and he admired in this habit. Who is this that comes from Edom? with
garments died red from Bozra?

By dying thou shall die, etc. Here is the grave of a whole world of felicity,
and a stone rolled upon it, daring all powers in heaven and in earth, to open
it if they can; and that grace notwithstanding so buried, should rise and
become atainable, is admirable. I wonder that all the world is not bleeding and
howling in hell, and every one catching his blood as it falls, and writing out
his fall in capital letters, to the glory of justice to all eternity., it is
wonderful to me, that it is not the whole employment of all the creatures in
this world, to drown one another in blood, to stab, tear, and rend one another
in pieces without any ceasing, as that world below does; that there are not two
hells, a higher and a lower, an upmost, and a nethermost, and that this is not
as bad as that; that all of this side heaven, is not hell outright.

Murmuring spirits be patient, you think much to see so much spoil and
bloodshed in the land, it is the way of God to bring great things to man;
through the blood of prime brave persons, are brave things brought forth. Is
there a braver person then Christ in the land, or in any land? and yet through
his sides and through his blood, must great and gallant favors come. You eye
your pain, and not Gods pleasure, his way is in the deep, the Leviathan tumbles
there, in the sea, in the red sea, in blood and death; to life and glory; do ye
think to justle God out of his ways as ye justle a man? Murmuring, is spirit
justling against spirit, a bad against a good, and the worst will have the
worst; for God treads such to death, as will not give him his way. You know
that God fell out with his own people deadly; when they disliked the way of
hardship, which he had cast them into to humble them, and to do them good under
heathen princes. Let a wise man propose such an end, and such a way to it, let
it be what it will, red or white, fair or foul, you honor him in all, and with
joy look for good in this way: give God this honor. Wisdoms way to great
things is in blood, in the blood of some prime persons, to the life and welfare
of many.

One or two things may make us give God* the honor of his way to such an end,
let his way be never so sad in our eye. God always makes his way* most just,
to what end soever he bends: mercy comes clothed, but like your sin, when it
comes clothed in scarlet, your sins are crimson scarlet sins: you die
mercies red and bloody, it is not God. Justice treads upon sin properly, upon
man accidentally, as he lies under it; if no body did ly under sin, justice
would tread no body to death, to bring life into the world, nor shed a drop of
any ones blood, to bring the greatest blessings to us. God goes after man,
because man will not go after God; justice follows sinners, because sinners
will not follow righteousness; God does not step a step in a way of
punishment, but as you lead him, and to trace you in your ways of sin; all
ways of blood and death, you chalk out to him; you lead love out of his way,
and make him become bloody. God is love, fury is not in him naturally, but
love, he delights not in the death of any; God is nothing but life, and so is
his motion naturally, and therefore called a fountain of life, nothing runs
from him naturally but life; if death run out of the fountain of life, it is
because of poison cast in by you. Generation in blood, one mercy to die to
bring forth another, is such a generation as was not known in the beginning,
God never appointed things thus to generate; but life to bring forth life, and
such a happy creature, to bring forth such a happy creature, and all happiness
to live, each speak out fully the vastness of the fountain, and the similitude
of the stream to it. The sin of the first Adam, cost the blood of the second,
and all the blood that ever since has been shed, to keep any good alive in the
world. Murmuring souls you are blind, justice steres the ship, when it sails in
blood with jewels to you: you would never open your mouths, at all the blood
that is shed in the land, no nor at all the blood that ever has been shed in
the world, if your eyes were but open to see this first thing.

I will surely do thee good, says God to Abraham, and yet they must into
hardship so much, and so long; and yet still the end sure, and this
hart-bleeding condition, the only sure way to it, and no other way would have
been sure to such an end. Certainty of an end with us, depends upon the
standing or falling of such a thing; but the certainty of Gods end which he
proposes, does not stand upon the standing or falling of this or that, but
upon the resolution of his will, I will certainly do thee good. One may die,
another may die, and yet whilst the will of God remains resolute to such an
end, the end will live, and the dying of such prime persons is onward to it,
and without which it could not be. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not
one tittle of Gods will shall fall to the ground. The certainty of Gods
intention you see, depends upon his will: heaven and earth may die, which are
greater bodies then man, and yet Gods intention live, because his will lives. I
must say again, that murmuring spirits are blind, they can see nothing certain
in these uncertain times, they think that all that God intends, must bleed and
die, because all that men intend bleed and die, and the very men too. Blind
creatures, the certainty of what God intends, does not depend upon any of
these; when all is in blood and dead, God is alive, and on in his way to his
end, the unspeakable good of many.

His way is honorable, and glorious, says the Psalmist; all his ways are so
when he goes in blood, (for he speaks of the execution of justice there) when
he goes in the death of one thing, to the life of another, he goes in in state
and glory; God is always tender of his name, when he seems not tender of any
person: his son, his only son, scoffed, crowned, hanged, used in all the
cruellest and basest manner that men and devils could devise, and yet this
son so used by men, was so managed by God and all his hardship, that the name
of God was made wonderful honorable in all. Noble persons stand not upon
loss, but upon their honor, they value not life, they will step every step in
blood, rather then prosecute their designs basely. An honorable spirit is
natural to God, he brings nothing about basely, he eyes not the blood of
men, nor the blood of his son, nor the bravest blood that ever ran in blood
vessels; but what he eyes is the accomplishment of his will honorably.
Murmuring spirits! you are blind, and you are base, so you may but have your
own ends, the fafety of your lives and states, you care not how God brings this
about, whether honorably or dishonourably. Unruly hearts are unfit to order
weighty matters, such spirits must be guided by better then their own; what is
done with dishonor to God, saves a little blood and forfeits a great deal. God
will manage his way with honor, though he drown and burn worlds, and turn all
the creation into blood. Our spirits should move like Gods; that his will may
be done by me to his honor. What is my blood? What is God break my back with
standing upon it, and squeez out my blood, so that it may but color his
garments scarlet, and honorable.



I have but one thing more to say, and that is for as much as great things come
in a way of hardship to fallen man, that you would all prepare for hardship.
London do thou not see? England, do thou not feel that thy mercies come in
blood? that thy redemption is likely, if ever, to be through much blood, but
through much more then yet is shed, who can say? Men die daily, bloody clouds
go up and down, and fall upon this city and that, and shall thou London escape
the storm? Londoners, Londoners, are you prepared to welcome in your mercies in
blood? You have had a Thames of water bringing in wealth to you for a great
while, are you prepared to have a Thames made of your blood, to bring in brave
wealth to you for another while? God has stirred up some brave spirits amongst
you, I would all were such, and yet I see many unworthy spirits amongst you;
tell such from me, their doom is coming: your blood is dear, your money dear,
but how dear? Dearer to you then Christ? then Christ will trample upon both.
Christ is lavish, because we are nigardly, he spoils all, money* goods blood,
because men have no heart to offer all, to bring him in all, to this blind
land; yet this men will not do, this men cannot do, till better qualified in
heart. The heart must have precious principles, ere it will part with its blood
like Christ, to bring great favors into the world for others. How noble
spirited was Christ! he had principles, which if you labor after, will make
you as he, ready and able to part with your blood, to bring more of truth into
the world: he only eyed and magnified the truth of God, and the glory of God:
he sought not his own will, nor his own glory; and therefore so easily parted
with all that was his own, to bring in God and his love to us; let him be your
pattern in this, and you will do likewise.

Coloss. 1.14. Even the forgiveness of sin.
THe essence of Christianity, and the foundation of all felicity. providence
now puts me plainly to speak of to you. This last clause of the verse is an
application of the former: what is first borrowedly, is here properly
expressed: if you understand not spiritual redemption, it is forgiveness of
sin. In whom we have redemption through his blood, [the forgiveness of sin.

Forgiveness notes two things, and so does sin* which shall be touched in
their order. Forgiveness necessarily notes transgression, and therefore are
they here both joined together, forgiveness of sins. Sin is transgressio
legis, man out of his way his action is trespass, he eats forbidden fruit; his
life is disallowed by truth, and his person abhorred by God. Man in his best
state was an inferior, inferiority is minority, and has always some
observation upon it, to speak it out to beholders; the will of God was man's law
and his felicity, the observation of this was was the acknowledgement of his
distance, and yet his fellowship with God, and his heaven upon earth. The state
of inferiority though so blessed, yet disliked; man would be no inferior, but
equal another god: Dislike of condition made transgression, the soul did
sin, (as that expression in Ezekiel is) as well as the body; the eye changed
its object, and carried the heart with it; fruit forbidden was looked upon, and
then pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired to make one wise. That heart which
had the will of God perfectly written upon it, and the glorious presence of God
as the daily majesty of it, broke out against both, to the prosecution of its
own private will, as such an absolute being, venturing its prerogative to raise
or ruin his condition, which made Adams transgression without similitude, as
the Apostle speaks (who had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression.) Our transgression is the transgression of the law written in
books, his was the transgression of the law written in his heart; sins of the
latter sort the Apostle did mean here, forgiveness of transgression against
the external written word of Christ.

Now you say, We see; therefore your sin remains, says Christ. These words
materially considered, died as soon as spoken, but the wickedness of these
words lives, remains. Where? upon record in the breast of God, which is beyond
all record, to meet the man when he goes out of this world. Sin has two
things in it, obliquity and obligation, transgression of truth, and obligement
to wrath, God lays sin to heart, and keeps it there, though we do not.
Trespass makes debt; obligation to Gods displeasure, is the debt of sin,
this is blood upon the man that shed it, the spots of the blood sticking fast
upon the murderer to detect him, and bring him to the gallows. His blood be
upon us, said they, that is, whatsoever it obliges to in this world or in the
world to come, let that fall on us. Sin in the text notes three things; act,
obliquity, and obligation; and forgiveness takes off all these, and I will now
tell you what that is.

Forgiveness notes remission, which is the term in the original (...),
remissio, remittere quasi retromittere, which signifies the sending of a thing
back again from whence 'twas taken, the unravelling and undoing of a thing
misdone, the nullifying of a disallowed and unlawful action. As sin makes
void the law, and nullifies it, so does forgiveness nullify and make void
sin: obliquity and obligation not only nullified, but the very act that bare
these, all nullified by forgetfulness, and therefore is forgiveness called
forgetfulness, I will remember their iniquities no more. Iniquity notes the
crookedness of the action, and the incongruity of it to rule, and this is as
if it had never been, remembered no more. And not only iniquity is blotted out,
but the very act that bears this obliquity: therefore as you read of subduing,
so of destroying the work of the devil: and therefore is pardon elsewhere
called blotting out iniquity as a cloud: a cloud is by superior power of the
heavens nullified, neither form nor matter to be found, not any circumstance
like it, to note that ever such a being was; and this is our state in Christ,
we are remitted, we are retromissi, sent back again to our first condition, as
when we were in Paradise, no more mentioned, nor no more thought os, rhen of
Adam before his fall. What we were in our own person then, that we are now in
the person of Christ, which lived and died for us.

Forgiveness notes reconciliation, reconciliation notes acceptance to favor,
and acceptance to favor notes peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, and
fruition of glory, as many blessings as heaven and earth can hold, as many
blessings as a God can hold, which is greater then heaven and earth. Sin
separates, God and man are out, and God-man interposeth with his life, and
gives up this wholly to the last drop of blood in this quarrel, and in this is
justice satisfied, and all truth fulfilled, and Christ as a general person
designed so to act in the person of many, and so has reconciled two in one
body, God and man, and has slain the enmity that was between them: And that he
might reconcile both unto God in one body, by the cross, having slain enmity
thereby, Ephesians. 2.15, 16. that is, Jews and Gentiles one unto another, and borh
unto God by the expiration of such a noble life in such a cursed death as the
Cross. The sum of all is this, Forgiveness of sin is an act of God,
putting all transgressions utterly out of remembrance, and esteeming our
persons in crucified Christ as Christ, the dearest to himself, and so held
communion with, and dispensed to, both here and hereafter,

and not any motive from without him: Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive,
plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86.5. The latter expression explains the former;
good, that is, plenteous in mercy, and this makes readiness to pardon; were
not God plenteous in kindness, a God rich in love, he would never be ready to
pardon sin, because it destroys his visible being, all this world and all
things in it, yea it destroys his invisible being; God is no God without, nor
no God within: The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. He affirms it
to Gods face within, the fool does this, that is, the man that lives in his
sin. Can you forget such as would crush you to nothing?

Repent that your sins may be blotted out, thus runs the Gospel throughout.
Repentance has two things; sense of sin, and faith in Christ, which grace is
said to justify, because a necessary condition of justification, and without
which, though not for which does God forgive. Abraham believed, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness; which is as much as if the holy Ghost had
said, Abraham went in the right way of justification, and so found it, he
sought it not by works, but by faith* (for you know that is the dispute there.)
This was imputed to him for righteousness, this* that is, not nudus actus
cred^ndi, the naked act of believing; the act abstractively considered, but
con^unctively considered as such a hand laying hold of such a person, this is
the condition which the Gospel calls for, that Christ be trusted in which also
God works; which work being wrought, justification follows actually.

actus numeratas, a numerall act, an act repeated, in order to sense, though
not in order to the thing it self to wit, sin: a repeated act in order to
chastisements, though not in order to condign punishment. We are forgiven this
day, and we are forgiven to morrow, and when to morrow comes, a man must be in
this to ^e again; we must pray daily for the forgiveness of debts, or else
they are as not forgiven, in order to internal sense, and external suffering.
Forgiveness is a daily thing with him are forgivenesses, says Daniel; and God
does multiply to pardon, says the Prophet Esaias, 55.7. Forgiveness is actus
multiplicatus, and this with the property thereof, and this property
essential, and which destroyed as many misled persons now do, destroy
forgiveness and destroy their souls. As such a multiplied act does David
apprehend mercy, and makes toward it: According to the multitude of thy
tender mercies, blot out my transgressions. Mercy thou have ordained to go
forth in a multiplied way, in a repeated and a renewed way, and in this way I
come unto thee, says the Prophet. Forgiveness in the court of conscience, est
actus repetitus.

I have now opened to you the weightiest point in Divinity* that upon which
your temporal and eternal good depends, a very considerable point, and
circumstanced with a very considerable time, it is a bloody time, a very bloody
deadly time. Sinners, are your sins forgiven? A dreadful throne is palpably
errected, the judge of all the world is now riding his circuit in England, and
his trumpets sound sadly in every County; Drunkards, swearers, bad good, come
away to judgment; Sinners, are your sins forgiven? Execution is general,
great and small are trussed up every where: bodies leave blood, blood leaves
spirits, spirits leave this world apace, but ah Lord, to what world do they go?
England, wicked England, where do thou bury thy dead, thy dead souls which
depart by troops? in heaven or in hell? One sad thing let me tell you all,
Death is at your door, therefore let every man smite his breast. and say,
Shall I die in my sin, or shall I die in thy favor.

Coloss. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible God, the first born of every
creature.
YOu have heard of Christ according to the dignity of office, a Redeemer, a
redeemer with his blood; you are now to hear of him according to dignity of
person, he is as in action so in person the noblest; He is the image of the
invisible God; the first born of every creature.

Christ is admirable in action and person, altogether lovely, so in the
judgment of God, and so in the judgment of those who can discern what God,
and what the highest beauty is; Christ has his encomium here by men truly
discerning and hear what they say, and be taken: For his office it is the
noblest, it is to make peace between man and God: for his person it is the
noblest, it is the highest representation of God that is in this world, no
creature in this world yields the like; he makes similitude to him, who
otherwise is without similitude; if you look at calling, if you look at
countenance, if you look at birth, in all these he is beyond all: if you look
at calling, none is employed like him, for he brings souls out of the devils
power with his blood: if you look at countenance, he is the image of that God
which is so glorious that no mortal eye can behold, and therefore called here
an invisible God: if you look at birth, he is Reuben, a first born, not in
reference to this little family or that, but in reference to Gods great family,
which consists of two worlds, three worlds, all that compass and every one of
those rooms, which contain every creature. Who is the image of the invisible
God, the first born of every creature.

Some have beauty only by their place and office, and so had Saul, and in this
sense merely I think called the beauty of Israel, the beauty of Israel is
slain. Saul was the shame of Israel, and the plague of his family, if
personally and practically considered, all his beauty then lay in his chair. So
others only have their beauty in their face and skin, as Absolon; and others
in their birth and pedigree, as Esau, all over rude and hairy, a rough man, but
of a beautiful stock, the firstborn of a brave family: some have all these
beauties without, but none within, of a good family, of a good countenance, of
a good rank, but not of one good quality; but none of these are wanting in
Christ, he has a general beauty: in place a King, in countenance the image of
God, in birth primogenitus cunctae creaturae, inside and outside, both are as
beautiful as the other, his goodness as beautiful as his greatness;
therefore both are joined together by the Prophet Zachary, and admired, How
great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty? Zach. 9.17. Christ's
goodness is admirably glorious and beautiful, as any other beauty so is the
beauty both of inside and outside of every thing belonging to Christ, and here
loftily expressed, and admired: Who is the image of the invisible God, the
first born of every creature,

The admirablenesse of Christ's person makes the admirablenesse of his action;
as things are made so they act, he is incomparably made, and therefore
incomparably acts, he is made higher then the heavens, and therefore of more
power and glory in action then they, though they be most admirable bodies in
the world in operation. Christ is in his form more noble then the heavens,
those noblest bodies; according to the nobility of form so is action, and
therefore are his actions mentioned in that place, as all suitable to this
supreme form, wherefore he is said to save to the uttermost for evermore:
which action is suitable to his form: he is made of an everlasting shape, above
the heavens; these last a great while, but he longer, because higher, and
because made above them; the heavens can make no everlasting operation, because
they have no everlasting form; but Christ being made above them, he acts above
them, and produces everlasting things suitable to his form. See this
argumentation used by the spirit of God himself, Hebr. 7.25, 26. Wherefore he
is able to save them to the utmost, that is, for ever, that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: for such an high
Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and
made higher then the heavens. Christ is made higher then the heavens, and
therefore can produce higher effects; he is made as high as the Highest; and
therefore suitable to him in action: he redeems from hell, from the torturing
power, not only of men, but of devils. Alike place is that, Luke 1.32. He
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, as things are in
the greatness and glory of their birth and formation, so in the greatness and
glory of their action; if a Son of the Highest, he will do the highest
things, things incomparably great, all shall see it and say so: if in the image
and form of God, and equal to him, he will do equal to him, things which no
man can do, destroy principalities and powers, and lift souls out of hell to
heaven. This lies along in the story here: In whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins, who is the image cf the invisible God,
etc.

Complement is to express and to gain love; Christ is in person and action
complete, to express and gain affection. God is invisible, and has no image
nor lively expression of himself but Christ, what he is for wisdom, for power,
for mercy, all these are out of sight, and have no expression, but in Christ;
the excellency of an invisible God, shines visibly, and expressly in him, in
his person and in his action, and this to gain man unto him, and therefore is
it said after the mentioning of his endowments, his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God: the government shall be laid upon his
shoulders, and then he shall be called this and that, etc. Transscendent honor
shall be put upon him by God, and this to gain the like from men, they shall
call Christ as God has made him and endowed him, as they see the image of God
in him, his wisdom, his power, his love. Invisible things do not work upon
sensible creatures, therefore are the invisible things of God made visible in
Christ, in his person and in his action, and this to work and win; therefore
are all the beauties of Christ so exactly and so loftily related; it is the
mystery of the Apostles art here, in drawing out God in Christ, and telling you
who Christ is like, that he might draw love to both. The fumme of all is this,
Christ is admirable both in person and action.

In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, and then observe what
follows, and ye are completed in him, Coloss. 2.9, 10. Christ's completenesse
is ours; what he has as Christ, that is, as one anointed, he has it as a
designed person in the stead and person of others, and therefore may you that
believe say, I am complete in person and work; and so does the Psalmist apply
this point to his comfort. Thou art perfect, and make my way perfect: person
is comprehended under action, the perfection of Christ makes us perfect, person
and action all together lovely: The Lord himself does approve of this
application of him, and calls an applicatory beauty, our beauty, and a perfect
beauty. And thy renown went among the heathen for thy beauty; for it was
perfect through my comeliness which I have put upon thee. Weak souls, learn to
comfort your selves as you should; your hearts need never droop for want of
holiness and comeliness in the eye of God, as long as Christ is, and he is
everlasting, and so are all his perfections.

Pride kills faith, you would have an absolute beauty in your selves to commend
you to God, which will never be: pride springs from ignorance, and both have a
hand in your weak state. Weak souls, you think duty makes beauty, but it does
not, it is only Christ; the glorious sun makes stars glorious. Satan
tells penitent spirits, that to believe is to presume: appropriation is no act
of presumption in qualified persons: Broken hearts, you are commanded to
believe: Ho, every one that thirsts, and every one that is weary, come to me,
says Christ: and you that do not see your ugliness, are wished to come to buy
eye salve that you may see. Every state of man has its proper command and
injunction of God upon it, men that do not see their deformity, the injunction
of the Gospel is, that such should come to Christ for eye salve; and such as
have spiritual sight and sense, the injunction of the Gospel is, that such
should believe that Christ and his comeliness is theirs; and weak hearts, you
may as well justify your selves in an act of self murder, as in unbelief; the
one respects the body, the other your eternal souls,

Coloss. 1.15. Who is the image, etc.
SCripture expressions are above us, where lowest and plainest, but how much
more where deep, and utterred exact to reach the loftiest beings; and in such a
style and strain does the holy Ghost speak here. Men over-matched should have
help from others: your prayers are doubly needed, and I entreat that they may
be answerably powered forth, that our labors may be solid and sweet, to the
salvation of your immortal souls, and to the joyful giving up of our own
account at the great day. Christ has a general beauty, and this particularly
expressed, first his image, and then his birth, and therefore are according to
his own order of expression to be prosecuted. Who is the image, etc.

The image of God signifies several things, sometime similitude in place, and
sometime similitude in qualification. Christ is the image of God in majesty,
in purity, in simplicity, and Identity of being: I intend to touch all these,
and then give you the use. Christ holds forth the majesty of God to man: divine
majesty notes two things, infinite power, and wisdom, and Christ carries both
these through the world in open view, which none else do, neither man nor
Angel. What they falsely said of Simon the sorcerer, that I may truly say of
Christ, He is the great power of God, he has power over all flesh, over all
spirits; men, devils, winds, seas, are all subject to him. Christ makes every
knee bow to him, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and under earth, he
is the head of all principallitie and power, Coloss. 2.10. Christ moves in an
upper sphere, and moves all other after him, as he pleases, he sits in heaven
and does what soever he will, he puts forth an infinite power here, which I
wonder this world can bear, and manages all things according to the counsel of
his will, which is one beam of God: divine power working fully as it is,
according to its infinite nature infinitely; and so it works in none, nor by
none, but in and by Christ.

power of God, and the wisdom of God, and both joined together by the Apostle,
as always going forth together to man. But unto them which are called both
Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. Christ has
an almighty arm, and an almighty brain, he over-reaches all, the deceived and
the deceiver; no action of his proves an abortive, or looses one whit of its
scope or intention for want of due time, or due place, or any other oportune,
and seasonable circumstance. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. There is not any excellency accidental in Christ, so you are not to
understand the term hid, but all excellency of power and wisdom, wrapped up in
flesh naturally, in him there is the fullness of the Godhead bodily. It Is an
allusion to treasure, where it lies naturally hid in the earth in a proper
body; and there lies abundance of treasures, after an unexpressable measure:
so in Christ lies wrapped up, wisdom, and knowledge, in their full dimensions,
and according to their incomprehensible nature, as in a proper body, and
answerably work to the managing of power, and therefore is it said, that he did
all things well, and that he spoke and did, as never man did. The power of God
fully as it is, and the wisdom of God, according to its naturality, and
immensity of being and working, which makes up the majesty of God, and so one
part of the image of God in Christ.

grace and truth, and the fullness of these in view. And the word was made
flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Providence is full of variety
of action, and all very profound, one cannot feel bottom here, yet this we can
pitch upon, that grace and truth are the scope of them all: the works of Gods
hands are verity and judgment; all his Laws are sure, and stand fast for
ever, and they are done in truth and uprightness. Christ's action is often beyond
our apprehension, and contrary to our expectation, but never beyond, nor
contrary to grace and truth. Grace goes forth in truth, mercy is managed by
justice; love is tendered, and if abused, wrath cuts off that person, or that
people, and this is the carriage of Christ through the world. Grace and truth
are the nature of God, and these in fullness, are in the person and action of
Christ, which plainly speaks out what Christ is, to all the world. Under this
notion is Christ called the image of God. Holiness and righteousness, was
called Gods image in Adam, because this was in his person and action createdly
exact, but this is uncreatedly exact in the second Adam, which gives him this
high title in the text; the image of the invisible God.

a king eternal, immortal, invisible. Before Abraham was, Christ was, before
any creature was, Christ was; in the beginning was the word. Christ was that
word which began all, and will be that word which shall end all, he is Alpha
and Omega, but without beginning or end of days himself: by him all things are
made, and by him all things shall be destroyed, but he himself abides for
ever, as God does.

Immortal. It Is eternity in a metaphor: about is the nearest way home, in
expression of high things. (...). the graven image of his substance. Use.
Immortal. Christ was never quite dead, he was so fully in the image of God:
malice killed man, but could not kill God-man, nor never will. Spirits have no
flesh and blood, no deadly matter, because no mixture. Christ's divine nature is
spiritual, and the spirituality of his being, not infinite as Angels, but
infinite as God, and in this sense, above the reach of sense, and much more
above the injury of finite force, and therefore called both immortal and
invisible. And so the express image of Gods person, and the brightness of his
glory. The sum of all is this, that Christ is that person in the trinity,
which does most immediately and fully, hold forth God to man's observation and
use, for temporal and eternal good.

As Christ is the image of God in purity, so we are to conform to him. Whom he
did foreknow, he did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son,
that is, in purity, in righteousness, and holiness, according to that of the
Apostle, Put on the new man which after God, is created in righteousness, and
true holiness. Sinners look well upon your souls, who are they like, Christ or
Satan? Satan knows who are like him, and so does Christ, neither will he be
deceived, therefore deceive not your selves: Death is at your door, do you not
see him; after him, the next dispatch will be for eternity, and it will bear
but upon the resolution of this question; whose image and superscrition is upon
this soul? If you would seek to delude at that day, it will not do in the
least, for conscience then shall manage its office fully, without any confront
from an unsound heart, it shall speak out then, and unmask the face of the
inward man to the judge of all. Deluded souls, I dread to think of you, you
have used a damnable art a great while, to mask a naughty heart, and a naughty
life, this trade must down now; the sword of the Lords vengeance is come to rip
you up, you shall be known as you are, judged as you are. This man is as like
the Devil in heart, as he can look, let children swim home to their father in
blood, I will make no better conveyance for them. Let them have marshall law,
will the Lord of hosts say, slay them in their beds, slay them at their doors;
uggly souls, I cannot endure any longer to look upon them. But as for you that
bear the image of Christ, lift up your heads, sing for joy of heart now, though
all the land be so sad. Christ's image is his mark upon you for mercy, he will
know you by this, in the midst of the bloudiest battle, in the midst of a
fired city. You being like the Son of God, you shall have one like the Son
of God, to embrace you in fiery flames, as the three children had.

Coloss. 1.15. Who is the image of the invisible God.
THis is said of Christ eminenter, he is what none else are in heaven or in
earth for likeness to God. They are exclusive words, and make a proper rule
for our right apprehension of God. When we would conceive of God as he is, we
are to conceive of him as he holds forth himself in Christ, and no where else;
for God has no representation, for divine adoration but Christ; God has no
artificial similitude, nor no natural similitude, nothing grows like him, nor
nothing can be made like him.

no man has seen God at any time, that is, as he is, only he that lay in his
bosom thus saw him. Sight is the rule of art, fancy cannot work upon nothing,
not our fancy. Folly makes her self visible and not God, when the man goes to
make the likeness of him he never saw. Fancy is but bad at recollection when
at a loss, yet a little it can do sometimes this way, call to mind such a
countenance which at such a time it saw; but that which it never saw it can do
nothing about that, but befool it self: No man has seen God at any time.

relief respecting God: neither the natural form of God, nor any artificial
shape can be got: Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his
shape, John 5.37. No man has seen God to draw him to the life, nor none has
seen his shape to copy him out, ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen his
shape. Christ as man is not the shape of God. There was apparition frequently
under the old covenant, vision was an ordinance, and although it were an
ordinance, yet God did make vision still under the shape of some other thing,
and not of himself; under the shape of men, or of an eagle, or a dove. The form
of man gives not a shape of the form of God; Christ as man was not the image
nor the shape of God, but called so as he had a divine essence and action, as
the godhead and the fullness of the godhead dwelt in him, and wrought by him.

Take good heed, for ye saw no manner of similitude when God talked with you in
Horeb; If there were any times to get some glimpse of God, it was in Horeb, but
yet then there was no manner of similitude. The result of all is this, There is
no image of God but Christ, nor can be. There is no representation, for relief
of apprehension in adoration, but Christ.



Some men's principles are strange, yet they will venture their souls upon the
practice of them; the pride of man and the wrath of God is in this; what is the
idol of any man's heart, shall become the idol of his life, to his death. God
will have what is in the heart, under the man's hand to condemn him: Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the
uncorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds,
and foure-footed beasts, says the Apostle. First they became vain in
imagination, then in action; the idol of the heart begins the idol of the hand,
and outward man necessarily: if you would know any man's conception of God, look
upon his action, if you would know what idol is in any man's heart, be but
patient a while, and he will draw it out himself in his life. How Romanists
conceive of God, they give it you under their hand* by the many sensual helps
they use in their devotion, their images, and multitudes of carnal
representations, whereas God is a spirit, and under the same notion and
apprehension alone, must be worshipped. Carnality speaks corruptibility, and
that is admirable abominable to relieve apprehension by, respecting an
incorruptible God, and yet this is the abomination of Rome, and the persons
which we stand to defend our selves against at this day.

Men which have corrupted their own glory, strive to corrupt infinite glory,
let this set an edge upon every man's sword: I go forth against a company of
carnal worshippers, which destroy God, which change the glory of the
incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man. I know not what
fire this puts in your spirits, I know what fire it kindles in Gods spirit,
namely, jealousy which is a kind of unquenchable fire, which burns to the
third and fourth generation, and which nothing quenches, but the blood of them
that kindle it; shed this when called to it, or else God will, and yours too.
Read the sad condition of this generation, Revel. 14.9. If any man worship the
beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered out without
mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the
holy Lamb. False representation makes false adoration, and our kingdom is
full of this, and we have done little spiritually to give better instruction,
and therefore it is no wonder that we fall corporally with them that fall; it is
the manner of God to whip his with those with whom they sin, and commit
fornication. The beast and the image of the beast, idolatry and superstition,
has swayed above three parts of us for a long time, and it will be no wonder
to see scarce one part of four outlive our present misery; if there be any
place to sanctify your selves, and to save this generation, it will be well if
God give you hearts to take it; know your own blindness, and it will teach you
how to use your out-going against others: Immedicabile vulnus ense, etc.
if means to reclaim take place before cutting off, I wish that may be used
every where.

Coloss. 1.15. Who is the image of the [invisible God.
Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth, declare if thou know it all,
says God to Job, chap. 38.18. so I may say to the greatest astronomer, Have
thou perceived the breadth of the heavens, declare if thou know it all? If
we see not the roof nor the floor, surely we see not the foundation of this
world at all: whereupon are the foundations of the world framed, or who laid
the cornerstone thereof? The profundity and invisibility of God in creation,
does he himself go on, thus speaking of to Job. Solomon in a like style speaks
to this purpose: He has set the world in its perfection, so that no man can
find out the work which God makes from the beginning to the end, Eccles. 3.

He does great things past finding out, and wonders without number: Lo he goes
by me and I see him not, and he passes on also, but I perceive him not, Job
9.10. A man, a Christian cannot see God many times, and yet God fast by. A man
thinks God is going backward with such a business, when he is going on with
it: He passes on, and yet I cannot perceive him: Job spoke this as if this had
been his case alone; but alas, it is not, it is every man's case: God goes out of
sight to him; the wisest man, the most seeing man is in the dark frequently, in
this point of providence, Eccles. 8.17.

God is not only invisible in regard of his essence or godhead, but also in
regard of the fullness and glory thereof, which is called light indeed in the
Scripture, but yet such as to which no mortal eye can approach. The beams of
the sun above, though light, yet so glorious as too big for any organ we have
to take in. Things have density to terminate, color to congregate, being, and
glory of being finite; yea both not only finite, but both brought down to a
suitable proportion to such a tender organ, or else our eye languishes, and
closes it self, as able to make no vision. God is not simply invisible, but
invisible in reference to us; Angels see him, and Saints above see him, they
behold his face, which is the most invisible. God is invisible to a mortal
eye, as the Apostle speaks: a mortal eye must have its adaequatae objecta, or
else it is discouraged, and closes, and gives off its office. God has not one
adequate to render him visible to a mortal eye, neither matter nor form,
neither longitude nor latitude, neither white nor ruddy, without any dimension,
and without any circumscription of time or place, or any accident or shadow of
them. The sum of all is what I said in the beginning, That God is wholly
invisible, invisible in person and action.

fall fearfully, hell pangs are upon them; do you not hear them groan to be
there, by their horride imprecations? Our war has slain more then we see,
how do men give up the holy Ghost daily! and souls breathe out their last good
breath! What making of graves, tolling and ringing out is there in the other
world below, if a man could see it! Sinners, tremble at these things, for I
tremble to think of some of you: I see that in some of you, which I fear is yet
invisible to your souls, invisible judiciary action upon your souls, beg that
your eyes may be opened that you may see Gods actions within you in some
measure, or you are lost men.

Gods action is invisible, trust in him: when Gods action carries not that in
it visibly, which we look for, we think it has nothing in it at all, nor means
nothing for our good, and so let fall faith, and fall a quarrelling with God
and one another; it is our great disadvantage at this day and nothing more, with
which God is displeased, which will be more and more disadvantage to us only.
Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord,
and my judgment is passed over from my God? When we cannot see God going along
with us in every thing, we think he has cast us off; the godly despair, and
the wicked presume when things are thus carried, both which are much alike
good; one loses his comfort, the other loses his soul. When we are in the
dark and know not where we are, God knows where he is, variation of action does
not prove variation of intention; one end may be intended in travel, though
every day the way turn. In countries full of mountains, ways are necessitated
to turn and take compass much: there are great mountains in the Churches way,
these make many turnings, and put us often to a stand, to see our way, and him
that goes before us. Christians, be not discouraged, it is the manner of God to
hide himself often, when he intends to show his face gloriously. I cannot let
down my faith respecting Gods intentions of love, to this bleeding land: that
that God now hides himself let it make matter of prayer, as it did to David in
like case, and not matter of unbelief and impatience: Hide not thy face from
thy servant, for I am in trouble: hear me speedily, and deliver me out of the
mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out
of the deep waters: let not the water-flouds overflow me, neither let the deep
swallow me in, let not the pit shut her mouth upon me, etc.

Finally, for as much as God according to person is invisible to a mortal eye;
long to be out of the body, that mortality may put on immortality, a mortal
eye, become an immortal eye, that you may see him that dwells in that light,
to which no mortal eye can reach. The body makes misery, and not felicity to
the soul here; our mortal eye beholds nothing but mortality, and so all our
vision in the body, makes misery, and not felicity to the soul. What is this
world but a great body filled with the curse of God! and what are all the
creatures of this world but each others deadly executioners, and the dust of
one, a grave to turn another into the same! and this is our doleful vision
throughout our dying life here; our eye affects, and afflicts our hearts, and
yet do not we long to go home, to have better vision, the vision of Saints, and
the vision of Angels and the vision of God, in which is heaven. Know your
error now, you carnal wretches: all is going away, whither are your souls
going, to see God, or the devil? Know your error Christians, the glory of this
world has taken your eye, and the shame of it will take your persons, unless
the Lord pity. What bloody objects do I see in the country, and what bloody
objects may I see in the city! But were I in that holy city above, I know
whom, and what I should see and feel to all eternity.

Coloss. 1.15. First-born] of every creature.
Firstborn, notes two things, precedence in affection, and precedence in
being, in reference to all the creation: Christ is before all chosen, beloved,
and endued with grace, and in this sense is called the firstborn. Whom he
fore-knew, he predestined to be conformed to the image of his son, that he
might be the firstborn among many brethren. Christ and all the elect are here
resembled by a family, and Christ the first brought forth, in the image of the
Father of this family, and all the rest conformed to this image; Christ the
first chosen and endued, and then all others chosen and endued in him. In this
sense, namely, in regard of precedence in affection, is Israel called Gods
firstborn, that is, in reference to all other people, the first chosen and
beloved: And thou shall say unto Pharaoh, thus says the Lord, Israel is my
son, even [my first-born] Let my son, my firstborn go, or else I will slay
thy firstborn, Exodus 4.22.

Firstborn, notes precedencie in being: there is a first coming into the
kingdom of God, and a first coming into this world. First was the word
begotten, and then all other things begotten by him; before any thing had being
Christ had. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works
of old: I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, when there were no
depths, I was brought forth, etc. Proverbs 8. He speaks you see in reference to
the creature, and challenged priority of being, in reference to them all, and
therefore called in the Revelation, the beginning of the creation of God: and
therefore here also called the firstborn of every creature. Birthright you
see by this has a double consideration, natural, and spiritual, and both
honorable, and to beheld up and maintained, and so does the spirit of God here
infer.

Birthright is an honorable thing, and to be holden up, and maintained. It Is
taken for granted to be honorable, and to be maintained, and therefore is so
used and prosecuted in reference to Christ: what is due to him by birth in a
spiritual sense, is held forth and maintained, to wit, that he is the
firstborn of many brethren; and what is due to him by birth in a natural
sense is held forth, and maintained also, that he is the firstborn of every
creature: all his privileges are protested.

Right is the privilege of being, and felicity falls as this falls; a being
without privilege, is a being without felicity; and a being without felicity,
is hell. Birthright contains much: it is a bundle of privileges bound up by
God and man, as many as grace and nature affords, to make such a being blessed,
both here and hereafter. Consider a man as born, and he has such natural
privilege from nature: and consider a man as new born, and he has such
spiritual privilege from grace. That which carries the felicity of life in
it, its own worth necessarily calls for standing for; if I must stand to
maintain my life against deadly creatures which invade it, much more that which
is the felicity of my life: right and privilege, is the felicity of life, the
felicity of natural life, and the felicity of spiritual life.



every creature, and the first born among many brethren. Natural privilege
makes natural felicity, and this becomes a snare often times; accommodations of
nature make men slight grace, which was Esaus sin and ruin; birthright in
the spirituality of it, he despised, obtaining carnal content. The more of the
world enjoyed, the less is Christ cared for, this is a common plague, and
consider how it is with you. Are you beloved of God, or do you look after it?
they are his firstborn, his prime birth, which issue out of the womb of love.
There is a child and a pleasant child: is he not a pleasant child? So there are
sons, and firstborn sons. All men are Gods sons in some sense. We are
his offspring; but some are chosen out of the world, and have special love
set upon them, they are called a first offspring, a prime birth, because born
of love, their birth being not only from the hand of God, but from the heart
of God, born of water and the spirit, brought forth to the obedience of the
Gospel, by a spiritual efficacy in the word: if this be not your condition,
your honor is not full, whatever your worldly privilege be, and you will soon
know it; for though you seem to be sons made much of, you will quickly be cast
off; none but firstborn are written in heaven, and embraced for ever. To the
Church of the firstborn [written in heaven.

Firstborn have a propriety in eternal felicity, they are written in heaven,
and others are written in hell; they are joint heirs with Christ, which a state
worth the looking after. You see how all things go here, tyranny tramples your
privilege under foot; you are born to much, and it comes to nothing but blood
and misery; you dare not go where your revenue lies, to challenge your
birthright, the sword is so furbisht and set against you: had you a state in
grace, were you a generation of firstborn as Christ, there were something sure
to take too, let times and things work as they will. The folly of men is great,
this world is only prized, and men will not be reclaimed, which is a
destructive thing. Let me ask the children of this world, does the bloody sword
make you question your state, whether you are the children of God or no? born
of the spirit, to an inheritance eternal, immortal, that passes not away?
Newborn are firstborn: you are as you were in life, and you will be as you
never were in death. Do ye see children of this world, how black and bloody
this world is? But what is that to come, where your names are written, and unto
which, you are heirs! Look about you children of this world, your misery
gathers every day more and more, and nearer and nearer, and it will swallow you
up, and feed upon you for ever, if not prevented; your birthright is barely
natural, that is, such privileges, in such a kingdom; and you had need fight
hard for these; for you have no more, these gone, and all gone, loose what you
are born to of flesh and blood, and you loose all: fight hard carnal
creatures, or you will be quite undone else.

Birthright is honorable and to be maintained: you that have this honor in a
full sense, in a natural and in a divine sense, as Christ had, hold up your
honor, and maintain it as Christ does here by his spirit, in my text: assert
your state, as Christ does here, and not desert it: tell the children of this
world what you are, children of such men, and children of such a God, that you
are born to such secular privilege by man, and to such spiritual privilege
by God, and will maintain it in his way, as long as blood is in your veins.
It Is below a man to be a slave: usurped power, makes illegal yokes, and the
man that will put his neck into these, is an ass, a silly beast, and not a
man: as the posterity of Issachar are called upon this very ground. The soul is
base, as it yields to baseness, it fears man more then God, which will be its
ruin without remedy: a subdued spirit in this sense, is a silly dove, without
heart, of weak principles, and of an unsound mind: so many trialls, and so many
plagues to this man, all that is shot at him hits him to the heart, and kills
him dead: this is our misery at this day, we have a great many persons, but a
few men, a great deal of stir but no action; the enemy at the gate,
birthright giving up, corporal privilege, and spiritual privilege, wounded
at the heart, and yet we have no heart to do our duty; something lost makes us
conclude all is lost; every one kills himself with despair, that there is none
to kill them, which kill Law, Religion, and all goodness. Our color is fallen
strangely of a sudden: what a deal of blood and life had we to stand for the
honor of our birthright, a little while since! and what is now become of it?
has harlots got it all away from our army, and from our city too? I can look
upon no man's face, but their sits a pale deadly spirit. Ah Lord! how ghastly
it is! What does it presage? the death of all? Londoners, what do you mean? will
you let frogs and toads creep into your houses, and up into your beds, ere
you will stir and put forth for your birthright? shall the enemy come and
write up your baseness at your door, in your own blood.

Bravenesse of spirit for the maintenance of our privilege is much wanting,
and yet I doubt will be, there is so much carnal bravery. Our armies swagger,
every street stares upon their pride; pride seeks it self, and not Christ, nor
any thing that is noble. Men go forth to maintain themselves, and not to
maintain right: how much do many men swagger, now Christ is turned out of all!
Unsound hearts swell: pride is a fruit of rottenness, rotten wretches
entrusted, have undone all: are not our lives now in as much danger as our
liberties? We may thank our selves, should we not have chosen sincere humble
men to lead us forth, to stand for our birthright in the field? Humility and
integrity are the foundation of true valor; others vapor, but these will be
brave indeed. Look to your hearts every one, I think it will come to every man's
turn to stand for his birthright. When man by man shall be singled out, trial
will be quick: When the sword is at the breast, for whom art thou? for the
King, or for the Parliament? for Antichrist or for Christ? Your hearts will
shake unless very sound. As you find your unsoundnesse, make out for healing,
you will betray all else when put to it to stand for your birthright; you will
like Peter, in stead of professing Christ, profess that you know him not.

Coloss. 1.15. First born of every creature.
OF every creature.] That is, brought forth by eternal generation before any
creature was. This term creature is not made a genus, in reference to Christ;
but in reference to all below Christ, as Angels, and all other things. It is
observable here under what genus all things below Christ are put, creatures,
firstborn of every [creature, etc. Angels, a creature; man a creature; every
thing man sees, hears, smells, tastes, feels, a creature. Every thing on this
side Christ, is but a creature; a piece of his workmanship.

The sin of man is aggravated upon this ground by Moses: They have corrupted
themselves, they are a perverse people: Do ye thus requite the Lord. unwise
people? Did not he make thee, and establish thee? etc. What I made, flies now
in my face: what I made, seeks now to mar and destroy me: thus God aggravates
your sins, sinners, in his word, and he will do it hereafter to your faces. I
have brought forth children, and they rebel against me: creatures are the
children of Gods power, new creatures and old creatures. As you have children
of your womb, so God has children of his hand: the work of my hand strikes to
my heart, I am stabbed by instruments of mine own making, I am slain by
children of mine own womb this circumstance will heighten sin with a
witness; and as sin heightens, justice will heighten, and what a hell will he
have then, that dishonours his maker.

Relation is obliging: Remember your Creator, him to whom you ow your being,
who made you such brave creatures, and not toads; or else he that made you,
will have no mercy upon you. It Is a thousand pities that every one considers
not his station; men swell in pride, and walk as if they were not creatures,
but gods, which is the cause of all our blood and misery at this day. The will
of the Creator trampled under foot, and the creature will have his will; this
is a creature making himself a God: but believe me, God will fight for his
prerogative, the creature shall know he is but a creature, every creature shall
know it; Princes and great men shall know they are but creatures, men shall
know themselves to be but men, as the Psalmist speaks: Woe unto him that
striveth against his Maker, says the Prophet. And you will see this woe
fulfilled in this land, if you pray hard, and fight hard.

Behold; they shall surely gather together, but not by me, whosoever shall
gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake: Behold, I have created
the smith that blows the coals in the fire, and that brings forth an
instrument for his work, no weapon formed against thee shall prosper, etc. Esaias
45.15, 16, 17. Does God create wasters to destroy, and does he not carry a
power over them, to rule them and order them respecting his Church? Yes, says
the next verse, No weapon formed against thee shall prosper. Misery is much
lessened by a right consideration of things: terror is the misery of miseries.
When I look upon a soldier with such deadly weapons about him, and look no
further, he is terrible to me, but when I look upon him as a creature, and say
to my self, I know who made the man, and who made those deadly instruments that
are in his hand, who made the waster and his wasting tackling, then his dread
falls. Creatures are bounded, they move as ordered; some things they can do,
and some things they cannot do, nor shall not do: No weapon formed against me
shall prosper. If there be any power beyond devils, the Apostle Paul raises
himself beyond fear of it, from this consideration, that they are but
creatures: Neither height, nor depth, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God.

creature is subjected to vanity. Creatures are vanishing things. We pick and
choose creatures, and make as it were a nose-gay of them, and set them in our
bosom, and no sooner there but they die: wife dies, children die, friends,
fortunes, states, kingdoms die, thus do all the sweetest creatures we look
upon, and this is common to every ones experience, but not to every ones
instruction; yet for all this do men love the creature more then the Creator.
When shall we have mortification in England? and when in London? When all is
dead? It Is sad to behold how still we love the creature, although the Creator
has set creature to kill creature, as if he would not leave a creature alive.

you did nor trust in God, but in man, when your great armies went forth,
because you have no faith, now men are gone. Papists upbraid us with the terms
of solifideans, but these forementioned may I upbraid with a term near it,
solofideans, trusters in earth, or carnifideans, trusters in flesh.

Coloss. 1.16. For by him all things were created that are in heaven, and that
are in earth, etc.
THe Sovereignty of Christ is argued and demonstrated in this, as in the
following expressions: He has created all things in heaven and in earth, and
therefore to be conceived of over and above all things; higher then all, and
greater then all.

Men are apt to conceive too low and too mean of Christ. He that comes down
from heaven is above all, says Christ. He that is of the earth is earthly, and
speaks of the earth; but he that comes down from heaven is above all; and
what he has seen and heard, that he testifies, and yet no man receives his
testimony, John 3. Twice is the sovereignty of Christ affirmed, and yet not
once received; he lifts and lifts again to lift up thoughts and affections
concerning Christ, as one above all, and yet all would not do. He that comes
down from heaven is above all; above all on earth, and above all in heaven. He
multiplies high expression to raise high conception, and yet poor low
creatures would conceive of him no otherwise then of other men, nor yet hardly
so well. Thus are high expressions multiplied here for the same end, which
argues that man is a creature very apt to conceive very low of Christ.

meanly judged of. What Christ is visibly is looked after, and this is little;
nothing visible speaks him the author of invisible things, the maker of
thrones and dominions: from nothing visible, flesh and blood can argue nothing
real, to raise apprehension respecting any thing, no not respecting God
himself.



and many of them shall stumble and fall and be broke, that is, many shall have
low thoughts of Christ, and so reject him, which is death without remedy.
Christ is not carnally plausible, and it is so ordered of purpose for a snare
to carnal wretches, which will set up nothing but what the world does, and to
accomplish judiciary will. Man eyes his will, and so does God: man orders all
his actions according to this, and so does God: sinners fulfill their own wills
and Gods, when they set Christ low, and their souls lower, when they stumble at
Christ, and ruin themselves. You vex not God when ye debase Christ, and
destroy your souls, you only accomplish his righteous will, and your own
wicked will.

Consider the point in hand, and how it reaches you: Christ is a mere fancy to
forlorn souls. Men oppose creature to creature, this is higher then that, and
this is better then that, but who opposes Christ to all the creatures, and
sets him in his thoughts above all, above earth and above heaven, above visible
and above invisible things, above thrones and dominions, above every being as
the being thereof? Sovereignty is peculiar state, Christ must have glory in the
highest; that salutation was but due which they gave when Christ came into
Jerusalem; Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord, peace in
heaven, and [glory in the highest. Christ set highest in the soul, is set no
higher then he should be, the king is but set in his throne: men fancy that
they thus set up Christ in their thoughts, but they do but fancy it I doubt. I
will give you some things to demonstrate where this is real, that the soul
does indeed as the Apostle here, look upon Christ as supreme and above all.

Can thou do this? and can thou do that? says God, and holds out his
sovereignty over all before him. Then Job answered and said, I know that thou
can do every thing, and no thought can be held from thee, Job 42.12. Job did
but fancy this point before that he apprehended God as over all, but now he
comes indeed to behold it, his heart shakes, and he draws doctrine upon
doctrine from it. I know that he which is over all can do what ever he will: he
made me of the dust with his word, and he can turn me to dust with his word. I
cannot hide a fault from him; he that made the ear, shall he not hear, if I
speak sin? he that made the eye, shall he not see, I do sin? and he that made
the heart, shall not he discern if I think sin? The soul is full of strong
argument with its self, when it does indeed behold God as the maker of all, his
sovereignty.

he is precious: if I see him the son of the highest, I give glory in the
highest to him. As things are in height so in honor; honor carries glory, and
glory carries the heart; the one seen, and the other is more seen, and swayes;
glory is a very taking thing: The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory
is above the heavens. If I indeed behold the person of God above the earth, and
above the heaven, I see him in glory above all these; and if I see him in glory
above all these, I am taken with him above all. Most vaunt of light and yet
have nothing in love, such apprehension is fancy and not real apprehension.
Can I indeed see the sun, and not be taken with it,

higher then the highest, that is the quieting argument. If thou see the
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment in the Province,
marvel not at it, for he that is higher then the highest regards, and there
be higher then they. The sovereignty of Christ indeed beheld, takes off
disquiet, though powers opposing be never so great; the soul can argue with its
fears, and find out shoulders for his burdens, as long as God is above all. He
that made all is above all, and will maintain his universal sovereignty; the
highest shall know they have one above them, and here the oppressed rest. A man
that indeed looks upon. God as a Creator, rests his soul upon him as a
faithful Creator, that is, as one that will regard the beings which he has
made, although various and so many. Great troubles make great fears, and great
fears make great shifts and sins: What a fearful time, and what a sinful
time is this! Princes are but men, and yet humane sovereignty makes us do any
thing. Fearful souls, you do but fancy Christ's sovereignty, that he is King
of kings, and the Creator of all; you have no apprehension of what you speak:
you fear God and offer to Baal, as the expression is, that is, you set man
above Christ, what ever you say.

Some of you may possibly see your sin by this point, that you are not so
noble spirited as you dreamt, that you have but low conception of Christ. You
that are proud in spirit, carnal in affection, and fearful of men, have a
base and low opinion of Christ, and Christ will require it. As long as God is
supreme, a brave spirit flincheth not a step, but others do like themselves,
which will be their shame and judgment. He judges those that are high, says
brave Job to his friends, which carried themselves high, Job 21.22. he saw his
opposites high, yet this daunted him not a jot, because he beheld one higher.
Judge not light of this point in hand, you cannot hear one more useful in
this trying time. A man fears nothing that sees Christ above all, neither what
men can say nor do; a man fears where no fear is that sees not this: Also now
behold my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high; my friends scorn me,
but mine eye pours out tears unto God, Job 16.19, 20. Men think of me thus
and thus, but it troubles me not a jot, I look at one that is above all men,
that made all, and knows all, and will judge all; to him I refer all: all
cannot daunt one in good that sees God above all. Low souls, look upon him that
is high if you would become high, as high as Christ and heaven.

Coloss. 1.16. For by him were all things created] that are in heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they he thrones or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, etc.
HEaven and earth, and the Author and end of both, are wrapped up in this verse
and what we shall say of either, for the good of your precious souls, depends
wholly upon the blessing of Christ. Christ's house is stately, but of few
causes; efficient, and final: first by him, and secondly for him, were all
things created: Christ's house is great, but of few rooms, Heaven and Earth: For
by him all things were created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth.
Christ's family is but of few kinds, visible, and invisible. From one cause to
another, from the efficient to the final; from one kind to another, from
visible to invisible: from one room to another, from Earth to Heaven is a
Christians journey quite home, and lies all along in this text for us to
travel.

Christ is considered under much variety of notion, and still sweet under all
as a redeemer, as the image of God, as a firstborn, and here as a creator. A
holy soul cannot tire it self in the contemplation of Christ. Their is variety
of excellency in Christ; variety of time, he is Alpha and Omega: Variety.
variety of beauty, white and ruddie: variety of quality, mild and fierce; a
lion and a lamb, a servant and a son, a Man and God, a Redeemer and a
Creator. Christ is all variety of excellency, he has all the powders of the
Merchants, Canticles 3.6. In things below Christ, some have excellency, and
some none: some this excellency, and some that, but none have all; and this
checks the soul in his game, and withers contemplation at the root.
Contemplation is soul-recreation, recreation is kept up by variety: one thing
tires quickly, unless that one be all, which so is Christ and none else, he is
all, Colossians, 3.11. All belonging to well being, and all belonging to being,
Redeemer and Creator, for by him were all things created.

There is congruity of excellency in Christ: Congruity
what things are in Christ are all suitable to a holy soul, and suitable things
tire not; we lie down where we are pleased. It Is with a holy soul, as it is with
a holy God; unsuitable things tire him presently. Your new moons, and your
appointed feasts, that is, their hypocritical observations, I am weary to bear
them, says God, Esaias, 1.14. Holy persons, and holy actions, things congruous
to his will, in these he takes up his dwelling; his thoughts though vast and
noble hire themselves here, so far are such things from wearying of him; his
thoughts respecting this world, the people, and practices of it, rove and
wander, and tire, as weary of all, till he come to Sion, and then observe what
he says of her; This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
desired it, Psalm, 132.14. Affection makes motion, and thoughts go after
desires; desires suited, thoughts sit down and take up their rest, and their
dwelling, and like the place of their habitation: it is thus with God, and it is
thus with godly men: one holy spirit roves and tires out it self, till it meet
with another; the soul of a christian flies from creature to creature, and
pitches down upon this and that, but rises up again presently as one wearied,
because it can find nothing suitable; and thus it does in reference to all the
creatures, till it come to Christ, and in him it finds all suitableness, and
then sits down, suitableness to being and well-being. Christ is my
redeemer, and my creator, enough for all that I can wish, and therefore here I
rest says the soul.

Transcendency.
There is transcendency of excellency in Christ: variety and congruity of
excellency, and all above expression, more then can be reached. A holy heart is
deep, and loves to bath it self in deep waters: contemplation is a soul making
one deep to swallow up another; and this is so far from tiring, that it is the
very Heaven of a holy heart. Contemplation is a soul widening it self to
swallow up infiniteness, what ever God is, if it can. Not a step of Christ
toward man, but it is a great deep. Redemption is a great deep, and Creation a
great deep, and it is delightful to a divine heart to dive where sweetness
has no bottom. Carnal contemplation tires: because though it find something
suitable in the creature, yet but very little, and that little in a little time
turns to nothing, and then the soul is not ohely tired, but vexed, which makes
thoughts retreat disorderly. Divine contemplation cannot tire, for it finds out
suitable things, and yet there are more besides these still; it finds out one
Heaven, and when the soul is in this, and it sees another beyond this; when it
beholds a Redeemer, it sees a Creator more plainly.

cleave to the dust. You do not observe whither your hearts go, nor what
journeyes they make; you do not observe their going out, nor their layings out,
whither they wander; nor how prodigal when abroad; nor possible will not,
because it is pleasing: men do contentedly lose their souls in things below
Christ.

blindness, idleness, wilfulness. Some men know nothing of Christ, the soul
cannot dwell upon nothing. Thoughts are soon tired when confounded; they clash
much where there is no apprehension; one fights against another, and the
spirit dies in this fight, because condemned to abide in a dungeon. Confusion
makes distraction, distraction makes madness; men throw off all, when they can
understand nothing in divine mysteries; and I persuade my self that this has
undone many a soul. I have known learned men, who though conte^plative enough
in their way, yet when they set to conte^plate divine things can make no
sweetness to their souls, but knots, tricks, and fancies to cavil with; and
it is impossible but that the soul should tire quickly, that can find out
nothing in Christ but knots and bones to feed on. Learned persons look about
you, your contemplation is highest and yet lowest; the hid things of nature
wrap you up, and the high things of Christ tire you presently, which is naught,
and speaks the heart bewitched with curiosity; high in fancy, but low and
carnal in affection: such a soul as this makes its nest in the stars of this
world, but God will from thence pluck it down; every soul that nests not it
self in Christ, and in those glorious excellencies which shine in him will be
judged, and perish as carnal.

The spirit of a man, knows the things of a man. You know how carnally your
hearts work, and what do you do to reduce them? You keep no watch,
sloth-betrayes your souls to lust, and lust will betray your souls to the
devil. How secretly does many a man's heart steal away Christ, and yet not so
secretly but it is seen, and the man for want of activity lets it go, and so is
accessory to the betraying of his own soul, Ah Lord! what will that man be able
to say for himself in judgment, that stood still and saw his heart steal away
from God to the creature, and did nothing to turn it back, made no prayer, nor
shed no tears! Men complain of losses now, but who complains; O God I have lost
my soul: I can never find it in Christ; it is sometime in wealth, in husband,
and sometime in children, in houses and in lands, but never in Heaven; when it
sets about this it is tired presently. As the body so the soul goes downward
with ease, but up hill with much pains-taking; you must be full of complaints
to Christ to keep your souls in his bosom.



Let us all know our duty and do it all, Christ is to be considered; so did
David, so did Paul, and so must we consider him. I will meditate of all thy
works and talk of all thy doings, Psalm. 77. what Christ has done as a
Redeemer, and what as a Creator; what he has done with his finger, what with
his hand, what with his spirit, and what with his blood, we must meditate on
all his works. Divine things are still unfruitful as unthought of; when we
seek after Christ, then he brings us into his chambers; the efficacy of all
that Christ is, comes in by contemplation. Every thing in Christ is useful,
the very leaves of the tree of Life are healing: consider Christ under any
notion in which the Scripture holds him forth as a Redeemer, or but as a
Creator, as the image of God, as the firstborn, and the like, or under any
other more remote consideration, and they are all powerful to take off the
heart from earth and send it to Heaven. Christ's action and Christ's person, yea
and Christ's garments; all he said, and all he did, and all he wore, very
virtuall and instructing.

Know your duty and know your felicity: you have now but a few things to think
upon, this world is bleeding and dying apace; he that gives all being, me
thinks every one should now much think upon, when all creatures cease to be so
fast. A man's tranquillity is permanent when his thoughts dwell upon Christ; let
friends, means, towns, kingdoms die, and yet his Heaven lives, because his
heart is lodged in one that can die no more, that ever lives. Misery is double,
because loss of the creature does not reduce thoughts to Christ: the end of
affliction not accomplished, you will be afflicted seven times more, till your
prodigal souls return home to their father, and leave feeding on husks.

Coloss. 1.16. For by him were all things created that are in heaven and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities or powers, etc.
I Have given you the respect which this verse bears to those which precede;
and I am now to give out to you as I am able, what it has in it self. If you
read this verse, you will find it to consider creation, in reference to two
parts, and two causes: two parts, heaven and earth, visible and invisible: two
causes, efficient and final; the first is in the beginning of the verse, and
the second is mentioned in the latter end; the one says, all things were made
by him, and the other says that all things were made for him.

Christ's method pleases me best. I will therefore take terms as they lie, and
suck as much out of them as I can for my self and you. For by him were all
things, etc. (...).
in him were all things created, says the original, Christ's method and
Christ's expression pleases me best. God does create and new-create in Christ.
God does all things respecting the creature in his Son; the Father works in the
Son, the Son in the Spirit, and the Spirit in your spirits. The order of
divine action is admirable; the beauty of God in his outgoings is held out to
us. Christ is the wisdom of the Father; all that God does he does in wisdom.
The Lord by wisdom has founded the earth, and by understanding has
established the heavens, Prove. 3.19. a like place to this you have Jeremy
10.12. He has made the earth by his power, he has established the world by
his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his discretion.

Divine action is made with delight: you have many prime agents, but God has
but one; you look more at ability to your work, then suitableness to your
spirits in the agents you employ, but God does not: you can bear discontent in
the agent, so his work be well done, but God cannot: he so moves as to have
delight in both, not only in the work done, but in the agent that does it, and
therefore does all in Christ. I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before
him, says Christ, speaking of God when in the creation of all things, Prove. 8.

Success.
The comfort of the godly is in this point: all divine action going forth in
Christ, we may conclude success; successefulnesse to their good. Christ is
mighty in strength and wisdom, our agents are unsuccessefull for want of
power, and for want of wisdom; but the agent in and by whom God acts, is
mighty in both. God is mighty in strength and wisdom, he preserves not the
life of the wicked, but gives right to the poor, Job 36.5. Where great humane
power is (it is Elihu his speech to Job) men think to evade the bent and force
of divine action, and to shun what God intends, as they shun what man intends,
to get out of his reach as out of ours; but no such matter, for all his action
shall acquire his intention, and no man shall evade it; for he works in him who
is mighty in strength and wisdom. God intended a world, did he miss the
accomplishment of it? Godly souls, you look much in and by whom the king acts,
such and such skillful men, and mighty men, and shake and fear; but look in and
by whom God acts, and comfort your selves. Has the king such an agent as
Christ is for strength and wisdom?

Full success.
All divine action going forth in Christ, we may conclude full success, that
is, in the thing, and in the circumstance of time: Christ does so much as God
intends, and in such a time; in so many days he was to make the world, and he
did it to a punctum of time, and rested with his Father: and in so many years
he is to make a new world, First and second resurrection are timed in word, and
so shall be in work; the two beloved cities will be built one after another, in
their predicted time.
and he will do it exact to a punctum of time, and then give it up all to his
Father, and rest with him and his Church for ever. Time is in Christ's hand as
well as the work of time: the Father has put all into his hand, my times are
in thy hand. The great world may say to Christ, My times was in thy hand, in so
many days did thou bring me forth, and so many years will thou uphold me.
And the new world may say, My time is in thy hand, in so many years thou will
bring me forth. You murmr that things go no faster on, the time of the new
world is in Christ's hand, and it should be rest enough to a saint in all
troubles, to look up and consider in whose hands worlds are transacted. God
moves in one that answers his will exact, that observes his work and his
time. Lo I come, as it is [written] in the volume of thy book. Search how it is
written concerning Christ's creating this new world, and you shall see that he
will come and do it exactly. Lo I come, as it is written, says Christ, but not
as impatient spirits expect: instruments must be blamed when they take not
their time, (I mean instruments which we employ for our good in this time of
distress) but the heart must be quieted in this, that Gods agent exactly keeps
his time,

This is not all your consolation: you may argue for the choicest mercies upon
this ground, that God is your Creator in Christ, Thy hands have made me and
fashioned me give me understanding that I may live, Psalm. 119.73. from such
power you may argue to such love; from great power you may argue for great
love: Thou did create me in Christ according to such a noble being, do thou
new create me in Christ, for the restoration of this being, as if the Psalmist
had so said: this I think may be his meaning, and the strength of his argument.
Many of you are weary of your being, you do so sin, but you might have more
comfort in your being, if you did look up and consider who gave it, and what
obligement lies upon him by it; he gave your being in Christ, and he will
restore this being in Christ, if you plead it to him as David. Thine hands have
made me and fashioned me; give me understanding that I may live. Thus do thou
say to God. A child of God may argue love and compassion from any thing that
Gods hand does to him, upon this very ground, because he does all that he does
to him, in Christ.

To ungodly persons.
Sinners, the Scripture pressetn obedience to Christ upon you from this point
upon pain of death, that all things are made in and by him: how able is he to
take away being from all, which gave it to all. Read Proverbs 8.31.32. After
that Christ is there mentioned in state as the Creator of all, this he
infers upon it: viz. Now therefore hearken unto me O ye children, that is,
children by creation; for blessed are they that keep my ways. Hear
instruction and be wise and refuse it not. He that sins against me, wrongeth
his own soul. So he concludes, as Christ is complete to attract love, the same
will be his sufficiency and advantage to aggravate our sliding off him: for
thus Christ will say to sinners at the great day, I am a firstborn, I am the
Image of the Father, I am a Redeemer, I am a Creator, and yet though all these
thou regardest me not; all excellencies slighted shall be turned into so many
rods to lash your dead souls. The sins you love will destroy your being, and
your being, being destroyed, you will fall into your Creatours hand again, and
what being do you think he will give you then. God deals with you as you are;
you are natural, and he fetches argument against you from nature, as what is
more natural to you then your being: the lower God stoupes to stir you and
you yet unmoved, the more obstinate you are; you are no new creatures,
therefore God argues with you simply as creatures, and then you show your
selves blocks: you use no art about a block but to burn it, and so does God
when sinners become sots and blocks and understand not so much as the
principal of their natural being, though opened and urged upon them by a God:
blockish souls think on this, you will have a very hot sermon to warm you when
you come to your place.

Coloss. 1.16. And that are in earth.
BEing and disposition of being are from Christ, he creates all, and disposes
all. You make creatures and then you place your creatures, and prefer them as
you think good, and so does Christ; and he tells you where; some in Heaven,
and some in earth: he suiteth place to person; pure persons are placed in
Heaven, and impure in earth: where we are placed, is that which I am now come
to tell you, in earth, for by him all things were created that are in Heaven
[and that are in earth, etc.

What kind of room we live in here these words command me to set out unto you,
and then to ask you how you like it. 1. Low.
It Is a low room we are in here: the earth is the lowest element, lower then
the air, lower then the water, and yet as earth comprehends both these, it is
but Gods footstool. Swear not by the earth, for it is his footstool; a footstool
speaks the lowest service, such is the earth and all things in it of the
lowest use to God; it is a kitchen below stairs to scour vessels in, and it is a
conveyance for the filth that comes off; there is a gutter out of earth into
hell, to carry away all things that offend; hell is the sink which belongs to
the earth: God has more noble service done in one moment in Heaven, then in
all the earth in all the age of it, though it be now many thousand years old.
In this lower room wherein we are, here is nothing done but kitchen work,
washing and scouring, killing, stripping and fleaing that which is fat: Earth
is the slaughter house that belongs to hell; hearts that are made fat are
killed on earth, and roasted in hell. We dwell in Gods kitchen and the devils
slaughterhouse, in earth: this is low, and this is the first thing: earth
speaks a lower room.

It Is common: Lions and Bears, Wolves and Men are all in one room in earth:
Frogs and Toads, Snakes, 2. Common.
Serpents and Men are all in one room in earth: good men bad men, yea and
devils, all in one room together in earth: this room is so common that the
devil is not shut out of it, he has a door out of hell into earth, and leave
to walk from one end of the earth to the other when he will. And the Lord said
to Satan whence come thou; and he said from going to and fro in the earth,
and from walking up and down in it. The earth is the devils heaven, he has his
walk allowed him here: Earth is such a common place, that you cannot walk alone
in it if you would give never so much; go never so privately, yet if in earth
you will have men or devils with you, and just in your walk. Many together is
troublesome, especially when of contrary spirits; the devil and man never do
well together in one walk. Community lessens privilege here, it is a hell to be
where all variety and all contrariety dwell together; and yet so it is here,
scarce two of one spirit throughout the earth, and yet these must live together
in one room, agree together as they will; fight or scratch, or kill one another
all is one, there is no remedy, in seventy, eighty, ninety, no possibly not in
a hundred years. Heaven has some community in it; there dwells East-country,
West-country, North-country, South-country men, but then they are all one
spirit; no walk above in which there is hearing, seeing, tasting or smelling,
any contrary thing: though there be many millions more above then are here; as
having been the receptacle of all travelers from hence for this many thousand
years, besides the natives of the place, and yet not two spirits amongst all
these innumerable numbers that disagree, or will in the space of eternity. But
here one cannot walk any where, but one contradicting and afflicting thing or
other meets a man: here I see a Toad, there I feel a Serpent; here I hear a
Lion, there I smell a Fox; and yet all these claim a dwelling just where I do,
in earth. This is the second thing: earth speaks a common room.

3. Dark.
It Is a dark room: In earth we see earth, but nothing else; we cannot see Heaven
in earth, no not any mansion there how stately it is, we cannot see Heaven nor
any heavenly thing in earth; Angels are invisible, Christ is invisible; Christ
cannot be seen now in earth, though the Son of the bravest world: The Father
is invisible, the Son invisible, yea the Spirit by which these two work here
in earth (as the wind which blows in your eyes, yet you cannot see it)
invisible. We are here a great wide Common full of moles and mole-hills, all
heaving and heaping up earth, but blind and do not see what we do. Bring forth
the blind that have eyes, and the deaf which have ears, says God. Earthen
creatures look one another in the face, as if they had eyes and yet are all
blind; some sitting in darkness, others walking in darkness, not knowing
whither they go. The best persons here, are as Samson when his hair was gone,
and taken by the Philistines, of some good stirrings and desires, but weak and
blind, not able to find a pillar but as led to find a pillar but as led to it.
Man is but of yesterday, and knows nothing, because his days upon [earth]
are but a shadow, says Job. Earth is a great room full of fools which know
nothing, and set alone by themselves to wrangle and talk nonsense to no bodies
disquiet but their own. This is a third thing: earth speaks a dark room.

It Is a filthy room: the earth is corrupt, full of snails, 4. Filthy.
that with creeping up and down, leave their slime and pollute all. One
creature polluteth another, and man polluteth all the earth he treads on;
Blood defiles the land, says God. Sin rendereth not only the person, but
the very place where that person lives detestable. The earth is cursed from
Heaven all over, which speaks out the strength of divine detestation: it is a
great brave body, with face blasted, breasts seared, bowels torn, guts and
filth hanging out, poisoning and putrefying the inhabitants. which first
poisoned and putrified it. All runs into this, we dwell in a very base
place: A low, common, dark, filthy room, in earth; and so indeed is the
original Hebrew word Adamah, for earth, used.



I might go along this way and do well, but I must turn another way and tell
you, that you have a base dwelling here, and therefore expect things
answerable. Christians have no art to quiet their souls when things go hard:
you may gather patience from the very place you dwell in; you live in a base
place, and what can you expect but base usage? When your dwelling is removed
from earth to Heaven, things will be better presently, as well as you would
wish. You dwell in earth, and in earth dwells all sorts, and every one will
act according to his property, and how can it be helped here? Some are
back-biters, and they will kill your name: some are sycophants, and they will
kiss you and hug you to death like Judas; some are hypocrites, wolves in
sheeps clothing, and they will not only kill your bodies, but your souls too.
The earth yields variety of deadly vermin, and you cannot tread upon all, some
will tread upon you, some will crawl about you and sting you, do what you can.
Distress should make mortification, but not vexation; so it did with David, it
took him off from all in earth but one, whom have I in earth but thee?
Distress should not disturb but subdue the heart, and yet it is hard to keep
the spirit quiet when basely used, tell it what one will, Fallen creatures are
full of passion, and strong passion can bear nothing, and yet must bear it
self, which is the heaviest burden of all. All things in earth do like
themselves, and therefore turn aside my soul from them: whom have I in earth in
comparison of thee, O Christ.

There is one good in earth, and that's all I know: get acquaintance with him,
yea that would find comfort in your dwelling here. Blessed be one good
neighbor, or how solitary should we be in earth. Defile not the land which ye
shall inhabit [wherein I dwell] says Christ, Numb. 35.34. The earth would be
hell did not Christ dwell in it: you have much misery kept off by one good
neighbor you have, and you might have more if you did but get more
acquaintance with him. You have lived a great while in the earth, and so has
Christ: do ye know him? do ye love him? he makes the earth a blessing as base
as it is, to such. A man's felicity depends altogether upon the favor of God.
let his dwelling be where 'twill. Earth is heaven, hell is heaven when God
dwells with one there. Mourning creatures tell me, where do ye dwell? In a
valley of tears? In earth does Christ dwell with you? does he dwell in earth
too, in your hearts? then be cheared for he will wipe all tears from your eyes:
and if your hearts be a rest for him, he will be a rest for them, when you have
none in earth. When the earth trembles and melts, you have one that dwells in
it that will see you shall do well. Christians visit your next neighbor often,
lie in his bosom whilst you live on earth, you will live very desolate else
were the earth a better place then it is.

I pity all that live in this world it is so base and miserable, but them that
live without God in this world, my heart bleedeth over them. Some live where
they have no good neighbor, nor no friend, and they truly have a bad life on
it; some live so in earth, that it were as good they were in hell almost; whipped
in body, tortured in soul, longing for death and yet it must not be, because
not yet full ripe for hell, Ah Lord! here is a dwelling in earth indeed: what
difference now between earth and hell? All you that live in earth and live in
your sins, expect such a life every hour. The earth groneth, it bears so
many and so naught: sinners do not you groan too? Do not you groan to Christ to
be better? The earth will be eased of her burden quickly, but not you; your
place will be changed quickly, but not for the better; all that are now in
earth will be anon in hell, that do not leave their sins quickly; the sword
and strange diseases are going about for this purpose, and do you not see how
they sweep the earth?

Coloss. 1.16. Visible and invisible, etc.
THe works of God afford man a full soul-imployment. Some things are subjected
to sense, and these are called visible: but other things are not subjected to
sense, but ordered for more noble powers of the soul to make at, and these are
called invisible.

The soul is manifold in its acts and operations, and so is Christ that all the
soul may follow him. There is a manifold grace of God as the Apostle speaks;
a grace visible, and a grace invisible, and the soul can make at both, and so
Christ would have it. The eye can see, the ear can hear, the heart can
conceive; here is working without and within. Conception is operation about
invisibilia unseen, things; it is a spirit at work upon words, shaping out to it
self what they but mentioned, as countries and creatures where the body never
was nor never saw, but only shall; divine conception it is a spirit taking
shiping as it were in the word, and sailing round the world, taking in visible
and invisible things, to leave out none of Christ.

visible things be to low to be busied about there be invisible: if there be
nothing without door to be found for employment, to wit in earth, it may find
something within about invisible things, by going to Heaven. Creation is laid
by Christ with gradation higher and higher, visible and invisible; if one room
be too low the soul may go higher, as high as it will, as high as it has
power; the works of Christ lie as high as the tallest spirit can reach. The
soul is not forced but drawn to noble action; Creation is temptation, the works
of God are laid so as to entice the soul higher and higher, like Jacobs ladder,
till it come as high as it should be. When the eye of the body is weary of
looking upon bruits, trees and such like visible things as are here, then the
eyes of the soul may go one room higher in the ladder toward Heaven, to things
which are not seen, to that invisible place and society above.

Thou wicked and slothful servant] should thou not have employed what I gave
thee to my advantage, Matthew. 25.26. take from him what he has says Christ, A
man has his soul taken away, that imployeth it not: an idle soul becomes a
besotted soul, a besotted soul is no soul; a spirit dead and buried in the
flesh: powers and parts are blasted and withered when neglected.

Soul-idlenesse about divine things, springs sometimes from too much
employment about humane, and such men neither know their hearts, nor yet this
time: worldly now, and you will be worldly when the world comes to be burnt.
The soul is first let loose from divine things, and then when it is abroad, it
will not be lured in again by them, though held up to them. Wicked worldlings,
you know not what you do when you let your souls loose to the world; there it is
cursed and becomes wild, and will not return though words of God and works of
God, all that God is and does be held up to it: and therefore is the prodigal
said to be lost, for this my son was lost, etc.

Sometimes soul-idlenesse about divine things springs from dislike of them.
Some, the God of this world blinds them, and it is idle to talk to these of
visible or invisible things, for all that is good is invisible to them; they
know not how to set their spirits about any thing, but to make provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. Ah Lord, how blind, how base are some
souls! No word of God, no work of God visible to them, under a divine notion.
Idleness makes profaneness, profaneness puts all powers under the black
rod, to wit, the devil: A soul under the power of Satan and the world, cannot
employ it self well. Poor bondslaves, seek your freedom by Christ, or you
will be condemned.

You whose soul-powers are under no power but Christ's, from you is this
expected, that you make full employment to your selves about the various works
of God, that you travel this world over, and the next above it as far as you
can, into visible and invisible things, and if you loose your souls this way,
you will find them in Heaven: the soul gets his perfection by much travel.
Bees fill not their hives from one flower, nor in one journey, they are fain to
go far and near, from garden to garden, from field to field, from flower to
flower: so must we from visible to invisible things, to fill our souls with the
sweetness of Christ.

1. Coloss. 16. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible [whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, etc.]
INvisible things are here named by visible for our sakes; thrones, dominions,
principalities and powers, are all terms used amongst us, and we know what they
mean, some chief in place and office, superiority and rule over others; and so
have Angels over this lower world, at the appointment and pleasure of Christ,
therefore called chief Princes in Daniel. The Prince of the kingdom of Persia,
withstood me one and twenty days, but lo Michael one of the [chief Princes]
came to help me, Daniel 10.13. Greek terms here sound the same with the Hebrew
word Shinan, a Shanach, to second, (...), next to the first, as these which
have the prime office and command under a King, are said to be next to him,
Hester 10.3. Mordecay was next to king Ahasuerus; so Angels they are next to
Christ, in ruling the visible world, and therefore called Shinan in the Hebrew,
and principalities and powers in the Greek, that is, chief governors next to
Christ in reference to all the creation beside.

Terms are here multiplied synonymically, which when they are so, it is for our
weakness, there being no term comprehensive enough below, to express, things
above, Angels being so transcendent in all eminences both of nature and office.
Multiplication like to this you shall find in the first to the Ephesians, 21.
Far above all principalities, powers, might, dominion, etc. There is variety
of offices amongst the Angels, as appears by that place forecited in Daniel,
but this is not pointed at here in my text (as I think) by the variety of
terms which are used, because they are all of the same signification according
to the letters, and point jointly at one main thing, which Christ would have
all his know. That the worlds are subordinate, that the visible world is under
the dominion of the invisible world, that Christ has an unexpressable power
and strength by him at command, to overruled this world and all things in it,
thrones, dominions, etc. that is, transcendent powers, which all the powers in
this world call them what you will, will not fully express.

I will demonstrate this truth unto you by some angelical properties. The
chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands, or many thousands of
Angels. His meaning is, that God has more for number then any general can
muster up here, if he should muster up all the creatures in the world. You
begin to number here from tennes and twenties, they do not begin to number
above so low; thousands and twenty thousands, are Gods units, there he does
but begin to number. If men will go to numbering, God will out-number them, for
his number is innumerable. Ye are come to an innumerable company of Angels,
Hebr. 12.22. Our Saviors expression does plainly demonstrate it, that the
invisible world is very populous, and that God has a mighty vast command
thereof; soldiery to still tumults here with ease, or to do what else service
he will. When one of Christ's company pulled out his sword to fight for him, Put
it up, said Christ, think not that I can now pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more then twelve Legions of Angels? and every Legion
according to the Romans, was six thousand; twelve six thousands and more. His
meaning is innumerable numbers, and all these raised presently, at a word
sighed out. Certainly they are very populous above. You are here along while of
raising an army of ten thousand, and when you have done it, it is longer ere
you can raise such another; and when you have done it you cannot spare so many
to wait up one person, about this poor creature, and that poor creature; and
yet this is an ordinary thing with God. When Jacob went from Laban, Angels met
him innumerable, and he admires it. This is Gods host, says he, and calls it
Mahanaim, that is, two hosts, or two camps. Gods host, one is as big as two
of ours, ten of ours, and yet these employed every where, about this, and that
Saint of God. Certainly the invisible world is unspeakable populous: Angels are
unexpresseable for number.

is death to us. A man of God came to me, and his countenance was like the
countenance of an Angel of God, very terrible, said Manoahs wife to him, Judge.
13.6. it was so terrible that it would have killed her and her husband too, if
God had not mightily upheld, they are so fearfully made to flesh and blood. He
has made his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. What is more
terrible then a flame of fire? it conjures natural spirits, and makes them all
crowd in upon the heart, ready to crowd the heart to death. 'Twas the presence
of an Angel that rendered the bush as a flame of fire to Moses; it was a
multitude of Angels, which rendered mount Sinai a burning mount, which was a
terrible sight; so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and quake, Hebr. 12. Fire is a supreme element for dread; its an element that
sits nearer God then all others do, and goes forth with more of his majesty
when it descends. Angels have the advantage of a perfect image; this advantage
when it was upon man, rendered him very terrible to all the creation. They have
not defiled their scarlet robes; as God did put them on at first, so they wear
them still, which render them full of majesty. Man has but a little of God in
him, and with him now, and yet this holds him up, and holds him out, as a
creature of much state; but Angels have much of God in them and with them, he
never sends out these ambassadors, but he sends the very crown-jewels with
them, Christ goes personally among them. Three Angels came to Abraham, and one
of them is Christ, as you shall plainly see, if you examine the 18. and 19. of
Genesis together. And so the Psalmist says, the chariots of the Lord are so
many thousands, and the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.
Kings, they have some that wait only upon their person, and chariots only for
their person. Angels they wait only upon Christ's person, where they go, one
may say as the Psalmist, the Lord is among them, though men cannot always
alike see it; and this I think was the reason, that Moses was called to put off
his shoes, when the Angel appeared in the bush, because Christ was personally
present there, among those ministering spirits that were there, to signify good
to that people.

they affright all, but themselves are affrighted with nothing, neither with
men nor with devils; they will set upon either. There is an expression, Matthew.
13. toward the latter end, which demonstrates the strength and courage of
Angels admirably. They are Christ's reapers of the great field of this world.
The enemy that sowed tares is the devil; the tares are the children of the
wicked, the harvest the end of the world, and the reapers the Angels. The
Angels are they that will make an end of the world, that will cut down tares
and the sowers of them, and make no more of one then of the other: they are
such creatures as shall cleanse the world, and then burn the world; glean the
world of all the godly, and then burn the rest: they can lay such a train, that
shall blow up the world: they are those flames of fire, that will set a fire,
and burn all the world at the great day: they can take up this world, as big
as it is, and throw it all into hell, and hold it there to all eternity. They
shall be isntrumental about the greatest design the Scripture speaks of. The
son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
kingdom all that offend, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire. I judge,
that good Angels are the inflicters of plagues upon the bad, and that it is
they that make hell to cursed spirits, one sparkle of which, is bigger then
that flame which shall burn the world; and judge you then of what courage and
strength they are, that can take all the wicked men in the world, and all the
wicked spirits in hell at once by the throat, and make them all roar together
to eternity. All runs into this, that Christ has an unexpresseable power and
strength with him at command, to overruled the visible world.

Let us bewail the blindness of the visible world. Would the great men of the
world did know how great Christ is. Thoughts advance themselves upon no ground,
pride will be the ruin of thousands, a little fleshly dying strength, makes men
dare heaven; this folly will sink men to hell. This world is overmatched
infinitely, and yet proud in its attempts; it is beset with invincible force,
and yet sees nothing, nor does nothing, but rebel against all the host of
heaven, and the Lord of these hosts; what strength Christ has, he will put
forth against this generation. Wicked men, fear Christ: he will eat you out
like a moth else, an invisible power will carry the day against you. You can
only look upon fleshly strength, and you see we have but little of this now,
so God in his wisdom has ordered things against us, and this makes you bold
in your attempts: but tremble, for verily Christ has a stratagem upon you;
when you are confident, because you see little power on earth, you shall be cut
off without hand, as the Scripture speaks, with an invisible force. This is
Babylons proper judgment, Thou have trusted in thy wickedness, thou have said
in thy heart, I am, and none else besides me, therefore shall evil come upon
thee, and thou shall not know whence it arises, and mischief shall fall upon
thee, and thou shall not be able to put it off; and desolation shall come upon
thee suddenly, which thou shall not know, Esa. 47.11. Wicked wretches, glory
not whatever your strength be. Christ has an ambuscadoe for you, an invisible
army which will consume you strangely.

Trust in the Lord, for with him is everlasting strength: Angels never die, no
work nor no weather kills them, or tires them. You will be sure, Christians, of
one complete army to lie out for you all this winter, which will cost you no
money, nor need no recrute; an army of reformadoes which have been in all the
fights, that have been in the world since the creation, and under such a
general to get skill, as is not in the world. No men more fearful then the
godly usually: I wonder at it, you have a wall of fire about you, which is
better then your wall of earth. His ministers are a flame of fire, and his
ministers are your ministers, and encompasse you. The Angels of the Lord encamp
about them that fear him. Fear springs from unbelief, and unbelief from unseen
means, and this is living by sense, which if our Father Abraham had so lived in
his journey to the mount Moriah, and in his journey to Canaan, he had broke his
heart,: God has in this, and in many other things shadowed out to Christians,
how all things respecting the Church of Christ, shall be carried in unseen
ways, and by unseen powers, and therefore commanded living by faith, and not
by sight, and yet every man pleads for a life of sense. God works in a way of
means, say they, which is true, but these means not always visible: As you get
by such a life, so continue your argument for it. Passion is better confuted by
the hand of God. then by the word of God. Unbelief is confuted with standing
punishment. Lots wife is turned into a pillar of salt, and salt is a very
tormenting and yet a very lasting thing.

Thou have broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain; thou have scattered
thine enemies with thy strong arm, Psalm 89.10. by Rahab is meant Egypt the
generation which now are slain; and the holy Ghost goes on and tells us how
we should attribute victory to the glory of the invisible power, and not to any
fleshly arm; Thou have broken Rahab, etc. A like Scripture you have; Hosea,
1.7. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah; and will save them by the
Lord their God, and will not save them by bow nor by sword, nor by battle, nor
by horses, nor by horsemen. Therefore let us lift up our hearts and tongues
now, and say to Christ, that we are saved by the Lord our God, and by his
invisible host, and not by men.

Coloss. 1.16. All things were created by him [and for him, etc:
GOd upholdeth our way, we have traveled through many things, and we are now
come to the end of all; the end of this verse, and the end of the whole
creation, to wit, the glory of Christ: for all things that were created by him,
were created for him. Some things are for Christ's use, and some things for his
delight, but all for his glory. Any motion makes action, but only such motion
makes divine action, as brings all to Christ's end. Christ's work is here
mentioned, and so is man's: What is made by Christ, must be by us made for him.
The Law of Gods action we are to stand upon: All things must be for Christ.

There is one kind of flesh of men, another of fish, another of beasts, says
the Apostle: and things may be distinguished in their place, as some high, and
some low; and things may be distinguished by their parts, as some learned, and
some unlearned: but none must be distinguished in their end; all creatures, all
places, all parts must be for Christ. The Law is universal, nothing is
absolutely given, but all the creation is put out to use for him; ten talents,
five talents, one talent, not one thing in the world for man's use, but must be
for Christ's; not one thing in the world made for man, but must be by man made
for Christ.

Christ in a few days made man work for all his days; things are not to be
for Christ to day, and against him to morrow, but for him for ever. His praise
endures for ever. In good times, in bad times, all things must be for him, as
long as they are, Christ's glory must be everlasting, as ours shall be when he
comes to order all the creation for us. Scripture expressions must have their
extent. Men misunderstand this phrase in the Text that think Christ must have
all things for him, when all advantages serve. All things must be for Christ in
all times, till times shall be no more, and then all things are to be for us.

Man has a great deal of work upon him, and considers it not, he is to take
every thing by the hand, and lead it home; every thing on earth that he medleth
with, and lead it home to Heaven: husband, wife, children, goods, meat, drink,
by him, and through him. and to him are all things. Some things are further
from God then others, and yet all I meddle with I must up with, in one notion
or other, and away with it to him. There is but one carrier to Heaven in all
the earth, and that is man, and he is loaded with a witness; he must carry all
that is by God and through him, to him; and this he must do though he sigh, and
groan till his back break and he die, and then he will have a porters pay. You
have some carriers for letters, and then you have creatures of a lower rank to
carry other things; but Christ has but one carrier for all; man must carry his
words, his works, his letters and all else here below to him.

Divinity is high in its scope: the glory of Christ is the highest thing, and
nothing makes at it but man, but he must make at nothing else. Man is not to
ask what things are made of, but what things are made for; the former belongs
to Christ, and the latter to us. It Is an earthen world this, but man's work is
to make it heavenly; it is an earthen boul but wants a by as to run right, and
man is to put in one to make it incline Heavenward, and to run true to God that
made it.

Low things have a high scope, and yet as high as it is, man must make at it
upon pain of death: we may use any thing but take the glory of nothing: if an
Herod, a King feed on this dish, he dies for it. Benjamin must have a dish of
dainties alone, what fit may be given to instruments, but divine glory, this is
Christ's dish, he alone must feed on these dainties; if any taste of this honey,
though but with the tip of his staff, he dies for it, and worms the meanest
creatures, shall be strong enough to do it.

Some points will bear dispute, but this will bear none, whether I am to give
glory to Christ yea or no in all. God has set a King in Sion, and it is sin
to say, may I crown him? I must crown him with glory, though I take off mine
own crown to do it. The four and twenty elders fell down before him that sat
on the throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their
crowns before the throne, saying, thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory,
honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are, and were created, Rev. 4.10, 11. There is no place for the dispute of meum
and tuum in this point with Christ, for all is his: all mine are thine: as he
said to his Father, so we are to say to him, all ours are his; the very crowns
we wear, the things we have that render us most glorious in the eye of men,
must be for Christ: all our crowns must go to his crown.

Many will die by this law, for every man seeks his own. I and mine must live,
and so must Christ and his. Skin is dear, all must go for this, but nothing
for Christ; which is the life of a beast, and not of a Christian. This time
discovers thousands, nothing must be for Christ, because times call for all for
him. Neutrality is condemned by this point; some will be neither for, nor
against Christ, which cannot be; all must be for him. Conceits are strange,
where the heart is naught: can a man only be a looker on in matters of God,
which concern his glory, and our eternal welfare? Flesh is fearful, and where
this predominates, all the care is to look to one, and that one is self, and
not Christ, which will be the shame of that one unto all forever. O how dear is
name, and state, wife, and children now! But how dear is Christ? Men of the
world, look into your hearts now, if ever you would know them thoroughly: would
you not fain stand Neuters now in our cause, to give your purse some rest? Is
not the pulling of your purse-strings, as the pulling of your heart strings?
Alas for me, what shall I and mine do? all will be gone, I shall be quite
undone. What is Christ beleft, is all gone?

Nothing will be for Christ, as it should be, when the heart is not, I would
you would all look to this, Give your selves to the Lord, and then you will
give all that is yours. This they did, they gave their own selves to the Lord,
and then to us, by the will of God. Make your hearts thoroughly for Christ, and
you will make all other things with ease. Lusts unmortified, the heart is
unruly; the heart unruly, will part with things according to its own will, and
not according to Christ's. An unruly heart becomes froward; frowardness knows
none but its own will. Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? that I
should take up what is mine and give to I know not who? Many things go for
Christ a while, plate, horse, money, men, and of a sudden all is checked, and
nothing shall be for him; the plague of this is at the heart, this was never
for him; but yet men do not consider this, but plead a thousand things of this
side, and that speaks all more miserable.

Two things speak the heart for Christ, the rise and the scope of action: the
heart is not for Christ, let the action be what it will, when it springs not
from love. Peter love thou me? Feed my lambs. Naked action, though never so
good, speaks not the heart for Christ, but the spring of that action. Do ye
love Christ's Lambs and feed them? I will tell you a sad thing, many a soldier
has a hand for Christ, and a heart against him, and what a pity is this. So
many a Citizen has a purse a little open for Christ, and a spirit quite shut
against him. Certainly our motion for Christ is heartlesse motion: love oils
her own wheels. as long as she has any work, or any power, and we are quickly
weary of well-doing.

The spring of action, and the scope of action, speaks the heart for God: not
what you do, but at what you aim. He that seeks his glory that sent him, the
same is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him, John 7.18. The
generation is spiritually plagued, which is worse then all the plagues which
are upon us: men do little, and mean less: scarce a true heart amongst us. The
body has two eyes, but the soul should have but one, looking only at Christ;
but show me such a man now. We are a kingdom of squint-eyed persons; states are
broken, any way will serve to mend them: let whose will lose, is there any way
for me to gain? Trialls are quick, spirits perverse; kingdoms reel, nothing to
be had; you must comply and do as others do, and seek your self, for you cannot
rid it out: thus we reason. Simplicity is a rock, I see but few of these in our
seas, Surely, surely, souls are drowned apace in the deluge, that is upon us.
Men that did look bravely at Christ, now look basely at themselves, which
speaks more wounds to a wounded kingdom: the Lord heal such hearts, or else
when will this land be healed.

Coloss. 1.17. And he is before all things, etc.
Affection naturally, is no whit divine. Christ is very honorable in gifts,
and so in years, he is the ancient of days, He is before all things, and yet
all nothing.

Let us all bleed under the baseness of our affection so much should not be
said to quicken, were we not all very dead. There must be some divine
principal in the soul, ere any divine principal held up to it, will take it.
if heaven were open to you, yet would you have no heart to go in, unless your
hearts be opened too. Should Christ himself come from the dead, and stand in
that glory before you, in which he stands now, at the right hand of God, yet
unless something be done within, this sight without, will not gain you to him;
you will tremble, and entreat him to depart.

Sinners, know the plague of your heart: Christ is not revealed in you, and
therefore all that here he says to you, is no more stirring. You have glory
after glory here, and yet nothing gains: you spit out the sowernesse of your
souls, in the face of him that is sweet to you: I am afraid nothing is yet done
within you, and is this nothing to you? And if so, your state is the more
grievous to Christ. When we do not love Christ, we should confess it to him; a
plague hid, Christ looks not after it, but lets it ramble and kill the soul.

Yet must we Christ's servants, strive with you still, and fight with dead men,
as long as we are in this dying tabernacle; and all that Christ says of
himself, we must say to you, though you grow worse and worse: into every
chamber of the king of glory we must lead you, though it be of no taking glory
to you. My text puts me now to speak of the eternity of Christ to you, he is
before all things, which is one of the highest things of concernment in the
world, to see what this will do. We must be sweet to sour souls, though they
grow more sour by it: we must put sweets into filthy stomachs, though they
cruddle in their stomachs, and spue them up again, in the face of him that
prescribed them.

Coloss. 1.17, He is before all things, etc.
LIke to this is that expression of Christ. Before Abraham was I am. They are
expressions only competent to Christ as God, and put us to speak of that which
is altogether above us, to wit, the Eternity of Christ.

Eternity is continuation without termination, quae nnllo tempore finitur,
that is bounded with no time. Melchisedeck is made a shadow of eternity, he is
said to be without beginning of days and end of life. You may call eternity
life, for it is an essential attribute to the highest life: but then you cannot
measure this life by days and years, no not by beginning nor endding, for it is
without both says the holy Ghost, Without beginning of days or end of life:
Eternity is a life of and to it self, without term or dependence, any
denomination from any thing without it self. You may denominate some things by
some accidents that belong to them, as long, short, great, little, but eternity
is without all accident, and can be called by none of these, neither long nor
short, great nor little, but what it is essentially within it self, a life
without all term, a life everlasting; a life from everlasting to everlasting:
and such a life did Christ live whilst on earth, a life that had no term, that
was before all things, and after all things.

Eternal life is consistent with humanity, though not with iniquity, with
humane nature, though not with sinful nature. The Godhead dwelt bodily with
us, that is, in our nature dwelt that life which is eternal; that is, of and
to it self without any term, dependence or denomination, but from it self.
There is principium ordinis, and principium temporis, a beginning of order, and
this is competent to Christ as the Son of God: First the Father, and then the
Son. There is a beginning of time, and this is competent to Christ as the
Son of man: but principium essentiae, a beginning in regard of that essence
and life, which is the same in all the three Persons, so there is none: The
Father is eternal, the Son eternal, and the holy Ghost eternal, without
termination, or denomination known to us: The Sun is appointed for times and
seasons, for days, and months, and years, Genesis 1. It Is a long met-yard to
measure the Heavens which is wonderful spacious, and it does it speedily; it is
mensura motus, the measure of all motion above and below; but there is no
measure for eternity but it self, but the Son of righteousness who fully
comprehends his own being, in all the properties of it: it can be put under
no definition in our terms, and so consequently into no humane conception, and
therefore when spoken of it is very brokenly, and yet as may best reach to your
apprehension, as calling it something before the eldest thing you can think of.
He is before all things.

As Christ is in being so in office, the one gives fitness to the other: He
is a King eternal, a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. Every
being has proper action; as Christ is he does, he has eternal life, and does
eternal actions; he blesses for ever, curses for ever; he blotteth out sin
for ever, and writes down sin for ever; Now go write it before them in a
table and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and
ever, that this is a rebellious people, lying children, that will not hear the
Law of the Lord. Esaias 30.8.9. If thou forsake him he will cast thee off for
ever, 1. Chron. 28.9. The works I do they bear witness of me, says Christ,
when he would convince them of what a being he was. As things are so they act,
such a life generateth such a life. Whosoever shall drink of the waters that I
shall give him, shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting life.

Our duty must be suited to Christ's being and moving, both which are for ever,
and so must our obedience be. I will extol thee my God O King, and I will
bless thy Name for ever and ever, Psalm, 145.1. the being and moving of Christ
should not be separated, his Person and Office should go joint, and
answerablely be observed in conversation; God and King are here coupled
together by the Psalmist, and Christ as God and King lifted and extolled: I
will extol thee O God my King. Christ is eternal in both, and in all other
attributes, he is God-King, and God-Priest, and God-Prophet, that is, of
suitable action in all these Offices to the nature of an eternal life, of a
God-life (I may so speak) and therefore ought jointly still to be considered
and observed. Naughty hearts suspend duty at pleasure, they consider not with
whom they have to do; to day they will be holy, to morrow they will not, and in
this undo themselves for ever, as falling under an eternal stroke. Beings and
Offices over us must be acknowledged as they are; they are eternal, and must
be obeyed eternally: Ever follow that which is good, These. 5.15. Religion if it
cost you money, or if it cost you blood, yet you must obey, for he that lives
for ever, will otherwise make you die for ever. O England, take heed of
eternal blows, if thou wave thy fidelity to Christ, to wave temporal strokes,
thou will have eternal strokes, thou will be judged as Elies house for ever,
and as the Churches in the East with a perpetual desolation, and Ziim and
Ochim shall dance here, and thou shall hear the voice of the Turtle no more
for ever, Esaias 13. Thy bending affrighteth me more then thy bleeding; but I
spare thee O weak England. Truth should be managed according to its nature, and
according to its Father; it is eternal, and so must we cleave to it; if thou
can not receive this, the Lord have mercy upon thee England.

I leave generals and speak to particulars: it is an eternal God ye have to do
with, he is before all things, and will be after all things, wherefore tremble,
and consider your state every one, what eternal things are done upon you. An
eternal agent, has an eternal subject to work upon; your souls are
everlasting, and there Christ specially works, as most suitable to him:
little is to be heeded what is done without, in comparison of what is done
within: you complain of many strokes upon your states, names, bodies, but is
there not a stroke of strokes, an eternal stroke upon your souls? Hence forth
let fruit never be on thee more, Ah Lord! here is an eternal God, striking a
stroke like himself! Barren souls, is not this eternal stroke stricken upon
you? You of this congregation (let me wash my hands of your blood, ere my
glass amongst you be quite out) what has my eternal master done in your
eternal souls by the eternal words which he has spoken by me, since the day
I came amongst you? Are not your hearts the same? as sour, as bitter, as cold,
as carnal, as worldly as ever? Are not these symptoms of an eternal stroke,
that God has cursed you for your barrenness under brave means, which you a
long while have had, never to be otherwise then you are? Take time to give me
an answer, till I come to this place again.

Christ being eternal, eternal mercy may be had, if wanted by any people, and
with more content to Christ then lesser things: great persons delight to give
like themselves. He asked life of thee, and thou gave him long life, even
life for ever more: As for natural life, Christ makes nothing of this gift.
David thought that to beg natural life had been a great request, and no doubt
but he would have accounted this much in some straights but God makes nothing
of this, as being not to give like himself. An eternal God loves to give
eternally; The gift of God is eternal life. This is the privilege of the
generation of them that seek him; they ask small things, and he gives great;
they ask one thing, and he gives them a better; they ask like themselves, and
he gives like himself. Tender hearts are afraid to ask great things, but it
should not be, for it is most becoming him with whom we have to do, and you will
sooner get him to give audience about such things, then about petty temporary
things. Kings will not be moved in small things, but in matters which beseem
their greatness, to this they are ready. Our God is ready to give the least
good thing we need, to tender every hair, and every leaf, His leaf shall not
wither; but he is most delighted to give the things that are most like him.
When Jacob wrestleth in a case of natural life, the Angel would fain get gone:
doubtless his petition lay too low, for the Text says, he was greatly afraid,
and had there not been something wrapped up in the business, that had an
eternal respect, and which the Angel at this time did more look to then Jacob
did, doubtless Christ would have got away: he would not have been troubled
with Jacob all night only about the natural life of him and his. Let weak
souls remember the carriage of the King to Hester, when she comes upon matters
of weight; the golden Scepter is held out, and she touches it; What will thou
Queen Hester? It shadoweth out what Christ is to his Church, ready to give
things of weight, such a royal life and state to his Church, as he has
himself, and to continue it against all Hamans.

Coloss. 1.17. In him all things consist, etc.
PRovidence has put me to speak of many things, but now she puts me to speak
of her self; she is a servant of servants, she waits upon every one, but now
she commands you to wait a little upon her, to know what she is, and what a
blessing you have in her. Of Christ as a creator you have heard, and now as an
upholder, you shall hear of him. In him all things are made of nothing, and in
him all things abide, or else would turn all to nothing. One thing lives in
another: fish in the sea, foul in the air, brutes in the earth, but all in
Christ: In him all things consist.

There is an inconsistencie in the creation by the curse, one thing cannot live
by another, one thing bites and devours another, great ones eat up little ones;
the whole world is a great body gnawing out it self, it has gnawed it self to
skin and bones now, it is so old and torn, as is very sad to look upon, or
live in, and it would have gnawed it self to nothing long ere this, if Christ
had not upheld; in him has the whole creation, things in heaven and things in
earth, a reconciliation of consistency; father would kill son else, and the
stones in the street would rise against you all, but in him these all consist.

The expression speaks supportation: there be many things in the world, and
they all live upon one. Thou openest thy hand and satisfiest every living
thing. There be many mouths in the world, and some gape very wide, and yet one
hand fills them all. In whom things have esse, they have porro esse; it is the
case of all created things, they are dependant. The noblest life below Christ,
is in Christ, upheld in him, or else it would die presently. In him [we live]
move, etc. Man, holy man, lives the highest life of all creatures here below,
yet this is in Christ: life is the noblest thing and Christ is the fountain of
this: he is the fountain of the noblest life, that any creature lives: all
life, the life of plants, the life of beasts, the life of men, the life of
Saints, the life of Angels, all runs from that vast spirit of life, that is
in him. Look what your spirit is to the little world, that is Christ's spirit to
the great world: your spirit carries life about to all, to every finger, to
every toe, and to every joint; your soul is a fountain of life to all the
strings, veins, and sinews of your body, so is Christ to all the creation, he
gives life to all. Bread is called a staff and support, but this is but by
Ordinance from Christ; for life comes not merely out of bread, it comes from
Christ; life is not in bread, but in the word of blessing which comes out of
the mouth of Christ. One thing would die in the bosom of another, if all were
not in the bosom of Christ; children in the bosom of parents, and parents in
the bosom of plenty, for in him, and not in these, all things consist.

In him we live and [move. Look how seas and winds, and heavens, and birds, and
beasts, and men move, and admire, for it is in Christ. Christ is not only the
supporter, but the orderer of all things; it is not in the noblest creatures to
live its own life, nor to move like to its own principle of motion: it is not in
man to order [his steps. Man has the noblest life, the greatest parts, and
gifts, and yet it is not in these, to order themselves like themselves; it is not
in man to order his life like a man: do you not see many men live like beasts?
In whom is it then? it is in Christ. No life has its one property independent,
we cannot live of our selves, nor we cannot move, but in Christ, although we
have life; life and motion proper to it, is in him: this is true at the same
height of the new man. We can do nothing of our selves, not think a good
thought; thinking good and holy thoughts, this is the property of a holy
spirit, and yet this its own property is dependant; it is not in a holy spirit,
think holy thoughts, but it is in Christ. To live and to act the least acts of
life, is in the fountain of life. In him all things consist, that is, beings,
and actions. Christ does uphold goings, as well as beings. Uphold my goings in
thy paths, that my footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17.5. Such beings and such goings,
Christ upholds: he upholds the world, and disposes the world; being and
government, both are upon his shoulders, that is, being and disposition of
being. Who has given him a charge over the earth, or who has disposed the
whole world, Job. 34.13.

These things speak the nature of providence what it is: it is a divine
condescension to the necessity of the creature: Christ becoming an ark for
every species, and for every individual; power floating upon mercy, with the
whole creation in its bosom. Providence is power made out of mercy into food
and raiment for the body, grace and glory for the souls.

Providence is either common or special. Common providence.
Common providence, is the naked supportation of being, and but a little more
at best. That the wicked in hell are, is providence, but it were better for
them they were not, that their misery did nihilate them, unless their mercy
were more. Common providence is an act of power, dispensing things commonly:
the heavens give their wealth to all, and so do the earth and the sea: the
sun lights good and bad, all in and out of the world: God upholds all that
fall. There is a general compassion upon our fallen condition, by which it is
upheld, and lies in the way of special compassion. Some things Christ carries
upon his back, others in his bosom: the one is common providence, and the
other is special. He upholds all things by the word of his power, he carries
all things, says the original.

Common providence lasts but for a time, God will not always be good to bad
men. The triumphing of the wicked is short, says Jobs friends. They flourished
like a gree Bay Tree, but were suddenly gone, says the Psalmist of the wicked.
Divine dealings, shall be exactly suitable to condition: wicked men, as they
have not a drop of grace, so they shall not have a drop of mercy to cool them,
though now they have a great deal. Providence is very promiscuous for a time,
all comes alike to all; but 'twill be very proper, precise, and distinct in its
way, divine dealing shall speak the man, the hand of God shall plainly speak
out the heart of man; as the Lord will be known, so shall men be known, by the
judgments which he executes: this is a Cain, the brand of a vagabond is upon
him, this is a Judas, the character of perdition is upon him: providence marked
the one, and pointed out the other: it is he that dippeth with me. Both these
examples rypifie, that divine carriage shall be such, to all of that side, as
plainly to speak out love and hatred. Goats shall be known by their places,
providence will be so exact. If the Bore cannot be known by his hair and his
tusks, yet he shall be known by the knife that is in his throat, and his
roaring. Time shall be when this expression, in him all things consist, shall
loose its latitude; above half the world shall be shut out of the common
providence of God utterly, and then will be the devils harvest; O what a deal
of business will he have then, and how will hell enlarge it self! when he
shall have the ordering of all his own in the world, as he will!

Special providence
Special providence, is wisdom ordering all things about man, to an eternal
good: using the rod and the staff to comfort; giving and taking away, clothing
and stripping the body, to make the soul divine. Providence seems to be a heap
of confusion, but it has always a proper scope, and all its acts, which to us
are strange, still make very directly to it. There are two sorts of vessels in
the world, and these are fitted to their proper end, says the Apostle, one to
honor, and the other to dishonor; not an act of God in the world, but it has
a fitting scope in it; not an act of God about a Christian, but it has a
fitting scope to shape his soul for Abraham's bosom to fit in Christ's arms for
ever. A man is not to measure special providence, by an external success of
action toward him as most do, but by an internal success: how does poverty
or riches, health or sickness, better the heart? Right Hand providence, is
special providence, Why with-drawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand, pull
it out of thy bosom, Psalm. 74. When that hand orders all to me, upon which I
shall stand for ever, and orders all so, as to bring me there, and set me
there, this is special providence. David speaks much of Gods right hand
toward him: then is a right hand upon me, when all is ordered to bring my soul
to its right end, and this is in Christ. In him all things consist. In him
grace is upheld, ordered, and brought to glory. Grace cannot live without
Christ, glory cannot live without Christ. In him all things consist.

Special providence is perpetual, but yet with respect to our abiding in him
with whom it is; in him all things consist, and out of him Saints cannot
consist. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers,
which men gather and cast into the fire, says Christ. Christ carries as he is
leaned upon; cast burdens upon him as many as you will, and he will bear them
all; lean not upon him, and he will let you fall, and all your burdens upon
you. Christ cannot endure to have his children out of his bosom; if they keep
in his arms he carries them for ever, and is never wearied with them: but let
them go out of his arms, and he is tired with them presently. Special
providence works in order to faith, though it work not simply or faith:
Christ does all freely, but yet in his own way. Go teach all nations to observe
whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always to the end of the
world. In such a way Christ walks, walk out of that way and you will never
meet him. This is divinity not understood, men's ignorance is to be pitied;
when we press duty as in order to which Christ moves, they say we press it
as merit, for which Christ must move: unbelief destroys special providence a
tanto licet non a toto, in part though not in whole. Some things Christ does to
the soul, when it does not believe, and that is to make faith; and other things
he will not do till it does believe, and yet does all freely. In him not out of
him do we consist.



all things do, though not as noble things do, yet thou will have meat. The
eyes of all things] look up to thee, and thou give them meat. Cry but as
Hagar, and thou will have drink. Seek but as the young Lions, they seek their
bread of God; and thou will have bread. If thou can but rore as they do, thou will be heard; and bleat and bellow as the cattle of Ninivie, some deliverance
will come out. Christ is never put to it though you be, he will find one thing
or other to make provision for all. The eyes of all look unto thee, and thou
feedest them. Providence has meat in her mouth for all.



in due season, these all wait upon thee, and thou give them meat in due
season.

morning and evening. Among enemies, the children of the captivity found
friends, and found favor for a tender conscience in Babylon.



in sometimes a great deal more then we expect. See a brave instance in Jacob,
Genesis 48.11. And Israel said unto Joseph. I had not thought to see thy face, and
lo God has showed me also thy seed. Providence is plentiful and bountiful,
as well as seasonable, and brings in twice as much, twenty times more, then
we think of, enough in supply necessity, yea enough to satisfy desire. Jacob
had corn for necessity, and he had also the sight of Joseph and his posterity,
and the life of Benjamin, and many gallant mercies more, which bordered upon
these, even to the utmost of desires, so literally was that promise fulfilled
to him, thou satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Desire is vaster then
necessity, in most creatures, in man it is I am sure, and yet providence is so
bountiful, that it satisfies this. Providence, not only brings about what one
needs, but what one wishes, yea more, providence does prepare things, and
bestow this and that, which the heart cannot wish, nor expect; it does prevent
us with loving kindness.

Two things must be eyed, to make Christ give out himself plenteously, for your
sweet subsistence: the first is, interest. I am thine, save me, says David.
God is very tender about his own; a child shall have any thing. Remember me O
Lord, with the favor that thou barest to [thy people] O visit me with thy
salvation. Union draws out all the fullness of Christ; what goes beside the
pipes which are laid into the founntain, are but drops, and by means of these
pipes too, these droppings are upon the world: Christ would not give forth a
drop of favor to the world, were there not some in it nearely allied to him;
all wicked men's mercies are but as it were some droppings of the great mercies
of Saints; this kingdom would not consist, were there not some Saints in it;
all the upholding it has is long of them that are united to him, from whom he
cannot break off. England use thy Saints well they are thy pipes and veins to
heaven, through which thy great blessings fall upon thee; All art must be used
to advance interest in Christ; out of the favor of God, and you will be outed
of all, whether it be the case of a person, or a whole nation. You are not my
people, and I will not be your God. Lo-ammi Lo-eli. This man is none of my
child, let the devil look to him, let his own father provide for him: this
Kingdom is not my people, let it bleed to death and 'twill, will God say.
England look to this or thou art lost, and all the world shall not save thee;
let thy reformation be such as to render thee Christ's Church, that he may say
England is my people, or thy consumption will kill thee. Friendship in Heaven
is all, to the livelihood of a Nation, or of a person here; every thing will
run cross whilst the great wheel is out with one: lets all set things right
with Christ and all will run well, let disadvantages be what they will. But
thou Israel art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen the seed of Abraham my
friend; fear not for I am with thee, and they that war against thee shall be
as nothing.

My soul cleaves after the Lord, thy right hand upholdeth me, Psalm, 93. The
spirit of union must not be checked, it must work after the Lord freely: In
this way the soul has a right hand upholding it, and this makes and keeps
the life contentfull. Grace is a pursuit of Christ, they live most sweetly that
run most swiftly after him; check this pursuit and you die. Unbelief makes
fear, fear sets the soul at a stand; shall I go forward, or shall I stand
still? Now God is displeased and the heart tortured for its baseness. Englands
fearfulness to pursue Christ, has deprived her almost of subsistence, and
tumbled her to nothing but blood. Fearful hearts pursue your Savior that you
may do well, or he will pursue you: help not on the ruin of a brave kingdom:
will neglect of the ways of the Lord, keep up you, or this tottering kingdoms?

Coloss. 1.18. And he is the head of the body, etc.
CHrist has many titles, and every one speaks much, but this speaks all;
head notes all the offices of Christ: As a Priest Christ is head, as a Prophet
Christ is head, as a King, Christ is head of the most beautiful body the
Church: One word of God needs many words of man to open it. Manna lies of a
heap here, and if Christ wait to be gracious, we shall gather much. We must
begin with that which is the foundation of office, fullness. Head notes
officium and basin officii, office and that which makes sufficience to office,
Christ is called head quod omnia in capite sunt fere dupla, as one says, bini
oculi, binae aures, binae nares, because all things in the head are as it were
double, there are two eyes, and two ears, and two nostrils etc. that is, a
great fullness of all exquisite sense and ability, for organisation: and under
this notion I purpose first to handle this term. Rule is a noble thing,
Sunbeams weaved into a crown; he must be higher by the head then the rest of
Israel, that is, called out to wear this: person must be beautiful, and parts
double, and so were Christ's, he is head: (...), kaphal duplicavit, cum omnia in
capite sunt fere dupla; the head has two eyes, two ears, two nostrills,
doubly organized to act it self, and all the rest; to supply it self and all
the rest: so is Christ double endowed, not only for himself, but for all that
shall need him.

Leviticall unctions were by pouring and not by dropping, enough was poured
upon the head to run down to the feet: so is Christ anointed as head, that is,
double grace is powered into his lips.

There is store in Christ for all spiritual necessity; if any want an ear, if
any want an eye, our head has two, one for himself, and another for us; if any
want an ear, Christ has two, he is our head. If any man want any other
ability Christ can furnish, for he is head and anointed so.



Giving is made in order to an ultimate end: Christ is not the ultimate end of
divine donation, Christ is not given unto merely to retain, but he is given
unto to give. There is reciprocation in divine donation, every thing is given
unto to give back again; the sea is filled with water to fill the earth with
springs and showers: things must have much which are to supply many. Christ is
anointed to anoint, Ye have received] an unction from the [holy one]. Christ
has what he has in order to abide, and therefore called head.



Yes, the nature of such a condition should be considered: soul-pressures are
from several apprehensions, all are not kind; if this be not looked to,
fullness in Christ will not be looked after, though the heart be ready to die
with load: there is soul-pressure from conscience enlightened: guilt by divine
ordination looks back upon the soul daily, howerly, and the soul would look
away from it, and think of no sin, nor no such thing, but cannot, visions of
wrath so haunt him, and here lies his load; if any company, if any music
would cheer and charm away this evil spirit that so haunteth the man, he
would get it what ever it did cost: life though bad, not at all disliked by the
man, but horribly disliked of God and conscience, that the man cannot do what
he would, he is so plagued within; and here lies the burden, that the man
cannot keep his sin, and not that he cannot leave his sin.

Let such men know, that that that arrow which is shot into the heart, shall
abide, and how able and full soever Christ be to power oil into wounded souls,
he will power none into these wounds, these shall gangrene and destroy the man,
for they are diaboli ulcera; this is the burden of the damned, that they cannot
prosecute their will, but are tormented. Pressures are pitied, which spring
from love to Christ, and hatred of sin. I am sick of love, Christ is my life,
more then my life, but I cannot enjoy him, therefore I sin, sink, groan and
die: such bleeding is staid, such wounds have mercy powered into them. Oppressed
hearts, do you prize the fullness that is in Christ? O nothing dearer, then
blessed are ye, for dispensation to you shall be full, you shall have flaggons.
Previous dispositions, speak the mercy coming certainly; the heavens glimmer in
the east, the sun is certainly rising; affections stir, the beloved is not
far off, the way is strewed, the king is coming, there will be crying
Hosanna, and triumphing anon. Panting hearts, let the king come his own pace,
and he will get home to you by night, he will sup with you, and feast with you,
and what ever he has to refresh and revive the soul, you shall have it, ere
any temptation shall destroy you; Christ feasting is usually at supper, his
full communications are ordinarily late, but never too late; fullness of mercy,
comes in fullness of time. Let passions burn strong, but not turbulent: if any
thing make your beloved make haste, and come skipping to you like a young Roe,
it will be this. Christ comes in a still voice, and unto still souls, that long
earnestly, but wait patiently for him. Simeon waited for the consolation of
Israel, and he had his bosom full. Deep waters come slowly, infinite fullness
is long a emptying it self. That which works exactly, must have time: grace that
goes forth in height goes forth very exact. Of his fullness we receive, and
grace for grace. Fullness works exactly, to make the recipient fully like it
self, grace for grace. The best wine is kept till last. Full dispensations are
best, the best wine, and these are kept till last, and they are kept by Christ,
thou have kept the best wine till last. Grace goes forth free, but not without
order, no soul has fullness presently, though Christ be fullness always.

Vessels of mercy are narrow mouthed (weak hearts, I speak to you to keep you
quiet). O ye of little faith. You have but little faith, and yet complain that
ye have not great mercy; fullness comes in, by opening the mouth wide: that
dead soul that can spread himself upon the living, neeses seven times; perfect
life comes in, by spreading our souls upon him that is perfect. Every thing in
Christ is mine, when faith says this in the heart, then every thing indeed,
actually becomes mine. The eye of Christ becomes mine to see, the hand of
Christ becomes mine to work, and the feet of Christ becomes mine to walk. Our
right lies as concealed, till faith acts; there is much in the fathers house,
but the soul starves, till it remember it self, and own its father. I will
return unto my father, and then I know I shall have bread enough, what he has,
I shall have: strong acting of faith, makes Christ's fullness yours.

Fullness would fill your vessels, but your hands jogge, and that runs
besides, which should run in. There is never a time you come to these waters,
but here is pouring out enough to fill you all, but every ones hand jogges
almost, so that much precious water is spilt, and every one returns empty.
Jacob is ready to draw water, to water all, to fill the bellies of all the
cattle, but Rachel will do it her self, she is shie and modest, and will not
take help: Christ is willing to draw out his fullness, and to fill every heart,
but we are shie and modest, and will be doing all our selves, and not trouble
Christ; we will be drawing out of this thing, and out of that duty to fill our
souls, and not out of Christ. Let my beloved come into his garden, and do his
work himself, for I can do no more; Blow O north wind, Blow O south, and make
my spices flow out, for I beat and blow, and nothing will come out but sin
and shame, this brings in fullness; fullness comes out of nothing. I am
nothing, preaching nothing, hearing nothing, but Christ all, and this makes him
all unto the soul; the clearer in self denial, the fuller in the fruition of
Christ. You rest in your works, and stagger at the promise through unbelief,
and how is it possible, that fullness should fill you. You are full of self,
and you cannot be full of Christ; the promises are pipes from the fountain,
which are laid of purpose to fill you, and you stagger at them.

I would every bleeding heart did know what wounds him, and who is his greatest
enemy; he thinks it is Christ, and alas it is not: thou have not a dearer friend
in the world then Christ is, nor one that pities thee more; thou art the
greatest enemy to thy self, and thine own unbelief keeps thee low, this is the
secret leak in the vessel, which thou have not yet found out, thou had been
full else, long ere this. Christ is full, and art not thou full? Search thy
soul, certainly there is some leak; unbelief is long ere it be seen, but when
it is, no monster like it; it is more uggly then Satan, then that cage of
unclean birds below, as that without which, Satan nor sin could do any hurt.
A stubborn child that had blasphemed, was to be brought forth, and those that
heard him to blaspheme, were to lay their hands on his head, and he was to be
stoned. Unbelief is the frowardness of the heart, which makes you to blaspheme
God, and his gracious word; bring forth this froward child, and lay your hands
upon the head of it, and cast stones at it at the throne of grace: say, Lord
this is that child that has blasphemed thee, that has dishonored thee more
then any evil, stone it to death from heaven; this suit you must pursue and
follow, which would be filled with the spirit.

Finally, fullness speaks such dispensations, as make, and settle peace in the
soul, and Christ is King of peace, he is King of Salem, he has the command of
peace; he can still the raging sea with a word of his mouth, so he can a raging
conscience, and he must be looked upon, and acknowledged, according to such a
transcendent ability, and then he gives out, as he has in him, fullness to
supply the necessity of the soul. Lord I know that thou can do whatever thou will. Now Christ works richly. Christ will have his prerogative acknowledged;
grace is his own to dispose as he will, all his wealth is his own, he can
advance a soul at his pleasure; if there be no word, which the soul ever yet
heard, that has spoken peace, Christ can create words, and make them so drop
from his lips, as to make peace. Devils are at the command of Christ, and
Angels are at the command of Christ, yea the holy Ghost is at the command of
Christ, he can breath and blow with this wind, where he lists: Christ is met
half way (as it were) when the soul can thus look toward him, when Prerogative
is fully acknowledged.

Coloss. 1.18. He is the head of the body.
HEad speaks fullness, and that which bears upon this, to wit, Office; of the
one we have spoken, of the other we are now to speak. Divine ordination fills
up one vessel, and then makes channel out of that for others. Office is a
conveyance of gifts, for a public good; something to draw out one, to the use
of many. Christ does bear Office to the creature, which is more humility then
can be expressed; he is head. The word speaks rule. Christ has government upon
his shoulders, the government of the choicest body which God has in the the
world, He is the head of the Church.

Every corporation has privilege, but none more then the Church; Jerusalem is
free, yet not lawless, she has a head. Universal bodies are great, the
invisible catholic Church, takes up heaven and earth, and yet not masterlesse,
all under rule, and Christ is the head of this great body.

Christ's rule is universal, God rules in Jacob, to the ends of the earth,
says the Psalmist. Yea, to the ends of heaven. There is a throne in the Church
militant, and Christ sits upon that: there is a throne in the Church
triumphant, and Christ sits upon that. We have such an high priest, who is let
down on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens, Hebr. 8.1.
There is majesty below and above, and Christ sits as head upon them all, every
knee bows to him.

The kingdom of God is within you, there are his Laws written, and there is
his throne. Aarons rod, and the tables of the covenant, were in the inner
Court, and the Manna in the golden pot. The command of the purse may serve a
man, but it does not Christ, he commands the heart. My son give me thy heart.
You suit your seats, so does Christ, he makes his throne in that which is
nearest him to wit, the spirit. Christ's rule, is one soul bound up in another,
Paul bound in the Spirit, and that bond, bound all to good behavior.

Christ's rule is perpetual. Some heads may be cut off, this head my text
speaks of cannot. Death has slain many commanders, but Christ has slain
death, and him that had the power of death. Satan is the executioner of
Justice, and therefore said to have the power of death, as well as in other
respects; Christ has destroyed all, and has his life in jeopardy by none, he
lives and reigns for ever, he rules by his power for ever, Psalm, 66.7. He
shall rule till he has put down all rule, and all power, and all authority, 1.
Cor. 15.24. Until he and his be one, as he and his father are one till the
kingdom be resigned up. There be now many powers against Christ, but he must
reign till they be all down, yet not any to help him.

his shoulders, that is, upon his alone. Christ had none suffered with him, and
he has none to reign with him here. Christ has trod the wine press alone, he
slew Goliath alone, and is that stone alone, that sunk into his brain; he makes
his kingdom alone, and rules it alone: He shall build the Temple of the Lord,
and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, Zachary,
6.13.

chief corner stone, are crushed by it; that soul that killed Christ, is killed
by him, his blood is upon every heart that nullifieth him. The Lord be
merciful to the souls of men: do ye know what ye do when you secretly say,
this lust shall reign, and Christ shall not reign over me? You commit Adoniahs
treason, treason against the crown, that you may put by Solomon from the
throne, your blood and your life will go for this. When Adam committed treason
against the crown, and would become a God, God cutteth him off presently,
though there were no more men in the world.

Justice has its heights and depths as mercy has: treason against the King
has exquisite torture, such a death as has many deaths in it: so it is in this
case, spiritual treason has double death. By dying thou shall die thou
traitor against the crown of Heaven, said Christ to Adam, and in him to all
that do as he did. There is death unto death, and this the punishment of every
traitor against Christ.

This is too general: a more particular application shall be made. Your souls
are under command, you have a spiritual head. You have fathers of your flesh,
and you obey them; you have a father of spirits, and why do ye not obey him?
Most men look least at their hearts, all the care is to order the tongue and
the outward man. Hypocritical creatures, you overlook the kingdom of Christ,
you look at the outside, Christ looks at the heart, who rules within; all is
under command, body and soul; the soul principally, and yet this principally
neglected must needs be the death of all: thoughts must be brought into
subjection to Christ, as well as words. Loose hearts have their plague upon
them, their holiness is painted, but their judgment will be real, they have
sold their souls to do wickedly, and will be paid in hell. The behavior of
the heart is all, dethrone Christ and he will fight it out with you to the
death; a disloyal soul shall never have the sword depart from him, not a quiet
day as long as he lives. Our temporal king which rules in this land, does
but imagine that you go about to dethrone him, or take off some flowers from
his crowns, and you see and feel that he fights it out with you to the death,
and seems resolved not to give England a quiet day as long as he lives. Make
spiritual application of this ye Hypocrites, ye painted toombs, that come here
and profess Christ, and go out like Judas and betray him, you dethrone Christ
in your hearts, you destroy the flowers of his crown; the rule of the soul is
the only flower of his crown, and taking away this from him, he will fight it
out with you to the death, the sword shall never depart from your souls, you
shall not have a quiet day, for the hypocrisy which you know.

Tremble Hypocrites, fearfulness will surprise you, your secret baseness will
generate a secret hell, justice shall rule where truth and love cannot: the
rottenness of your hearts shall have a corasite to feed upon it for ever; let
every one lay these things to heart, and consider whether Christ be head there
yea, or no.

heart. Some spirits are indifferent for truth or error, and hold a virtue to
be hot for neither, but to stand in all times of contradiction, so as to keep
the skin whole; Hypocrisy rules in this heart and not truth, and this
temper is the plague of this generation, neither hot nor cold. Cold sweats are
death pangs; the soul is near his end that thus lives. If God be God worship
him, halting between many things is nothing, this speaks the prince of
darkness yet ruling: affections which break through obstacles to discharge
duty, speak Christ head in the heart.

I will not stand on qualities themselves, but at what every quality makes,
and this will be more plain to you to demonstrate who rules in your hearts.
Fire encounters all opposites, so does every element from a natural instinct,
and so does grace where it reigns. Sin is the proper object of hatred, and
every sin is made so where Christ indeed is head. Dominion speaks all
subdued, if any sin reign Christ does not. Weak hearts must not here wrong
themselves: the being of sin and the stirring of sin, which the Apostle
calls the motion of sin, do not necessarily speak the reign of sin. Many
precious hearts when they feel sin strong in them, conclude it reigns in
them, and censure their souls exceedingly, and so make their life a hell; they
please themselves in this, but Christ is not pleased. Sin makes motions:
that is nothing, how is it harkned to? This denominateth dominion or not: does
every stirring make thee groan? wretched man, etc. Do thou carry sin to
Christ, when it is about to carry thee to the Devil? Lord, this is the plague
of my heart, heal it; this universally practiced speaks the reign of Christ:
some of you are by pangs plaintifes against corruption, and then another while
defendants; and plaintifes against one corruption, upon some more then ordinary
evil that falls out upon it, and then defendants in reference to another,
that takes better to your designs: this man's eyes are out, and Satan has him
by the hand, and the Lord knows whither he will lead him.

You that cannot so well understand this, may consider the next: Sin
universally hated, Truth universally loved speaks Christ's dominion indeed in
the soul. Truth is homogeneall, and is all sweet to a sweet soul; the heart
conquered by Christ, all his Laws are holy, just and good. Christ's yoke is
easy, and burdensome things light: Truth is no pressure, not simply as a truth
(I think) where the soul is sincere; the pressure is, if any, that it cannot
love enough, nor obey enough things of such a noble nature. One of the first
things Christ takes is love, here he fortifieth till he has taken all other
parts; here he mounteth cannons against all that is naught, and issues out
from hence, and takes in all that is truth. Love is Christ's fort-Royall in the
soul, mighty vast, and holds play on all sides, for all truth, and against
all sin. A soul under the command of Christ loves much, though he can do but
little, loves all truths, though he can scarce practice one. Christ is a King
of glory, into whatsoever everlasting doors he comes: every line in Christ's
book is glorious, every hair upon Christ's head glorious, where he is a head.
Christ's head is bushy and black as a Raven; lines of truth are black hairs of
that head that rules, and they are all beautiful in that heart that is
married to Christ. The sum of all is this, as Christ rules in the heart so
is the life; you may look without and see who rules within; a through
conversation speaks a through dominion of Christ, (...).

Follow me says he often, and I will make you this, and make you that. Christ
will make his way rhrough the blond of thousands, through the blood of Towns,
Cities, Kingdoms, but he will have his own Kingdom stand. Malice strikes
craftily and desperately, yet this head will ward as well; no evil shall
accomplish its end, as long as Christ reigns; Why do the Heathen rage, and
the people imagine a vain thing? The wrath of God makes the wrath of man vain
in its hottest pursuit. He is dead that seeks thy life, says the holy Ghost.
Kings and great men rage against us, but they will burn to death with the flame
that is in their breasts; a bad spirit beats out it self to death. The cannons
which malice mounts are double loaded, and recoyl and kill the cannonee^s, and
that is Christ's way of destroying those that would destroy his.

This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Christ did thoroughly obey
and he fed upon the sweet of it here, he had meat to eat in this world, which
none knew of. There is no straight when a man does his duty, Christ makes
enlargement in bonds; joy in sorrow, life, in death. Christ does counterwork
the world; there desire is to rob us of peace, and rob us of joy; but it shall
not be says Christ, In me you shall have peace, what ever you meet with in the
world. Wisdoms ways are pleasant, when bloody: when men are froward, Christ
is kind; the churlishness of Laban. made God speak often and very sweetly to
Jacob. Christ smileth upon tender consciences, when the world frowneth; his
bosom is open to give rest, when the sighing spirit breaths out it self to
him. What is thy request Hester? will pride trample thee under foot? It shall
not. As no time is unseasonable to show duty to Christ, so no time unseasonable
for an obedient soul to find favor with him.

Hence forth is [laid up] for me a crown etc. What you lose in earth, Christ
lays it up in Heaven, and when you come home you shall have it again with
advantage; your name again your estate again, your life again, all that you
loose in obedience to your heavenly head and sovereign. Christ does nothing in
order to merit, but much in order to bounty. If you suffer with him, you shall
reign with him: Spiritually fight and maintain Christ a King, and he will crown
you Kings. Troubles affright much, but alas what is man! Call upon flesh and
blood, upon your weak hearts, to think of eternity you and all that quarrel
with you, shall move before the King whom you obey.

1. Coloss. 18. and he is the head, etc.
MAnna lies in a heap in this word, as I have formerly told you: Head speaks
every office of Christ; as King Christ is Head, as Priest he is Head; he is
(...) head-priest, Prince-Priest, as the Greek word notes both, and as the
author to the Hebrews uses the word. Christ bears office to the creature, but
no inferior office: he does officiate to rule the body, but it is as the chief
Commander: he does officiate to save the body, but it is as chief-priest, as
head-priest, as prince-priest, as king of Salem. There was a principality in
the priesthood under the Law, there was a holy crown put upon the mitre Exodus
29.6.

called of God, an high priest, Heb. 5.10. Christ had princely ordination,
ordination as noble as his person: the Father ordained the Son: He testifies
thou art a Priest, etc. (...) contestatur, so the learned render that Greek
word, as noting a joint act, two speaking together with one mouth, to wit, the
Father and the holy Ghost, which is a most acute translation. Christ had not
only his ordination by joint protestation, but by oath. What a man is invested
with by word from the kings own mouth, is very noble; the word of a king has a
great state in it, but the oath of a king added makes double and treble
majesty; yet so is Christ invested with his Priestly office: The Lord has
sworn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever.

We have such an high priest which is set on the throne in the majesty in the
heavens, Hebr. 8.1. A minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle.
Christ has upon his mitre a crown in heaven, and he sits upon a throne of
state at the right hand of God, as a princely Priest, sacrificing in a princely
tabernacle, sprinkling the mercy-seat, where offended justice himself fits, to
make all communication to man. Aarons tabernacle the Apostle calls (...) umbra,
a shadow, as rather the shadow of a tabernacle, then indeed a tabernacle, then
a true tabernacle; a house of boughs, a leafie house: Christ is minister of the
true tabernacle. There was gold and state in the first tabernacle, but it was
all but painting, as it were; in the tabernacle where Christ sacrifices, there
is true state, the gold that is in heaven is true gold; the golden censer that
is there is true gold, the golden altar that is there is true gold. Truth is
the principality of things, such is Christ's tabernacle, it is as true as heaven.
Christ has his tabernacle as he has ordination, after a very immediate, and a
very stately way: Aarons tabernacle was pitched by man, bur Christ's by God
himself: He is a minister of the true tabernacle which the Lord has pitched,
and not man. Aarons tabernacle was pitched with hands, and made with hands, but
Christ is a high Priest in a more perfect tabernacle, (...), not of this
creation, of another creation, and of another fixation.

Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in
once into the holy place, etc. Life is a noble thing, you have not such another
jewel about you; but a spotless life is doubly noble, such blood did Christ
offer. Life is a jewel in which all is wrapped up, a man offers all when he
offers this, and that is a noble offering indeed. The widow threw in all, which
was a noble offering, so has Christ. It Is noble action for a great Peer, to
take his life in his hand, and say, This shall go for my kingdom, Christ is
the greatest Peer that ever the world saw, and yet he took his life in his
hand, and said, This shall go for my kingdom, and my people: I lay down my
life for my sheep. If Christ had laid down the life of all creatures for man,
it had been a noble sacrifice, but he says, I lay down [my life,] and then
tell me what nobility is in this offering? Judas valued this blood basely, but
God that values things as they are, takes it of more price then all your souls,
and yet every one of which is of more price then the world.

weak through the flesh it was a covenant in the external dispensation of it
so fleshly, that frail flesh could see little of Christ to better it self.
Christ has obtained a more excellent ministry, the way into the holiest of
all is now via propalata, spread open; ministration is clear, and things
ministered full the laws are opened unto our eyes, and given into our hearts
(...).

errata's, and therefore were to sacrifice for themselves as well as for
others; but Christ had none, he did all things well, he did live well, and die
well: when he offered up that great sacrifice, he did it perfectly. Christ
spoke truth when he looked over all his works, and said, (...), it is perfected
all sides give testimony of the noble discharge of Christ's office; God smileth
to look upon him, and our conscience smileth as soon as it can look upon him; he
makes the worshipper perfect, as pertaining to the conscience. Christ scarlet
garment takes heaven and earth, God and his people. Who is this that comes from
Edom, with garments died red from Bozra, etc. That expression may be applied
either to the Father admiring the Son, or the Churches admiring of him,

justices of worship as the Apostle speaks of those legal Christians, and
justices of the flesh, as he elsewhere speaks, they fast and pray, and are very
just and exact in hours and times, and all external observance, and yet like
the young man, at their wits end every foot, about their eternal condition;
they run to one preacher, and to another, Good Sir, What shall I do to be
saved? I am a damned man. They are (...) as he calls them there, which comes
from (...), which signifies to tremble, trembling worshippers to do all exact,
and yet their conscience shakes, as if hell were at the door to receive them,
as soon as they have done their duties. Their justices of worship, and justices
of the flesh, their exactness according to the letter, make them not perfect
as concerning their conscience: they pray no more, they give no more, and yet
full of fear, and none more: they run to this minister and that, Sir, I fear
all is naught. And so do I too, for thou make no use of the Priestly office
of Christ, thou do not put thy self and all thou do into the hand of a
Mediator; this is talked of as possible, but if it were done indeed, it would
soon set thy soul in a better condition.

be burnt else in your offering, your fire is an ignis fatuus, a strong foolish
fire.

upholds in duty, and this will speak out whether you trust in it. Sense is
some souls only relief; if duty oil not its own wheels, the soul stands still;
they can find no sweet in prayer, therefore pray no more, duty will not conjure
their consciences quiet, and therefore they will to the alehouse, and see
whether carnal devils will drive out uncarnall, whether one hell will swallow
up another; the pleasures of the flesh must take off the terrors of the
spirit: Ah Lord! what a black priest is here used! This soul is desparate, the
devil has ordination to priesthood, and the alehouse, or whore-house must be
his tabernacle to officiate in; hands are laid on him suddenly, and this made
the last remedy to ease and quiet the soul. Here is a sad condition: O that I
could cease preaching, and weep now in the face of such a forlorn wretch. Will
that which dames you, save you? Will sin blot out sin? Will adding to
transgression, plead for mercy in heaven, to quiet your consciences, and save
your souls? The devil is Abaddon a destroyer, no savior, so is sin. When
your souls are wounded, will you give them to sin and the devil to heal? the
spirit of God will finally leave you for this, so it did Saul for the like
practice. Rebellion makes wounds, and when wounds heighten rebellion, God will
have no more to do with that man. Let the soul bleed and bleed, and ordain what
priest it will, Christ will not bleed for him. Hardened hearts, think on these
things, the blood of a mediator will be charged upon you, for trampling it
under foot.

merciful high priest, and can be no other to you. God has ordained him to
officiate in such a tabernacle, as wherein you dwell, he is in all things like
to you: you are in want, and so was Christ, he had no house: you are
persecuted, so was Christ: sin loads you, and so it did Christ. A Christians
condition needs compassion, and Christ knows how much, and it is his work
continually to lay it open above. There are infirmities distinct from a wounded
spirit, you know the Scripture makes such a distinction, Common distresses have
their weight, and it is more then the best soul can bear these, if it maintain
not an eye to the compassion of Christ: men are wolves, dogs, they have no
bowels, and the soul beats it self to death with this, till it remember the
bowels of Christ. When good hearts have no compassion on earth, they are ready
to conclude they have none in heaven, but you cannot injure Christ and your
souls more, then by such conclusions: Christ lets men be merciless, that you
may look up, and behold how merciful he is, and that he needs not this
channel or that, to convey compassion in to you. Weeping eyes, sight fails
them often, but compassion never fails: it is mercy that a man can weep to God,
and do no worse, when he can get no mercy from man. Does not relief strangely
come in now and then? Why, write upon the forehead of such favors, I have a
merciful and compassionate mediator in heaven, my intercessour above sent me
this, and he will send me more; Christ has sounding of bowels. Where are the
sounding of thy bowels you may hear them from heaven to earth, in the most
distressed condition, if you listen and observe diligently in all passages
about you.

made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation, unto all them that
obey, Hebr. 5.9. Either the wound of a Christian lies in the greatness of the
evil which he has done, or in the fear of what he shall do against God, and
God against him; to all which I say only this, that Christ is a perfect
mediator, and being a perfect mediator, no condition can be desperate.

Coloss. 1.18. He is the head of the body, etc.
FRom Christ as head we have gathered many things, and I trust sweet to your
heart, and yet there are more. As King, Christ is head; as Priest, Christ is
head; (and of these we hove spoken) as Prophet, Christ is head. Christ rules,
none like him; Christ sacrifices, none like him: Christ teaches, none like
him. He spoke as never man spoke, Learned men were astonished at his doctrine.
Whence has this man these things, and what wisdom is this given unto him,
Mark, 2.6. Christ is (...), that Prophet, a Prophet indeed, abundantly more
then a Prophet. John was a teacher far beyond all the Prophets before him,
and therefore said to be abundantly more then a Prophet: but Christ was a
teacher far beyond John, farther beyond John then John was beyond any of the
Prophets before him, and therefore he may well be called, (...), abundantly
more then a Prophet. Matthew. 11.9. Concerning his Kingly office, he is said to
be greater then Solomon so I may say concerning his Prophetical office, he is
greater then John or any Prophet.

came to them, and then went away again. Balaam in a trance could see much, and
then of a sudden saw nothing no more then another man: so it was with the
greatest Prophets; seers, and then in the dark again; the spirit of the Lord
was transient, and came and went from one to another. That bad man intimates
this truth that I tell you, which struck the Prophet, and said, Which way went
the spirit of the Lord from me to thee, Vision is an abiding thing in Christ:
light abides in the Sun; it does so to day, it does so to morrow, and it
does so for ever. Christ sees much to day, as much to morrow, and as much to
all eternity: his eye is not darkened, the spirit of the Lord is not
accidentally but naturally in him: the Son lies in the bosom of the Father.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten which is in the bosom of
the Father, he has revealed him. I think these terms of Father, and Son, and
bosom, they point at the naturalnesse of Christ's ability, to explicate
infinite excellency. There is no new thing to Christ under the Sun, no nor
above the Sun; no new thing to Christ in earth, nor in Heaven, nor in the
bosom of God: Christ is never at a loss, respecting the knowledge of things
above or below, present or to come; he never needs instruction from any in
this thing or that; Who has instructed him? The lamp in the Tabernacles went
out, and Vision did fail, or at least it is conceived so by some of the
learned, which undertake to interpret these things, but the lamp in the true
Tabernacle never goes out, nor vision never fails. Light dwells with him,
Daniel 2.22. As the spirit dwells in the body, as the eye dwells in the
head, which confirms me more in that which I said before, concerning the
naturalnesse of Christ's abilities.

cunctis oculati, seers in all things; in some things they knew much, and in
other things nothing. David a great Prophet, and a very knowing man, yet in
some points a beast. The greatest Doctors knew but in part, skild in this
knowledge or that, each had their particular eminency. But Christ has all
wisdom, and all knowledge: He is not only skild in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians to use that allusion, but he is skild in all the wisdom and learning
that is in this world, or in any other world. In Christ is all wisdom and all
knowledge; yea all the treasures of these: the spring of whatsoever is admired
for light and skill amongst the Sons of men. In him are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2. His eyes run through the earth, so they
do Heaven, and he masters all he looks upon; his understanding is infinite, and
this without study primo intuitu, at the first look. There are but few things
that lie naked before you, you are fain to make a stand at every thing, to make
understanding but Christ makes a stand at nothing, for all things are naked
[before him, that is, he looks upon all, and understands all presently, his
beholding of a thing, and understanding of it are the same; He is quick of
understanding says the Prophet. The Lamb opens sealed books; and though all
dark sayings to every one else, yet he reads and understands presently;
when there was none found to open the book, the Lamb could, and therefore
called Palmoni by Daniel, the revealer of secrets. Dark things and plain
things, day and night are all one to him. He reveals deep and secret things,
he knows what is in the darkness, Dan. 2.22. the revelations delivered by
John, are called the revelations of Christ; The revelation of Jesus Christ,
which God gave unto him, etc. Revel. 1.1.

Moses was faithful as a servant, but he as a Son in [his own house. The
Church militant here, and the Church triumphant above, that is to say, grace
and glory, they are all Christ's own, even as they are his Fathers; and if there
be any thing beyond these, it is Christ's own too, even as it is Gods own: which
I think that expression points at, where he says, Glorify me with [thine own
self] with the glory that [I had with thee] before the world was. Grace is as
properly Christ's own, and as fully Christ's own, as sin is said to be the
devils own; when the devil tells a lie, he tells it of his own, that is, he
does that which is natural to him, and that wherein there can be no superior
to him, to lie more facilly nor more exquisitely then he. So what truth Christ
speaks, he speaks it of his own, that is, that wherein he is natural, and not
supernatural, and as it were above himself, and that wherein he is equally
full and parallel to any speaker of it connaturall with any that speaks this
language. The parallel state of Christ with the Father, in point of imparting
spiritual things, is hinted methinks in that form of speech which the Apostle
James uses, chap. 1. 18. Of his [own will] he begat us [with the word of
truth] that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. Propagation
here, which speaks all spiritual excellencies, is made coaction, or conaction
in order to the persons of the Trinity, that wherein they are joint and equal,
and do with one another, as two eyes which are convisive, seeing together, and
seeing equally together, without the least superiority that can be discerned:
Of his own will [he begat us [with the word] of truth.

Did not our hearts burn within us whilst he talked with us? Christ sets the
soul on fire with his breath, blows up internal powers, and breaks open
everlasting doors. The prince of darkness fortifieth within us, and Christ can
mount ordnances where the forts are, and shoot off terribly within, and destroy
the works of the devil, that is, sin, or the soul at every shot: Christ does
with his cannon within, as you do with yours without, rend and tear woefully:
You take off bodies in the very midst, so does Christ's cannon take off sins
and souls in the very midst, as Beza renders that word (...), which the Apostle
uses. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1. Cor. 1.19. tollam e medio, I
will cut it off in the midst. Sin is in the midst of the soul, and Christ can
mount such gunnes, as to cut it off in the midst.

of eternal life, or eternal death, and this simply as his words. We speak
words, and they stick but a moment, Christ speaks words and they stick for
ever. We make wounds, and you lick them whole in an alehouse; Christ makes
wounds that no art can heal; Thy arrows stick fast in me, says the Psalmist.
The arrows which Christ shoot, they stick fast, none can pull them out but that
hand that shot them. Christ can instruct and seal it. That is, make things so
impressive, as beyond obliteration. O God, thou have taught me from my youth,
and hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works, Psalm. 71.17. so Psalm. 119.102.
I have not departed from thy judgments, for thou have taught me. Christ can
teach beyond all other teachers, he can open the understanding, that is, open
powers to take in, and then close up these powers to keep in for ever.

instantly: his ministry is an instantaneous ministry. We are long hammering
and beating to make persons understand, and yet all will do nothing; but when
Christ takes the work in hand, he makes the most ignorant creature that is,
wise to salvation presently. Then] opened he their understandings, etc. Luke
24.45. Then at that instant he made them see thoroughly what they never saw.

We are fools, says the Apostle, but you are wise: How strong, and how
general this spirit is now, you that are spiritual may see, and what it
presages Christ will explain fully, if you can but hold fast a little.

Let every man look without, and look within, look abroad and look at home: the
plague of the multitude, is it not your plague? Are not you wiser in your
conceits then your preacher? is not spiritual preaching babbling? When things
touch your consciences, then you rage, and then the Minister is mad, because
you are mad. Alas for us! Lord thou make us men of contention, our life is a
fighting with beasts that will not understand us nor thee. If you had no other
Prophets but us, or did reject no other prophet but us, some dispute might be
made in the day of account; but we will not judge you to the Father, there is
another prophet which you hear in us, and yet will not hear, and it is he that
will judge you to the Father, and to your own consciences. If this will not
beat off men from deluding themselves, and from bearing off Christ, I will go
on.

Some spirits are wanton: as there be light bodies, so there be light souls,
such as go a whoring after lies. Fancy sick, longs after fresh speculation, if
this may be had it satisfies, let it be in what it will, in things as far
from Christ as earth is from heaven, yea as hell is from heaven. It is
otherwise with the soul that is taught of God, he has a little light of
Christ, and now cares for no other vision; all light is darkness, and all
wisdom folly, that relates not to make Christ more known: I purpose to know
nothing but Christ, and him crucified. Paul had many endowments, but they were
all slighted. Christ teaches the heart, as the heart is taught, love burns;
nothing satisfies love, but what stird it: if such an object made love, nothing
but the fruition of that object will satisfy it. You may know whether Christ
has opened any thing of himself to you, by your love to him: the purity of
your light will speak out it self in the purity of your love, and the purity of
your affection in the purity of your action. Should you say nothing, yet a man
that stands by you, may tell what your light is, and who has taught your
hearts, Christ or the devil. Some of you will swear, and curse, and lie; some
of you your love as fleshly, as base as the earth it self: Has Christ taught
such things as these? No certainly, the devil is the tutour of these, and they
will take their degree in hell. I have a word to you all, and conclude. A loose
life broadly speaks out an uninstructed heart: what secretly swayes, Christ
sees, and so shall all the world, use what art you will to hide it; wherein you
are intractable to the teaching of Christ, God will discover it, and require
it. Read these words over and over, I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their brethren like unto thee, and will put my words into his mouth, and he
shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name,
I will require it of him, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19.

Coloss. 1.18. He is the head of the body, the Church.
SOmethings have a general glory: look upon a pearl when you will, where you
will, and it shines and sparkles upon you: so does Christ. Christ is looked
upon before, in reference to the world, here in reference to such as are taken
out of the world; in the former he is looked upon with respect to the creation,
and here with respect to the Church, and in both admired, as great and glorious.

Christ wears a garment without seem, a general glory, his working-day suit is
all full of pearls. Consider Christ under any notion in reference to this
world, and you consider him in his working suit, in his country clothes, in
his traveling apparel, and yet in this, shining; earth, heaven, the Church,
is filled with his glory; he is head in the one, and in other.

Christ makes a similitude between the worlds, between this and that above;
there he is all fair, and so he is here; condition suits, as the sun goes in
the same height: we and they above, can see nothing but a perfection in the
sun that shines upon us, and no less moves desire amongst us. Man has an
exact eye, though not an exact heart, he will see much, ere he will love a
little. Things must be very clean, which you swallow; persons must be very
complete and without exception, which we set over us, whatever we be our
selves, which are to move under them.

if there be any hole in the coat, love goes out, and gets gone there, but
there is none in Christ's. Critics must be convinced, and then they will stand
still and consider; perfection makes conviction in the most critical spirit,
and till the soul can tell no longer how to take exception at others, it will
not begin to take exception at it self.

My people would none of me, and I will none of them.

Persons which are overmastered with a bad heart, and cannot do what they
would, find mercy from the Lord, but others are let alone to live as they will,
and die in their shame: complaining hearts, Christ is perfect in glory, would
you love him? Christ shines in the world, and he shines in the Church, in the
Church militant, and in the Church triumphant, he is great every where, would
you love him? Yes. This is accepted. Christ accepts according to that you have,
and out of this smoke shall come a flame. Holy desires, is Christ conceived in
the womb of the soul, do but stay a little time, and thou will feel the babe
leap in the womb, does it not now? O how strongly does that soul come to love
Christ, which would love him, but cannot.

Coloss. 1.18. He is the head of the body.
HOw God does suit things, is here considerable: such a body, and such a head.
Christ is [the] head os [the] body. God does nothing at random: divine
dispensations are exactly proportioned, one thing is fitted to another, and
this is the thing I would a little stand on.

I have set [my king] upon [my holy] hill of Sion. Such a body such a head, a
holy people have a holy king, my people have mine anointed over them. I have
set my king upon my holy hill. The world is full of variety of condition, so is
divine action shaped every one has as he is: Iron hearts have an iron scepter
to order them, and hearts of a more noble metal, have a scepter of gold,
every one has a suitable offendant.

lost sheep, says the Savior. God directs a Savior to lost man, and a
Physician to sick man; and to blind and hardened men, which think they see,
Christ is sent to move in justice to them: justice naturally suits all her
actions to the subject, about which she works, as mercy does. I am come for
judgment into the world, says Christ, to shape action to person, to suit
dispensation to condition.

annexed to the word, which could not understand a word of divinity before. As
I have dealt with others, so God has requited me, said Adonibezek; it is a
rare artist that can draw out himself, and yet this is natural to God; by
words and works together, he will draw out himself so plain, that any one shall
run and read him. God can cut and hew a block so by line, so exact by the
line of the word, and the manners of men, that you or any one else, the very
block it self, shall tell who and what hand did it. So God has requited me,
Persons that cannot read, are set to spell words by works, their own works by
Gods works. God can draw out himself in any attribute, to any man's
understanding, in justice, in mercy. God can suit action to any person, to any
condition, and so exactly that at first sight every eye shall see himself.

The Ass rebuked the madness of the Prophet. An Ass is a dogged wilful
beast, and so was Balaam, and God suits him in reproof, to convince. One Ass
was upon the back of another, and the worst a top, and God took his advantage
as they lay one upon another, and uses one Ass to convince the other: one is
wilful to go on, and the other is wilful and stops. It Is not easy to
convince stubborn souls, God must more immediately, and more exactly speak then
ordinary in this work: Divine action suited is an immediate speaking from
Heaven, and proud hearts fall at the sight of this, when nothing else will do
it. Some must have every thing openly told to their face, ere they will be
convinced and take shame, and God does use this way with the world to convince
them. Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he
has done, says the Scripture of God in order to wicked men, Job 21.31.
Justice suited to sin in word and work, speaks sinners sin to their face,
that they cannot possibly deny it.

Sinners look to your selves, God will be even with you, walk as craftily as
you will, with the froward he will be froward. Some men swell in pride, and yet
please themselves in their way, that they shall carry all before them without
control. Lofty hearts, you shall find a high and lofty one to deal with you,
The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
and this is the speech of a lofty God, Esaias 2.12. title is advanced, brows
bended, a soldiers face put on by God, when flesh swells and grows proud.
The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon the proud, etc. A stern spirit shall
see nothing but a stern God. Sin is a lie, sinners perish in the heat of
their pursuit, one fire kindles another; ere fiery spirits are aware, they are
cast into everlasting burning, and this is the way of God to fit things one to
and for another. Tophet is prepared for the King; the Kings of Israel made a
Tophet for the burning of little ones, and God suiteth this wicked action with
righteous justice, and makes another Tophet for them; you sacrifice your
children to the devil, and I will sacrifice you; as if the Lord had said; God
makes burning for burning, blood for blood, tooth for tooth. Poor distressed
England, comfort thy self, thy Princes and Nobles make a Tophet for thee; they
burn thy houses, thy goods, and sacrifice thy little ones and great ones to
devilish men, and God will fit them home if they repent not, he will make a
Tophet for them, he will burn their honors, their powers, and sacrifice all to
destruction; he will turn them out of all, as they turn thee and thine, Because
thou have dealt by taking vengeance, thou shall know my vengeance, says God to
Edom.

In great extremities it is hard to keep poor hearts quiet, the spirit
wounds it self when men wound the flesh: God is just to me in this and that,
I was thus and thus. Is God just to thee, and will he not be just to them that
spoiled thee? Has he paid thee home, and will he not do it to them that are
worse then thee? Justice in the exactness of it, does but hint her self to the
godly, it does but nod upon them as it were, but she strikes full blows at the
wicked, she prosecuteth her own nature in full strength, and makes a
compensation upon these creatures, because none made, nor to be had any where
else. Weep not for your selves, but weep for them that have spoiled you, Heaven
and Earth shall read the justice of God against the bloody wretches of England
and Ireland. They that kill with the sword shall be killed with the sword.
Stand still and be quiet, let God alone to suit wicked men's plagues, if thou
do not see them paid in their own coin, then do not believe me.

England, justify Christ: he has fitted one thing to another, such a body
has such a head, like Priest, like people; like Prince, like people. You cry
out of your king, and I cry out of you; Are not Gods ways equal? Say no, who
dares. You will not have a man rule over your bodies according to his will, and
you let the devil rule your souls as he will. Look into your hearts the best
of you all, do you not make truth a slave, to be at the beck of your reason,
and at the beck of your lusts? you make Christ a slave, and he gives you to be
slaves; you make your spiritual king a slave, and your temporal kings make
you slaves. Does not Christ fit you in your kind? Our king is so and so misled
says one, and siths and whispers: take it to thy self, so art thou misled by
many base lusts: every one reapeth as he sows; can a man gather figs of
thistles. England do not thou reap as thou have sowed? Have thou not had the
guilt of blood upon thee a great while? have not thou the guilt of the blood of
many abroad, and of many faithful ministers and Christians at home upon thee,
which could not swallow thy baseness? Have thou not made truth bleed this many
years? and that Christ makes the bleed a few months, and a few years, is it
not fit and right? To justify God is the first step to repentance: men that
can do nothing but wrangle at divine action, forget the main work. Do not bite
the stone that is thrown at thee, but bite thy heart; for one is as hard as the
other I dare say. Pride meriteth much, but can bear but little, but justice
will have its way for all that. Men that cannot be silent. shall have their
mouths stopped: misery becomes mortal, when impatience grows strong; the
burden kills, when the soul will use no shoulders to bear it. No life so
bitter as that which takes all ill at Gods hand; this is hard, and that is
hard, etc. and yet all is no harder then thy heart, nor yet so hard. God does
not an action without us, but to suit it to something within us.

This point may be useful respecting time to come, and the mercy you look for.
You look for great things, but how are ye fitted for them? Christ does fit one
thing to another. Great things are already, but you prise them not; the doors
of Gods house are open, but you have no hearts to go in: the day of small
things is despised, and yet you expect great things. Israel expected milk and
honey flowing, and yet could not eat the Manna that was about their tents, and
did God give them their expectation? does God give great spiritual mercy to
full stomachs? does he satisfy the loathing soul? The Israelits were judged in
the baseness of their hearts, and their bodies fell in a wilderness. Just as
they kept their souls, Do you not keep your souls in a wilderness, out of the
fellowship of the Gospel, as the rest of the world do? you will be judged where
you lie; where your souls lie cold and dead, their shall your carcases fall and
die. God is spuing out hovering spirits that are neither hot nor cold, but hot
and then cold, that will and then will not obey Christ. Discreet stomachs, do
not expect great feasts, you must have a vomit first; you are bid to come into
the feast, and you have excuses, the high ways and fields shall yield guests
to Christ, and you shall die in your shame. The poor unknown parts of the
world, possibly may possess what Christ is now dishing out.

Simplicity fitteth for great things, God makes such a spirit, and then
bestows all upon it, the choycest spiritual favors. England thy misery is
double, were it but single, thou might soon recover. Thou have no knowledge
of God, but this is not all, if it were, means might soon make this; but thou
have no truth nor knowledge of God: there is no truth nor knowledge of God.
Some spirits are wanton, and they know not what they would have; others proud,
and this and that they must have: others politic, and they say, this we should
have, but not yet: who can expect brave things in the midst of such a base
people. Christians deceive not your selves with dreams, for God is not mocked,
he will make you open your mouths wide, ere he give great things; Open thy
mouth wide and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. You purse up your spirits, and
wring and squeez your consciences, so that there is no capacity for the
reception of full soul-mercies. The new heaven will have a new earth, the holy
land shall have a holy seed come into it. Can you cleanse your selves from all
your abominations? and can you do this speedily? Then may you see the good of
Gods chosen, but otherwise expect as you are.

Coloss. 1.18. Who is the beginning, etc.
THe Apostle is in a rapture, every word speaks admiration of Christ, he is
(...) and he is (...), he is principium and praecipuum, first and chief. The
term we are now upon speaks dignity, a heart taken with Christ as chief in
order to all blessedness, which is a blessed frame. He is the head of the
body, [the chief] the first born: this I think may be the reading of this text.

A gracious heart is taken with Christ as chief. No honor, no felicity like
that which Christ has, and which he gives: Some are sons, Christ is an only
son: some are kings, but Christ is King of kings: some are honorable, none
above Angels, but Christ is so: To which of the Angels said he, etc. Some are
wealthy, Christ has all the sheep on a thousand hills, the utmost parts of the
earth: some are beautiful, Christ is the fairest, and so in the eye of those
that are best discerning, in the eyes of every gracious soul: Paul personates
all the godly here, in admiring Christ as chief.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, as soon as a man becomes a
disciple of he is made a good scholar. Carnal understanding is enmity to
truth, it scoffs at what it cannot comprehend with its own power. Grace has a
higher reach, Christ's children have spiritual understanding, they admire
things, not by outsides but by insides, not as they are among men, but as they
are with God. Christ is the lowest amongst men, but chiefest with God, and
therefore so with the godly. This is wisdom and all wisdom. I may apply the
latter to a Christian compared with worldly wise men; all wisdom is taken with
that which shall be all in another world, that which is all and shall be all to
all eternity. [He] is the beginning, the chief.

love is sincere in a called soul, he calls things as he finds them, and
nothing tastes so sweet as the dainties which Christ gives. Sense carries you to
call things as your palate relishes them, according to this you say, This is
the sweetest dish at table. Love is divine in a divine heart, and as things
rise in the divinity of their nature, so divine affection calls them, and
admires them. One Christian has much grace, I taste it in his discourse, and he
sits high in my breast; another has much more, and he sits much higher: but
Christ has most of all and he sits highest, he is chief. Affection is working,
if it be carnal it tumbles carnal things, and sets its mark upon that which
is most carnally advantageous; this is best, this will serve this time and my
turn best: if it be divine it will do the like; it will tumble divine things,
and that which is most divinely advantageous, this it marks, this is best, this
is chief, this will best accomplish my soul. Paul personates the godly here,
they call Christ as they love him, as they find him in sweetness to their
souls, in his words and works; none speak like him to their souls, nor none
does like him, and therefore they crown him and style him chief.

cannot savor the things of God. Words of Christ harsh, rules of Christ
scorned, these call Christ in their hearts base, not chief, however they call
him with their tongue. I know no man's heart, but Christ knows all; as the
creature is preferred, Christ is undervalued, as you love your souls look to
this. Who will show us any good? some can call nothing good, but what is
carnally good, trading is good, money is good, but nothing else: no nothing
else indeed, not the heart that says so. Not Christ, but the bag was chief to
Judas, though he heard so much, and saw so much of his worth, which spoke him a
child of perdition; there be more of these children in the world. You Londoners
have heard much, and seen much of Christ, more I think then any city under
heaven, and yet to many of you, your bags and your wealth (I fear) are dearer
then the Lord Jesus. Some things are afflicting, others ruining, undervaluing
of Christ is damnable, the spots of this I will show you.

sear their consciences, truth is neglected, when not made a rule of life. Able
discoursing speaks not prising of truth, but practicing. Truth is made
subordinate to self ends, the plague is in the heart, love is not sincere,
Christ is not prised above the world. Many will not fully follow God, because
it will fully undo them: to follow truth as the world approves, is to prize
Christ only as the world does. Fear your own hearts, snares are many within
and without; Christ is indeed prized, when his will is obeyed. Action speaks
out affection, If you love me keep my commandments: if the heart be drawn, the
foot will run; the crown wheel moving though but slowly, the little wheels run
apace: the hand and the foot are but little wheels, in order to the heart, if
this be drawn and moved though but a little, the other run. Draw me, and I will
run after thee. Draw me, that is, my heart, and then feet and all other parts
shall come. Affection puts on to action; O how willing to obey is that soul
that sincerely loves! He would go, he would run, he would ride post to please
God; no precept harsh where the heart is right. Christ made chief, and so is
his will, above an Isaac. By faith, Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac.
God tried Abraham what was chief in his heart, himself or Isaac, and Abraham
gives open testimony of his affection in his action.

Sin approved, speaks Christ undervalued. Will is strong, lusts overcoming
and pleasing to the most, and alas for such souls, Christ is not prised as
chief, Approbatio mali, est reprobatio animi. Some sin from
misunderstanding, God pities these: some sin from mis-affection, more then
from mis-apprehension, they love darkness better then light, which is
reprobation of mind, a soul disapproving the truth which he knows. What I would
I understand not, or I know not, says Paul, when he wrought evil, and he
argues from hence, that God and the Gospel would pity him. What I do, I allow
not, so you read, it is (...), Nosco, to know, I think is from this Greek word
I know not. Weak hearts, you do many things amiss of ignorance, and Christ
will pity you, and therefore wound not your selves. But wilful wretches, you
put bitter for sweet, you call evil good, you [love vanities] and follow after
lies, the evil courses you follow, you love and approve. To prise Christ and to
prise sin are inconsistent, you cannot love God and Mammon. You are positive
in your evil way, you put darkness for light, you justify your course, which
is drawing of Christ's blood out of his sides, and then trampling upon it, and
despising of it when ye have done, which is the highest undervaluing of Christ.

The great things of my Law are made small things, says the Lord. Lessening
speaks undervaluing, it does so respecting precepts, and respecting promises,
Unbelief makes great precepts no precepts, and it makes great promises no
promises. It is the highest commendation of any dish at Christ's table, that you
eat heartily of it, Christ accounts it so; it is the highest valuation of
Christ, that you rest upon him, that you take life at his hands, which he
proffers. Sinners, would you prise Christ? be invited then unto, unto him, by
what he proffers: he will pardon you, he will purge you, he will justify,
sanctify, glorify you, if you believe on him. Faith is laying Christ in your
bosom, and that is proper prising of a thing; faith is an heart act, a soul
going out of every thing to God, wearied with every thing as defective, and
fiting down in Christ as complete. Then do I prise Christ indeed, when I behold
him as all; and so appropriate him to my self, when I make him my wealth, my
honor, my righteousness; when I have none in heaven, nor none in earth, but
him; when I have none to present to God, to conscience, nor to the world, but
him. Weak hearts, if guilt deter you from Christ, you will die in your sin,
as undervaluers of remedy; salvation is brought near to you, God will not your
death, repent and believe the Gospel; to day do this, and to day shall
salvation come to your house.

suadere, it is that act of Christ. by which he does persuade a froward will.
Beg Christ to conquer thy will, and then thou will have power enough to believe
presently, he will persuade Japhet.

I cannot stand to speak of particulars: I have but one thing to speak in
general, and then I have done, and that is to all Gods people. You prise
Christ as chief, and so does Christ you; Christ is your jewel, and you are
Christ's jewels; you make him your husband, and you are to him as a wife. They
are blessed indeed, which have Christ's prime love upon them: prime love gives
out prime favors, you will be fed with the finest of the wheat, the fatted
calf will be killed for you, the best robe will be brought for you, Benjamins
double dish, and double dainties will be set before you. Prime love works out
into tender mercy, and tender mercy is mercy shaped to all your necessities, to
keep you happy against all unhappiness. Some are but commonly loved, yet they
live well upon it, and are merry; you are dearly beloved of Christ, and yet you
cannot live well upon this: No, I shall want my bread. Shall ravens be fed, and
not dear children? will not a Father, a heavenly Father provide?

rock of ages, he saves with an everlasting salvation. I carried you upon
eagles wings.

Coloss. 1.18. The first born from the dead.
THere are two firstborn mentioned in this chapter, the firstborn of every
creature, verse 15. and the firstborn from the dead: the one respects being,
the other respects well-being, and Christ is first in both these, first in
being in reference to all the creation, and first in well-being, in reference
to the new creation; the first that came forth from under the power of sin
alive, which is the firstborn from the dead here meant, which the Apostle
calls the firstborn amongst many brethren elsewhere, that is, the first in our
nature in the state of divine favor. Christ broke the ice (as we speak) in
reference to that body of death, under which the state of mankind lay, and so
the first that came forth alive from under the guilt of sin, and the killing
justice of God.

This time is sad, so is our text, it leads us to behold a world of dead men.
From the dead, etc. The term is indefinite, and speaks our condition
universally. We are all by sin dead, without power to please God, and liable
to wrath for ever, and Christ the first that made way out of this condition,
the first that broke through that displeasure which spoild us all. Bodily death
is sad, soul-death a thousand times more sad: we must walk amongst the tombs
for an hour, we are to rip up the dead, to set out the nature of soul-death.

Demonst 1.
Breath is gone, the spirit of God is not in a dead soul. Union speaks life,
Satan not Christ, lies in a sinners heart, he is alive to sin; affection
strong, action, that is, evil action, free among the dead. Such light has such
motion, ghosts walk in the dark, ways of death dead souls walk in. Spiritual
death, is a soul cast out from God; a soul cast out from God, casts out God,
the word of God, the operations of God; a dead soul fights against life,
quicknings are as stabbings, sermons which stir are conjurings; his eyes
stare, his heart quakes, let Paul be gone, Felix will be in hell else before
the time: the words of life, are death to a dead soul, Felix soul is in
departing, whilst a world of life was imparted to him: nothing will keep life
in a dead soul, but the departing of Christ, and his quickening spirit. The dead
deny the resurrection, they would not be raised out of their grave, means that
are used this way, are to them as conjuring from the dead, ghastly. Christ's yoke
is easy, wisdoms ways are pleasant: so the devils yoke is easy, and his
ways are pleasant: the dead are at rest in sin, they feel no pain though in
the way to hell, till they come there.

O that thou had known in this thy day. The sun brought out of heaven, and
set at the door, and yet not discerned; the dead see nothing in the day time;
day is night to the dead, sunshine darkness; Christ close by, yet not
apprehended by the dead; Christ knocks at the door, the voice though just
behind, or just before, yet not heard: our Gospel is hid, though this be light,
more sparkling, more shining, then all other light. Pride buds, as the Prophet
speaks, sin spreads, God frowns, hell gapes, yet the dead see nothing.
Spiritual death it is spiritual understanding quite lost, one not able to
discern divine things, however externally advantaged: hold a torch to the eye
of the dead, yet he sees nothing, and if ye could hold the sun close to the
eyes of a dead man, yet could he apprehend nothing: the wisdom of the world is
foolishness in it self, the wisdom of the Scriptures is even also the same to
a dead soul, he knows nothing as he ought, not the things he gathers, and looks
upon, in wisdoms house.

Havvoth pravitates wickednesses.
Spiritual death is the inward parts very wickedness, the heart given to a
harlot, a strumpet is base and stinking. Affection false, and your lungs are
rotten, the opening of your mouth to God, is as the opening of a sepulcher.
Spiritual death, it is a man abominable to God, person, action, in life, in
death; the dead stink always, God hates a wicked soul forever. Sin is
everlasting, so is justice, the soul that lies in it, is an abomination from
generation to generation. The grave and hell, do not purify the dead.
Spiritual death, is a soul eternally lothing, and lothed.

This night [they shall take away thy soul. A dead soul is stretched out,
carried forth, and buried in the night, says the Text; [This night they shall
take away thy soul. Dead souls are all buried in the night in utter darkness.
The sum of all is this, Spiritual death is a soul separated from God, under
pollution and conviction, until condemnation.

death passes over all; passion swayeth high and low, it is a pang of death,
and presageth the death of all, if the Lord heal it not. Prepare coffins and
graves for the dead: dead sinners, dead Christians, buy your winding-sheets,
make your wills, if there be any life in me, your condition is dangerous. The
axe is laid to the root now, I believe every dead tree will down, ere Christ
lay down his axe.

Danger only stirs some men, sinners stand up from the dead, do you see
nothing coming toward you? God is against you, is not he all enemies? and all
engines? the sword of man may be sheathed, yet will you be cut off; not a
wilful sinner will be spared, for the anger of the Lord is against you;
justice visites but seldom, but when she does, she sweeps every room. Every
one that is proud, and every one that is lofty, Esaias 2.12. Proud flesh is dead
flesh, every one that swells against Christ shall be lanced; every one that
stoopeth not, shall be broken: Without, Christ will sweep clean; within, he
will do the same, even amongst his own, he will thoroughly purge [his floor. If
you have any life in you think of these things. Londoners, Londoners, now
trading is dead, think of your dead hearts: these two years and upward trading
has been very dead; why, this ten year, this twenty year, thy heart has
been dead: a dead name, a dead state, a dead body, suit a dead soul: If you
have any love to your bodies, or any love to your souls, look out after
spiritual life, or all will die for ever.

destroyed, and all that would do the like, must come to him. Perverseness will
kill sinners quite; the dead want life, because they will not come to Christ.
You will not come to me that you may have life. Dead hearts look to it, your
sins loved and Christ rejected, you cannot live: you must let Christ kill any
thing, so he will but make alive your souls, cut off any thing, a right hand,
so he will but unite what remains to himself. Our merit must not be thought
of, for alas what can the dead do! but Christ's merit and order both must.
Christ kills and then makes alive; he slays pride, and brings souls to
fall at his feet, willing to be done any thing with, and then he does all for
them.

Waters of life are given to swouning persons, they that groan and are heavy
laden with sin, and come to Christ they find ease, a spirit of life and joy.
Coming to Christ is application of Christ, He has loved [me, and given himself
for [me. He satisfies for me, he intercedeth for me, he appears in the face
of perfect righteousness for me: All these are vital acts; the soul that
indeed this moves, is joined to all the living, and is a lively soul indeed;
Christ's merit and Christ's spirit is this man's, he has eternal life abiding in
him, and is passed from death. You must drink of the waters that Christ
profereth you* and then you will find a well of waters springing up in you to
everlasting life. He that shall drink of the waters which I shall give him,
etc. If the stomach be weak to this, lively ordinances must be looked out: dead
ordinances, make dead souls. Ordinances that are as the tree of life, of the
Lords own planting, speak Christ to the life, and make dead souls alive.

Coloss. 1.18. That in all things he might have the pre-eminence.
THe latitude of Christ's dominion is here expressed, it is without limits, and
without parallel. Some are great in such a compass, every ones Sun has a
circle, every ones glory has circumference, every ones Scepter has bounds,
they can command only within such a country, none are over all, not the
greatest Princes that are; but Christ has an universal command, in all things
he has the pre-eminence.

Evil hearts swell big, and sometimes rise high; pride nesteth it self among
the Stars, and yet then it is below Christ. No man is so big in conceit as
Christ is in deed, nor so high in thought as Christ is really Vice when at
highest is below Christ, Virtue when at highest it is below Christ: all is under
his feet. Evil men cannot over match Christ by their sin, good men cannot
over match him in their virtue, he is sweeter then the sweetest soul alive; He
is the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the valleys, he is above opposition,
and above comparison: things averse to him can take nothing from him, and
things congruous to him can add nothing to him: Our righteousness extends
not to him. Our righteousness; no nor Angels righteousness, among all things
in earth and in Heaven, he has the pre-eminence.

destructive, power instructive, power inspective. Christ has a destructive
power over all, he has many enemies, yet not one above him; many have fought
with him, but he has slain them all: In the field Christ has pre-eminence. I
will instance but in one battle that Christ fought, Exodus 14.28. He destroyed
Pharaoh and all his Host, that there remained [not so much as [one of them]
says the Text. Which is admired; again Psalm. 106.11. The waters covered their
enemies, there was [not one of them left.] He had amongst all the pre-eminence
indeed: Enemies are many, and they are upon Christ's back, and there for a long
while, and make long furrows, but he fetches them off his back, and lays
them under his feet, all of them. He must reign till he has put all his
enemies under his feet. 1. Cor. 15.25. If you have many upon your back, it is
very disadvantageous in fight, you cannot so easily fetch them off all, but it
is all one to Christ to have many behind him, as before him, those that are
upon his back, he can fetch them off and lay them under his feet with ease, he
is the best at the use of his arms, he has the pre-eminence in war, a
destructive power over all.

all nations, his commission is so large, English, Dutch, French; he can make
knowledge cover the face of the earth, as the waters do the sea. Christ can as
the sun, till all the world with light, and life, he has power over all
flesh, and he speaks it in regard of instruction, Joh. 17.2. Some spirits are
very fleshly, and very sottish, yet Christ has power over these, to make them
wise. Who so is simple, let him turn in hither, Prove. 9.4. Wisdom keeps a
free school, universally receptive, that is, for all comers though never so
simple, yea universally instructive, whoever comes thrives. Wisdoms house has
seven pillars, and sends out maidens every where: a complete light, and a
complete power to impart it, to any soul in any place. Some hearts are very
hard to learn, and yet not too hard for Christ to teach, he can teach blocks
and stones, of stones he can raise seed to Abraham.

oculis eminentior, his eyes run through the earth, and behold all; his eye
is very strong, nothing can be hid from it. Some could overruled such and such
things, were they but aware of them, craft carries it with you ofttimes, when
power cannot, but it cannot do so with Christ; he discovers deep things out of
the darkness, not a mote in the sun, not a hair on your head but he numbers
it, knows one by one, which is very exact knowledge. It Is like that expression
in another case, Not a thought in our hearts but he knows it [altogether.] The
sun is the eye of the world, and it is a very fair one, and looks far, and yet
looks not so far as Christ, who is the eye of worlds, of this world and that
world, as heaven is called, Luke 20.35. Christ looks beyond Luther, beyond
Solomon, beyond Abraham, who looked a great way, and saw Christ very far off,
yea, Christ looks beyond Adam, beyond all that are or ever were. All things are
naked before him, not only bodies, but spirits, whose vastness is far
deeper, and more then all the creation beside: in his book are all our members
written, yea in his book is written that which has no members, and hardly no
terms to express, to wit our souls, the fabric and motion of them. He can
tell where Satan is, when hid in a sheepskin; he knows his voice when he
speaks in a Saint, as well as when he speaks in a serpent. Get thee behind me
Satan, said he to Peter. And add but one thing more, and it will exceedingly
tend to the glory of Christ's sight: he has a presentiall sight, not a sight of
any one at a distance as we have, every thing is full in his eye, and fast by
him, because of the vastness of his presence. All runs into this, Christ
has an universal pre-eminence, a dominion over all.

Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one at thy self, Psalm 50.21.
Christ will not bear men's base conceptions of him, Christ misapprehended, his
majesty falls, majesty fallen in the heart, man runs wild; when men fly out,
God flies out; and now you shall see one underfoot presently, Christ, or the
creature that rises up against him.

Tremble, proud profane hearts, at the universality of Christ's power, he will
have the pre-eminence over you. Sinners propose to themselves what pleases
them, though it displease God, and bear out themselves that this shall hold,
they propose what is amiss, and yet promise felicity to themselves, and that
is more amiss. A soul at this height is near falling. Christ will have the
pre-eminence of this proud person, wherein he deals proudly Christ will be
above him. Watch your hearts sinners, they grow desperately wicked quickly: a
presumptuous soul denies the universality of Christ's dominion to his face, and
stands upon his guard against all the host of heaven; truth shall never command
me in this. Now the man has made his will, he will die presently: desperate
hearts have suitable justice, they go down quick into the pit.

Stoop to the universality of Christ's commands, as God has set him, so do you,
over all, in all things. Oppose Christ's least commands, to the commands of the
greatest men in the world, follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. Moses
parents did their duty to Christ in him, and kept him alive, not fearing the
commands of the king, Hebr. 11.23. Pharaoh puts forth an universal command,
every son that is born to the Hebrews, ye shall cast into the river, and
Moses parents opposed to this, the universality of Christ's power, and pursued
their duty, not fearing the kings command. What command soever, or from whom
soever, opposing any command of Christ, destroys the universality of his
authority, and speaks sinful fear if we obey it. The universality of Christ's
dominion, is the great jewel of his crown, that which distinguishes him from
all the great ones in the world; it is his Motto, King of kings, his grand
prerogative, and yet fear destroys this quite. Let flesh and blood attend to
this: nature weak, passion strong, men transported with pride, do they know not
what, throw down Christ to keep up themselves. England thou art unhappy at the
practice of this point, to raise the Lord Jesus above all, to give him the
pre-eminence in all things, the Lord grant it be not required of us. Is our
long bondage so soon forgot? Is our present bleeding nothing? Can we tell
whether we shall live or die? Shall we not put Christ inprimis in our will?
Shall we not give our dying breath to vote up Christ above all? are we not low
enough yet, to set Christ high? to give him the pre-eminence in all things?
Surely we shall be?

Let us all look about us and know our duty; truth, not men, must be our rule,
and blessed are they that can receive this: love is bountiful, she will give
Christ all, she seeks not her own, she sets Christ as high as God sets him,
whatever it cost her. Affection must have judgment to guide it, or else men
err on the right hand; and judgment must have love to quicken it, and warm
it, or else men err on the left hand; good men will become very bad, and speak
and do against their conscience, and break their peace to keep a bubble whole,
their honor with men and the like. I know not what hearts you have for Christ,
I know what hearts we all should have, to set Christ at this height my text
speaks of. Love must be very strong, conscience very tender, the heart very
humble, grace very sincere, to give Christ the pre-eminence in all things. Cold
hearts, brawnie hearts, proud hearts, rotten hearts, your plague is great, you
can never advance Christ to his pre-eminence, and look how far you are below
your duty, so far below your blessedness.

Hearts that can give Christ the pre-eminence in all things, have a very
blessed condition, Communion sweet, dispensations full, tranquillity secure:
When the strong man rules, all is at peace: it is true of Christ, he smiles upon
them which he leads, when he can rule all, and carry all in the soul, there is
sweet peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me peace, says
Christ. If the heart can endure tribulation to let Christ reign, if it can let
men domineer as they will, to give Christ pre-eminence over it self, there is
sweet peace in such a state: Christ keeps up the heart mightily, when name, and
state, and all things without are down, and under the feet of the men of this
world. Christ does triumph in his throne, let what war will be without; and
he makes war within, when kept from thence.

Communion is sweet, and dispensations are full, when Christ has an universal
dominion. As we anoint, we are anointed; anoint Christ all over, not only head
but feet, and so he will do you. Love Christ much, and he will love you much,
let John lay his head in Christ's bosom, and Christ will lay his heart and his
head too in John's bosom. What parts! what a spirit of light and revelation had
the Apostle John! as if Christ had left his head wholly in John's breast! he
fled for it, that Christ might have in all things the pre-eminence, and Christ
flies after him, and gives him pre-eminence in gifts above thousands.

Condition is secure, standing is firm indeed, when Christ has hold of all:
when there is no sand in the foundation but all rock, then winds may blow, and
storms beat, and yet the building will stand. The apostasy of persons now so
common, springs from hence, that they give not up all to Christ, and give him a
full dominion, and a full hold-fast, they will let Christ hold but a little,
and then he in justice lets go all, and then all that seemed good comes to
nothing. Sinners, you cut your own throats, in that you give not Christ a
universal command, you will not suffer him to out the strong man quite, and
therefore he returns with seven worse spirits, and so your latter end is worse
then your beginning. Know what is your peace and safety in these evil times,
and observe it.

Coloss. 1.19. For it pleased the Father, etc.
YOu set sweet bryer at your door, the very entrance into some houses is
taking: it is so in the verse I am now going upon; here is a term in the front,
as full of honey as Canaan: here is an Angel at the door as glorious as
heaven: you can no sooner begin to read, but your hearts must needs begin to
leap, if they be as heavenly as they should be. You are smiled upon and saluted
at the door, with precious words: It pleased the Father, etc. The word Father
is not in the original, only it pleased: which is so rather to be expressed,
that it may be fitly applied to Father and holy Ghost; for both are contented
and delighted in Christ, to lay out themselves for man in him. Kindness comes
from a full spring, and in a full channel to fallen man: God the Father
pleased, and God the holy Ghost pleased, that Christ should come stored into
the world, to restore poor souls. How freely God contrives relief for man! He
eyes extremity, and waves all other motive; his own goodness sets him at work,
to provide a remedy for a sad condition. It pleased the Father.

God needs none, all need him, and therefore what he does for any, must needs
be at his pleasure.

Thou] have triumphed gloriously, says the Scripture; that is, our mercies are
derived to us after an admirable manner, and are full of thy self and of
nothing else. If a crumb be given to a dog, it is bounty; but if the whole feast
be given to him, what bounty is this? God does something that sin may appear
sin: But sin that it might appear sin, etc. So God does something that
grace may appear grace, he dispenses it altogether at his pleasure, that this
may altogether appear, and nothing of the creature.

sure mercy; sure, because free. What is purely free, is incapable of
cessation, from airie impediments. What God does with pleasure and out of
pleasure, he never grows weary of, and thus he shows mercy to man, which
makes it sure indeed, and lasting from generation to generation. God moves
surely toward man: we are such creatures in our fallen state, that we throw
discouragement upon God every moment, for ever looking toward us more; we are
so froward, so throwing off of love, and therefore God has proposed to
himself, such a principle to move from, as may hold on his motion whatever he
see in us, to wit, his pleasure.

in Christ, and it is put there with all pleasure, and with all delight, which
renders Christ very taking to man indeed. Large action with straitened
affection, is a comely body with an ill-favored face, which is not so
generally taking. Christ is set out to man all fair, filled with all
excellency, and this by a hand of love, which is duplex plenitudo, a double
fullness, as it were. It was two deliverances to David, that he was delivered
from a principle of love, that he was delivered as one delighted in* He
delivered me, because [he delighted in me. Thus are we delivered by Christ,
from a principle of pleasure and delight. It pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell, for us empty creatures.



It is pleasing to God to do good but it is not pleasing to us to receive it;
the devil is too hard for us all. Observe Satan's wiles, we shall perish by
thousands else, though God be pleased to provide salvation for sinners; and
what a pity is that! Tempted souls, stir up the grace of God, and believe the
word of the Gospel; you please your selves in the thought of your sins, and in
the ruin of your souls through unbelief; but God is nor pleased with it. God
is pleased to contrive your salvation, and it would add to his pleasure, to
see his contrivement please you and save you.

Israel would none of me. Free grace is the sweetest dish in wisdoms house,
presented to make two merry together: it is wine upon the lees, it is the fat of
the kidneys of wheat, it is the fatted calf, and the best garment; it is the
heart of God held out, it is the glory of heaven visible, to gain hearts: what
heart has that man that is not taken with these! Unkindnesse sinks deep into
sweet spirits, God is such a spirit. Unkindnesse grieves God, this unkindnesse
most of all, that the fairest of ten thousand should make love to a
black-moore, that a king should make love to a beggar, and yet be rejected:
Your unkindnesse is your ingratitude.

Rahab by faith received the spies, and perished not with the [rebels: with
them that believed not, say you. Not to receive what God freely proffers, is
rebellion: it is man's will fighting against Gods; the King of kings warred
against within his own dominions: the King kept out from his own chair of
state, to wit, the soul. Shall not God dwell in his own? Will you keep him out
of his purchase, that which he has paid such a dear rate for? The workings of
our heart we observe not, we are undone by this carelessness: who strives
within? and who is thrust out? Is it Christ? or who is it? 'Twere worth the
inquiry, to know who it is that is resisted by the soul now and then. Man
through carelessness continues a rebel against Christ, and knows it not:
gain-sayings of free grace, speaks you all rebels, and so you are called by the
Psalmist, as well as in the place forecited. Men and women, study your own
hearts, and tell me how they move. It is pleasing to God to embrace you: is it
pleasing to you to accept him? Why not now then? your rebellion will be written
in heaven, if you turn off Christ from time to time. Rebellion has its
degrees, It is rebellion to abide in unbelief one hour. The land in which we
live is divided, it is deadly to behold. The Kings side say we are rebels, the
Parliaments side say that they are rebels: by such an account we are all
rebels; and truly that is my fear, that we are all rebels to Christ, and that
this is the reason he makes no better use of us, but one to destroy another. It
were well if spiritual rebellion were looked after betimes, 'twill end us all
else. Eternal peace, and eternal truth are worth nothing; men tread underfoot
the blood of the Son of God, the grace by which they should be saved, and
take pleasure in unrighteousness, and no pleasure in the good pleasure of God,
which is ready to save them.

3. It Is groundless wickedness; to deny the free grace of God. Some action
has reason, and then the creature can stand upon his defense. But sinners,
what reason have you for rejecting free grace? You refuse many things for cost,
you cannot refuse free grace upon this ground, you may have it for nothing. God
does cloth lillies and souls alike; though they do not spin, to make their own
apparel, yet have most royal habit. Every one of Gods children are rich, but
rise to it out of nothing: they have clothing of the best, lodging of the best,
feeding of the best, and all for nothing. None go so richly, none lodge so
delightfully, none fare so daintily as those that embrace the good pleasure of
God. Some things yield but a little of what you seek and expect, and therefore
you decline them; but you cannot reject free grace upon this ground. Free love
is full love, nothing is so full; it has all fulness in it. It pleased the
Father that in him should [all fullness dwell. What thing of all the things
which you are in love with, has all fullness in it? Things with which you are
taken, have commonly but one excellency, and but a little of that. You love
some for their wisdom, and yet they have not all wisdom, and all knowledge.
You love others for their strength and fortitude; and yet they have not all
power, nor all might: yet so has free grace, it has all kinds of graces in
it, and the complement of all these. The Son that smiles upon us, is all
light, and in him is no darkness. Ungracious hearts, think of this; it will be
put home upon you, why you have no grace, why you have no wedding garment; when
the great marriage day comes, you will presently be espied, by one that will
then view all: here is a man has no grace. What Is the reason? Could he have
none? or would he have none? To one I answer, says God, he might have had
grace and life, and it would have pleased me to have enriched him with these.
To the other I will answer says conscience, This wretched soul would have no
grace, he loved iniquity and hated righteousness, therefore is he here
unrighteous; he thought himself rich and well clothed, and therefore stands
here now poor and naked.

The wages of sin, that is, of every sin is death. For bodily distresses,
there be many remedies, if men will not pity me when I hunger, ravens may; If
Christians will not pity when I am sore, dogs may: but in soul distresses,
there is but one remedy, to wit, what God will please to do; if God will please
to do nothing for me, none else will or can. No eye pitied thee, to do any of
these for thee. Gods eye pitilesse, and there is no eye pitiful nor can be to
the soul. It Is storied of the balm, that it grows in the Holy Land and no
where else, which is the reason of that speech, Is there no balm in Gilead?
Mercy for your souls, is in the pleasure of God, and no where else. Sinners
make no more of the favor of God, then of the favor of man: I live not upon
one; the heart lays this conclusion and swells, and lifts up the heel. Ah
wretches, you cannot say so of God: you live upon one, yea upon one thing in
God, upon the smiles of his countenance, upon this that he is free in mercy,
that it pleases him to save souls.

This point has been applied to convince and humble, and it may also be
applied in the next place to cheer and revive. There are burdened hearts I
believe among you, but let no distress discourage you. How great soever the
wants of any be, let them come to God; it pleases him to lay out for you. Are
your wants more then Christ has where withal to: supply? What ever Christ
has or can do (and what is it that he cannot do) it pleases God to the heart,
that he should employ it for you. Men under guilt fancy hard thoughts of God:
my sins are great, and God will not pardon: yes he will, he is ready to
forgive, it pleases him to forgive, he has furnished Christ of purpose, and
laid out all upon this very design, which is real demonstration of his
pleasure, this way. If distress lie any otherwise, yet it should not distract,
because free grace speaks supply to any distress that you can mention: it is a
fountain, a fountain open, every one may draw and yet none draw dry. Your
straits are many, and you cannot tell which way to get out: remember the point
in hand; that it pleases God to contrive relief. To undo knots, is a
troublesome thing, especially such knots as unbelief knitteth in the soul, and
yet God is pleased with this work, he is a God of peace, made up of peace; his
whole pleasure, as well as his whole employment lies this way. The God of
peace establish and strengthen you, says the Apostle: The Apostles words are
of great emphasis, the Godhead bends strongly and delightfully this way, to
settle poor weak souls, which can do nothing themselves, Doubts, cavills, and
complaints are many, and God quieteth all, because his pleasure and delight is
in the peace and tranquillity of poor souls; He is a God of peace, his
pleasure is to make peace, and a Heaven, where he comes. It Is the pleasure of
things, to do things natural to them; it is the pleasure of wicked spirits, to
torment and vex, and to make hell where ever they come, and in this sense the
devil may be called the God of war: so it is the pleasure of God to do things
natural to him, to comfort and cheer poor souls, to strengthen and establish
them, to make a Heaven where ever he comes; as a God of, and a God at this
work.

Coloss. 1.19. For it pleased the Father, etc.
THe reason of what Christ is to man, is rendered by the Spirit of God in this
Text: the cause of his greatness and fullness to maintain it, is the will of
God, it pleased] the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. It Is not
(...) but (...), the word, speak will and delight, such a pursuit and such
action, as wherein there is transcendent souls rest. Behold my servant which I
have chosen my beloved which my soul has willed, Esaias, 42.1. In whom my soul
is at rest says the Evangelist, (...), which is the same word here in my Text,
which notes that the will and the delight of God, are in the furnishing of
Christ for us.

Scriptures compared, the word you see sounds double, the will and the
pleasure of God are wrapped up in it, which we shall unfold one after another.
God shapeth every thing to man according to his own will.

The will of God is absolute, he moves by a perfect rule, his motion is
without error, and yet guided in all, by that which is no guide in us, his own
will. We have many things from earth, from Heaven, and all shaped out to us
according to the will of God.

Things below man.
Things below man are many and various, and yet God turns and windeth them
all, according to his will. Can you tell how many good bodies come out of the
earth to wait upon one bad? Not one of them would do this, but that God gives
them such bodies, and shapeth them by his will, to such qualities and
properties, and to such ends and purposes, as to give their life to keep up
dying man. That which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but
God gives it a body as he wills, 1. Cor. 15.38.

Things equal to man.
It Is the like respecting things equal to us. No creatures would serve one
another; man would not serve man, member would not serve member; the eye would
not serve the hand, nor the hand any other part, were they not all shaped to
this by the will of God. God has set the members in the body, every one of
them as he wills. 1. Corinthians, 12.18. A foot with so many toes, a hand
with so many fingers, a head with so many hairs, bodies with such variety of
members, souls with such variety of gifts, have all their shape according to
divine will. But all these works that one and the self same spirit, dividing
to every man severally as he will, 1. Corinthians, 12.11. One has much
wisdom, another much knowledge, another but a little of either, only enough
for a toe, to be carried and guided by a bigger and nobler member, and yet as
much of the will of God in this as in the other. Winds, Seas, Planners,
Brutes, Men, Persons, Parts, Actions, all are carried about with one wheel, the
will of God.

Things above man are shaped also, Things above man.
and squared according to the will of God. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that
did he in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places, Psalm 35.6.
Omnia quae voluit Deus, all things which the Lord willed, etc. God has no
other counselor but his Will about all business; businesses here below, and
businesses above in Heaven. God moves to every thing in Heaven as he pleases,
and makes conveyance thence of things as he pleases: God has many about him,
and when he has any business to dispatch here below, he makes a messenger to
man, of whom he will, and wrappeth up what good he will, and sends it along
with him. The word goes forth out of Heaven for the souls of men, from divine
will: This wind blows where he lists, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching, etc. The Spirit goes forth out of Heaven by the will of God.

Christ goes forth from Gods will, and all that he brings: Gods will guides
him to send whom he will, and what he will with him, from Heaven to Earth. It
pleased the Father to send Christ out of his bosom, and with him all fullness
from Heaven to Earth. All runs into this, that God shapeth every thing to
man according to his will.

his own will. Man should know his bounds best, and he breaks bounds worst.
No man may pursue his own will, and do whatsoever pleases him, and yet he
thinks he may. Pride is desperate wickedness, the spirit of the Devil is in
man, he would be as God, above God, and carry all by his will: The enemies said
I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lusts shall be
satisfied upon thee, I will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy them,
Exodus, 15.9. All these expressions show how man does invade the prerogative of
God, to move according to his will, If they have persecuted me, says Christ
[they will persecute] you. Christ relates many sad things concerning his
people, but the saddest of all is this, that he mentioned at last: all these
sad things says he, they will do unto you for my names sake. Persecuting
bloody wretches, is your will absolute? May your will be an infallible rule to
you, as Gods is? Are ye men? or are ye Gods? or are ye Devils? Will you do what
you will? Is it a small thing to you to destroy divine prerogative, to step up
into the chair of State, to slash and cut Truth and the lovers of it, with your
tongues, and pens, and hands, as you will? Malice broke out, hypocrisy
striveth to hide it, men would not have their insides outward, but God gives
up man to his will, and then the heart is plainly seen: Resolution to evil, is
the punishment of hypocrisy: observe these times, and you shall see men speak
out themselves, and write down in red letters, what they are.

A man fast to his will, was first very loose from God. He that sees in
secret, does not tell all presently: looseness generateth pride, pride
generateth perverseness, and now God leaves the man to his will: A man left
to his will, makes this his rule as God does, and is a little god in his own
eyes, does what he will. Know your condition, you that know no rule but your
will: you are hypocrites discovered, a generation left of God; left by Mercy,
that Justice may take you. Resolution to evil, is a sinner upon the top of the
ladder, putting a halter about his own neck, and bidding the hangman to do his
office when he will.

thou gave us these wounds with thy will, thou have committed wilful
murder: we preached unto thee, we prayed unto thee, we cried and wept unto
thee, to save our blood, yet thou would not. O how is Jerusalems sin
aggravated, from their will! I would have gathered thee, but thou would not.
I spoke words to thee, shed tears to thee, to save my blood, to love my person,
and yet thou would not. It Is made self-murder in the Scripture, which is
the bloudiest murder of all, so highly is self-will aggravated. O Israel thou
have destroyed thy self. It Is all one as if God had said, thou have been
self-willed. A man may fall off, and yet have his honor with Christ, if will
move well; no sin is aggravated, but all extenuated, alas, the flesh is weak!
But it is enough to me says Christ, that the spirit is willing. Bigge-spirited
sinners, think of this, you sin nothing but big sins; the letters you
make are suitable to the pen with which you write them, it is a text pen you
write with, and they are all text letters which you make, and Christ will show
you them in his book hereafter, and they will be very plain to be read, by men,
Angels, and conscience, they are so big. Aggravation is a wilful sinners
plague, he sins nothing but big sins, all his brats are clothed in
scarlet, which speaks very loud to conscience.

the heart. Whilst the Saints are before the wicked, and the blood of their
names upon their tongues, sporting themselves, he makes them tremble as he did
Felix. Big vessels that are high above water, are easily shot through and
through: it is the usual practice of God, to make Pashurs Magormissabib, to
shoot them through and through, to smite such within, as smite his without, and
to make them fear round about. None in stronger terror at times, then
stout-hearted sinners. This makes vexation, which is our next thing to pursue.

contrary to them, which walk contrary to him, and this makes weeping and
gnashing of teeth indeed, amongst wilful wretches. Can you imagine how this
scourges wretches on the kings side, that God crosses their will in all things?
David pleased not Saul, Jonathan pleased not Saul, God pleased not Saul,
because none pleased his will, this was an evil spirit vexing him continually.
It Is the portion of all spirits more or less, which are pinned to their will,
they are vexed with an evil spirit of discontent perpetually. Continual
raging enrageth God, and then he reveals his will, and then devils descend to
hell, which is their place: all fiery spirits are put in a room together.

Let wilful wretches stoop to the will of God, which is the use that Solomon
makes of this point. Stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever
pleases him. Eccles. 8.3. He speaks it in regard of the king, how much more
true is it of the King of kings. That we do evil is not simply damnable, but
that we stand in it. There must be but one God, one to rule by will; when we
make more, then we pay for it. As God makes his will his rule in all things, so
do you make his will your rule in all things, and not your own. Mine own heart
is deceitful, it is an ill guide. Satan can get favor in every court here
below, not a heart upon earth, but he finds something in it, when he comes to
welcome him; it is dangerous to make this general commander of a man's military
life in this world, which holds such correspondencie, with such a deadly enemy.
O that men would thus wisely consider their way, and do like disciples of
Christ that have denied themselves, and not like heady persons, that have sold
themselves to do wickedly. Poor creatures think that there is but one step to
felicity, and that is to have their will in this thing or that. O if I had
this or if I had that, what a blessed creature should I be! whereas our
felicity is not in having our own will from God, but in Gods having his own
will from us; our blessedness is not in our selves, but in him; not in any
thing that we propose, but in what he proposes. It Is our meat and drink to do
Gods will. It Is our felicity to rise daily to the life of Christ, who pleases
not himself. For even Christ pleases not himself, but as it is written, the
reproaches of them that reproched thee, fell on me, Romans 15.3.

A word of consolation, and I have done. Some favors are long a coming, and
then we are sad: it should not be, for they come as soon as God will, and
sooner would not be well for us. Some persons are very bitter in their
carriage, this makes others concerned therein, to weep bitterly: it should not
be, no creature is bitterer to me then God will; the cup of gall and vinegar in
Christ's hand, is Gods will. Father thy will be done. Men are strong, devils are
strong, lusts are strong, and I think they shall never down, and this throws me
down: but it should not be, for though I cannot throw these down, God will; he
wills the death of sinners, when past remedy; and he wills the death of
sins, when past our strength, and that he wills this is enough; I will be
thou clean. That God shapes out every thing by his will, makes ill for sinners,
for wilful sinners, but very well for such as are humble and penitent.

COLOSSIANS 1.19. It pleases the Father, etc.
AS this term involves the will of God, simply and singly considered, so I
pursued it the last day: (...), it notes something dear or complacentiall to
us, and so rendered. 1 These. 2.8.
the word also comprehends the strength and intention of affection, such a
complacencie of love, as makes one delight and rest to do such or such a
thing. It gave rest to Father and holy Ghost, it delighted both to lay out
liberally in Christ, for fallen man's relief. Fire has its property, which is
to burn: so does love in Gods breast to usward. We are now led to speak
upon the property of mercy, how strongly the rivers and streams of life run:
God is restless till befallen man have full relief provided.



Adam.

Since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still, Jere. 31.20.
Earnest affection makes mind work, memory work, head work, heart work
still; it makes all restless perpetually, till the thing pitied and beloved
have rest. God goes reluctantly about no act of kindness, it is inglorious; it
may be competent to you, it cannot be to God. It Is below God to show kindness
to us here reluctantly, though we be all here such base creatures. God
delights to exercise loving kindness in the earth, Jerem. 9.24. One would
think that it might be delightful to him, to shine in his own sphere, to
exercise loving kindness in Heaven, to cast pearls and rays upon those noble
peers, and so it is; and it is delightful also to the Sun, to shine upon
dunghils, upon us base creatures, to exercise loving kindness in the earth.

Paul, Necessity is upon me, and I cannot be quiet, unless I preach; unless
my soul stir uncessantly, it is lost for ever; alas for us! we cannot put
home necessity thus, though our lives lie on it, and therefore does the Devil
fetch away all under our very Citie-wals. What we cannot do, God can and does.
God pities man, because no eye else does, our desperate condition is still in
his eye, and O how his heart beats! he can neither slumber nor sleep, he
watches continually, because we are groaning and dying; some hope of life, and
then, and not till then, he rests. It gave rest to the Father, etc.

be too slow to sin, nor bogle enough at a bad business, nor do too little of
that which is naught; 'twere better a man had no legs, then run to evil; no
brains, then acute and restless to do evil well. What grieves not you,
grieves God; but if this will not do, persons shall have their course, and
take as comes. 'Twere better I had nothing, no parts, then all Satan's.
Restless souls to evil, you are all Satan's, you serve him with your might,
with all your strength, you serve him when you are up, and when you are abed,
you give the devil four and twenty hours to his day. God you know had his
Holocaust under the Law, his whole burnt offerings, hair and hide, and all
burnt; so the devil has his Holocaust, his whole burnt offerings. Restless
souls in sin, you are Satan's whole burnt sacrifices, you are all on fire of
hell, heart, tongue, hand; you offer up all your rich parts, wealth; you are in
the depth of sin, in the gall of bitterness; and if you can suck any
sweetness out of this, do.

What is wholly Satan's, is firmly his, give the Devil hold with both hands,
and heel' hold fast. Restless souls to evil, you are close prisoners to the
Prince of darkness, such as are double bolted and chained, who ever get loose,
you will not. It Is sad to see the bent of men's spirit, it is nothing to them to
resign up all to the Devil; you are well pleased, so is Satan; but know that
he does not so easily resign all back again; he fortifies as he takes, and
will not lose an out-worke gained, easily. If Satan have got hold but on a man's
tongue or eye, or some such like out-part, this is not taken away from him
again presently; but when he has all, he makes impregnable works. Satan
secures his throne; if he get into the soul, that soul shall sink to hell,
ere he will rise out of his chair. Satan will not let you go, said I? You
will not let Satan go, which are restless to sin. Two knit in love, who can
part them? Satan and you burn together in affection, and God will not break
the match, you shall burn together in hell.

Till this marriage day, you shall not want tokens; can you tell how many
black letters are written to conscience, whilst affection burns to evil?
When you see sinners sin and smile, ask them, Does God and your conscience
smile? Face mirth is nothing to me, men's courses must not gain credit, because
they are impudent. I beseech you, deal truly with your eternal souls; how
often does your consciences smile upon you? There is no peace to the wicked. What
then to him, that is nothing but wicked? What nothing but war, and wounds and
blood inwardly, and yet smiles and flaunts and flouts outwardly, against good?
What a bad condition is this! If you will talk of your ways, talk without to
others, as God talks to you within, and then 'twill be worth the hearing: if
you will write, write as God writes within, and 'twill be worth the reading.
Active spirits in ill, want not employment, conscience takes them up with
reading news, from beneath. Eye time to come, eye time present; the condition
is dreadful, where affection in strength works to any evil. Let it make
souls break off from this course, and become imitators of God, who is
restless to contrive good.

Gods motion is exemplary, you may safely make his spirit your pattern, and
it is a blessed soul that can move as he does. Bodies bleed to death, souls
blead to death, all England giving up, and we are not restless in prayer, nor
restless in preaching, nor in wrestling with God and man, to save. The hour
of Christ's crucifixion is come, and a spirit of slumber is upon us; we cannot
watch nor pray, what ever temptation be at our door. Jacob was renowned, he
wrestled for himself and family all night, he was restless till he had
gotten the blessing; but alas, our night is not over, and God knows when
'twill, and we are tired already; purse tired, spirit tired; men will do
nothing, but God will if we wrestle restlesly with him. A man may do much with
God, a righteous man may, one unrighteous man may by importunity. Was not the
unrighteous Judge overcome by importunity? Keep on to move as a Christian, to
God and to men, and make no conclusions at home; take wing, and to Heaven, and
die not in the nest. Mercy still is in travail for them that are in travail
for it. Error of one hand, must not make error of the other: we have our mercies
by degrees, that duty may be hightened, not flatned. Let Us better every one,
by our unwearied goodness. We must serve God for naught; let issues be what
they will, pains must be perpetual. It Is Gods case, as he has to do with
us, he is restless in means to gain us all; but alas! how few does he gain!
If men were restless till they had done their part, God would be restless
till he had done his. Be restless till you are in Gods garden, and he will be
restless to make a hedge about you; give your hearts to God, God will give the
hearts of men to you: be restless about your own work, be not restless
about Gods.

The carriage of God should be imitated, and the love of God should be
received, and admired; these are the last things that I will urge upon you.
Every heart should be taken, when divine love breaks forth, especially when it
breaks forth strongly, and restlesly. Our climate is more glorious then all the
world, the Sun in brightness shines continually upon us; wisdom cries in
every street, and cries restlesly, cries and dies. The Crowner will sit, the
debt of love will be laid to our charge; If you love your souls, be as
restless to receive and admire, as God is to proffer. Mercy is our Manna, our
bread from heaven, we should feed upon it; every good thing comes down from
heaven, and should lead our souls thither, and then it is good to us. You have
not a crum of kindness but comes from heaven; but love in strength is heaven
it self descending. Who can but admire, and receive this? who can but enter
into heaven, when it comes to his door? What will heaven be turned into, if
turned off at our door?

Let sinners tremble, such as trample upon restless love, and gag the mouth of
continual crying mercy, but let weak hearts cheer themselves: it is a
delightful thing to God, to receive you; he is restless, and will be
restless, till you have rest. Broken hearts can make nothing hold together, to
do them good: with cords of love, they hang themselves. When mercy in latitude
is mentioned, it is turned off: God has no heart to me; why? I mis-pend and
misuse all. Why, yet thou art invited to eat that which is good, and to let
thy soul delight it self in fatness. And God is restless in this
invitation; he eyes not what you have neglected, no nor what you have abused;
he eyes your necessity, and his own grace; and it would delight him much, if
you would now eat that which is good, and let your souls delight themselves
in fatness, Esa. 45.2. God is not pleased that I sin, but he is pleased that
I believe, let my sin be what it will, dying hearts fetch life from this Text,
that it pleases God to give Christ for you.

COLOSSIANS 1.19. That in him should all fullness dwell.
O Lord, how great are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 92.5. We are vaster in thoughts, then we can be in words or
works; it is not so with God, he is as profound in expression, as in
conception, and in action as in either; admirable great and deep in both. How
great are thy works, and thy thoughts very deep. The depth of divine
expression in action, we are now to fathom, fullness, all fullness: The work
is above us, but God will be merciful to weakness, if we lose our selves in
him. If we can but admire thoughts, words, and works, of bottomless depth, as
David did, and as the Apostle here does, we shall do something on-ward of our
duty, and follow the footsteps of the flock. For it pleased the Father, that
in him should all fullness dwell, etc.

Man is a creature, rather induced, then forced; as things are endowed, so they
draw. What has much, moves a little; what has very much, moves a little more;
what has all, fetches often some from all, to embrace this: this property only
has Christ, he has all fullness. The expression speaks admirable perfection,
reception, and fruition unto the highest blessedness; which that Christ has,
I will demonstrate to you, that I may pursue the scope of the holy Ghost, and
gain you all, if it may be, to love him.

is in God; the Leviathan tumbles in the deep; the heart of God is deep, what
is in this, Christ only knows; what he determins and means within himself,
Christ imparts and none else. What Christ sees the Father do, that does he,
Joh. 5.19. Christ is in word and action, the revelation of what was hid in God
from the beginning of the world. The Apostle to the Ephesians, when he would
tell you what is the riches of Christ, says, that it is immediate riches,
something that he has, which all the world beside has not, something that
lies hid where none can come at but himself, something that is hid in God,
Ephesians. 3.8, 9. You have many instructers, but Christ has none; Who has
instructed him? He dwells in light. Nothing is hid from Christ, not the things
which are in Gods breast, for he lies there. Christ has immediate
communication, which is full, as full as God. Christ has vast brains, for God
is his head, and none else. I would have you know, that the head of every man
is Christ, and the head of the woman is man, and the [head of Christ is God] 1
Cor. 11.3. that is a brave headpiece indeed. The like place is that, 1 Cor.
3.23. And ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Christ has immediate reference
to none but God.

God is in Christ reconciling the world, etc. Some things will hold much, but
are not filled; nothing will hold all but Christ, and he has actual
communication, according to his utmost capacity. God is in Christ, doing what
he does in this world. There is communicatio essentiae, according to which
Christ and his Father are one. There be many things have God in them, but none
as Christ has, none have all God in them, none have so much of God, as that
they can speak and do as God, and so as that without blasphemy they may be
called God; yet so may Christ, it is no blasphemy to call Christ equal to God,
to call him God. Christ is God, and moves as God. Whatsoever things the Father
does, these also does the Son. There is a universalitie of communication, you
see, to Christ. Whatsoever things the Father does, etc. Life is quid essentiale
and quid universale, it comprehends all. As the Father has this in himself,
so has he given to the Son. As the Father has life in himself, so has he
given unto the Son to have life in himself, Joh. 5.26. There is a
universalitie that lies scattered in many things, as well as comprised in one,
and if you heed this, this also is communicated to Christ. All the 'promises
are in Christ, yea, and in him amen, (i.) they are fulfilled in him first, and
then by him to all others.

He is the express image of his person, and the brightness of his glory.
Christ has the same life, and the same felicities of life; he has the same
meat, the same habit, and the same dwelling; one Sun has as many rays as
the other, and rises as high as the other; they move both in one sphere, they dwell
in the same house, they have the same train and attendance; where one goes,
the other goes. My Father and I will come and sup with him. Christ and his Father
sup together, lodge together. Esse and radiatum esse, is communicated; Glory is
communicated, the very glory which God personally wears, is communicated to
Christ. Glorify me with thine [owne selfe] with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was. All Christ's is Gods, and all Gods is Christ's; All
mine are thine, and thine are mine. The very glory that God wears himself,
the glory which he wears in heaven, that which he wore before all the world
was, is Christ's. Whatsoever is under the whole Heaven, is Christ's, Job 41.11.
Yea, whatsoever is above the whole Heaven, whatsoever is in Heaven, is Christ's:
glory is his; thine is the kingdom, power, and glory. What glory? Why, that
glory which is at the right hand of God; The choicest glory in Heaven, in the
Heaven of Heavens, is Christ's, and at his dispose.



Some have no grace, nor no good nature; far from righteousness, as the
Prophet speaks; full of pride, and full of malice: Solomon spied it in his
time, so do I now. The heart of the sons of men is full of evil and
madness, Eccles. 9.3. Men watch not their hearts, and they please themselves
in it, as loving ease, and are undone ere they are aware. Evil is a growing
thing, but when dunged a little by remissness, the heart will grow full of it
presently, and then the next step is, madness, as Solomon says, full of evil
and madness. The heart full of evil, and the man grows mad to maintain it,
and to spread it. Alas for thee England! thou art in a sad condition, full of
madmen, men whose hearts are full of evil, and mad to maintain it: men
empty their chests of gold, yea they empty their veins of blood, to fill
their souls and lives full of wickedness, which they love. The heart full of
evil, cannot hide it self; the curse of God is upon sin in strength, to cut
off the sinner that is white to Harvest. Things will struggle for life, though
they die for it: full streams have their adventitious occurrences, which make
overflowings. Were you at Oxford, you would see spring-tides every day, hearts
full of evil, and overflowing, and running out at their mouth, in blasphemies
as black as hell. 'Twere well if such a great plague were at such a great
distance from us as Oxford: but alas for us! Oxford is full, London is full,
England is full, scarce a heart amongst us but is full of evil, and mad to
maintain it. What will become of us all? Hearts are full of sin, God is full
of wrath, the Land is full of blood: Ah Lord! are we not in hell on earth? And
yet empty hearts consider nothing.

Delusions destroy thousands; men full of pride, their eyes are swelled out;
till they feel much, they can see nothing amiss in their own ways. The Land
is full of wrath; not a man of you almost, but full of distress in one kind
or other, and what is this but Gods broad demonstration, that your hearts and
lives are full of sin, yet can you see this? sense is the first step to
remedy, where this is not, notwithstanding all means, ruin not remedy is
near: ah England! I fear thy condition, but yet still will pray: your hearts
are full of sin, your lives full of miseries, are your eyes full of tears? O
that my heart were full of grace; Christ fills the hungry, etc.

Grace in fullness, is the felicity of life, bend not after this height, and
you cannot be fully happy. Set God his distance, and be but never so little,
and he cannot kiss you: unless you take him fully into your arms, he will be
jealous of your love, and set you at a distance every day more then other, till
he has shaken you off for ever. Times square men's course, yea men's grace;
affection and action must rise but so high, lest it set all afire, names,
state, fortune; if love burn so strong as some Ministers would have it, 'twill
burn us out of all. The Lord be merciful to men's baseness, this earth will
not bear us long else; hell will be full of such souls, ere such souls will
be full of grace. Let times be what they will, truth must be pursued to the
full, this fills the soul with grace; neglect this, and it is impossible your
hearts should be full of grace, how full soever you get your purses of money.
Great things in the world, cut the throats of men, they will rather have empty
spirits, then empty purses, lean souls, then lean cheeks. Ah Lord! how do
the dead bury the dead in earth now! Fill one another mouths with earth!
Little of the world must serve, if we would be full of grace. This gold lies
not in earth, but in Heaven, not in the world, but in truth; dig these mines
thoroughly, and you will find all treasure, and be filled with all the fullness
of God.

Consolation springs from this point; a word of this and I have done. We have
said much of Christ's fullness, and yet too little; Christians, comfort your
selves, it is all yours. Christ has all, and is full, so have you in him;
claim your propriety, and comfort your selves with it, in all your distresses
in this life; as Paul did; Phil. 4.18. I have all and am full, says he, and
yet had nothing in the world. The Apostle had Christ which has all, heaven and
earth: Qui habet habentem omnia, habet omnia.
He that has Christ has all, formally, or eminenter (i.) whatsoever is
wanting in the creature at any time, Christ makes it up, so that the soul is
still full; full of content, full of joy, and that is a blessed life that cannot
be made miserable. Thou have no righteousness, but Christ has enough, which
is all thine if thou could see it. Thou can not pray, but Christ has the
art on it, for he is full of the Spirit, and he makes thy requests; thou have no
spirituals, no corporals, but Chist has all: and thou may from hence, as the
Apostle does, conclude, that he will supply all thy wants, Phil. 4.19. Christ
will do for you according to his riches, and that will amount to very much, to
the supply of all your wants, let them be what they will. But now my God will
supply all your wants according to [his riches in glory] by Jesus Christ.
According to that all fullness, which now Christ has in glory, will he
dispense. Lord, how full! how rich! how blessed will all Saints be! I leave
them to admire this, till I can speak of it more.

COLOS. 1.19. That [in him] should all fullness dwell, etc.
Opportunity and assistance has continued to pursue our work, both beyond our
expectation; God must have all the glory. We spoke last day of Christ's wealth,
and we found his revenue very great; we are now to tell you where it lies.
Much may be nothing, so it may be situated; situation is the glory of our
inheritance: Christ's inheritance lies very commodiously, very blessedly, it
lies all in him: It pleased the Father, that [in him] should all fullness
dwell. You dwell in your inheritance, but Christ's inheritance dwells in him. You
have a hint here, how to raise estimation.

We are to prize persons and things according to the wealth and worth that they
have in them. Christ has all worth in him.

It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell; without him he
had nothing.

Know ye not that Christ is in you? etc. So much grace in the heart, so much of
Christ himself; soul-fulnesse is nothing else, but one spirit filling up
another. Magnitude makes admiration, a ^rum of grace is great; it is God, the
great God in you: Judgment amongst us is false; things should be weighed in an
even balance, to make right estimation of persons and things. We value the
casket only, and not what is in it; if vastness of estate makes difference in
price, that is greatest which lies within. The weakness of God is stronger then
men: So may I say, the least of God in the heart, is more then all the world. A
thing may take up little compass, and yet be vastly big in price: What a great
estate lies round together in some little stones? can you value one virtue? The
price of Wisdom is above Rubies, and yet the seat of this is within; the inner
man has many Jewels about his neck, of inestimable price; the Bride has a
chain of Pearls given her when married to Christ, so had Christ of his Father,
when married to the flesh, which is that according to which he is admired here
as so wealthy, the Jewels which he had within him, in that casket of flesh.

Colos. 3.16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to
be strengthened with might by his Spirit, according to the inward man. The
riches of the inward man, are riches of glory. Stars twinckle and make the
heavens all glorious: so Grace sparkles and makes all glorious within. Christ
is transient in the world, but he dwells in the hearts, and where he dwells is
his chair of State, that is glorious. The Kingdom of Christ is glorious; that is
within you; the killing of sin is sweet, the soul drinks the blood of the
slain, and grows fat; it is heaven to any soul, to be conquered by Christ, his
smitings are precious balm, what are his embraces then? Not any thing in grace,
but most contentfull to the soul; the bitterest things about grace are sweet;
the very bark and rind of grace sweet. Persons have not heaven as they have
much without, but as they have much within: Heaven is all; the person that has
this in him is admirable, though never so contemptible in the world. It pleased
the Father, that in him should be all the sweetest delights that are in the
bosom of God, and therefore admired here by the Apostle.

tree of life. Mercy, that runs only into the purse, runs out again; but Mercy,
that runs into the soul, abides there for ever. You value estates, not as
things hazardous, but according to what is sure. What wealth is in the heart,
is sure; riches leave the body, but God never leaves the soul. Riches and
honors are [with me,] yea durable riches and substance. Things have a natural
advantage, to wit, the advantage of their kind, long lived by kind:
spiritual life is begotten by him that lives for ever, and so long lived by
kind: That which is borne of the spirit is spirit; so I may say, that which is
borne of one that is eternal, is eternal. All wealth within us, is borne of
the everlastingest Spirit, and is everlasting it self. Things have also, an
accidental advantage, or an adventitious advantage, the advantage of their
station. In Heaven, wealth is sure, says Christ, there be no thieves break
in: so is wealth in the soul, graces are fixed stars, in a region where
nothing can come to pull down, or darken. All ends in this, Persons are to be
prized according to the wealth and worth they have in them.

Woe unto the Land where the Prince is a child, says the Prophet: double woe
surely then to that Land, where Prince and people are children. Infatuation is
a heavy stroke; there are more deadly blows upon us, then we are aware of:
truth is trampled upon, and this lightly esteemed, what judgment can be in
men, to make judgment of persons or ways. O ye simple, understand wisdom,
says Solomon; divine discretion is peculiar wisdom, it is a thing by it self
to discern what true worth persons and things have in them; and yet he that
cannot do this, will lay vipers in his bosom, and whet knives to cut his own
throat: so have thou done, poor England, for a long time, which makes thee
bleed now so long and so deadly.

We must plead with our Maker, and plead with our selves. O my soul, which
side of things takes thee, inside or outside? Painting is a common art, and the
worst are best at it; women use it, men use it; Statesmen, tradesmen, you paint
your words, your actions, you put gloss upon every thing in your shops; a man
shall lose his estate, yea, a man shall lose his soul, that can look no
further then outsides. It Is the unhappiest time that ever came, to take any
thing upon trust, by the sound, or by the outside; persons, preachers, prayers,
Sermons: a man may have his soul slain in the Sanctuary, his spirit turned
out of the way, and bitterly beaten by watchmen. I said in my haste, (I may
say it soberly) all men are liers: the Land with much bleeding, is turned into
a rotten Bog; one thinks he goes safe here, and safe there, and sinkes over
head and ears, ere he is aware. The bosom of a neighbor is your grave, his
white candid words, your winding sheet: Ah thrice unhappie man, that live now
in England, and can look no farther then outsides! Godliness is a mystery:
the kernel of Scriptures, of every word you hear, lies inward. Christ's words,
are spirit and life. As the spirit and life of things is held out, so prize and
embrace them, and no otherwise. Many Sermons, nothing in them; Many books,
nothing in them; Many persons have fine clothes, but nothing in them: Let them
go for nothing, which have nothing in them: fine clothes, are like fine
covers and titles of books, both to be valued alike, if nothing folded up in
them.



By what comes from them you may; it is proper to Christ in some sense, to know
what is in man, but it is proper enough to us to know what is in man, by what
comes from him. Does the breath of man stink? then his intrailes are rotten.
The heart and the tongue trade together; the tongue has all from within; Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. My heart was at my mouth, you
have such a Proverb; it is true. When the mouth frothes, the heart works; if
men drivel upon their beards, if men's words fall as drivel upon their chin,
it is a light soul within, brains are cracked, or spirit cursed, which is
worse; and therefore say where you see such sights, as he to David, Away with
this fellow, what should I do with madmen? If you cannot find what is in
persons or things, suspend putting price upon them, till you can. Lay hands
upon nothing suddenly, lay hearts upon nothing suddenly, let election of
persons and things, be deliberate.

If you cannot find out what is in others, yet you may find out what is in
your selves: The spirit of man knows the things that are in man. Some persons
swell with pride, and I wonder at them: do you indeed know what is in you? In
me there dwells no good, says the Apostle, it is every man's case. It Is
mischievous not to know what is in others, but it is damnable not to know what
is in our own heart, in some measure. You that swell in pride, know not your
own hearts, if God be not merciful to you, you will set such a high price upon
your selves, that Christ will give nothing for you, nor Christians care nothing
for you. Some creatures rot in their own dung; it is a heavy judgment, and yet
it is your condition, that think highly of your selves. Were this rule I am
upon pursued, things prized according to what worth is in them, there could not
be a proud person amongst us. Alas! what good is in me! what is in me, is
Christ's; he is all, all in all. If upon search, you find nothing in you, it
should not discourage, for Christ can become all in you. Christ is for inward
diseases, as well as for outward wants: if you be poor in purse, he can enrich
you, yea, if you be poor in spirit, he can enrich you, Esa. 29.24. They also
that [erred in spirit] shall come to understanding, and they that murmured,
shall learn doctrine; Christ is excellent in working, Esa. 28.29. not a wheel
in the Watch within, that goes untrue, but he can find it, and mend it.

COLOSSIANS 1.20. And having made peace through the blood of his cross.
THe connection of this Verse with the former, yielded us some things very
useful, of which you heard the last day. We are now to consider the Verse in it
self; divine favor according to its formality, causality, and extent, are here
particularly set down: According to its formality, and so it is expressed in
Synonymicall terms, Peace and reconciliation: according to its causality, and
this expressed and amplified; Christ's blood, the blood of his cross. By that
blood which took away Christ's life, love, between God and the creature, was
made. The latitude of this love, how far it reaches, in the last words of the
verse is expressed, to wit, to things in earth, and to things in Heaven. The
love that breathes forth by Christ, casts rays and beams over all. The
opening of things thus divided, shall be one after another, as we come to them.

The grand thing that belongs to our welfare, I am now to enter upon. Our
blessedness lies in union with the chiefest good. Man is ruined, because out
with God; God at variance communicates no blessings, and man is in hell every
where, if he have not blessings. A man out with God, may have many things, but
no blessings: Riches are no blessing, honors no blessing, knowledge no
blessing to a man, on whom God frowns. The smiles of the Son, comprehend all
the virtues, which do felicitate nature: In the love of God is wrapped up our
temporal and eternal felicity. Peace and reconciliation speak the special
love of God.

Definit.
Reconciliation, it is entire, full, and firm friendship between God and fallen
mam, by virtue of which, his condition in all things is blessed.

friendship: God and man are enemies; which falling out is sad, but God can
wash his hands because it began wholly on man's side, he disliked Gods will, and
so threw it off, and God disliked man's practice in this, and so threw him off:
they are now far off one from another. You that are far off, etc. Not far off
according to presence, but far off according to affection. Man is a hater of
the Lord, and the Lord a hater of man. Affection opposite, and actions are
opposite: God and man fight, they seek the life of one another: fleshly lusts
fight against the soul (i.) against God in the soul. God considers man's
venomous nature, and pursues him; that which rises up against me shall die:
The soul that sins shall die. Rebellion is death, by divine Statute, no man
shall have his book in this case, says Justice. Reconciliation is that act of
Christ, which takes off this deadly pursuit: Let not this soul die, I have
died: Reconciliation speaks compassion, compensation, yea, advocation; one
pleads when the Sinner by reason of guilt is speechless. If crime be crying,
and must have blood, let my blood go for it, says Christ. Reconciliation, it is
Christ personating a sinner and pleading with a displeased God, till he be
overcome, and think well of one whom he said he would ruin. If we sin, we have
an advocate, etc. Reconsiliation has advocation; advocation closes spirits
and and things which differ, and begets right understanding, and so settles
amity between such as were at enmity; Christ has slain enmity.

is entire; you have I known of all the people of the earth. God knows some
above all (i.) loves some above all other: Reconciliation speaks peculiar love.
God carries a common respect to all; he makes the Sun to shine upon the good,
and upon the bad; as a creator he upholds the whole world, which is great
friendship, this speaks not reconciliation. Reconciliation speaks fatherly
friendship. Gods motion is wonderful, he comes very near, or goes very far off
every one: If he fall out, he kills; if he fall in, he marries: Reconciliation
speaks conjugall love, two united, as Father and Son; yea, two united, as
Husband and Wife. Christ personates a sinner (i.) stands under his notion in
point of sin and wrath, and works both off, and then he privileges a sinner,
he puts his own raiment upon him: The King sets Moredeai upon his own horse,
and gives him royal apparel, makes him stand in his own relation, as a son. We
are children and heirs [with Christ]: this speaks reconciliation, entire union
and friendship. You fall out, and can never get so far in as you were; your
hearts are naught: you are reconciled, yet remember something, and for this
keep your distance; God does not so. Christ mediates, and sin is put quite
away, so that God remembers iniquity no more: the offender is laid where Christ
is, in the bosom of God. Reconciliation it has compensation, advocation, and
remission. There is no iniquity in Jacob; nothing without, nothing withing
amiss, in that person, with whom God is at peace, (i.) nothing amiss is
imputed. The expression sets forth that peculiar love, which shines in Christ
upon such, as he mediates for, they are the beautifullest in Gods eye of all
the world.

full friendship: God at peace, all is ours, he could say so much to Job,
Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, thereby God shall come unto thee
(i.) all good, Job 22.21. Communion follows union; if God become a Father,
Christ will get him to come along with him, and feast with you; a father goes
often to his children. My Father and I, will come and sup, says Christ.
Reconciliation speaks full communication, feasting; divine friendship is not as
humane, that works coldly, and reaches out but a little, lest it should
over-do, and undo; divine friendship works freely, because there is no fear of
beggering the donor; all his care is, how to make the recipient receptive
enough, rich enough. God at peace smiles, the rays of this Sun, make a very
rich Region; I cannot tell you the prosperity, that goes along with divine
peace. Secular peace wraps up all secular good in it, divine peace wraps up all
good, Secular and Celestial. My peace I leave with you: Reconciliation is a
legacy, a legacy that has all treasure in it. In times of peace; wealth comes
tumbling in: Reconciliation is a state of great income, a soul sent to from
heaven daily, and presented with the choycest gifts that heaven will afford:
Reconciliation, it is heaven gates set open, and the soul given free egresse
and regresse, to ask, receive, and carry away any thing, and this not for once,
but always.

With everlasting kindness will I embrace thee. God lends his ear to be abused
by none, concerning any of his children. Satan is an accuser of the brethren,
but God hearkens to nothing which he says. You cannot hearken to accusation
but it takes impression, and affection flattens, which is your weakness. You
have many enemies; one says this of you, another that, and God hears all, and
yet lessens not love one whit, but heightens it. A reconciled person has one
friend sure, let the world go which way 'twill, My love shall never depart,
etc. Whom he loves, he loves to the end, etc. There is no condition so tickle
as secular favorites, a man is an honor to day, and cast out to morrow;
corruption is strong in all, and therefore every little thing by asseth us
about. No state more sure, then a divine favorite. Principles within are pure
foundation without firm, to wit, Christ. Reconciliation speaks persons beloved
for Christ's sake, love running through a sure channel, and so becoming sure
mercy to the soul. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. Not a
man in the world which God loves, but in Christ, which is a firm foundation of
love. Christ waxes not old, his beauty fades not, that the Fathers love
should decline thereby. He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: All
(...) into this, that I have said, Reconciliation is an entire, full, and firm
friendship between God and fallen man, by virtue of which his condition is in
all things blessed.



Persons in with God, would not be out with him again for all the world. Blind
consciences can do much, sleepy consciences can do more, but seared consciences
can do any thing, and not be stirred; this speaks not peace, not a reconciled
state: Reconciliation makes tender consciences; it is too much that Christ was
crucified once, I cannot crucify him again. Sin is slain, the new man tender;
some friends may fall out, and fight; but Christ and a reconciled soul cannot:
The heart cannot bear a disagreement, after it is once reconciled to God; much
less strike a stroke against him. The soul bleeds a fresh when Christ does, by
any ones crucifying of him, much more, when it does it it self. Temptations
transport, then a good man is not himself, such cases must be spoken to alone.
Reconciliation makes a very tender union: Sinners view these times, they are
very bloody; God is out with us certainly, how much does it trouble you? Are
you not the same men you were, in the same ways you were? Can a man live in
his sins, and be at peace with God? Can a man be at peace with his lusts, and
with his God? Security slayes us; nothing will break our hearts, therefore
God breaks our names, our states, our bones. We flatter our selves, but rise
not to our duty; men thus in with themselves, are certainly out with God; it is
Englands heavy plague, if it be any of yours here present, abase your selves.
God speaks peace to the contrite; if you cannot judge your selves, you will be
judged, not justified of the Lord. Men that dote upon themselves, are seldom
cured of this plague till they die.

God looks not as man looks; When you feast, he mournes. Victories speak not
God reconciled: What victories do you see truth make upon men's lusts? Are not
men as dead hearted, as stout-hearted, as rotten-hearted, as ever? The works
of God must be acknowledged, but not abused; you must have other things then
this or that external victory, to make a true medium to demonstrate God
reconciled to you. When justice kills bodies on one side, it may kill as many
souls on the other side; wrath works without and within. Lord, how many are
hardened and fatned, by the blood of others! Evil men understand not
judgment, but they that seek the Lord, understand all things, Pro. 28.5. A
man had need pray over one act of providence a thousand times, ere he venture
to interpret it once; it is the highest wisdom in the world, to understand the
works of God. The words of God are ambiguous, the works of God are more
ambiguous, yet compared they will illustrate one another; but few do this at
all, not one of a thousand an artist this way, and hence it is that persons and
Kingdoms cry peace, peace, when there is no peace. We take up words and works
by rote, and ruin our selves and others. If all the Kings side were slain,
yet were we never the nearer peace with God, if we continue to resist his
will; He has many ways to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and to make
all sides know their own. National peace and personal peace, have one
foundation, a through embracing of Christ, as you see persons or Kingdoms
pursue or faulter herein, so fear or hope. He is our peace, which has made
two one, and broken down the wall of perdition. Christ is our peace; as we
become one with him, we become one with God, and the creature. Christ and we
two, God and we are two, God and we out, we must needs be out with one
another, and with all the creation.

Christ is the knot that knits God and man together, faith is the bond that
knits Christ and man together; some of you complain that you have no peace,
surely you have no faith. Broken bleeding hearts, remember who is your
peacemaker, and how able he is at the work. Christ is the Prince of peace: he
commanded the Seas to be quiet, so he can command your consciences, Christ has
balm at command, what ever the Father has to refresh, Christ has under his
dispose. God rests in Christ; Infinite justice rests in him, therefore the
soul cannot but much more find rest in him. This is my beloved Son, in whom
[I] rest. Does God himself find rest in Christ concerning sin, whose
purity is so exact? And can not thou? God can object nothing, but Christ
answers it: and can thou nonplus Christ? Satan is a sophister; temptation
abuses troubled spirits, such cannot see neither the sufficiency, nor the
willingness of Christ to settle their condition. It Is a trouble to Christ,
that you bleed so inwardly; he would have but one bleed; his bowels turn and
beat within him, to see your wounds raw and open; he would bind them up, and
power oil into them, and carry your souls to his lodging, and lay them in the
breast of his Father, and your Father, where is rest indeed, and you will not.
Reconciliation is either virtually, or actually considered: the foundation of
our peace between Christ and the Father, was laid a great while ago, but
actually finished between Christ and us, when we believe: the first act does
engage to the second, that God is at peace with Christ, O troubled souls, it is
an assurance that he will be at peace with you, and you should plead it, and
build upon it.

COLOSSIANS 1.20. And having made peace by the blood of his Cross, etc.
CHrist had dispensation made to him, in order to use: God meant to do much by
him, and therefore gave much to him. Christ had full reception, and full
employment; of the one you have heard, and of the other you are now to hear.
Christ had all fullness, all in Heaven, and all in earth, to reconcile all that
are in heaven, and that are in earth; as full as Christ was, God emptied out
all, he drew out grace, he drew out nature, to the last drop of blood that was
in him. And having made peace by the blood of his Cross, etc.

Every condition in this world, has mutation. A man wears a Jewel in his
breast, twenty, thirty years, forty, fifty years, and then it is snatched
away again. The spirit returns to God that gave it. Yea Christ, and all that
Christ has, return to God that gave him: Christ lives, and then dies; dies,
and then rises. Where is Christ now, and all the fullness that he has, but in
that bosom from whence he came forth? Has not Christ bled out all into the
hand of the first Doner? it is a brave condition which they have above, there is
all giving, and no taking away, every ones life is everlasting: and as the
silver coard is, so are the Jewels that are hung upon it. Above, all things are
everlasting, but here nothing is so, no not Christ whilst in this world. Yet a
little while, and the world sees [me] no more. This world has, and then
loses the biggest blessings; sees [me] no more. This world is a little while
rich, and has all, and then a great while poor, and stripped of all. Sees [me]
no more.

Thou shall see an enemy in [my habitation] said God to Eli, 1 Samuel 2.32.
Christ is Gods habitation, his special habitation, yet is an enemy there, Sin
of man.
whilst Christ is here. The noblest life, dies: Sin has brought death over
all, over Christ. Felicity at first was fixed; no mercy Adam had, died;
transgression has made mutation, this is the worm that lies at the root, and
gnawes and killes the greenest and pleasantest Goard that grows over us here.
The sin of the first Adam, has sucked the blood of the second, and not only
his blood, but the blood of all things else. That which follows in the place
forecited, is here applicable. Thou shall see an enemy in my habitation, and in
all the wealth which God shall give Israel, etc. Much was made in a little
time, and marred in less. Sin has subjected the whole creation to vanity;
the fall of the body of Christ, which was so firmly knit, is the liveliest
demonstration of it in the world. Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten
thousands, but sin has slain its millions, has wounded every thing to the
heart, Christ not excepted, he together with all the creation groans, bleeds,
dies; Some things are venomous and deadly within such a limited compass, the
destructive property of sin is universal, it poisons and killes all the world
over; it changes times, seasons, Kingdoms, worlds; has swept one world away,
and 'twill sweep another world away. Sin makes the Heavens wax old, and pass
away, yea, that which is more firm then the Heavens, Christ's glorious and
heavenly body, which was not as the Apostle says, of this creation. (...).


Sin has its influence into the mutation of things; so has the will of God.
Mutation speaks affliction, Will of God.
affliction springs not out of the dust, but from the will of God: God sets one
thing against another, and makes fighting between creature and creature,
between man and man unto death. I set all men every one against his neighbor,
Zach. 8.9, 10. I set all men, etc. That there were men against Christ, and took
away his life; that there were such men against Christ, neighbors, one in his
own family, etc. God set them against him. Christ was delivered by the
determinate counsel of God. Things are set their course; divine determination,
byasseth every state to such an end: conditions can be no otherwise then they
are. Known to the Lord are all his works from the beginning. The age of a man
is set; the age of the world is set; it shall be an hundred and twenty years,
says God. Sin provokes, justice decrees, this makes condition vary
necessarily: every thing shall die, rather then divine justice; this overturnes
all, to keep up it self, Angels, men, the world, he which is greater and
better then the world, Christ.

The will of God, the wisdom of God, Wisdom of God.
has its influence into the mutation of things here below. The being of all
things is such, that no man may be secure. Mutation moulds up time into
opportunity, and duty presses hard upon a man's spirit, under such a notion, it
did upon Christ. I have but a day to work in, says Christ, things will change
quickly, night will come, and then there will be no opportunity to work. If
Christ made use of motive from the changeableness of his condition, fallen man
may much more. God is wise, condition is squared to quicken duty. God would
have any thing die, rather then your grace. Were nothing dying, holy action
would not be lively. Man is confident; if not powered out from vessel to vessel,
he settles upon his lees. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear
not God, says the Psalmist. Fallen man is pursued in his own way, to wit, with
the falling of things; now one thing crackes, and anon another thing crackes,
and these all echo to one another, and speak jointly and lowdly to the soul,
that all will crack anon and fall. Wherefore look about thee sinner, not a
thing, not a person comes into thy bosom, but breaks there, to break the
heart. You mourn at the funeral of things; groans beget groans. The blood
and death of things, when that cries and preaches to us, if there be any grace,
if there be any nature, the heart cannot but stir. Wisdom has ordered every
thing, to preach it self to death to you; plants, brutes, men; the choicest
man that ever was, that ever came into the world, went out of it again in his
blood, to move, and so to save the world. Having made peace by the blood of his
Cross. All runs into this, All conditions here below have mutation.

that all things here below are mutable, the times in which we live are a sad
demonstration of it. View how like himself God still moves, this shall be our
use of the point. What condition but is full of mutation? Brave estates, brave
Kingdoms bleeding to death, and brought almost to nothing; our sin is ripe,
wrath is gone forth, England that was as the Queen of Nations for all fullness,
is wasting to nothing. Natives that for a while have left us, and now returned
to visit us, scarce know their mother-Land, her face which looked so
pleasantly, is now so besmeared with blood. Here was the seat of my ancestors,
but it is burned; there had I brave and sweet kindred, but now they are slain;
and those that live, wish for death, because nothing left to live upon. We had
treasure as the flints of the brook, estate to accomplish any thing, but now
we faint in every undertaking, for want of silver-sinewes. We had many
callings, as so many several ornaments and pillars of state, now all is turned
into one, all grave-makers one for another, every one with his spade by his
side, to dig into the heart of his brother, to dig out a subsistence. Light was
little, but love was much; truth could not be found, but if it could, O how
sweet (said we) should it be to us, dearer then all? Truth now shines in our
consciences, and we care not for it: Ah Lord! this is the saddest change of
all. The living are dead; the soul-living are slain, with an evil time. Gods
vows were upon us, but now thrown off, and because the times will not bear
them. Outward changes are bad, but inward changes are far worse. England,
where are those flames of love, which blazed so gloriously a few years ago?
Brethren in New England, were precious: O that we had Ilium in Italium,
New England in old. Brethren in Holland were precious: O that we had them
again, and the mercies which there they enjoy, and now they are with us, they
are trampled upon as the dirt, and all their pains to hold forth Christ and
truth to us. Are not these sad changes? Englands outside, inside, all changed;
from virtue to sin, from love to malice, from wrath to blood, and thus lies
weltring, and no eye pities her, neither Gods eye, nor her own. Is this Naomi?
'Twas Naomies friends speech to her; her condition was so altered, that they
knew her not. Is this pleasant? O no, says she, call me not pleasant, call
me Mara, bitterness, for the Lord has dealt very bitterly with me. So may I
say now; Is this England? Pleasant England? O no, call it Mara, bitterness,
for affection is turned into gall and wormwood, she deals very bitterly with
God and his people, and the Lord deals very bitterly with her.

Contemplate truth sadly fulfilled, and then set your selves to draw
instruction from it. Mutation preaches submission; Does God give and take?
bless him, it is wis way: he does so with Christ. God filled Christ's veins with
brave blood, and then drew it out all; he prepared him a body, and then
destroyed it; he gave him a being on earth, and then turned him into hell.
Christ's tranquillity was turned into the strongest extremity; outside and
inside changed: he that heard that sweet voice, This is my beloved Son, etc.
cries My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Condition varies, rich are
made poor, whole are wounded; men cannot bear this, therefore the land is full
of discontent. Sin multiplies and hightens it self as misery does; if God be
not very merciful, 'twill make misery last, till there be not a man of us
left. We feel the rod, but do not bear it; sense stirs up passion, we rage,
and this foments divine displeasure; the heart listens not after Gods meaning
in his dealing, to accomplish that, and when is it likely that our calamities
will cease? God makes changes without, to make changes within: he makes broken
estates, to make broken hearts; he brings much to nothing, that he may make you
contented with any thing, with mean things. There are many turnings in your
heart, do you consider them? No, God writes them out in your life, that you
may: God takes a copy from within, for all that he does to us without. Mariners
are cheerful when tossed, if their Ship be good, because they know the nature
of the seas. The Ark is very good which a Christian sails in, it is Christ: the
things we meet with here, are common to men, much more common to holy men;
tossings, tempests, All men are partakers of these, says the Apostle;
Christians therefore should be cheerful.

Finally, the point in hand should commend the life to come to us, and make us
long much for it. Job from a tossed state here, falls a commending the state of
the dead: They that are in the grave, are at rest, etc. The earth is the grave
of the body, heaven or hell will be the grave of the soul; they that are in
heaven are at rest. I pity the state of men that live in their sins, they are
tossed and tumbled here, and will be worse tossed and tumbled hereafter. Wicked
men, you will never have rest; there is no peace to you, none here, nor none
hereafter. Godly hearts, be cheerful, you shall have a condition without all
distraction, you shall be tossed and tumbled no more. Labor and sorrow the
Scripture makes the proprium of this life, incident to it, as the sparks fly
upward; but there is no labor above, much less sorrow, least of all greatest
sorrow, which falls out by great changes. Every ones labor follows him, and
they sit still above, and eat the fruit thereof, they solace themselves, in the
travel of their souls, as Christ does; as for changes, they above know none,
there are no misty foggy days above, no clouds, no clapping in and out of the
Sun, they are above those regions which make such mutations of weather. Were
one above those impure regions of air we breath in, and close by the Sun, one
should have the strong influence and glory of it always, every day alike. Here
we sojourn, and God sojourns; God is as a wayfaring man, that stays here but a
night; but above we shall all dwell together, and no sojourning to make
alteration of condition. If there be any felicity here, it is to know that our
misery shall end: Lord let me know my [end] and the number of my days, how
long I have to live, etc.

COLOS. 1.20. Made peace through the blood of his cross.
DIvine favor, according to its formality, we have handled, to wit,
Reconciliation; according to its causality, we are now to pursue it, which is
here mentioned Synecdochically; the blood of the cross, as including all other
passions and actions prevening and conducing, to make this last act effectual
to so great an end, as man's deliverance from the wrath of God. Some persons in
a business bear the name of the whole; so some actions in work, carry the
denomination of the whole. The blood of the cross, was the finishing act of
our redemption; and therefore here, and elsewhere mentioned, in stead of all
other acts. Having made peace by the blood of his cross.

The blood of the cross, notes the very strength of cruelty, malice heightened
by art, contriving many deaths into one; a death for the head, a death for the
foot, a death for the arms, a death for the sides; an army of tortures divided
into parties, to go their several ways in the body, and to meet all at the
heart, to make as many torments as members, and as many hels as drops of blood.
A forlorn state is here sadly hinted; men of parts first rejected Christ, and
then employed all to cut his throat. Apostasy generates tyranny.

The greatest cruelty is among persons hypocritically professing Christianity.
The death of the cross was inflicted upon Christ, by them that sat in Moses
chair: Christ among his own loses all friends, honors, blood; betrayed and
butchered in his own family, amongst his own. He came to his own, but could not
get off without the loss of his life.

answerable first or last, what ever the tongue say. Some do worse then they
meant; a Chieverall heart stretches when reached, further then thought of.
Morality is too weak to resist sin, Divinity is too weak to resist sin, if it
reach not the soul: A man is as the temptation that assaults him, that has not
the sword of the Spirit in his spirit; if it be to kill, to kill cruelly, to
crucify Christ; if a man's heart be not crucified by his light, he will
crucify his Father, his Savior, when temptation lies this way. Sin is so far
from lessening, that it heightens it self by notionall light, accidentally,
though not naturally. What light takes not hold of the heart, the heart can
take hold of it, to make its own way the stronger by. Light is a crutch to help
Satan's criples to go well: Low persons get a stool and become high; light
makes men otherwise weaponlesse, armed, strong and wise to do evil.

Jews. Christ was as John, a burning and shining light; the light he held forth
to hypocrites, did burn their consciences, and to quench this, they cared not
what they did to Christ; open his own veins, and take his own blood, to quench
his own Spirit. Hypocrites will take the blood of Christ, out of every member
of Christ, to quench the Spirit of Christ, that burns within them.

draught-net, it brings up of all sorts, whole Christians, half Christians; a
man almost a Christian, will quite condemn you, and all out torture you, and
yet wash his hands as innocent of your blood. Truth may do much upon the
tongue, yea, much upon the heart of your neighbor, and yet not enough to
secure your skin, the lives next to him. Felix trembled, Pilate suffered much
in his spirit, yet did they make Christ suffer much in his flesh and Spirit.
The Word is of much power upon conscience, when of none at all upon affection;
affrights sometimes, but not reforms: an affrighted heart recovers it self, and
becomes by so much the more resolute and hardened to desperate work. You that
tremble under our ministry now, you will recover many such pangs, and be
hard-hearted to our death, to our crucifixion, when times turn another way. Let
no man promise himself immunity from any misery, because he lives where
profession is rife. The best hearts are oftentimes soonest deceived; much
goodness is ready to trust it self, where there is but little, and receives a
wound. A Lark has but a bad eye, to discern a true Sun from a false; she sees
a Sun in a glass, and comes down to delight in it, and is ensnared. Sweet
spirits know this time, you have a double disadvantage now: You think all are
good, because they speak well; you will be taken with a Sun in a glass,
ensnared with something like a Sun. Integrity goes with an open breast,
Hypocrisy makes advantage of this, and stabs to the heart: There was never
more need of this caution.

Some out of sweetness, others out of courage are over credulous; Gedeliah
lost his life this way. England has almost lost its life, through overmuch
credulousnesse, but from whence our credulity has sprung, I know not. We have
had fair words, shows of goodness, and would not heed real badnesse, and look
to our selves. 'Twas told Gedeliah, again and again, that such sought his life;
so 'thath been told us, again and again, that such and such have been false and
base, and yet, because they have been specious for this and that, we have been
incredulous, and ruiningly venturous. Courage degenerates into stupidity, when
faith builds altogether upon fancy. Stupidity speaks destruction decreed; all
is destroyed that should prevent destruction. Understanding swallows fancies,
judgment builds its welfare upon these; now the heart is asleep amongst
Serpents: Write Lord have mercy upon this soul, he will certainly be stung to
death, ere he awake. I have spoken Englands case ere I was aware: Stupidity is
a common glague, our head is broke, our wounds are many, and we lay our
bleeding state in the bosom of such as have served the times, to fetch life in
us again. Ah Lord! may it not make a tender heart shake, to see how much we
lean upon many, that a little while since, bended any way? Where wealth and
advantage abound, trust may be venturous with less peril, because much will
bear out a little loss, and do well; but when all is almost gone, then one
must be double wary how one trusts in weighty matter. This is our case, we are
at last cast, upon the brink of death and ruin, making our will in order to
all privilege, civil and divine, and yet have not that mercy from the Lord,
to take double heed and care, whom we make executors, to whom we leave the hope
of posterity: We look at parts, honors, more then at truth of grace, in those
that manage our affairs; so there be but profession and specious pretenses,
some court divinity to paint persons over, to look fair in the eye of men, and
something like the Cause we manage, we venture all upon them.

Naked profession is not to be trusted, the characters of this I will give you,
that no man may deceive himself, nor others.

They do all things to be seen of men. A mere professor fails and flats in his
noblest action, if men observe him not; his zeal dies, if the breath of men
blow it not. Come, see my zeal, etc. A mere professor is a Chameleon, he lives
by the air of men's mouths; he christens his children himself, and calls all
virtue that he does. Come, see my [zeal] etc. And it was but vainglory; a
vice, and no virtue; a stinking weed, and no flower. They are ugly brats that
Hypocrites bring forth, no body else can endure to lick them to any beauty, and
therefore they lick them themselves. Come, see my zeal: Rotten lungs use art to
breath sweet; they are not troubled when they smell it themselves, they only
blush when others smell it stinck, and therefore use skill, to make their
breath smell sweet: Come, see my zeal. Integrity hatches good, and runs away,
can scarce own her own children, though they run after her; a good man cannot
tell how to lay hands upon any good action, as his; but Hypocrisy calls evil
good, and yet openly appropriates it: Come, see my zeal. If an upright man be
any thing, or do any thing, it is not he, but Christ in him; he does not say,
come, see my zeal, or my wisdom, but, come and see the Wisdom and Life of
Christ, in me.

Woe to your when all men speak well of you, (i) when you so order your
religion and course of life, as to please all sides, though God be displeased.
Religion is lovely sometimes, but not for it self; some take it up to drive
designs, and can taste sweetness in it no longer, then it will conduce to
some secular advantage. Christ is an abiding sweet, where the heart is upright.
Christ is dear upon the Cross; when torn to pieces dear; every limb, every
drop of his blood, dear; so for ever. The way of Christ is more, then the
strewings of it, to a real Christian; all the wealth, and all the honor in
the world, are not so pleasant as one despised and persecuted truth of Christ.
They are joy'd in the way, they remember thee in thy ways, Esa. 64.5. They
respect the way, not the strewings of the way, no other strewings but what
Christ makes by his going before them. They remember [thee] in thy ways, (i.)
Christ; For he makes his own ways sweet, to them that simply walk in them.
Times vary often, and all present new temptations, yet one thing is constantly
made at, in all where profession is real, (i) to enjoy Christ: let my soul
lie still in the bosom of Christ, and move steadily in his ways, and then let
times and fortunes change as they will. Real profession pursues realitie in
every condition; it hunts one hare, how many soever cross the way in which it
goes. Distraction of times, naughtiness of men, make not Christ unpleasant,
but more precious. If the world will frown, O that I could see Christ smile
more. If truth be slighted, O that I could so walk, as to live some beauty
into it: Integrity holds on her way, as Solomon says. I tremble to think of
this generation, we are clouds without water, carried as the wind sits,
that is Judes description of naked profession. When the Parliament prevails,
then their ways are honored; when the King prevails, then his ways are
honored; when men's persons are honored and prosper'd, then their religion is
honored; mere profession is a babble, a humor, any thing, nothing; a double
mind, unstable, a double mouth; sweet and bitter from the same fountain, as
the cisterne will best receive that is powered into: and this may be the motto
of the profession of this time.

All that has been formerly said, to distinguish in this matter, is but one
thing, and may be plainly rendered thus; Naked profession, is without internal
reformation. Spirits can transform themselves, they can speak like Angels,
and yet abide Devils; men can do much this way. Put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. The tongue can do this, when the heart has never a rag upon its
back. Their inward parts are very wickedness. There is (...) and (...), a
turning and a turning inwardly. The Author to the Hebrews uses the latter
word; We have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence, Heb. 12.9.
(...), and we were inwardly turned, the spirit recoiling as ashamed: An
internal turning (i) when the heart is turned as well as the outward man,
according to that in Malachi, The heart of the children shall be turned to the
fathers, which is real profession. The Temple was the same in the outside in
Christ's time, that it was in the Prophets time before, yet he could not own it,
because the inside was not the same, it had a den of thieves in it; My Temple
has a better inside, says he, and whips out these thieves, and overturnes
their Tables: it shadows out this, that where there is a real Temple, a true
Christian, the power of all lusts, though never so many, is overturned in the
soul by the power of Christ, which works in us.

I will speak no more by way of discovery, but let the discovered lay to heart
their condition. You which are but seeming professors, you will be real
persecutors. The punishment of one sin, hardens to another. The proper plague
of hypocrisy, is searing; burned spirits, are fit to burn others; so they do
in hell. 'Twas a generation of seared hypocrites, which contrived the blood of
Christ: are they not such, many of them, which contrive Christ's blood and
torment at this day, in the Christian world? The cross we bear is the wound
of friends; the enemies which cut our throats, are of our own house, of our
own Land, and pretend to be of our own Religion. Would not that bloody Army
abroad, be accounted Protestants, and for Protestant Religion? I send you forth
as lambs amongst wolves, and yet those wolves wore sheepskins, they would be
accounted of the seed of Abraham: it is our case, and it makes our trial the
greater; our burden is heavy, but God is lightning it, glory be to his name.
The axe is to the root of the tree which bare but leaves, and they are cut
down apace. If this side would but mend, as fast as the other side end, we
should be a very blessed people quickly. The ripest fall first, we shall not
hang long after, if our profession also be found hypocritical.

COLOSSIANS 1.20. Through the blood of his Cross.
AS this expression speaks cruelty, we pursued it in the last Exercise; as it
speaks the causalitie of divine friendship, I purpose now to handle it. Christ
has by his death accomplished the favor of God. Having made peace [through
the bloud] of his Cross. Hanging was used under the old Covenant, onel^ for
some notorious crimes, as blasphemy, sacrificing to Devils, etc. and was used
as a second death; first, life was taken away by some other punishment, as
stoning, or the like, and then the body hanged up, to render the person as well
as the fact, abominable to all, to God and man, which is the meaning of that
expression, [He] that is hanged is accursed of God, Deuteronomy. 21.23. his person as
well as his fact, is execrable, greatly abhorred. Thus David commanded Rechab
and Barzillah, to be punished, with a double death, for that foul fact of
murdering Ishbosheth, he slew them, and then he hanged them up, 2 Samuel 4.12.
Such a one was Christ judged to be, a notorious malefactor, a blasphemer, one
that had a devil, etc. and therefore hanged on a tree; not slain first, but
tortured to death upon the Cross, which was a Romish variation from the rule,
as in matter, so in form, and served in this case only to vend the height of
malice against innocence, making not two deaths, but a thousand deaths in one.

I went down to the bottom of the mountains, says Jonah, All the waves
passed over me, yet have thou brought my life the pit. These expressions speak
Christ, he lay under mountains, seas of displeasure, he bore the full weight
of divine wrath, he paid the utmost farthing. God is not extreme to mark
what is done amiss, in reference to us, but he was so in reference to Christ;
not a sin, not a circumstance of sin overlooked, of all those millions of
sinners and sins undertaken for, but wrath weighed out exact in proportion to
all, and laid on Christ, and he bore all. He bore the iniquity of us all.
Justice mingles her self with mercy, when she breaks forth upon us; in the
midst of Justice, God remembers mercy, but it did not so in reference to
Christ; Justice went forth in its full strength against him, without a dram of
mercy mixed with it. He was made a [curse] for us. Which words speak no mercy.
The strength of sin is the Law, and the strength of the Law is the curse, all
the curses written in Gods book, without any mercy mixed, and all this did
Christ bear upon the cross. The cross was a grand curse, a superlative
punishment, which wrapped up all the misery in it, that ever justice made, or any
creature felt. Christ's cup had mixture in it, but not one sweet ingredient, all
corroding and speaking full and pure wrath; gall and vinegar was given him in
the pangs of death:

Lutron, a ransom. We were sold under sin, and the blood of the cross bought
us, paid the full demands of that power under which we were. The Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and give his life a ransom for
many. The blood of the cross is a ransom, that which gives full satisfaction
to an offended God, under whose wrath we lay. We are bought with a price,
this price is not gold, nor silver, but the precious blood of Christ. The blood
of Christ, is blood of price, that this is shed, is as much as if the blood of
all the creatures in the world had been shed; yea more: life is our choicest
jewel, yet all creatures lives put together, and put into one bundle of life,
and presented to God, he would not have taken it to ransom one soul; no, he
would not have taken it as satisfactory for one sin. Justice offended is
infinite, the price given for satisfaction must be proportionable, or else no
satisfaction: the blood of all the world is finite, and not proportionable to
infinite, and therefore God shed his blood: the blood of the cross, is the
blood of him that was God-man; this made the blood of the humane nature
precious blood, as Peter speaks; that is, infinitely precious, of worth to
satisfy for all the sins that are, or shall be committed in the world, because
all will rise but to a finite bulk, let it swell as big as 'twill; it is of
price to satisfy for all the sins in the world, and if there were so many
more then there are; therefore is that expression, (...), much more, repeated
twice in the fifth of the Romans, Not as the offense, so is the free gift: the
price is another gets thing, then that in proportion to which it is given: for
if through the offense of one, many be dead: much more the grace of God, and
the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.

He bore our sins in his body upon the cross, says the Apostle Peter. The
Leviticall blood was purging, it purified the flesh, as the Scripture speaks,
and pointed at Christ's blood, which purifies flesh and spirit, (i) takes away
the wrath of God liable to both. Without blood there is no remission, but with
blood there is remission, full remission, the blood of the cross takes out all
spots. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. There
is not a spot in Christ; consider him as our undertaker, as married to our
nature, he is all fair. Thou art all fair my love, etc. Joshua had filthy
garments, but he has washed them white in his own blood, so have they which
are in him by faith, their garments are white with the blood of the Lamb; by
garments is not meant the outside only, but outside and inside, the whole
person. They that are washed are clean every whit. Christ speaks of the
Spouse, as the Spouse speaks of him, Thou art all fair, etc.

David, the keys of those everlasting doors, he is the door to the bosom of
the Father, he has by his blood entered within the veil, bought all under his
custody. Christ is furnished to do us good, and we make no use of him.
Sinners tumble in their sins, and fall asleep, and wrath cuts them off ere
they dream of a Savior. There is a death in sin, to which the death of Christ
is without profit; this is when the soul will go his own way. Many walk by
no rule, all is fish that comes to net, all is contentfull, that suits to a
carnal affection: conscience jogges these souls sometimes, and then they
talk of Christ, that he has dyed for their sins; but poor souls, they do
but talk. If the faith of such persons forementioned were faith indeed, and no
fancy, the soul would be crucified, with crucified Christ. I am crucified
with Christ. They which indeed appropriate the death of Christ, die with him in
affection first, and then in action by little and little, according as the
death of Christ is more and more beheld.

The death of Christ is of double virtue, it makes a death of guilt, and a
death of the very being of sin. The body of sin as well as the soul of sin,
is dead. The body is dead, says the Apostle, speaking of corruption.
Corruption keeps in a body, all that while it is alive: all powers combine to
beat out their own way, as will best carry the world before it, and wink at,
if not scoff at the way of Christ; this soul crucifies Christ, but is not
crucified with him. The sin of this age is bloody wickedness, therefore do we
bleed. Surely, we bleed not so much for small sin; our sin is crimson and
scarlet colored; we crucify Christ, his truth, his people, therefore does he
crucify us. Light rises, so does malice; it is nothing to the men of this
generation, to speak bitterly, to murder bloudily, their own convictions;
Christ shall die at the door, rather then they will open love to him, to
destroy the advantage of this time. A man crucified to Christ, is crucified to
the world; you that kill not the lusts of the world, you kill Christ, but not
believe on him, and his blood shall be upon you, not to take off guilt, but to
bind on guilt till you die, till blood go for blood. It Is a very bloody time
in which we live, trials murder love to Christ, and to one another; hearty
affection to Christ can hardly be found, men are so taken up with their own
ends. Poverty is marching toward us like an armed man, all is falling; flesh
shakes at this, and treads upon Christ, and treads out his bowels, to keep up;
such wretches as these, know not their wretched condition, they have not tasted
of the blood of Christ, nor know what Christ is now doing: Christ is now
avenging the blood of his Covenant, upon all that tread upon it; men that do
not so take hold of his blood and death, as to bleed and die with him, in name,
in state, in person, shall bleed and die by him; this time is a discovery of
unbelief, and a recompense.

Unsensible persons are below discipline, these therefore I must let go. Where
conscience bleedes, the blood of the cross may be of use; and to these in the
last place I will address my self. Souls are loaded and troubled about many
things, but where the distress is about eternal life, whether shall I live or
die? Whether shall I live where Christ is or not? 'Twill be relief to such a
burdened heart to think, what Christ can do for him in this case. Thou have
a tender friend in Heaven, and thy soul is precious to Christ, he has shed
his blood, that thou might not die, nor more despair. Things are very well
between God and Christ, he has stood in the person of many, and discharged
well his undertaking: the favor of God is at his dispose: whom he intercedes
for with his blood, escape the wrath of God. It Is sad to me to see, how some
souls sink, they think peace an impossible thing for them ever to attain.
What is not peace Christ's? Is not Heaven Christ's? Is not kingdom, power, and
glory, Christ's? That all is Christ's, methinkes should quiet the cryings of
conscience. That God is at peace with Christ, should generate faith in the most
complaingest soul. It Is a facile thing for Christ to procure the favor of
God: but how should one get Christ's favor? And Christ is solicitous how to get
thy favor. Christ's favor comes far easier to us, then Gods favor did to
him; he does not expect your blood, to get his favor: to accept him, is to
gain him; his favor is free, all that he expects, is that poor souls would
but trust him, and employ him with their estates, that they would employ him
and none else, to procure the love of God, and eternal blessedness.

Could I trust Christ with my estate, I know all would be well, but I cannot
believe. Why, know this, that Christ's blood has engaged God to give faith, and
every grace else unto thee; what thou would do and can not, let not that
deject, put out that grace you have. When a man cannot go into the poole, it is
hopeful to lie near it, for one or other may take him up and carry him in
thither, whither he cannot go himself. Pained souls, speak of nothing but
the blood of Christ, prize nothing in comparison of this; hence must come thy
ease if ever: out of these pantings, spring faith unto joy. Christ takes up
these creeples of a sudden, and carries them into the poole of his blood. You
that have the Kings evil, stand in the way of the King, and though you cannot
cure your selves, yet you will lie as fair for cure as you can. In a
spiritual sense, be thus prudent: in the midst of all your soule-paines,
say, If ever any thing give me ease, it must be the blood of Christ; if ever
any thing quiet my conscience, it must be Christ's blood sprinkled upon it: out
of these honorable thoughts of proper remedy, proceeds remedy to the soul.

Matter of faith, and matter of love, should spring from this point, if one had
time to go this way. The blood of the cross speaks love in strength, love as
strong as death; what speaks it in Christ, should make it in us. No such
Sermon of love in the Bible, nor in the Creation, as the blood of the Cross.
Enlarge this your selves in deeds.

COLOSSIANS 1.20. Whether they be things in earth, or things in Heaven.
DIvine friendship, according to its formalitie and causalitie I have handled;
according to its extent, I am now to pursue it, to wit, how far it reaches,
which is noted in these last words; To things in earth, and to things in
Heaven. This Scripture is difficult, yet other Scriptures compared with it,
will help us to see something into it. By things in earth, is meant the Elect,
called and uncalled. By things in Heaven, is meant Saints and Angels. By
reconciling of all these to himself, is meant the gathering of them all into
one spiritual body, under one head the Lord Jesus Christ, by virtue of which
the state of fallen man is restored, the state of blessed Angels confirmed, all
to concenter in one common blessedness for ever; according to that Ephesians.
1.10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of time, he might gather
together in one all things in Christ, which are in Heaven, and which are in
earth. Gathered together in one (...), to renew the state and condition of all,
Angels and men, in and under one head, which is here mentioned Jesus Christ.
That Angels have the same common head with Saints, and so consequently the
completion of their state in the same head, together with us, is apparent, Col.
2.10. And ye are complete in him which is the head of all principality and
power. Angels are of the quire above, together with the Saints, and they all
sing one tune; and they are of the fellowship below also, they are brought in
as joint members of the universal invisible Church. You are come to mount
Sion, to the City of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels.

The condition of the greatest states, is here considerable: The noblest
creatures are beholding to Christ, things in heaven as well as things in earth.
Nothing is absolute but God: men are noble, Angels are noble, but they all lean
upon one more noble then themselves, or else they would fall and become as
ignoble as those cursed spirits below us. Man is a little lower then Angels,
Angels a great deal lower then Christ; their being is founded in his
greatness, and is confirmed in his goodness. That grace which is redemption
to the lower world, is confirmation to the upper.

There would be no place for pride, if this point were well digested. None
apter to swell in spirit then man; man sets us up externally a little, and then
the Devil sets us up internally much; few but swell and break eternally, when
gotten high in the world. I wonder at it, were you as high as heaven, as high
as Angels, yet were ye below Christ. The body of Heaven in its brightness, is
under his feet, Exodus 24.10. What is under Christ's feet, he can trample upon at
pleasure; pride is no small sin, and yet it grows up (the Lord knows) from
very small things. What have thou that thou have not received? What have things
in heaven, which they have not, and hold not from Christ?

The less may be said for sin, the greater it is, and the worse that heart in
which it grows. Pride is a grand plague, it is one that has taken leave of
Christ and conscience, to humor himself; but Ah Lord, when will this man
content himself! A man will sooner break his heart, then content his heart,
which pursues the proud lusts of it. A soul devoted to it self, is as cruel a
Master to serve, as the Devil: to pursue the dictates of a proud spirit, is
endless work, and hell enough for any creature, if there were none else to
come: Souls in this consumption, should consider their disease, and their
cure. The remedy of every vice is in Christ, this tree has leaves to cure all
diseases. There is no distemper in the spirit, but Christ may be considered
under such a notion as to rectify it. Consider Christ as the keeper up of
Angels, and it is enough to keep down the spirit of any man.

COLOSS. 1.20. Whether they be things in earth, etc.
AS the expression points at things in heaven, it is useful you see; as it
speaks of things in earth, it is more proper to us. The latitude of divine love
downward, is as large as upward; it reaches all things in heaven, and all
things in earth. That he might reconcile [all things] to himself, whether
things in heaven, or things in earth. The grace of reconciliation, as it works
toward things on earth, is very vast; as it works toward creatures above,
it is unexpressible; a man cannot tell how many love smiles upon in heaven, and
therefore generally expressed, all things; a universal term, to note the
vastness of that kindness: So as it works toward things on earth, it is
inexpressible, it is called all things, to note the vastness, the unexpressible
company, which Christ embraces here below. A man cannot tell the number of
spirits in earth, which Christ does reconcile to his Father in heaven.

Grace works unexpressibly vast to us ward.

The Lord is upon many waters, Psalm. 29.3. As providence external, so
providence internal, does reach forth it self to many. Many bodies are saved
from sinking in the sea, because the Lord is upon the waters: So many souls
are saved from sinking into hell, because the Lord moves upon these many waters
too. The world is full of troubles, as the sea of waves, not one but meets with
enough to over-turn all, if God did not uphold; the whole world would fall into
a consumption and die, as big a body as it is, if God did not uphold. Not one,
nor two, nor three, but all creatures share, in upholding mercy, or else all
would sink; it is so in a proportion in spiritual respects. Satan is an
industrious creature, to overthrow man's welfare, he goes about, seeking whom he
may devour, none would escape hell, if God were not exceeding rich in mercy;
Satan's desire is to destroy all, and his malice is attended with such art, that
it would certainly bring forth its end, did not the special providence of
Christ prevent; which it does, and does it to many, the grace of Christ unto
life is powered out upon many souls. There are many last, which are made first,
as well as many first are made last. Many are eternally saved out of the power
of Satan, as many are preyed upon by him.

Grace did work more compendiously then now it does, before Christ's coming in
the flesh; lost sheep of the house of Israel found all that dropped from heaven,
and they were but few, the Lord knows, one of a City, and two of a Tribe. But
since, a great door of love is opened, and many hundred souls in one City;
yea, many thousands in one Country, come in to the Lord Jesus Christ. The
white sheet of mercy that is let down from Heaven now, is great, says the
Text, and it has all manner of beasts in it; and the Apostle makes a Comment
upon it as I do. My vision, says he, speaks the grace of Christ working now
very richly; God has showed me that I should call nothing common, or unclean.
He speaks it in the case of Saul; not a man so vile, so bloody and malicious,
but the blood of Christ may reconcile him to God, the love of God does now so
richly work.

Mercy is infinite, and it works so; God shows mercy to thousands, from
generation to generation. Abraham's seed are as the stars of heaven for
multitude: God has but one Son, but Christ has many; he brings many sons to
glory. Infinite mercy generates infinitely; what is in Christ, derives it self
to all the nations of the earth. Aarons rod buds, Christ's blessing buds, it
multiplies into many blessings, and spreads all the world over: In thee shall
all the nations of the earth be blessed. The Sun that shines upon us, shines
upon thousands more, it casts over the world, and shines upon a world; so
does the Son of righteousness. God was in Christ, reconciling a world to
himself: the expression notes quantity in some sense, as well as quality, a
world of worldly men.

he reconciles all things. Love is destroyed, when the heart is not taken with
great goodness; love destroyed, there can be no marrying between Christ and
the soul. 'Twas a great judgment, when their maids were not given to marry.
There is no inclination to embrace Christ, when his beauty is no whit admired.
Vanities destroy affection, some souls are sots, talk of any thing that is
spiritual, and their hearts grow not amorous by it, but die within them, like
Nabals; the curse of God is in strength here, these have made themselves
Eunuchs for the kingdom of darkness. Christ has no engine to raise love
like this, to wit, his bounty and sweetness, that he will give every one to
drink that is dry; that Moses a fair man will marry a Blackmoore; that Abraham
will lodge a Lazarus in his bosom. If goodness will not make good; if love
will not draw love, let the soul marry whom he will, Christ will have none of
him. Christ is noble, he will gain the heart fully, or he will marry no person
in the world: Persons shall be sick of love, or they shall be unmarried to
Christ. You care not whether persons love you, so you can but get their wealth.
Christ is righteous, he seeks us, not ours, persons, not dowry: I seek not
yours, but you. He was a friend to the Bride, which spoke that, and spoke his
heart. I know not what hearts you have, nor how to woo for my Masters Son; I
can say nothing but this, he is all love, he reconcileth all, high, low, rich,
poor, heavenly things, earthly things, he takes dust into his bosom, and
delights in it for ever.

The contemplation of Christ's sweetness, makes the marriage knot, and the
solace of the marriage when made. When is the soul in heaven? but when taken
with that love which has loved him, when considering love in its latitude: He
has loved me, and given himself for me; he reconciles all things indeed, that
would not leave out me. Milk and honey is Canaan: As the soul feeds upon the
riches of love, it is in heaven. Man is doubly miserable, he is at a loss of
satisfying solace, and of the right way to acquire it, he is taken with
creatures, and when he comes to lie down in their bosom to solace, they vanish
and vex; a man lies down smiling, rises up howling, because that is nothing
which he made so much; and this may be the Motto of all earthly beauties, That
creature is nothing which man makes all. Taken with the love of Christ, and the
longer so, the stronger so, the more blessed; the soul cannot want depth here,
and tumble it self ashore, as it does when it tumbles in other waters;
sweetness in this way is found bottomless. O the depth of the riches of the
goodness of God! etc. It Is a brave thing to dive the depths of kindness; if
there be heaven any where, it is in the bottom of divine love. Things have
their full solace in their proper element, this in reference to the soul of
man, is the love of God, in the extent thereof. What did take up Adams soul
into Paradise, whilst he moved well, but the beauty of God, the extent of his
kindness, that it reached all that Adam could look upon? and all that while
had he Paradise in his spirit; but when he began to admire the beauty of
forbidden things, the beauty of Diabolical fancies, then he dyed in his nest
presently. What takes up those blessed spirits above, but the contemplation of
the love of God? Here lies their full and perpetual blessedness, that they
cannot nor will not look beside love. It Is a very desolate time in which we
live, many have little left in the world to think upon, and yet set not
themselves to think of that which might make all to them. Such are without
solace indeed, which have none without nor within; how such poor creatures bear
up, I know not, how to keep them up if they sink, I know not; there is no
cordial in any distress, but the contemplation of the love of Christ, and
under this notion, how large it is.

This bleeding time makes my heart bleed, to think what refreshments to give
forth to mourning persons in every corner. State is gone, friends gone, all
left me gone, this the complaint of thousands. Yet he that is all, is ready to
receive you all, and to impart all to you. God has set you free of this world,
to think of another which is better. Make use of the rich proffers of grace,
and all will do well yet. What, does Christ reconcile all things in earth to
himself, and leave out me? Bless me, even me also, O my Father, so pray. Some
are froward, and will not stir after grace, though never so plentiful, though
Christ will be friends with them, yet they will not with him: How often would I
have gathered thee, and thou would not? Take heed of stubbornness in sin,
though Christ show mercy to thousands, yet he will be the death of such a soul.
I am afraid of some of you, lest Satan should harden your hearts against the
Lord Jesus Christ. Know the disposition of grace; Christ treads upon none that
stoop. Know the season of grace; does Christ knock? O then is the time when he
would reconcile thee to himself. Never let that word of Christ which takes
thee, be forgotten; that is a kiss of Christ's lips to gain thee; kiss the Son
again. Bless God, that he would make any word of his, a sword to wound thy
hard heart: Bless Christ, that he would come so near where thou dwell,
that he would not once knock, but put in his finger by the hole of the door, to
make thy bowels yearn after him: when he knocks again, entreat him to knock all
down, that hinders his coming in. Longing souls after Christ, are the blessedst
souls in the world, who ever die unreconciled to God, they will not.

This point will leave all men without excuse, I will touch this, and conclude:
God would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, and
Christ acts according to this latitude; he reconciles all things to himself, he
desires not the death of one sinner: Sinners, if you die in your sins, blame
your selves, not God, you will die as those that exclude your selves, as those
that judge your selves unworthy of the Kingdom of God. Spirits deeply engaged
to their lusts, have desperate reasonings against free grace; when they can say
nothing to stop the mouth of men and their conscience, to keep on in their
course, they allege the decree of God; and if I be decreed to life, I shall do
better one day, if not, all you say, or that I shall do, will do me no good.
Ah, that so much of hell should flame out of any man's mouth upon earth! What
has any soul to do with the Decree of God? Gods secret will does not
contradict his revealed. What latitude of love does his revealed will hold
forth? consider that, and know, that God is real. Does he reconcile all
things? then thou art bound to believe it, and to put in for a share in that
grace which is so large, which no soul ever did and missed.

COLOSSIANS 1.21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your
minds by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, etc.
A Double condition is here mentioned; what these Colossians are, and what they
once were; They were alienated in their minds, naught at heart, souls
sinful; and this they expressed in life by wicked works; very doingly evil;
and yet these, though thus bad, made very good, hellfire in the soul
quenched, two spirits burning one against another, reconciled by an act of
love, and man and God made one in the body of Christ's flesh, to be presented
blameless in the exactest eye. And you that were sometimes alienated, etc. yet
now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh, etc.

How ever condition change, yet it is a good thing to consider what once we
were. And you which were sometimes so and so. The heart is naught, it forgets
its own worst and Gods best acts. You were so sinful, you are now otherwise;
you need be hinted and minded of both; as if the Apostle had said; Sin slips
out of our minds; transgression makes lasting impression upon Gods Spirit,
though little upon ours. I remember what once you were, though ye have
forgotten.

Some glory in their shame, that is a sinful remembering of sin; so some die in
their shame, this also is a sinful remembering of sin. Evil past thought of
with joy, or thought of with despair, are both displeasing to Christ. My sin
is ever before me, they are a load too heavy; this was not commended by God,
though loved by a wounded spirit. There are two extremes, and both naught;
broken hearts ever think of their sins, and hard hearts never; a stone as often
sighs as they. The text and point I am upon, points at a third thing, though
distinct from either of these, (i) sin remembered with godly sorrow, this godly
hearts are backward to, it is intimated in the text. Ye were enemies in your
minds by wicked works: do ye remember it.

I remembered God and was troubled, and complained, and my spirit was
overwhelmed. To remember what God is, and how unsuitable we have been to him,
will trouble, yea overwhelme the stoutest spirit; we do not care to meddle
with troublesome works. When sin revives we die: remembering what we were,
reviveth sin: it is terrible to the flesh, to wound and kill it self; it is so
spiritually, we had rather any should wake and sit up then conscience; we had
rather go quietly to hell, then conscience should torment us before the time.

I call to remembrance my song in the night; I commune with mine own heart, and
my spirit made diligent search. But 'twas long first, so long, till he stood in
fear of being cast off for ever, as you may see in the next verse, Psalm.
77.6, 7. A string slackened or broken in play, and it is laborious to be winding
up the pin still to keep tune to the song one sings; to take notice how many
notes too flat or too loud in play, requires a diligent ear, the labor of it
makes one willing to pass by, and forget many false strokes. If the
examination of small things be so laborious, much more to examine things of
weight, our spiritual state when all is naught. Man does not love hard work,
nor terrible work.

Their hearts are as hard as an adamant. You cannot beat things into a stone,
no words nor blows, will make hard hearts think of their ways. Though a man
eat of the evil of his way, weeks, months, years, yet will not this make
him bethink himself, what steps he trod in all that while, to call his way
evil, and his person wicked: Present sin, if it harden not much, it wounds
much, and wounded persons think altogether of their present pain. Dolor
distracts, crazie brains are weak at any thing, but worst at recollection,
specially if things of weight. When wounds are deep, much bleeding inwardly,
makes much faintness: Languishing dying souls, think of nothing but going to
hell. It Is with sins, as it is with mercies, when a man goes about to number
them, one can find no end of them, and this makes a bleeding heart leave
looking backward, and look forward, to fix his eyes upon that black place,
whither all sin looks; he leaves multiplying, number rises so innumerably, and
turns himself to consider where all will end; the sum of all will come to
this, says he, the death of my soul for ever; because the sinner can make a
kind use of no sin, he gives up the consideration of all, and lays down his
soul at the foot of Justice for lost. I am sure, all sin centers whither my
soul is going, says the sinner, and closes his eyes; though I cannot tell
their number, yet I know their nature. All runs into this, We are all apt
sinfully to forget sin.

England, unhappy England, thou do neither, therefore do thou bleed and die
daily; thou do not lay to heart what thou wast, nor what thou art: For twenty
years together, forty, fifty years and more, have thou been a bitter
persecuting kingdom of truth and godliness: What art thou now? France is
noted for pride, Germany for drunkenness, but England for persecuting the
power of godliness, the last of these is the worst, and by so much the more
the worst, by how much more we less think what we have been, and are. How many
Saints suffered under Queen Mary! How many under Bishops! a Prelaticall spirit
is still alive, truth and the power of godliness persecuted at this day, and
what suffering is yet behind for Christ, Christ knows. Englands genius and
dexterity, seems to lie this way, always to vex the Saints of the most High.
Thou have made many a conscience bleed, O England, therefore does thy carcass
bleed. Do thou call to mind thy bitterness and baseness against Christ and
godliness? Our ruins are great, this lies heavy upon us. Many think of what
they had, and weep, but not of what they did, when they had such things, and
weep. We are more apt to lay to heart misery, then sin, though this be the
greatest misery in the world; 'twas Jerusalems case, it is Englands. He has
turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces; he has made me desolate, he
has made his arrows to enter into my reins, he has filled me with
bitterness, he has made me drunk with wormwood; and so goes on exactly
repeating misery, Lament. 3. But observe what she says, verse. 19, 20.
Remember my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall [my soul has
them still in remembrance] and is humbled in me, etc. The gall and the wormwood
that God gave Jerusalem, this she had still in her remembrance, but the gall
and vinegar which she gave Christ and his servants, this not so called to
mind. It Is so with us; our losses and overthrowes in the West, in the North,
the gall and wormwood which God in diverse fights has given us, this is called
to mind, and days of mourning, because of it, but the gall and wormwood which
we have for many years, and under several Princes reigns given to Christ and
his members, we call not this to mind.

England does sinfully forget her sin, that she does not call to mind what she
was in Bishops time. The demonstration is this: to wit, an aptness to run into
the same sin. Sin kindly called to mind, melts the heart; the heart melted,
abhors its former course. Yea, what indignation, yea, what revenge! Where is
this to be found now, against that barbarous and bloody sin of burthening the
conscience with unwarranted things which was the sin of Bishops, and for which
the Land now mourns. Are we not very apt to run into the same courses? What is
that which we humbly seek for now in matters of Church Government, but divine
warrant, and where this is not, that customs and courses of our own may not be
imposed? and yet this accounted harsh and refractorinesse by many, and persons
conscienciously carried but at this height, construed and trampled on at men's
pleasure, because they can stoop to nothing but the will of Christ: Consciences
are of several constitutions; such as are peevish must be pitied, not knocked
in head; such as are ingenuously tender, honored; where neither of these can
be found, that spirit is Prelaticall, and Lording over the conscience, let it
live in what breast it will. Now what pity, or what honor, tender consciences
find at this present in England, of all Lands, I leave to you to judge. Satan
rages at us in many, God is good to us in a few, to bind him up, or we should
be buried alive again, thrown in prisons and dungeons again, as bad as ever;
men's tongues talk freely this way, which speaks the heart, and what the hand
should be, if other things did concur. How do men's fingers itch to be tearing
our estates and fortunes, and whatsoever is dear, as formerly! Antichrist is
set forth in the Scripture, under various shapes; alteration of times
necessitates him to change habit, to save his life and livelihood; but he
never went so like a Lamb as now, and yet a Lion still; poor hearts can tell
you so, which feel how bard he pinches, name, state, conscience, etc. If this
be repenting for former ill deeds, then England does not sinfully forget her
former sins.

If inclination to former sins, make demonstration of a sinful forgetting of
sin, resolution to former courses may much more; I beg that this may never
gather about thy heart, O England, for death is in it: my heart bleeds for
thee, when I consider, with what violence thou go in thine own way, but in
this I spare thee yet, and speak more of this to God upon my knees.

Application hitherto has been national, let every one turn it now, and make
it personal. I was a blasphemer, a persecutor, alienated from God by wicked
works, but now I have obtained mercy. I doubt you cannot all say thus. Do you
lay your condition past and present to heart; and no smiting of breast; nor no
change? it cannot be. What you were you are, and would be. Alas for such souls!
their condition is more miserable then any, they have no mercy, nor care for
none. The first step to conversion, is to consider what we have been, and are.
I considered my ways, turned my feet unto thy testimonies. The prodigal came
to himself, and then returned to his father. To himself (i.) to consider what
course he had led, what state he was in, whither that way he was in did lead.
Would sinners would tread one step in the way to life: What is the course I
have led? What a man, or a woman have I been hitherto? A sinners hand to the
Devils Plough, he may look back, and do well; but Satan is against it: so is a
man's own heart, yet something must be done in this way against both, or the
soul is unavoidably lost. Satan cannot endure that a man should commune with
his own heart, his ways have no gloss at a view, he has twenty ways to
prevent the danger of losing a soul. What Is past cannot be helped, what
should thou trouble thy self to think upon it. God forgets thy sin, and wilt
not thou? Sinner, Satan is rocking thy soul now, if thou look not to it, thou
will die in a slumber. God forgets our sins, when we do remember them, and lay
them upon Christ, not otherwise; when we examine our selves and judge our
selves, and go out of our selves to Christ. If we confess our sin, God is
merciful to forgive: Many that had been thus and thus, says the Text, came
and confessed their deeds, and then found mercy from Christ. Christ will know
what a man has been out of his own mouth, ere he make him better. Christ will
know what a man has been, what a man is, and what he would be, and then goes
to work hard indeed to make a miserable creature, blessed.

Take this Item, we can do nothing of our selves, the least good is above us:
to look back upon a bad life, it is of grace; as well as to reform a bad life.
Creepies must take hold of something when they would go: In our weakness to
duty, we must lean upon the Word of God. If you want a word to lean upon, I
will give you one: And they that escape of you, shall remember me among the
nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their
whorish heart, and they shall loath themselves, for the evils they have
committed in all their abominations, Ezekiel. 6.9. It Is hard to find a looking
glass to see ones life from one end to the other, yet Christ can help us to one,
and he has promised this and more, to make us look upon all our abominations,
and to loath them and our selves for them; a soul got thus far, will grow in
grace apace; no motive to the soul to grow kind to Christ, as to think well how
unkind it has been. What a hater, and then what a lover of Christ was Paul: To
look back upon badnesse, 'twill raise goodness, when the heart is turned; O
how often have I kicked against Christ. How often now should I kiss him! How basely
did I tread him under foot, and how tenderly now should I lay him in my bosom!
Paul labored more abundantly then they all. If you would be eminent for the
strength of love, and for the truth of love, look back.

COLOS. 1.21. You that were sometimes alienated, etc.
THe Garden of God is pleasant, 'thath variety yet in all congruity, to make
perpetual delight. We are come to consider a sad state, yet surely this will
be sweet to souls that desire to know their condition: God and all creatures
were in a league, all good in common, infinite felicity every ones mercy, God
in the bosom of every soul, throughout the creation: Sin has broke this
league; the fat and fertile cloud that covered Adams Tabernacle, and the Oracle
upon his Mercy-seat, that was so universally audible, is drawn up, and God that
was near every one, is now far from all naturally. And you which were sometimes
alienated.

Alienation speaks all misery; man quite gone from God, and God quite gone from
man; body and soul under the perpetual influence, of infinite wrath. God is
all, or nothing to the creature, all favor, or nothing but displeasure.
Displeasure orders every thing about a sinful State, as love orders all about
a good condition; poison is in every dish at a sinners Table, not a bit he
eats, not a rag he wears, not a thing he does, but it is cursed from heaven:
This is the proper expression of alienation. The fruit of thy land, and all thy
labors, shall a nation which thou know not, eat up, and thou shall be only
oppressed, and crushed always, Deuteronomy. 28.33. These expressions suit a stranger,
he is one that is blasted in all things, the divine hand of God does only
oppress him (i.) only punish him, only crush and curse him always. Some men
live so far from the Sun, that they have nothing but hard weather, only Winter
and storms.

Alienation is a state shut out from all divine privilege. Divine privileges
are of several sorts, some signify more favor then other: a man alienated
from God, is cut off from all, he is none of the Commonwealth of Israel; if he
be called an Israelite, if he be called a Christian, he is mis-called. The
proper title of an alienated person, is a Heathen, a Publican, a Dog. A title
is a small thing, a shadow, yet God allows not this to some; an alienated
person has not the shadow of love, he may not call himself by the name of
Israel, he shall answer for this, that he bears the name of a Christian, that
he carries the name of the living, and is dead; that he calls himself homo, and
is cadaver, a man, and is a carcass. There be many things in the Commonwealth
of Israel; common and special, yet nothing so common as an alienated person
can challenge any interest in. There were Candlesticks, Basins, Tongs,
Snuffers, and there were Pins and Ashes, about the Tabernacle; an alienated
person is not a pin, not a dust of the Tabernacle, he cannot write himself by
the title of one Cinder of the Sanctuary; not the least scruple of the Church
of Christ militant, he is not the dust of the balance of the Sanctuary; and
yet it is strange to consider the spirit of strangers, they think they are
wronged, when they are denied the greatest privileges of Church state, and
they are wronged when they have the least: Alienated persons are strangers from
the Commonwealth of Israel.

life of God, that is one expression to the life which the Apostle uses, Ephesians.
4.18. Having their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of
God, because of the blindness of their hearts. Alienation speaks God gone,
respecting externals, but the weight of the expression lies in this, God gone
from the soul, the heart without the life of God, through darkness. The life
of God, is heart-panting to follow Christ: Life makes pulsation: Did you see my
Beloved? Which way is he gone, that I may go after him? Blind hearts beat out
themselves after other things, no pulsation of spirit after Christ, this speaks
the soul dead, alienated from the life of God through darkness. As men's
principles are, so they stir to or from God, after, or away from Christ,
strangers to God, their principles are strange; divinity is no rule, reason is
no rule. That we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. That Is
wickedness indeed, which destroys divinity and reason, and yet it is spoken of
aliens, whose lust is their law, their belly their god; not one lust, but many
lusts: they serve diverse lusts. It Is a strange life that strangers to God lead,
they obey that which God and nature forbids, they serve lusts against religion
and reason. Reason is low divinity, teaching things necessary and comely to the
body; it runs forth into many principles, and makes conscience to keep them,
till temptation be strong, and then an alien becomes unreasonable, unnatural,
a brute beast. Every man is brutish, by his knowledge, the founder is
confounded by his graven Image, Jerem. 51.17. Pastors brutish, people brutish;
temptations came, and instructed persons waved all, divinity, reason, and moved
as nonsensically as wild brutes; and this is the Proprium of an alienated
state in strength, one at an utter distance from the life of God. Even amongst
them that are far off from God, some are nearer then others. Thou art not far
from the Kingdom of God, and yet so far, that Christ had no kingdom in the
man, not simple subjection to his will, which is that alienation from the life
of God, which the Apostle speaks of.

having no hope. Divine privilege is graduall, every step to Heaven, a heaven:
a stranger to God cannot de jure, set hiS foot upon one round of Jacobs ladder,
he cannot without presumption, promise himself any good, and yet nothing more
common with persons unacquainted with Christ, then to hope for good when bad is
upon them. I hope all will be better one day: but when will that day be? They
do not this upon warrantable grounds; for alienation is a condition without
hope; a man in this state may fancy what he will, and set his soul at a
greater distance from mercy then it is, but he can warrantably expect no
felicity for time to come, what ever his present misery be. Misery I know is
graduall, some are nearer hell upon earth then others, yet the most is just, it
merits no pity, neither can the largest head alive, argue any pity from
extremity, but from the quality of the party in it; if he be a stranger to
God, 'twill be stranger with him, yet then it is, and yet neither now nor then,
must he or may he hope, to have things better, whilst he abides naught, an
alien from God. The quality of persons is all; persons near God, let
distress be what it will, and seem to set them never so far from God, yet
they may and should hope: persons far from God, must let his favor lie at
the same distance from them, which they let himself; God will have none meddle
with his favors in the least kind, which let alone himself, not so much as
fancy them as theirs, or that ever they shall be theirs; if any thing rises in
their soul this way, God blasts it. The hope of Aliens perishes, they have no
hope of good; if they create any, God blasts it; it is a condition without hope.
All runs into this, Alienation is a condition wholly shut out from all divine
privilege.

where they will meet! aliens and strangers what is it to you, that God comes
so little at you? Little or much? Nothing more sad to a sensible soul, then
the loss of divine presence: God gone, a good heart is broke. Woe is me, now
all is gone, now I am undone, and never till now. Why hidest thou thy face
far away? This was the wound that went to the heart, and yet this is nothing,
if other things be present, to one that is a stranger. We little lament the
departure of such as we know not, we let strangers come and go, and take no
notice. Sinners, what do ye enjoy of God? much or little? When was he with
you? Not a great while. When will he again? I know not: I doubt whether ever
any more. Ah Lord! how did thou use Christ then? did thou as the Gaderens,
thrust him out of door?

Alienation is sometime eternized, ah tremble at that every heart! dogged usage
of Christ, makes this. See my face no more, says Pharaoh to Moses. Thou have
well said, I will see thy face no more, says Moses, and Christ in him. What a
sad parture was here! Such a parture had Saul and Samuel, but they lived not
long neither of them after this. Some say to the Almighty depart: ah wretches!
is not God far enough from you already? Will you have him quite gone? This
is the sin of this generation: our hearts swell against truth, we bid the
Almighty depart. Sinful England, God is gone very far from thee, do thou
not feel it? Thou will. Will thou have God quite gone? Woe unto sinners, if
God judge them in the perverseness of their hearts. If God take a person or a
Kingdom at their word, he returns no more till they die, he comes no more but
to the funeral. Mercy is everlasting, so is justice, and it acts so upon us,
upon desperate discoveries; God does not always strike. Whom God loves, he
loves to the end, and whom he hates, he hates to the end, when all means to
gain love, are thrown off. Know the state of your souls, pervernesse in any
sin, speaks your souls far from Gods law, Psalm. 119.150. one far from Gods
law, is far from God: know the danger of your souls, God may be so far gone
from you, that he will not return; Ye shall die in your sins, says Christ,
or in this your sin you shall die.

Perverse sinners must have their portion, but humble hearts must not wrong
themselves. Persons never so far off, that would be near, verily God is very
inclinable: conflicts are strong in some hearts, sin now and then is too hard,
and then the soul concludes that condition is desperate. God will not take me
by the hand, and therefore I fall and fall, and shall do so till I fall as low
as hell. God has taken something unkindly, and is gone far away. God hides
his face in wrath sometimes, and then he and the soul never meet, till the
great day: that is my case, methinkes I hear some poor sinner say: Conscience
is out with me, that condemns me; God is quite out with me, he will not look
toward me, but he forbeares condemning, till that day in which he will do it
once for all. This soul must be told this, The naked acting of sin, speaks not
the condition desperate, God finally gone, but abiding perversely in it.
Secondly, the medium of returning God to man is Christ, throw not off Christ,
because thou think God has thrown off thee: The least degree of faith,
will turn God about toward a poor sinner, and all good that has forsaken
him. We are made near by the blood of Christ (i.) by believing in it. When
mercy is thus held out, conflicting souls question the latitude of it; Christ
does make many afar off near, but he will not do this for me; such must read
the latitude of the promise, none are excluded. I create peace to them that are
near, and to them that are far off: persons discourage not Christ's
undertaking, let them be who they will: the work discourages not Christ's
undertaking, though the greatest in the world; though it be as the creating of
another world, to bring God and the soul together, yet Christ undertakes it
for them that groan after it. I create the fruit of the lips, peace to them
that are far off. Sin wounds, and then Satan makes it mortal, this must be
looked to: it is the work of Christ to seek out poor souls, which are
strayed away from God, and to carry them home to him in his arm.

We that enjoy the presence of God, should joy and bless him, so I conclude
this point. Alienation is a sad condition, it hints lively what the contrary
is, to wit, a fruition of all privilege, a soul in the bosom of God, one
ever with the Lord, which is Heaven. In thy presence is the fullness of joy:
it is so here, God present in an Ordinance, God present in a Saint, God present
in a dungeon, and there is fullness of joy to the soul, what ever be to the
body. Much company spoils some, so does much solitude others: a man is too
much alone, when without God. Society is never too few, nor too many, when God
is one: Delight, not too little, nor too much, when God is present. If I had
never so many enemies, I would care but for the company of one to encounter
them. It Is enemies we fear now, it should not be. Fear not, I am with thee: So
'twas spoken to Gideon, The Lord is with thee. God takes it for granted, that
he has spoken enough to setle any heart against any fear, when he has said,
we shall have his presence, Read Isaiah 64.1, 2. O that thou would rend the
heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at
thy presence, as when the melting fire burns; The fire causes the waters to
boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble
at thy presence: Let Us prise much that condition which cannot be undone; having
Christ with us, we have him whose presence can make mountains melt, turn any
thing to nothing that nihilates our felicity.

COLOS. 1.21. Being enemies in your mind, etc.
SUch a tree, such fruit; what a sad state alienation from God is, appears by
the effects, which are here to the life expressed; it makes a man all over
naught; inside, outside, heart, hand; it casts all into a resolute posture of
defiance against God. Enemies in your mind by wicked works; or, enemies with
your mind, in wicked works; not nillingly, but willingly wicked; not so in
affection only, but in action; not in one action only, but in many actions;
enemies in their mind, in wicked [works].

The words of God are of weight, every one has much in it, 'twill appear so,
being distinctly considered, which has been, and shall be, our method and
manner of following of him who is so far above us, and will not let one tittle
of his will fall to the ground. Alienation is here anatomised, we must read
lectures distinctly, upon distinct parts. They are enemies, etc. We must open
this. They are enemies with their minds; or, in their minds, etc. We must
read upon this also: They are thus not only in affection, but in action, in
their works. We must consider this too, and by that time you will see much of a
bad condition, and it may be, something of your own. The Land is overrun with
enemies against Christ, therefore it bleeds and dies; 'twill be very seasonable
therefore, to lay open to you, what an enemy to Christ is, which is our first
work here in the Text, to follow the words as they lie. And ye which were
sometimes alienated, enemies, etc.

Sin was Gods first enemy; a steady pursuit of this, renders men and Angels the
next. The worst man alive as a creature, simply as a creature, is not accounted
Gods enemy, but as these noble creatures above all others, prostituted
themselves to something besides Gods will. God had no enemies till sin came
into the world; as long as all obeyed Gods will, there was love and friendship
all the world over. Sin has a legal and a Gospel consideration: considered
according to the former, the least transgression of rule, the eating of any
fruit forbidden, enough to render man an enemy, and to be pursued so with all
the plagues written in Gods Book. Sin has a Gospel consideration, and so the
naked acting of sin, does not presently denote an enemy, but the going on in
it, as a constant intended and approved course. God shall smite the head of his
enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their trespasses, says
the Psalmist. Sin is an unwearied course to some, what ever rubs they meet with
from the hand of God, by blows or otherwise, yet they step over them all, and
go on still: That Is an enemy, the spirit of an enemy is in him. Enemies fear no
colors, blows, blood, death, will not divert their design against one another.
The expression in the original, speaks not only resolution, but delight in
sin, and there are not two fuller properties more infallibly to express an
enemy ambulandis dilictis, such as walk in sins: a man's walk is his pleasure,
it is made and contrived of purpose with much art, to suit fancy, and to give a
complacency. As the outward man, so the inward man has his walks, something
that with much industry he makes and shapes, to suit and delight it self, and
this is preferred before all other ways; now if this be any thing dissonant to
Gods will, this speaks the man an enemy.

Some words of Christ set out an enemy more generally, others more
particularly; I shall touch both: Christ is set as King over the sons of men,
his Laws are written and divulged, and such as obey him not according to
these, he calls his enemies: Bring those mine enemies, which would not that I
should reign over them, (i.) such as will not obey my will. Some disobey one
part of Gods will, and some another. Christ has many sorts of enemies, but all
so called from one ground, to wit, disobeying of his Laws. The Laws of Christ
are said to be disobeyed, when carelessly neglected, ignorantly opposed, or
maliciously rejected. Truth is truth with some men, and that is all, as one
would say; it bears little or no price in affection, how plain and convincing
soever to judgment; they see, and do not see (i.) see, and do not regard. O
that thou had known in this thy day, etc. Did not Israel know the will of
God? yes, there was light, but no love to it, which was as no light in the
account of Christ, and this went to his heart. Such as stab Christ to the
heart, are surely his enemies. It Is as if Christ had said, O that thou had
regarded! and so it notes an ignorance of opportunity, a defect in affection,
and not simply an ignorance of the thing it self. Love naught, and the heart is
so too; hatred in the seeds of it, lie in such a soul which will spring up with
a little more rain. A man naught at heart, is Gods enemy. Neutrality has the
seeds of enmity; there is the buddings of hatred where love is but cold to
Christ. Men that love not, hate truth: They that are not with me, are against
me, says Christ; and all that are against Christ, though never so gently,
neutrally, and indifferently, yet are his enemies. Judas was an enemy when no
hearty lover, as well as when an actual betrayer of Christ. Enmity is sown
deep, it lies long under ground, and puts up with a very little blade at first,
no body takes it for such a deadly weed as it is, it may be not the party in
whose heart it lies; but the Lord of the vineyard, who knows all grain in its
first bud, calls men and things as they are; this is a Serpent by kind, though
it do not sting yet, he will do. False love is true hatred; Cinders will burn
out anon, when blown.

Christ is disobeyed, when stubbornly opposed: Some are fighters against God,
and will be so, these are deadly enemies. Deliver me from my deadly enemies,
says David, Psalm. 17.9. There is fighting against God within, and fighting
against God without; strong art and industry to kill conscience, in a man's self
and others; this is a bloody enemy. Christ knocks at most men's doors, though he
can have entrance into few. Not a soul where the Gospel comes, but he strives
and wrestles with it, to gain it to God: pravity cannot bear these conflicts,
something is taken to destroy conception, vinegar is used to prevent vomiting,
to stay and still the wambling stomach, that it may hold what it has; acts of
violence rushed upon, to darken that light that troubles, and any medium good,
that may but stupifie that faculty that stings; when the soul chooses his own
way, this is called resisting the Holy Ghost; this is a fight under deck, a
murdering Christ in the cradle, these are Christ's bloody enemies. Christ lays
the axe to the root of some sinners, and some sinners lay the axe to the root
of Christ; as soon as ever any word of Christ begins to take hold of the heart,
as soon as ever Christ begins to stir in the conscience, or affection, (as if
the soul were on fire on hell) all means are used to quench the Spirit, hell
is sent for to keep out heaven, many bad spirits to keep out one good; there
are sad issues of this: men kill themselves sometimes, rather then Christ
should live in them.

Opposition has rejection folded up in it, this is distinguished from that, as
it carries despite against the spirit of grace, and makes the hand bloody, if
need be, as well as the heart and tongue, with the blood of Gods dearest ones,
these are Esaus, red all over. And the first came out red all over, like an
hairy garment, and I called his name Esau, Genesis 25.25. The sum of all is
this, An enemy is one that with resolution, and delight, disobeys the will of
God.

Israel, who are of Israel. Christ has enemies in his own house, would we knew
them; would they knew themselves. It Is a time of much opposition, party against
party, this side against that; if we should all be found opposite to Christ,
we are undone. Heat transports, so does self ends; such persons do they know
not what, and are they know not what themselves; one while this, and another
while that, constant in nothing, but enemies to Christ, being secretly swayed,
by blind and base principles. Say we not well, that thou art so and so, and
have a Devil. Hypocrisy knows every one but her self, exactly, knows
another to be a Devil, an arch enemy to Christ, but knows not her self to be
so. To mistake others, proves sometimes afflicting; but to mistake our selves
is damning; O how should we beg to be delivered from this. In a trying time,
wherein many prove rotten, let us do as Christ's disciples, lay our hand upon
our own heart, is it I? Tell me, O Christ, is it I that am an enemy to thee? A
man that looks into his heart, and then looks up to God, he will know much. He
that tasketh himself but to know one, will certainly find him out; but he
that tasketh himself to know many, and to call them by their names, as
hypocrites, or the like, will certainly mistake them, or himself, or both.
Truth and the heart compared, speak out one another. Christ puts us all upon
an exact way to know the thing in question: Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command. A friend loves not only in word, but in deed; what you
are in action for Christ, speaks out what you are in denomination, whether
friends or enemies. Ye are my friends if ye do, etc. Good talk is cheap,
has a great many friends, if this were it. But what do ye do for Christ?
Action also must have its latitude, or else doing is nothing neither. The will
of Christ runs forth into many precepts, that is obedience which excepts against
none. Then are ye my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Truth is
Homogeniall, one precept sweet, and all precepts are so, when the heart is
right: the heart is naught, the man an enemy to Christ, that is partial in his
Law. Yet this is the plague of most men's hearts: Surely Christ has more
enemies a great many then we are aware of. We are for dividing the living
child, therefore are divisions and rumors amongst us; it speaks stony hearts
unnaturallnesse to Christ, he answerably handles us; the truths we scorn, are
the swords which kill us as Gods enemies, as a generation of hypocrites.

Integrity has a double universalitie in it; all Gods precepts are obeyed,
always: a friend loves at all times; it does not divide Christ, to day, nor to
morrow, nor never will; his bowels will not bear it: all truth is of
everlasting sweetness, in a sound soul. Christ is the bright morning Star: a
Star holds its glory, it is always admirable, a man admires it to day, and
admires to morrow, and so as long as he lives; So is Christ, in the eye of
him, which indeed sees him. The Land in which we live is stony ground; Love
withers, it does so very frequently; men that were friends fall off, and become
enemies: Apostate are the worst enemies Christ has, yet how many does this
time make! The Land is full of Apostates, therefore it groans; God is avenging
himself upon these enemies first, fire goes before him, and burns up these
enemies round about, Psalm. 97.3. The most notorious are made examplary amongst
us; it is so in the proceedings of God. All the adversaries of the Lord should
tremble, when some are executed, and learn instruction by his judgments: that
wrath is kindled which will burn you all; such of you as are not burnt here,
will be burnt in hell. Wrath is a flame that never goes out; it runs all along
upon the earth, as it is said of the fire which burnt every green thing in
Pharaohs time; so this burns every flourishing wicked person, first or last,
here or hereafter.

Adversaries of the Lord, cease your course: could one say nothing of the
ability which Christ has, to right himself upon his enemies, yet it is pity
he should have any enemies he is so good: he keeps up the earth you go upon,
the heavens you breath in, they would come together else, and crush you in the
midst; Heaven and earth are full of Gods goodness, though you be bad: you live
in the fruition of these, and thousands more as bad as you, and yet he does not
grudge your enjoyment: Christ beds you, and boards you; where ever you make a
meal, you sit at his Table, and live upon his expense every day: he gives you
your daily bread, all comes out of his Treasure, who ever be the purse-bearer,
and he pays the Reckoning, who ever carries it to the host. And now will you,
nay, can you be enemies to such a friend, and cut his throat like Judas at his
own Table? Christ is the spirit of your blood, the red blood of your cheeks,
the white sinews of your joints, the marrow of your bones, the breath of your
nostrills, and can you be enemies to such a friend? Christ numbers your hairs,
writes down your members, presses all the creatures in the world, to serve and
defend you, and will ye not love him? Can you be enemies to him, or any of his?
Christ is naturally good, and he is morally good; he is patient,
long-suffering, abundant in this goodness. You have been transgressors from
the womb, from the Cradle you have fought against Christ, making your members
your weapons, and you would have killed him long ago if you could, and yet he
has not killed you. You have multiplied your transgressions, so that you have
made the heavens weep now for many days together; and the earth to bleed now
for many months together, you have pressed the Lord, and all the Creation with
your sins, and yet you are at ease, though all these be in pain. You have been
prodigalls, following excess of riot, chambering, and wantonness, and yet
Justice has not eat the nose off your faces, the flesh off your bones, nor
rotted you limb by limb alive, to defraud the grave of her due; and yet can
you be enemies to this God? Finally, Christ is not only naturally good, and
morally good, but divinely good, he is not only patient, but merciful, not
only slow to wrath, but ready to forgive; though you have been bloody enemies,
yet he is ready to cleanse your scarlet sins; during all the times you have
continued enemies, plotted against him, he has not plotted against, but for
you. When we were enemies, God gave his Son. Let my Son go out of my bosom,
says the Father, and let him go to a wretched world, amongst millions of
enemies, and let him preach to them, pray for them, bleed over them, die for
them, that they may not die. Can you now do any other, but love this God, and
love this Christ? I can say no more, would I could weep out the rest, for all
the enemies of the Lord, which these words will not work upon.

COLOSSIANS 1.21. Enemies in your mind, etc.
TRees which grow high and spread much, root deep; so does sin: nothing grows
higher, nor spreads broader then sin; it spreads over the world. The world lies
in wickedness. The height of sin is answerable, if one should speak of it
under such a metaphor; it reaches up to heaven. The cry of your sin is come to
heaven, says God of the sin of the people of old. And sinners are set out as
climbers up to heaven, Amos 9.2. Sin is a Tree that rooteth deep, as well as
shoots high. The heart is deep, says the Scripture, and sin roots there. If
you see a man an enemy in his tongue, or in his hand, by wicked works, the
root of this is in his mind. Enemies in your mind by wicked works.

in the soul. Seeds are sown where they may grow best; so does the evil man
sow Tares, where they may take and live, and that is in the mind. The soul is
fit mould, to give nourishment to sin, 'twill assimulate, 'twill transform,
and become one with that, which gets into it. No substance, that can or will,
so mould, or consubstantiate it self with Satan, as the soul of man. Every
substance will not inocculate, because there is not a fitness between all
substances, to assimulate, and consubstantiate, sap and vigor will not digest
themselves together. The soul is a Crabstock, fit to graffe any forbidden
fruit upon, it will naturally give out all its sap. The advantage of property
is all, to make such a life, and in such abundance. The soul is, I cannot say
blessed, but cursed, to fruitfulness in evil, as the ground is to Briars and
Thorns: the mind is dunged ground by divine wrath, for every root of
bitterness; in it are passions to keep sin warm, faculties to make legs,
arms, eyes, any member for it, to work, provide, and defend it self, as can
be imagined sufficient for any thing to subsist withal. The soul is a
fountain of life, and that which lives in this, must needs live, and thrive
well. As the soul when it is seated in Gods breast, who is the fountain of
life, then its full of such a noble life, and so, by such an advantage of
neernesse to him that is all: so in a proportion it is with lower things; that
which bosoms its self in the soul, is planted by the rivers sides, it is in
the fountain of natural life, it must needs live therefore and thrive much,
because of that advantage it has, of neernesse to, and ones with, a substance
so vigorous, and congruous to it.

Philistians struck at that in Sompson, by which they might be sure to rule
him, and lead him whither they listed, though a strong man; they put out his
eyes. These Philistians were a type of the Devil in that act: man was a strong
creature, and that which Satan struck at was his eyes, darkened his mind,
says the Apostle, and then leads him whither he listed. Where Satan struck at
first, there he strikes still, where he seated himself then, he abides now.
When he would make a Hamon, a proud man, where does he begin to accomplish
this? Within; he puffs up the mind first, and then blows up all: Vainly puffed
up with their fleshly mind; Satan makes the spirit fleshly first, and then
makes all fleshly. If the eye be dark, if the heart be carnnall, all is so.
It Is not enough to Satan to live, he is a Prince, seeks a kingdom, and so
plants and seats himself, as to be Lord over all, where he sits down, and this
can be no where but in the mind.

Levit. 13.31. If the plague go deeper then the skin, then says God, it is a
plague of the skull, and the person must be shut out from all his friends. I
may tell you, that there is a plague, which goes deeper then the skin, yea,
and deeper then the skull; a plague of the brain, and of the mind, and this is
mortal; it shuts out from heaven, and all good. Plagues that go deeper then
the skull, exclude from all: They do err in their hearts, and they have not
known my ways; their plague was deeper then the skull, it reached their
hearts, and observe what followed, they were shut out with a witness: So I
swear in my wrath, they should not enter into my rest, Hebr. 3.10. That which
goes to the heart kills, and cuts off for ever; the Devil seated in the soul,
that soul is lost for ever, such a one shall never have rest, for God has
sworn it.

Adam, has the second given you any vomit, and made you throw it up?
Physicians purge your bodies; Does Christ purge your minds, and your
consciences from defilement? Within lies defilement, which if not purged out,
will spoil us for ever. Naboths vineyard was gotten into Ahabs mind, 'twas
nearer to him internally, then externally; though in the latter sense it lay
very near, and it proved mortal to him; he sickn'd upon it, and died for ever.

it must have, or it dies; this is minding sin, or sin gotten into the mind,
which was the case of Ahab, before mentioned. Sin gotten into the mind,
nothing can beat it out. It Is sad to consider how some men sleep, how some men
talk, and walk in their sleep, yea, how they talk and walk when they are awake,
just as if they were asleep, especially, if one be talking to them of heavenly
things. It Is doleful to consider, how some sit here for an hour; thoughts
quite gone, to this thing, and to that. Ah wretches! vanity is got into your
minds, it holds its seat there, the plague of it is this; God cannot enter, the
soul will be vexed to death, 'twill become a sot, or a Bedlam.

only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5. Such another power is Satan; Satan
roars like a Lion, one would think, it should tear his throat, such violent
action, one would think, should make him breast, and lung-soare, and tire him
out; yet it does not, he goes about gaping and roaring, day and night, and
never gives off; he is cordial in what he does, he minds evil, and this is
the ground why he is untired. The mind is an untired power, that way it takes
in all creatures; the spirit evil, and it is so only and continually. What the
heart is taken up with, it is very intense at it; so that one may in a manner
say, that its only about such a thing, and then it holds its vigor; thus is the
soul toward one sin or other, whilst corruption keeps it is seat in the mind.
There is a busy immortal substance in the midst of you, 'twere well, if you
did know about what. Some mind earthly things, says the Apostle, (i.) upon
the matter only, and continually; this man is carnally minded, and it will be
his death, if God be not gracious to him. If sin hold its seat in the mind
against all means, there is no way but one with the man, if sin die not in the
soul, the soul dies in it; Ye shall die in your sins.

It Is the greatest blessing in the world to get sin thoroughly out of the mind,
not only by way of negation, but by way of actual fruition, not privatively
only, but positively too. Sin thoroughly out of the mind, and the soul is
altogether in heaven. That which cuts our wings, when we would mount up where
Christ is, is that so many naughty things are in our minds. Contemplation
pure, and the man is an Angel, taken up wholly with the admiring of God, and
the glory of another world. Sin thoroughly out of the mind, and all tears are
wiped from the eyes already. What makes mourning and sadness amongst Saints
here, but that sin keeps still in their minds, the evil working of their
minds? The mind pure, and conscience is quiet, peace is settled; nothing can
burden when the mind is free. Sin thoroughly out of the mind, and it becomes
presently the Presence Chamber of the great King; in no creature is Christ so
present, as in a pure mind, the full explanation of this is above us.

COLOSS. 1.21. Enemies with the mind, etc.
ACcording to the former reading of these words, we were led to consider the
seat of sin; and according to this reading, we are led to consider the
voluntarinesse of sin. We are pressed to many external services of men, but we
are by nature the Devils volunteers, so and so bad, and with our minds
desperately set against Christ, and this with our mind: Enemies with your
mind. The expression speaks intention. Some things we do, that which we do not
mean; the will is redeemed, corruption not emptied, this upon advantage
surprises, and carries the soul captive to what it did never intend; this is
transgression of the rule, but not sinning willingly, (i.) with the mind; a
captive under another, is no volunteer. I find a law in my members, carrying
me captive to the law of sin. Powers within clash sometimes, several things in
view, which to be followed, not agreed: debates determined, the way proposed:
actus voluntarius, est actus pleno consensu, pursued with full consent, is an
act with the mind. And if a Levite come from any of thy gates, out of all
Israel, where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind, be
colarath naphsho, in all the desire of his mind, then he shall minister in the
Name of the Lord his God, Deuteronomy. 18.6. There is preaching but of constraint, not
with a ready mind, not toto desiderio animae, (i.) not with intention, nor
approbation. So there is living, and walking in ways that are divine, but not
toto desiderio, with a whole desire, but with constraint. As about good things,
so about bad: some sin from a coercive power, not with a whole desire of the
mind. There is reluctatio debilis, and reluctatio fortis, a weak reluctance,
and a strong reluctance: in acts of evil with the mind, there may be weak
reluctation, because conscience stings, wrath and justice hems about the sinner
sometimes, so that he goes affrightedly along in his course, yet this is
consistent with full consent. Pharaoh and Judas had this kind of reluctation
in their course, and yet were enemies with their mind, and fully consenting to
what was done against Christ.

The expression speaks extention, all powers fully consenting, and all powers
to the utmost acting, to perform what is chosen and consented to. Things
naturally grown to bring forth, venture one life to bring forth another, and
all pangs and throws nothing, so the birth may be, though but a monster when
born. What is with all the heart, is with all the might, they are joined
together in expression, as they are in order of nature in working. Enemies with
your mind, and enemies with your might, with full purpose, and with full
endeavor; if with the heart, then with both hands, as the Prophet speaks; yea,
with every finger, with every toe: An enemy with the mind, it is one that
fills his hand to the Devil, as the expression is in another kind, 1 Chro.
29.5. 'Twas David's speech, when they were offering of jewels and wealth to the
House of the Lord. Who then it willing to consecrate his service this day to
the Lord, Lemmalloth jado haijom, etc. to fill his hand this day to the Lord,
says the original. An enemy with the heart, is one that fills his hand to the
Devil, that offers like a Prince to the prince of darkness, that fills his
hand with his heart in every action, that sends forth every spirit, the soul
and all that is within him, into every part without him, to stand against
Christ; it is one that does draw out all to accomplish all that a corrupt heart
thirsts after; he does, (...), do the wills of the flesh, as the Apostle
speaks, (i.) not one thing that the flesh lusts after, but every thing it lusts
after. You say of a servant, that he is a willing servant, when he gives his
mind to serve you, (i.) when he does every thing you bid him; not when he does
one thing, and neglects another thing which you bid him, but when he does your
wills, when he applies himself to serve you in all your command, then you say,
he serves you with his mind.

afflict willingly; his people do not sin willingly, they repent; in like
proportion does God carry himself toward them. You do evil with both hands,
so shall justice fight against you, and woe to that soul that God strikes with
all his heart, and with all his might. God will laugh at your destruction:
hearty sinners, God will be very hearty in all those acts which fit you for
your home. Two in full carreer, one against another, one will be spoiled, and
surely 'twill be that man that does run with his mind against the Lord.

Remedy must be speedy; two enemies that set to it with their mind, will
dispatch one another quickly, if they be not parted. Wilful sinners, you
cannot strike so desperately against God, as he does against you; every blow is
upon your heart, he is turning that into a stone, which work done, you will
sink presently, like Pharaoh. Properties are not suspended; when you are once
sinking, ah Lord! what will you catch hold on? what can you catch hold on, to
keep you out of hell? Does a stone use any struggling to keep up, when it is
falling down? Wilful sinners, this is your judgment written in your
foreheads, you will go laughing, like Bedlams, to everlasting chains: you
will have no book, nor ask for none. Will as it runs its course, swells bigger
and bigger, and it swells so big at last, that it will break eternally, rather
then stoop to God or man. If this be the case of any sinner here, let him tie a
handkerchiefe about his eyes, the halter is about his neck, he will be turned
off suddenly, ere he is aware. Wilful sinners need remedy speedily, but of
all sorts are most untractable to it: much must be done from heaven, to stop a
Balaam, ere he would give back, will was so perverse. You that are Balaams,
must consider how God has now drawn his sword against you from Heaven, and
give back, or you cannot long escape. Consider how many wilful sinners God
has slain in these few months; Bathe and soak your stubborn hearts in their
blood. What a wonder is it, that I am not yet cut off! My will has killed
many, but has not killed me yet: it may be God has mercy in store for me, it
may be he will make me a pattern of long-suffering, as he did Saul. I have but
one thing to say to you all; O that will were thoroughly slain, if this were
thoroughly slain, we should have no more die.

COLOSSIANS 1.21. In wicked works, etc.
ACtion is the maturitie of conception; the creature in external motion to
some end; one spinning out his bowels into a curious engine, to live upon and
delight in. Action is in some creatures, purely natural, and then instinct, a
noble virtue in nature unexpressible, guides: works from hence are some very
useful, others very hurtful to us, yet none properly called wicked, because
all the proper acts of such creatures, in their kind. Action is in other
creatures called moral; the stain of this action we are to stand upon, (to
wit) what it is that speaks the actions of a man wicked.

Vzza to touch the Arc, not materially, but efficiently, because he did it.
Fire burns down all sometimes, and a man knows not whence it springs.
Unqualified men will be meddling with divine things, and think this is their
sanctity, and it is their killing iniquity. We beget in our own likeness as
Adam did: what the man is, that is his work. To the unclean, all things are
unclean, their hearing, reading, praying, wicked works. Actions name persons,
and persons name actions. What have [thou] to do to take my name in thy mouth?
[your] solemn meetings are an abomination.

And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer
the lame, and the sick, is it not evil? A good man may do a wicked act: the
lamp gone out, zeal for God fallen, and the man takes up a dead dog, and
offers it to God, he brings a dead stinking carcass, and sets it close under
Gods nostrills: what abominable wickedness is that! Isaac must have that which
his soul loved, what pain soever be used to get it. Every dish would not down
with the Patriarch: so every dish is not savoury meat to God, he must have
venison, how hard soever we hunt for it. What action is unfavoury, is wicked.
Persons want salt sometimes. If that have lost its savor, cast it to the
dunghill, this is spoken of persons: so actions want salt sometimes. If actions
have lost their savor, cast them to the dunghill, says the Lord, as
abominable things. Weakness or wantonness of palate is not with God, but
perfection of will: What he commands for offering, is our obedience to bring;
to bring less is wicked, to bring more is wicked; to add or detract is wicked
action, according to the matter; To have Altars at Dan and Bethel, when that at
Jerusalem was enough, to set up posts, to help bear up Gods post, and make
his house of more rooms, and more rafters then he has made it, is wicked
action.

to make a good bell. Christian action is a piece full of art, it must be so
cast, as to carry the image and face of Christ in it, or else it is wicked. God
looks for his image in our persons, and in our actions, or else he disclaimes
both as wicked. There is the matter of duty, and the circumstance, and both
under express command. You shall do this, and you shall do it thus: pray and
pray fervently; give and give liberally; rule and rule diligently; in the
observation of these circumstances, consists the formalitie of action, in these
small lines lies the feature of Christ, the form of his countenance; hit these
and you hit the white: these observed, and a Christian brings forth a child
like God, such a one as will own God, and God it any where. Hypocrisy draws
out her self, not Christ in action, when matter is allowed of, but manner of
divine action must depend upon the humor of the man. A humerous Christian
allows such and such dishes at Wisdoms table, but he will sower or sweeten
them himself, and eat what he will, and when he will; a line of his own will
must be read and observed in every business, or else he is no body: this is
wicked action. Life is the sum of action, this must be hid quite in the life of
Christ, or else the life is wicked. [Not I] but Christ lives in me. If I act so
that any thing of self lives in the action (i) that a man's own will orders the
will of God in any thing, though but in the least circumstance, it is wicked
action: Formalitie in action, speaks the exactness of it to rule.

round as it is: so put silver enough in the pockets of some persons, fill the
hole in the side of the bowl, and the man will work hard and run which way
you will have him; this man seeks not you but yours, not the glory of Christ,
but his belly; he aims at himself, therefore shoots naught, it is wicked
action. Intention in action, is with more or less strength; where it is with
much strength, what is aimed at, though it be never so wicked, is made
complacentiall to the soul, which makes wicked action notoriously wicked.
Scope is universally naught, where hypocrisy is thick and deep. They do all
things to be seen of men, this is action abominably wicked. Aim is the first
thing stirring, though the last thing accomplished. Action is at the very root
rotten and wicked, when intention is awry, therefore is this action called
wicked with emphasis, violation of Gods will, and loving of it. The Lord loves
the righteous, but the wicked and him that loves violence, his soul he
hates, Psalm. 11.5. He is set a degree beyond a wicked man, (i.) beyond
ordinary wicked men. The wicked [and him that loves violence]; that loves
violence (i) that does aim at it, and make it his scope, as his life and
pleasure; this is so wicked, that it goes to the soul of God, because it is
complacentiall sin.

Am I my brothers keeper? This spoke he who a little before said as much in
action to God himself, by a carnal offering to him. Consider seriously at what
pitch and posture of remissness in divine action you are, if you do ill
tremblingly, stop there, acknowledge that power within, that jogges you to look
better to your way: if the fear of God be quite gone, that you do wickedly
freely, merrily, think of that of Solomon, that God will bring every work
into judgment. Wicked works have a double judgment, a judgment here and
hereafter. All motion to well being is succeslesse, much gotten comes to
nothing, because heaped together by wicked works; Name withers, state, yea,
strength withers; judged without, and judged within; Conscience lights a fire
with some wicked work or other, and no work so good can be wrought as to
quench it. They shall feel a pain in their bellies, says the text, Job
20.20. What you work outward, God makes to work inward in the guts, to
torture there, and make roaring. You that make nothing to speak wickedly, and
do wickedly, God makes as light to do justly. You are undone sinners, if God
ingrave but one wicked work upon your conscience, this will ever be before
you, and then a devil will ever be behind you, and between these two you will
erect a gibbet, and hang your selves, if the Lord be not gracious, and what a
fatal wicked work will this be!

Some hear such things as these, and then go merrily to mending their works
in all post haste, and never think of their hearts nor Christ. The hand goes
after the heart: do ye look without? look within too, if ever you mean to
mend things. In sin was I borne, says David, when he looked upon that bloody
wickedness against Vriah. Alas for me! I brought a wicked soul with me into
the world, this has brought forth this horrid and bloody act into the world.
My misery lies deeper then every one is aware. I shall shed blood again and
again, I shall make Vriahs blood touch the blood of many other men, if the
Lord be not merciful to my wicked soul. Does thy hand work naught? use it to
smite thine heart, that is the first step to get it to move well. O if Christ
were in my heart, I should work admirable well. I can do all things through
Christ, yea and I can do all well. There needs many things in the soul, to
make action holy: exact knowledge, exact faith, etc. and Christ is all these.
In the dark men work naughtily: a blind soul cannot act well. Action must be
squared by truth, but ignorant persons know not the rule. Christ is light, he
is so in the darkest soul; as a pearl he sparkles and glisters in a dungeon,
in what ever breast, in what ever dark cell you put him. Scales fell from
Paul's eyes, but 'twas Christ in him that did it, and he knew Christ presently,
and to doing good works he would go presently. Lord, what will thou have me
to do? He understood much in a little while, his Master, his service, and
wanted nothing but divine mission, as before he had diabolical. Lord, what
will thou have me to do? A man is made very knowing with one Tutor.

Affection tends to make good action; If I do this, and that, and have not
love. Love alone does not well; If the blind lead the blind, etc. Here is a
great deal of love, but both fall into the ditch, and drown both it and
themselves. Light and love together do well; Christ is both, he is a light of
life in the soul where he is. Coldness is the property of a stone, there is no
soul in this body, a stone stirs not, unless it be downward. Folly talks to
the grief of the wise; I do not love sudden pangs: some will do great matters
presently, and what noble works they will perform, when in the company of some,
a little warmer then themselves, and no sooner these more lively spirits
departed from them, but they return to their proper temper, as cold as stones,
and doing nothing but descending downward to their place; these men's ears were
warmed, and not their hearts. The heart fired with love to Christ, 'twill give
name, state, every drop of blood to Christ, and these are noble works indeed.
Noble actions are of several sorts, that is the noblest that offers up all to
Christ, that forsakes all to follow him, father, mother, husband, wife, self;
love does this, she offers nothing but whole burnt-offerings, holocausts.

Finally, faith also bears its proper part, to make a good work. It Is the
highest art in the world to do a good work; a man must pray with the mouth of
Christ, and then it is a good prayer; a man must give with the hand of Christ,
and then it is good alms: a man must do all that Christ says, but then must
lean only upon what Christ is, to make a good action. A man must do all, and
then undo all, to make it thoroughly good, (i.) deny all, and account all my
actions nothing, my self nothing, and make Christ as fully and purely all to
rest on, as if I had never so much as thought one good thought, in all my life.
A man not himself, is but a bad Artificer, but a Christian, when not himself,
(i.) when out of himself, is a brave Artist; then a Christian works bravely,
nobly, heavenly indeed, when quite off himself, and wholly in the bosom and
arms of Christ, in all he does. There go many things to make up this or that
secular thing good, but one to make a Divine good, to wit Christ; there is none
good but one, and there is none that properly does good but one, to wit,
Christ. There is as few good Artists for the practick part of Christianity, as
of any calling; many actions go through our hands only and never through the
hands of Christ, and these are all lost as wicked works. All that goes out of
our hands, must be put by faith into the hands of Christ, then it is maturated,
and shall meet us as so many royal Diadems, to adorn us for ever.

You see now the way to work well, thus work, and your work will be work and
wages; It Is a very sweet life, to do all in Christ. Things are very lively and
contentfull in their own element: Set a Lark to fly in the open air, it is his
element, it is his heaven, he will fly upward, upward, which is very hard work,
and yet he will do this, and sing too. The breast of Christ is the proper
element of a Christian, and when here, a man works nimbly, he works and sings
too, goes upward toward that place above, which is very hard work, and yet
sings as he goes, because he has such silver wings from Christ. If ye abide in
me, says Christ, ye will do bravely, you will bring forth good works, as a
Garden, as a Vine does fruits, smilingly. Let Us work as Christ did, and we
shall find our work as he did; 'twas meat and drink to him to do his Fathers
will; his works were all works wrought in God, as the Apostle speaks. Let a
Christian set himself in Christ, when he goes about any action, and he shall
find his work will be very sweet, work and wages, his meat and drink. No
motion so free and delightful as Christian motion; where it is purely
Christian. We set upon work out of Christ, and then the Chariot wheels move
heavily, and we look sadly, and are tired presently, Christ's sayings are so
hard to be done; by this a stumbling block is cast before men of the world, the
works and ways of God evil spoken of. To work divine works, is the
joyfullest, the sweetest life in the world, if a man take the advantage of his
work, that is, Christ with him in every thing; a Christian and Christ will do
any thing with ease, remove mountains, sins, harder to be removed then
mountains, and stand and smile to behold the plagues of death: O death, I will
be thy plagues; to be the plagues of the king of plagues, is brave action
indeed. A man might speak more consolatory from this point. Every workman in
Christ's Vineyard, has a penny here, and Christ's penny is more then any ones
pound, but I cannot stand to sum up this now.

COLOS. 1.21. Yet now has he reconciled.
THe love of God is wholly dispensed as love; it is in giving out as in taking
in, all along free, birth bears it not to this rather then to that. Not many
noble, etc. friends work it not; there is but one Mediator, but one favorite
in all the world, that appears in the presence of God about any such thing, and
he is no respecter of persons. The vilest as soon as those that are more
beholding to nature, obtain grace. And ye that were sometimes alienated, and
enemies in your mind by wicked works, [yet now has he reconciled].

Reconciliation in the formality of it, I have already handled, this therefore
I shall not meddle with again, neither is it that which the Holy Ghost does
principally point at here; but as you see by reading the whole verse, one
inviting property of reconciliation, is most aimed at, to wit, that the favor
of God goes forth to all sorts, that there is nothing in one sort of persons
more then another, to invite or discourage God, to dispense his eternal grace;
all sorts, and all at one price, may obtain the favor of God, (i.)

The Grace of God unto life is in all respects free; and this is that sweet
property of reconciliation, which according to the scope of this place, and the
necessity of many poor souls at this time, I would demonstrate to you.

Universally.
God does invite universally: You make feasts, but yet every one may not come;
God sets no such bound, nor makes no such distinction of persons. Ho, every
one, [as many as you shall find] bid to the marriage, Matthew. 22.9. The heavens
are general in their influence, not one grass on the ground, but dewed. The
Ark had of all sorts brought into it; from the East, West, North and South,
come and sit down in the Kingdom of God: As persons are in estate, so they
invite, and so they feast. Christ is a great King over all the earth, and so he
invites over all the earth; he has one house that will hold all, he has one
table that will hold all; yea, he has one dish that will serve all, and
answerably he invites, Ho, every one that thirsts. If there be any thing looked
at in those which Christ invites, it is something within, not any thing without.
If the man be lame, blind, halt, if he be bodily soar, yet its nothing; if he
would sit at Gods table, and if he would have crumbs or flagons, this is all
that is looked at.

God does universally invite, and he does affectionatly invite, Affectionatly.
which loudly speaks his love free. The world is deaf; 'twould discourage any
one to make a feast for a company of deaf folks, stocks and blocks, that one
must strain ones lungs, to make them hear, and yet it does not discourage God;
certainly his love is very affectionate, God does lay his mouth to the ear of
the deaf, and cries aloud, [Ho] every one that thirsts. John was a crier in the
Wilderness, he did Christ's work; so are we at this day, and the injunction is,
to cry aloud like a trumpet; spirits, lungs, nothing to be spared, in
expression of Gods affection to man's eternal good. Souls are precious to God,
distress is laid to heart as it is: bowels sound, lungs sound, [Ho] every one,
etc. vocations, interjections, etc. speaks very affectionate motion toward the
distressed: Why will you die, O Jerusalem? Matters of weight move not us, we
make expression from no impression; God smites his heart again and again, and
then speaks and proffers love. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee, O Judah?
how shall I give thee up? God calls and knocks, and waits; he calls and
beseeches; calls and weeps: what he utters is from his heart, that it may go to
our heart. Things are so molded and shaped, as to make their own way: Every
word of God, has so much Majesty and sweetness, conviction and consolation,
which plainly speaks him very free, and willing to be reconciled to man. Who
puts on such apparel when he wooes a Spouse, as Christ does? Who speaks such
effectual words, or presents such precious jewels when he wooes, as Christ
does?

I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. The counsel of Gods will, is his
guide: Mercy goes forth and embraces this or that person, and not from any
respect else, but Gods will; he does all things according to the counsel of
his will: Prerogative carries all with him. God is free, and will be free, to
give what he will, to whom he will; he has no respect nor obligement upon him,
nor will have: I will have mercy upon whom I will; men proffer to some persons
this or that, to induce them to do this or that for them, and they say no; what
we do, we will do freely: God is such a noble Spirit. The whole creation is
spiritually turned into a Chaos, darkness is upon the face of the deep, upon
the deepest understanding; every soul under heaven, without form and void of
God. As all things were then materially, as clay in the hands of the Potter,
free for God to shape how he would, one to this, another to that; so are we now
spiritually: and as then he was led in the old creation by his will, so is he
now in the new creation, and by nothing else; the will of none interrupts or
swayes a jot with God. Of his own will be begat us by the Word of truth, Jam.
1.18. Not any thing without God swayes him, in what he does in the old creation
or in the new, and therefore all that comes forth from him is free, and can be
no otherwise.

[no soundnesse] in us, Esa. 1. It Is a remarkable expression, if we had any
soundness, and 'twere but very light, we might present that to attract and
make friendship and love, and so with something of our own, help by art a bad
condition; but there is no soundness in us from the crown of the head, to the
sole of the foot. What grace does by degrees in a very long space of time, that
sin did presently. Grace does purge wholly, but it is long first. The God of
peace sanctify you [wholly] etc. Sin corrupts wholly presently; as soon as
ever Adam transgressed, it did as some strong poison, run quite over him
presently, so that we are become as the Psalmist says, Altogether filthy,
Psalm. 14.3. Such as are altogether filthy, cannot offer any thing of their own
altogether clean, and yet so it must be, to him who is altogether so, or else
it obtaines nothing with him; and therefore it is that the Scripture speaks of
our righteousness, as menstruous rags.

England, thy death will be but just desert. 'Twere well if what now is upon
us, were all we have deserved, we should then give a guess, when our troubles
would end, whereas now we can give none. A person or Nation pursued according
to merit, perishes unavoydably. The wages of sin is death: Our remedy is free
mercy, that God break off from what he is yet but entered upon, to wit,
judgment; for if he go on to do but justice, woe unto us all, he will find
matter enough to keep justice alive, till every person in the Land be dead. See
Esa. 9. He shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry, and he shall eat on
the left hand, and not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh of his
own arm, Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh, etc. And for all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, verse. 20, 21.
Justice will find work a great while, if this be only employed about a
people, 'twill eat out all and look over the hatch for more. For all this his
anger is not put away, etc. When justice has destroyed a whole Land, yet not a
jot satisfied nor pacified, but stands ready to burn it again and again.
Mercy finisheth her work, that consummates the creature: justice finisheth her
work too, and this consumes the creature. When justice does finish her work,
yet then it is righteous, it is in righteousness. He will finish his work [in
righteousnesse]. If this be the determination of God upon us, that justice
shall finish her work in the midst of us, we are in a consumption, and can
never recover. He [will finish] his work in righteousness, etc. That Is a
fatal sentence. If free grace intercept not, till justice has finished her
work, 'twill eat us out all. We have deserved to die all; beat at heaven,
to know whether the heart of God be hardened as yours is, and whether he be
only judiciarily bent against us. And whom he will he hardens, etc. Flint to
flint, strikes nothing but fire. God hardened and we hardened, nothing but
blows and fire, will or can issue out of this. Plead with God for grace and
compassion for the Land, or we cannot live.

More particularly, I would make application of this point. Grace is free in
soul distresses, let us all feed upon this doctrine. God does not choose us
and embrace us for our beauty, as Ahasuerus did Esther, and yet this is it
that makes many poor souls, to shake off what they should take hold on. I am
very filthy, preyed upon with this lust or that, and should such a one as I
kiss the King of glory? Is there any reason to think, that he will take me
into his arms, and make me his delight? We may not measure the ways of God,
by the ways of man: Grace works above reason, that which we can give no
ground for, God does: his love passes knowledge, in the breadth, length,
height, and depth of it, in the spring of it. Why is this man or that beloved?
can any man give a ground, more then that which Paul does? It [pleased] God to
reveal his Son in me. Nothing can be rendered as a reason of Gods love to any
thing, but to Christ; if any thing incite him toward us, it is that which
deters us from him, to wit, our desperate condition. The poor man that lay
wounded, when all passed by, Christ took compassion upon him. Grace does so
work, as best to show its own nature; the less you see in your selves, the
less you can say for your selves, the likelier to find favor and friendship
with God. Christ is come of purpose to make favor and friendship for such,
that see themselves worthy of none. Let what will be said of this nature, yet
tempted souls will put all off: something must be on my part, to get the
favor of God, and I can do nothing, I am under the power of darkness, and
cannot stir a limb: what can become of me but ruin? I cannot pray, nor
hear, nor believe: yet thou may be blessed. When we have no legs to go
forth to fetch in good things, they make legs to themselves, and come to us. As
Solomon says of riches, that they make wings to themselves, and fly away from
us: so divine favors make wings and legs to themselves, and come to us.
Salvation is come to thy house. Joy comes in the morning. I will not leave you
orphans; I will come to you. The doctrine in hand answers this objection too,
grace is in all points, and according to all circumstances free. The
preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue; what to think,
what to say, what to do, to make you blessed, you shall have all from the
Lord. Poor creatures, at an utter loss in themselves, conclude God is so too,
otherwise why should you give up your condition as desperate? When you can do
no more, can Christ do no more, to set the wheel of mercy going? Yes he can,
but he will not for me. Why? Because of this and that. This is all one to say,
that his love is not fully free, which is a direct contradiction of the
doctrine in hand. Grace has riches in it, unsearchable riches, it works
beyond what you can ask, beyond what you can think; it blots out
uncleanness, blood, guilt, treason against the highest State; grieving,
quenching, resisting the holy Ghost.

All this is to tempted Christians; to men in their carnal condition, a word
more, and this discourse will end. Your condition is not supposedly miserable,
but indeed so. You are not the people of God, you have not obtained mercy; and
yet all this may be, because grace is in all respects free. Conscience though
in a dead sleep, is startled now and then, and then rages terribly; cuts and
wounds, raves and tears, and then lies down again, as your bedlams do; this
is a woeful condition, and by so much the more woeful, because such pangs come
and go, and nothing done by them, but naked torment and despair. Such
distempers of soul, are much like those distempers of body, which you call
convulsions, falling sickness, it takes men by fits, upon changes of weather,
condition, and the like: such as are troubled with these fits, should do well
to have in readiness such Scriptures, as that 1 Pet. 2.10. Which in times past
were not a people, which in times past had not obtained mercy, but now all is
otherwise. And that Scripture, Ezekiel. 32.36. I will wash you, and cleanse you,
but not for your sakes. Though at present you are such and such sinful livers,
you may have mercy from the Lord, and be changed. Diabolical convulsions wry
and wrest your mouths and eyes ghastly against good, and make you foame at
mouth against Christ, and yet as fearfully wicked as you are, you may obtain
mercy. The Apostle speaks of such a generation as these in the text; And ye
which were enemies in your mind, by wicked works, has he reconciled. God
does (...), and then he does (...), bear men's manners, and then bears their
souls out of them at last. If these things harden you in your sins, they will
hasten your ruin; but if they melt you, and make you inquire after God, who is
so sweet, so giving and forgiving, you will be blessed for ever.

COLOSSIANS 1.22. In the body of his flesh.
CHrist can make work with any instrument, out of the dust can he raise seed
to Abraham: he assumes a body of flesh like ours, and in this body saves the
souls of men. Earth is the basest Element, and yet out of this Christ makes a
body, and does by it the noblest things. The mean and low ways that God goes
in, to bring about the greatest and bravest works, is wonderful: he chooses
weak things, and with these destroys strong. Flesh is weak, and with this he
destroys spirits, the strongest spirits, principalities, powers, all the
enemies of our salvation: Yea he takes things which are not, to bring to
naught things which are. One is not, meaning Joseph, which was slain, and by
this one which was not, by this despised person, were all the rest made to
stoop, yea by this one that was not, was all the rest, father and children
saved. Joseph was in this a type of Christ, by taking a body, a humane body, he
was sold into bondage, slain; one that was not, and by this brought to naught
things that are, sin, Satan, hell, and made the way open to heaven, which was
shut with everlasting doors.

It Is no matter what the instrument is, so the power used be vast. Sampson with
a jaw bone of an Ass, slew heaps upon heaps: the arm was mighty, though
the instrument was weak and unlikely. The power Christ has, to work with, is
absolute, he has much within him, he needs little without him, whether he
has any or none, it is all one, he is himself so mighty, he is a Sampson,
every hair of his head stronger then a Goliath, every finger stronger then an
arm, every glo^e of his eye, more terrible then legions of devils. Christ is
the power of God, the great power of God, as they falsely said of the Sorcerer,
he can with his own hand work salvation. That which can do a thing alone, can
do it with a small concurrence; if the hand be the hand of Sampson, then
whether a bone or feather be in that hand, it is all one, the work intended,
will be accomplished, Sampson will be mortal to his enemies, and accomplish
his will, what ever instrument he works by. The things we use must contribute
jointly with us, to the work we set upon, because we are too weak for it, we
take up no instrument, but we borrow something from it which we need, and
therefore pick and choose when we take up tools, lest we fail in our end.
It Is not so with Christ, he takes up no instrument from necessity, he is so
complete himself, and therefore any thing that comes next to hand, a jaw bone,
a sling, a nail, a clod of earth, a body of flesh like ours, weapon enough to
overthrow all the powers of darkness.

It Is no matter what the instrument be, so that it has but the advantage of
divine ordination to such an end. All the means that God uses are effectual
to his end, because he has appointed them, and not for any cause or reason
naturally in themselves. If there be no likely power in an instituted means,
yet it shall accomplish its end, because instituted. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, it is the power of God unto salvation. To speak a few plain
words of a despised person, and think by this to convert the souls of men from
their wicked ways, and to bring them to heaven, and to wave a lofty strain of
humane wisdom, more likely to take, I am not ashamed to do this; this course
may seem folly, yet certainly it shall accomplish its work, 'twill be the power
of God to salvation, because the will of God has instituted it. That Christ
should have such a frail instrument, and no other, to wit, a body of flesh, a
substance capable of death, to conquer death withal, was of Gods appointment;
a body have thou prepared for me, and therefore effectual to such an end.

God eyes himself in all he does by us: He does so order action and instrument,
as may most advance his own glory. When the instrument is great, God is little;
we cannot see much of Christ, when he takes up much of any thing here below to
do his will by. Man's argumentation generally, is very destructive to the glory
of God: That hand which is most visible still, that did all. Saul has slain
his thousand, David his ten thousand, God none. God therefore leaves all which
we so much look upon, and goes alone, and does work with poor despised ones,
which we cast off. The Stone which the builders refused, he must be head: Weak
and unlikely things to sense, are trampled upon by us; Can death bring about
heaven? Can base things bring about glory? Thus we reject and refuse things,
and then God uses them, and then he is seen as God. The humanity of Christ was
the fittest medium in the world, to demonstrate the Divinity of Christ by, to
all the world. For such an organ as ours to be made do mighty things, made
beholders put that question, What manner of man Christ was. We admire power,
wisdom, and every attribute else, when they put forth themselves by poor and
unlikely things, and not else. If means be likely to such an end, according to
our reason, we usually never look at God, but bury the glory of all that is
done, in instruments.

Enemies to Christ should tremble at this point. The kingdom of the Devil is
strong, men are confident and rage, Roundheads shall not live a man of them:
God suddenly blast this pride with a little power. Men despised for valor and
skill, God makes to drink the blood of despisers, so he will do, it is his way.
Great men, and great spirits, should abase themselves, if they will not, weak
things, Worms, Flies, Frogs, shall devour a king. The heart secretly rises,
but the man is openly pulled down; the ruin of the stout-hearted is very
notorious by two circumstances, in that it is done openly and utterly; that God
uses weak means to overthrow strong, and so, as never to rise more: They sank
as a stone, says the Text. Does a stone rise again? Jael nails Sisera to the
ground, could he rise again? Ah! what is become of many thousands of the Lords
enemies in this Land, which were mighty in battle? Are they not sunk as a
stone, pinned to the ground, gone to their center, to their place, whence they
cannot return, and this by poor despised means? With weak instruments God does
through work: David strikes down the Philistine, and that is not all, he is
used to make sure work with him, he runs and cuts off his head, which shadowed
out the utter ruin of the kingdom of the Devil by Christ a despised man. God
is upon a design the world will not believe; not a man shall stand before him
that stands against him: The baiers of the Lord shall be destroyed, that is,
all of them. If any ask how this shall be, because things are so unlikely. I
answer, The Lord creates evil; he can take any thing, a hailstone, a wounded
man, and form them into deadly instruments for his enemies. The fan in Christ's
hand, it is but a weak thing, a despised company, yet he will thoroughly purge
his floor, he will out with all that offends. When some bad humors are let
out, they gather and swell again, there is no end of action in an evil heart,
till there be an utter end of the man. It Is sad to behold, how enemies gather
ino a head again, when blasted from heaven; we shall prevail, we shall
prevail. The Devil befools wise men; How can ye prevail, and cannot conquer
the weakness of God? Poor weak things, if you cannot conquer an army of men,
how will you conquer a legion of Angels? God has a reserve which you are not
aware of; you choose out your stoutest for a forlorn, but God his weakest, and
yet these are too hard for you, and yet you feed your fancy, that you shall
prevail: The Devil is in this (would bloody wretches were aware of it,) that
he may have all; he would not have a man sit down in an evil way, till he come
to his journeys end, which is Hell, the destruction of the body and soul.

Christ has many sorts of enemies, all should tremble at this point, that God
does great things with small means. There is a corporal war, and a spiritual
war in England, and both bloody, in both Christ will conquer, how weak, and
poor, and despised soever his instruments be, which he uses. When Christ drew
out a party to go out against the kingdom of the Devil, observe how he
furnished him with munition: Go, says he, and take neither sword, nor staff,
nor money, yet these carried it in the business they went about. External
advantages about internal works, are much looked at, and much sway with sense:
what power, what honor and wealth goes along with the ways which are professed;
Christ takes neither, and yet raises up his Kingdom in the world; sends out
men not a whit seconded from secular advantage, no power from man, but the
sword of men against them; no honor from men, but the frowns of all against
them, and yet turns the world thus opposite, with two or three, upside down.
These are they which turn the world upside down. The world is a vast body, and
holds very hard in its way, and yet this turned upside down by two or three
despised ones: Thus has Christ done, thus does Christ do, and thus will he.
Choler is a scurvie humor, it burns black men's throats and tongues. The Devil
has shot thousands in the mouth, if not in the heart, in this war, between
Presbyterians and Independants. O how wickedly do some good men talk now! and
yet Christ will live, and every tittle of his will shall live, though bad and
good shoot at it. Satan has as large an army in the field now, as ever was
known, bad men, good men; Satan is got into Judas, yea, and he is got into
Peter, Master, drive gently, drive warily, save your skin, and avoid the bloody
cup, and yet Christ will be too hard for both. Christ wants wit, and wants
learning, and many things else, in the eyes of standers by, and yet though so
weak, conquers: God has chose, the foolish things of the world, to confound
the wise.

God should be honored in his way: the Psalmist breaks forth sweetly into
blessing God from this ground, that God out of the mouth of babes, should
ordain strength. And so Deborah notes it in her song, specially and sweetly,
how Jael a woman, did a man's work, and used a man's instrument She put her hand
to the nail, and her righ hand to the [work-mans] hammer. Women are usual very
aucherd at man's work, left handed, but Jael is right-handed at it, she put her
right hand, etc. and that which was a work-mans hammer, is now a work-womans
hammer, and she blesses God, and extols him, that ^^us trod down strength by
weakness, and turned a woman into a man, and a man into a beast, and butchered
him on the ground: So should we now, that children are turned into men, little
prentise boys, made valiant to cut off the mighty, and do the great works of
the kingdom, and little towns and villages, to waste great forces. Certainly,
we of this Land are very much behind hand with God, in honoring and praising
of him, according to this admirable way of working. Things that are precious,
you will lose none of them, you save the very dust of gold. The manifestations
of God, are the most precious things in all the world; the very dust of Gods
feet, in every path of his, we should carefully keep, we should talk of all his
doings, how much more therefore of his wonderful doings, when he does much
with nothing, and much for nothing, for worse then nothing, to wit, sinful
man. How God goes in the Sanctuary, and how he goes out of the Sanctuary, in
the family, in the city, in the country, in the army, upon what weak legs, and
with what little toes, should be all written down in the heart first, and then
carried up to heaven for God to read. Our father loves to have his children
brought home to him often, to see them and their Nurse, how well they prosper
together. You cannot present God with a more taking sight in all the world,
then with one of his own actions, with its special circumstances. They were
under the Law, to lay their hand of the head of some offerings, that was to
point out Christ, on whom they trusted. Bring an offering to God, any action of
God with its special circumstances, and you lay your hand on the head of the
offering, you point out Christ to all the world, as he whom you trusted on in
your way, and as he whom you would have all else, to do the like, and on none
else, and this is very sweet to God, he loves to lie high in the breast of all.
God has done things in England so, me thinks, as to be crowned for ever in
every English heart: by a very noise amongst the Mulberry trees, he makes the
mighty run and fall: Not by might, nor by power, but my Spirit, says God. It Is
by how much God gains in your hearts, that you are to measure his love to you
in his works. With little God does much for you, if with much you do little for
him, in speaking of him, and living to him, all will end sadly at last. If
nothing will set an instrument in tune, you break it and burn it, this makes me
fear our state in the midst of hope: God is very good to thee England, but
thou continuest very bad, dead inwardly, dead spiritually, which according to
reason, one would think, should make death corporally.

Finally, this way of God should be trusted in; or this God, which can thus
work, should be firmly rested on. When extremities are great, and little means
appearing, then our hearts sink; now misery is mortal, but of our own making,
for it is all one with God, to save with few, as with many. Nothing kills the
man, so long as faith keeps alive, and faith can never die, if the soul well
consider the point in hand, that any thing is enough for God to work salvation
by. I am much in debt, but a little oil in the cruce left. God can bless a
little, to rise to a subsistence, and to discharge off all engagements. A
little of God is enough to make one very rich, very strong, very wise, very
blessed in all conditions, let misery be as much as 'twill. Some are
disheartened from duty, because opposites before them are many, visible
advantages very few, these souls lie ensnared in their own devices, and dye at
a distance from God, which they have set themselves, to keep their body safe:
with a little light and an honest heart, God can enable to do much, to fight
with the Prince of darkness, very learned heads, and very malicious hearts.
Did not God enable many poor women, and illiterate men, to befoole the bloody
Clergy of the former ages of the world, and to hold faith and a good
conscience, in despite of all? Were not them we read of in the Hebrews, out
of weakness made strong; and the point in hand tells us, that this is the way
of God. Resolution should carry on to duty, and then let God alone to carry on
in it, how weak soever you are, or how strong soever your enemies are. A great
door was opened to Paul, and there were many enemies at it, he but one and
weak, and yet along he would, and venture upon Christ, to make way through
them, which makes one weak one, stronger then a thousand.

COLOSSIANS 1.22. In the body of his flesh [through death.]
IN several verses foregoing, the extremity of Christ's sufferings is
mentioned, and yet here again. In whom we have redemption through his blood,
verse. 14. This is repeated and amplified, ver. 20. where it is called the blood
of his cross. Here is the same thing repeated, but with variation of terms,
what before was called blood, and blood of the cross, is here called death.
Christ did bleed to death for sinners. Christ underwent much, but it works but
little upon us. Often repetition of the same thing, is for energies sake, that
what is not laid to heart at once speaking, may be at second; often repetition
of Christ's sufferings, speaks lowdly this; That it is a hard thing to be kindly
and thoroughly affected, with what others undergo for us.

Jacob underwent much for Laban, so did David for Nabal, heat and cold, but
both coldly remembered, such cold carnal wretches they were both. Earth has no
sense; this is the state of our souls naturally. Can a stone lay any thing to
heart? Such was ^abals heart, and such is ours, stones as we came from the
rock from whence we were digd. Affections follow sense: where nothing makes
impression, there can be no compassion. We are dead in trespasses and sin:
dead folks consider not who mourn for them, who die with grief for them.
Faculties hardened, the child will throw aside what the mother which bore him,
underwent; the pangs, the screeches, the tears of her that traveld in birth
with him. Ability to duty, springs not so much from things without, as from
things within: as the soul is disposed, not as the man is engaged, so the
party moves. I will demonstrate to you, that disposition to this duty of
being thoroughly and kindly affected, with what others undergo for us, is
hardly attained.

It springs from goodness purely contemplated; this is a very high thing to
do. Such a one did much for me, I did as much for him, or I may do. If such
be out in flesh, I am in purse. Now is others goodness killed with our own; now
is not the love of God, nor the love of man thought of, and how is it possible
that either should be beautiful in my eye: In such a spirit, love has her
wings cut, and no matter to work upon, which is that that gives disposition to
the soul, to keep him alive for ever in my breast, which has done any good
for me. We can do nothing for Christ, nor his people, and yet all that is done
for us by either, we think to be deserved. It Is certain, that infinite love
moulders to nothing in our breast, under the notion of our own merit, one way
or other, though we observe it not. If a man lose his state, his arm, his life
for me, if I think he was bound to it by any thing of mine, the life of the
action dies, the memory of the man and his kindness cannot live long: Not an
act that Christ does, but we dash it to death, against some industry of our
own. That any creature loves me, is all love: that any one shows mercy to me,
whether God or man, it is all mercy. I am vilder then the earth, below all
desert, desire, as far as hell is below heaven: a heart at this height, stoopes
and takes up kindness fully, sweetly, and keeps it in memory firmly. Things
taken up as mere love, stick; otherwise not: This is a high and hard thing. I
may instance this to you in God; he merits every thing at our hands we do, and
more then we can do, and yet he takes up all under the notion of kindness and
love, and this makes him to remember all we do, and all we suffer, exactly. I
remember the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thine espousalls. All is
kindness and love, which man shows to God. And when I was hungry, ye did
[give] me this, and give me that; God looking upon all that we do for him as
gift, and as kindness, this makes him to remember it always; it is hard to get
to that pitch, which God moves at.

Colossians had their Christian life, but yet not so, as to remember the love
of Christ, to the life: alas, who have! It Is hard to melt some things, much
fuel, much blowing and pains used, and yet all this must be, to dispose the
matter, fitly to receive a lasting stamp and form upon it. A heart melted with
love, lays to heart the least pains and kindness showed to it. Whence is
this, to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me, said Elizabeth to
Mary.

England become, since a seat of war! Husbands lose arms, legs, lives abroad,
and wife and children let starve at home. Our war is very bloody: conscience in
every man slain: not a tender heart scarce amongst us, to consider the
condition of the greatest sufferers for us in the Land. Naball had his ease at
home, his quarters quiet and plentiful; but what David underwent abroad, to
make it so at home, did not move, did not, nor would not Nabal consider. It Is
your case, Londoners: During all these bleeding times, Christ has been
Quartermaster for you, and so appointed your quarters, that you have been very
quiet, very blessed in peace and plenty; but what your brethren undergo
abroad, to procure all this for you at home, which of you does lay to heart?
Vriah refused rest and solace at home, because of the sufferings and hardship,
which the Armies of the Lord were in abroad. The backs and bellies of
thousands of you, speak no such thing: Ah Lord! what will cure the pride and
wantonness of this wicked City! Drunkenness and surfeiting now? Can you
laugh when your brethren mourn, and when God frowns? ye Epicures, Can ye
drink wine in bowls, and the blood of your brethren in bowls? You should at
all your exorbitant meetings, thus set fancy at work; The cup at my nose, is
the blood of the slain: My curious napkins and table-clothes, are the skins of
Christians: my guests the ghosts of the slain: my mad lascivious songs, the
groanings, gaspings, and shreechings of the wounded and dying. Can thou not
think thus, when thou art in the midst of thy jovall society? O, no; 'twould
spoil all my mirth, 'twould be like the handwriting on the wall, to
Belshasar. Do thou tender more the spoiling of thy carnal mirth, then the
spoiling of thy eternal soul? The guilt of all the blood that is slain, will
fall upon thee, as an unsensible soul. Had thou rather howl for ever, then
forbear mad-mirth a little while? If thou will not turn sinful mirth into
mourning, God will turn it into howling. God loves not revenge, yet what he is
exemplarily eminent in, he cannot endure that men should altogether slight. God
lays to heart all that we undergo for him; in all our afflictions, he is
afflicted: so should we lay to heart, all that he and his undergo for us. It Is
the grand medium of conversion, this that I touch: What will melt the heart, if
that love which bleeds to death for us, be forgotten. Sinners, Christ has
suffered the wrath of God for you; he left more wealth then this world is
worth, and became poor; he left a mansion in glory, and took a body of flesh,
a house of clay, and in this house dyed, and left you all, that you might live
for ever in the fruition of all. Is all this nothing? Will you regard your
sins, more then this Christ? Shall your lust live, though Christ have dyed?
The death and blood of the Lord Jesus, will be upon you. Can you look upon
pierced Christ, and not mourn? He will show you your own hardness of heart,
in a like carriage; he will look upon the wounds and torments of your
consciences, in the hour when you make your will, and not be affected. When
mercy cannot bring forth, justice becomes the midwife, and this cries save the
womb, save the womb, let what will become of the child; if this child die,
and be pulled to pieces between the legs, yet another may live, if the womb be
preserved. God much eyes the means he uses to do us good, he will preserve
the honor of these, though thousands die which trample upon them. What Christ
has suffered for us, shall gain and save thousands, though it destroy you;
though you lay not Christ's love to heart, yet Christ will have a great many to
do it: When I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me. Christ makes means,
and then blesses them to their end; men eye not this, and so die without the
benefit of them. What Christ has suffered for us; he has promised so to
order, as to make it drawing and winning of us; that his lifting up upon the
cross, and from thence to heaven; shall lift up our souls from sins, and from
thence to him, and to the place where he is. These words should be believingly
urged, and then the work of our welfare would go on an end. As mercy stoops
lowest, it takes up us; for God to make means and bless them, is mercy
stooping very low, to take up them that are quite down.

The mortality of all earthly and fleshly things. Death passes over all now.
The body of beasts flesh, the body of our flesh, the body of Christ's flesh,
dies; In the body of his flesh through death.

Some worms are small to look upon, and yet will penitrate and consume an Oak:
Sin is such a thing, small in the account of men, and yet gnawes asunder the
strongest sinews. the body of Christ, transcendently compacted, not of this
creation, (...), Heb. 9.11. as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, and yet sin
dissolves and moulders this stately fabric. From the greater to the less, we
may argue safely: If the body of Christ cannot live, in respect of sin, surely
no body else can. The body of Christ would have born more then all the world,
and not have cracked: Vanity of vanity, all is vanity; the body of Christ dies;
the body of all other things die, which stand further off from sin then the
body of Christ, and the body of man do: The body of Christ and the body of man
stand in a more immediate relation to sin, and the fruit thereof, then other
things of the creation do, and yet sin eats out every body of the creation,
those that stand furthest off from it: the whole world waxes old, waxes
languishing, 'thath made its will, 'twill die in a moment, the glory of this
world passes away; the forehead of this world, to wit, the heavens, will
become wrinckled, and wax old.

[your fathers] where are they? My father, my father, the chariots and horsemen
of Israel, etc. and yet this would not hold him, his dearest friend in the
world must be gone. It shadowed out Christ, he is our Father, our Father, twice
as good and as dear as all other friends; that is, he is the dearest friend man
has in all the earth, and yet a fiery chariot fetches up this Father from his
children here: Christ goes away, [I] go away, and ye shall see [me] no more.
So said Paul to his spiritual children, and it did cut to the quick.



our inward thoughts are, that our habitation shall endure for ever. England
all over is a demonstration of this point, that all things are bleeding and
dying. Christ had rather that a thousand thousands of bodies should die, then
one soul: one thing is aimed at, that all things die, to wit, the death of your
lust, the life of faith; and this is your lesson from this Doctrine. Can you
receive it? Every thing shall live for ever, when you can love all in Christ,
and admire all in Christ, and make an advantage of love by all, to Christ. All
the ruins you behold in this kingdom, or in the whole creation, all the seas
of blood wherein the world is at this day, are but to wash our hearts; that is
very foul, which must have all without, even Christ himself turned into blood,
to cleanse it. It Is long ere carnal affections be slain; every thing must die,
and its blood be thrown in the face of conscience, ere the man will spit out
what offends God. The stability of all about you, bears much upon the rectitude
of your affection. Take heed how you love husband, wife, children, you may hug
them to death with a sinful love: You complain of Cavalleers for killing your
estates, trades, friends, but your own lust did all this spoil; could the
Word, or any lesser rod have killed your affection to the world, the good
things thereof would have been all alive, and in your hand at this day.

Poor Christians should cheer themselves from this point. Thou have nothing
in this world, no wealth, no honors, no friends; thy gay clothing, is thy
skin; thy lands, thy hands; thy wealth, thy health; 'twill be the case of all;
all is dying, to them that have it: naked came every one out of the womb, and
naked shall they thither return; every thing shall die from him that has most:
thou will have as much in the grave, as he that has most out. The rich and the
poor shake hands in the dust. There is danger in rich men's joy, and poor men's
sorrow, about worldly things; The Doctrine in hand would cure both, if studied
well; that all dies, me thinks, should make one not love much what one had, nor
grieve much for what one has not, but in both, to look out after another state.

All things are dying here, but all things are ever living and everlasting
above, O that I were there! Were I in heaven, I should hear no more knels, nor
passing-bels, no noise of war. In the bosom of Christ, all is quiet; there
be a great many there, and yet they do not fight, nor kill one another, nor
never will. They are rivers of pleasure, which they drink of above; many going
to drink at a river, fall not out, because there is water enough, and space
enough; but many thirsty creatures going to a bottle to drink, fight and pull
it out of one another hand; I cannot drink, says one, 'twill be all drunk up,
says another; such a one drinks so much: none of all these complaints when
persons drink at a river, though thousands there, they drink all together
quietly, because a river is a large cup, and has springs at bottom: so is the
breast of Christ, it is a river of pleasure, yea it is rivers of pleasure;
thousands and thousand of thousands drink there all together, and no falling
out, for want of convenience to drink, or for fear of want of water, because
there be springs at bottom. 'Twere better to enjoy these things, then talk of
them, one can but speak so brokenly of them.

COLOSSIANS 1.22. To present you holy, and unblamable, and unreprovable in his
sight.
Terms here are multiplied, one thing meant, but not to be expressed to us, to
wit, our state with God in another world. The end and scope of all Christ's
industry is exegetically expressed in this clause, (i) one word explaining and
opening another. To present you holy, (i) without spot, and without reproof,
so as not to be disliked, nor reproved in the least kind, by perfect justice
it self, but honored and advanced as a complete being for ever, in the
presence of God.

To present you holy and unblamable, etc. This translation and the original
run along together throughout almost, only they part in the last word: You
read, in his sight, the text is, before him, and unreprovable [before him]
Actions and persons come before God, and the purity of both is exactly looked
after, but neither to be found in us, but both in and from Christ; from Christ
not simply as the Son of God, the second person in the Trinity, but from
Christ as Mediator, as the Father has deputed the Son to take our nature, dye,
rise, and stand before him with us in his hand, presenting himself before the
face of Justice first, and then us in his nature, in the body of his flesh,
etc. To present you holy, etc.

Divine presentation must be our subject now to stand upon, which I will
prosecute according to this method; First more remotely, and then proximately.
The object of divine presentation is God: All presents under the Law, they were
brought before the Lord, but the goat, which was the escape goat, was presented
alive before the Lord, Levit. 16.10. Presents of this nature, are our homage,
wherein we lively testify who is the Lord of all, which is none but God: their
offerings under the Law, they were a certain tenth of several kinds, and these
of the best, and these brought to the Tabernacle, or tent of Gods presence, for
divine acknowledgement: so it is at this day. All is ours, only a certain tenth
of the best, to wit, the heart, must be brought to the Tabernacle of presence,
(i) to God, and to Heaven, and presented to him. My son give me thy heart.

the spirit returns to him that gave it. Wisdom has so ordered, that all
things in the spirit and vigor of them, should be presented to God. Man is a
possessor of much, but not an absolute possessor, so as to acknowledge no
superior title, he has possession with injunction, fruition upon condition, he
must extract the spirit of all the things he uses, and bundle them up in his
own spirit, and bring them to the Father of spirits, and to him only, for a
present of thankesgiving. [Offer to God] the sacrifice of praise.

Judah, and for him only, to raise his state and glory: which was a type of
Christ, who is the glory of all the earth, who is a King higher then the Kings
of Judah, higher then the Kings of the Gentiles, higher then Agag. Divine
presentation is adoration, adoration is proper to God, and proper to Christ
only as God; as he sits upon the throne, managing the greatness of the
Godhead in the world, so crowns are brought and laid at his feet.

The object of divine presentation may be considered as more distant or less
distant, less visibly or more visibly present; as it is held out in the text to
be considered, it is to be considered under the most immediate notion, as
presents are made to him above. Persons and actions are often presented to God in
way of duty here, with the concurrence of Christ; hereafter both shall be
brought before God in way of office, only by Christ, we being wholly passive.
Christ shall appear first, and then all that are in him; Christ as Mediator
presents himself first, and then we are presented by him. Here am I, and the
children which thou have given me. This presentation shall be made very
accurately, every person and action; every act external, to a cup of cold
water; every act internal, every good thought shall be laid open before God,
every good purpose, that we would have built a house for God, and that we would
have done this and that, shall be presented before God as done: all good
intentions, and the person that has them; the persons shall be presented, as
the person of Christ, and his intentions, as the very actions of Christ; as
perfect in both as Christ, in his person and life; so as the Father and Christ
are one, Christ and we shall be one, and so be embraced for ever. We shall be
presented to God, so one with Christ, as a wife is one with her husband, as a
chaste Spouse without spot; thoroughly one in love with our husband, and so
fully one in privilege.

The properties of this presentation are these:

It Is very solemn; God, all the Saints and glorious Angels of Heaven,
beholders of it. Things are very publicly carried above, Jewels are not
secretly given and hanged in the breast, as Christ does here; every ones
instalment is with all the train and state of Nobles in bliss, every ones
presentation is matter of a new song, and all the quire of heaven have it in
their mouths presently, not one sits sad and mute, as unacquainted with the
matter, when the rest sing; every present is opened, all the myrrh seen and
smelt, by every one above, and so all sing at once, as equally revived, and
reviving the reviver. Every presentation brings new acts of God; not a soul
that is set before God by Christ, but peculiar ways of love and workings of
Gods grace found in him, and all these laid open before God, and all the Saints
and Angels in heaven, and set to several songs, for all the quire of heaven to
sing unto all eternity. There is joy in heaven, at the turning home, and
coming in of a sinner, that is, in this lower heaven, to wit, the kingdom of
grace; all the Saints rejoice exceedingly, as any one comes into God, as a
shadow of that which is gloriously done above. O if a man could but see what a
smiling heaven that above is all over, when any soul is brought and set down
before God, by the Lord Jesus Christ!

It Is an eternal act. Where the soul is set by Christ when it goes hence,
there it abides for ever. The things which God does internally, are eternal;
he blesses, and curses for ever: to whom the soul is presented hereafter,
there it abides for ever; souls that are set before Satan, there they abide
for ever; and such as are set before God, there they abide for ever, to behold
the glory of his countenance. God when he has his children brought home, he
puts them out no more, he gives them their inheritance, and this lies all
before him, and there they sit down upon it, and feed upon the sweet of it for
ever. It Is a large inheritance that every one has above, and yet it does not
occasion any that are brought before God, to be placed far off from him;
Mansions and thrones are all prepared, and they lie all before Gods throne, and
stand as long as his; the windows were open toward Jerusalem, because there
was Gods presence; so every ones mansion is so prepared and shaped, that the
windows all open toward God, they can fit in their chambers of rest above, and
look God full in the face. Blessed are they that stand before thee, they
always behold thy face, said that royal person, it hints one state above, and
rather speaks that, then this below. Blessed, yea blessed indeed are they that
sit before the Lord for ever, which sit in state as Kings, even as Solomon
himself, which sit upon thrones for ever, as that greater then Solomon does,
which are joint in concurrence in all acts of state, and triumph together for
ever, that where one goes the other goes, and so ever with the Lord, ever before
the Lord. Your last house, your last habit, your last condition, has no shadow
of change; not a thought that any degree of felicity shall waste and end, so
much as enters into any soul before the Lord, that they shall ever be set one
hairs breadth out of their place.

the offscouring of all things, fit for a present to none, but to a dunghill,
to all the reproaches, disgraces, and punishments that may be: this will last
but a little while; there are other thoughts of you, by great Statists and
Peers above; you will be gathered out of the world now quickly, as the myrrh
and frankincense of it, and be made a present to the King of heaven, which he
will embrace above all presents, and lay in his bosom to smell to, and delight
himself in for ever. Precious things are in some Countries, but not known by
the Inhabitants, they are so brutish, and so not improved, but trampled upon;
it is so all this world over, in a spiritual sense. A brutish spirit possesses
this world, so that persons know not the jewels and treasures which lie hid in
the bowels of it. There is such a precious metal amongst the earth and rubbish
of this world, that shines into heaven, that may make a rich and acceptable
present, to the great State above, did the world see it: their blindness is
their plague; and it is misery enough, one would not wish them more, what ever
one undergoes by them. I am tender of you the Lords people; I know you meet
with much evil from evil men, let nothing sadden nor imbitter you; still
consider what you are in the eye of God, what ever in the eye of man: let not
the bitterness of evil men, make you lose your own sweetness: still
consider, how precious you are, and to whom you shall be presented for ever.
The very influence of heaven, is enough for some choice creatures to live upon;
some sweet dewes that fall, the Bees pick out of it a sweet stock, and do
well, although these dewes fall but now and then: so some influences of the
highest heaven, of that state and condition we shall have; choice spirits me
thinks might live well upon, and wade strongly through all trials here, though
they have these influences but now and then; if we did but pick up the crumbs
from the Table above, if we did but consider where we shall be, and what we
shall be, we should rejoice in tribulation; 'twas a sweet dish to the
prodigal, when he was eating husks, to think what food was in his fathers
house, though he could not tell whether he should be admitted thither. The
world gives us husks and bones to feed on, we may fetch a dish from heaven to
mend the matter well enough, if we be so wise and so heavenly as we should be.

We are the ruin of our own life: it is hard to get thoughts high enough.
Present things are the things only to be minded, we must mind this, and we
must mind it thus, so we necessitate our minds, and mar all. What must I
only think of Shimei that curses? Must I only think of poverty? and only
think of sickness that is upon me? What necessity of this? There is no
necessity of this, but yet I cannot do otherwise. Would thou do otherwise?
No; I would not do otherwise. How can thou be remedied then? Some are married
to a Blackmore, and will not be divorced; to black melancholy spirits and
humors, etc. which they love and will not hear to part with. Rachel will not
be comforted. There is nothing to be said to these spirits, till their burdens
have more broken and humbled them.

Others are more ripened and mellowed by the rod, to whom my question is, Would
you have your thoughts taken off from thinking so much of your calamity? Would
you have your souls think much, what you shall be, and where you shall be? O
yes, rather then any thing in the world. The mercy is near, yea very near,
which you thirst after. Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it. Hungring,
longing, and praying, this is opening the mouth wide: believe it, the Lord
Jesus is at hand, he has sent his Prodromoi, his forerunners, to lay in some
provision; he will sup with you anon, and feast with you anon, and then all
will be well, the soul strong, and as high and as noble as its work. Our
strength to high duty, is from full presence, and full communion; The choicest
advantages to get this, you should carefully use, which would do much in
the other world, which would be much above, and before him where you shall ever
be. Some works have a great deal of heaven in them, read them: some persons
have a great deal of heaven in them, look out and read them: some ordinances
have a great deal of heaven, observe them. There is a great deal of advantage
in ones standing, to look a great way. When David stood in Gods house, he could
see into heaven plainly, and behold all the glory above, and where his place
should be for ever, and what train should follow, yea he was as if actually
possessed of all. Honor the Institution of Christ, how ever despised by men,
or you cannot be so heavenly and so blessed, as you would and should be.

COLOSS. 1.23. If you continue in the faith, etc.
AS God turns all to the good of his, so Satan labors to turn all to their
hurt. The best people have one too many still at their table, though they are
not aware of him, and he drops something still into every dish to curdle and
sower it in their souls, how sweet and precious soever in its own nature. When
the words of Christ wound, Satan then drops in gall and vinegar, to turn
convictions into despair; when they comfort, he sophisticates and makes the
doctrine of felicity, a medium to forget piety: this in some words of this
text is hinted, in others prevented. Heaven lengthens out a holy life to all
eternity, it does so in its proper nature; it is a laying of our souls in his
bosom, who has us but by the hand here: it is not in it self, nor under any
consideration to end grace here, or hereafter, but to consummate it. If you
continue, etc.

Two things of weight take up this text: the doctrine of perseverance, and
apostasy, cleaving to Christ, and casting him off; both these circumstanced,
and so drawn out, that their aspect speaks them to the life. To abide sweet a
while, and then to putrify with the heat of times, and smell carrionly, this
is not perseverance, it is not (...), permanere, continuing in the faith, or
through abiding of the faith: what is that? This is answered in the next words,
(...), founded, (...), fixed. One term alludes to a house founded upon a rock,
that is unmovable. The other term alluding to stars, which continue holding
forth their glory and virtue; let what stirs will be in these lower regions,
they never fall from their orb, nor fail in it of any influence or luster,
for any filthy vapors or fogges, that come from the earth, they are above them
all, and are faithful and firm as the Heavens; this is the property also of
stars of the terrestrial globe. Apostasy is also here drawn out to the
life: every fall does not kill, but falling away, falling away from truth
received, glorious truth, truth raising sweet hope, glad Gospel expectation,
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, etc. That truth which has
had its demonstration before all sorts of men.

Through abiding of, or in the faith, is the first thing that we are to stand
upon. By faith is meant the Gospel, as is explained in the next clause, Christ
as revealed in his Word. Truth has a latitude within and without it self; the
observation of both is a through pursuit. Truth has a latitude within it self,
that is, in the matter of it; 'thas many precepts, and all these their proper
extent. Thy commandments are exceeding broad: The Gospel has many rules
directory, many consolatory; when the soul sets before it self all as a rule of
life, then does it thoroughly abide in the faith; then are you my Disciples, if
you do whatsoever I command you. The whole bosom of Christ is the seat of the
soul hereafter, and the whole will of Christ, is the seat of the soul here;
when the soul does not make it so, it is wanton and wilful, and does not
thoroughly abide in the faith. Christ had a material garment when materially
present, and it had many threads, but all weaved into one web and robe, without
seam or sign of one: so Christ now spiritually present, has likewise a
spiritual garment of like form. The Gospel has many rules, when all these are
weaved together by a Christian in his life, and made a spiritual robe of state
for the glory of Christ, and not one thread left out, when the soul does put on
all Christ, and clothes himself with him from head to feet, then does he
thoroughly abide in the faith.

they rejoiced in his light for a season: if we make any truth short lived for
any temptation whatsoever, we abide not thoroughly in it. It Is in our spiritual
marriage, as in our natural, we are not freed from the careful and painful
obligation of it, till death. The observation of Gods will simply considered,
never ceases; they in heaven do Gods will, and are proposed as our pattern on
earth, they are so exact in the observation of it; but the painful observation
of Gods will, which is by reason of corruption within us, and wicked spirits
without us, this ceases as soon as we step out of this vile body, but not
before. They move to Christ above, as Christ does to them, with the same spirit
of freedom, joy, triumph, and glory. That they may be one as we are. There is
no sighing and groaning, mourning, dying, to accomplish Gods will above, all
move there as the Angels, with delight; every one milks out love from the
breasts of Christ, and sings over the Pail, to behold how full it is, and how
free it comes; and yet, though it cost all these to obey any truth of God here,
we are not to cease our course. Every child is brought forth with pain, but
some with more then others, it costs life to bring forth some, yet it is
horrible wickedness for any to strangle the birth, to prevent the pain.
Benjamin must be born, though it cost Rachel her life. She was a shadow of the
Church, which must bring forth Christ in all his will, though we die in
travel; if you abide thoroughly of the faith.

England, 'twill be thy Laodicean temper, that thou think thou art clean,
and art not washed from thy filthiness; that thou need nothing, and yet
observest nothing Euangelically, that looks like a lovely State. Our point sets
us too high a great deal, to speak to this generation; it calls for exact
observation, and we are by the hand of God upon us; cast into the quite
contrary, a generation that had a little conscience, but now have none.
Loosnesse and lewdness overspread the multitude, brawniness and benummedness
the more ingenious; good men become bad, bad stark naught, and stink above
ground. It Is worse then blood and death, to hear and see in every place where
one comes, what mire and dirt our troubled waters cast up, as if war were a
ticket under Gods own hand to dispense with all wickedness. O the oaths, the
execrations, whoredoms, oppressions, outrages of all sorts, that the very
highwayes and villages are filled with where ever one comes! The stink of your
camps, enough to kill a good heart, at a great distance. It Is sad, that the
blood and bodies of the dead, should taint and poison the living; that we
should die swearing and blaspheming. If there be any tender hearts among you,
carry these things home, and mourn, for I am fearful what they presage.

The work of this point is not only to wind you off from profaneness, but
wind you up to exactness, to through walking with Christ. We halt; the fruit
of it is upon us, the hand of God will not yet cure it, what it may, Christ
only knows. The heart must have its latitude, it is every ones saying this. To
hit the white, is not needful; one may shoot well, that does not this. But can
one shoot well that aims not at this? I press toward the mark, I forget what
is behind, if by any means I may obtain the resurrection. Here is the property
of grace in life, it owns nothing but perfection; makes at nothing else; it is
in aim and industry all Christ's. Men are charmed with their own unsoundnesse;
the heart secretly sinfully engaged, aim and industry are really correspondent
hereunto, what ever verbal flourish be made to better spirits, and persons
that stand by; here is a man strangling himself in his bed, which is a
condition that makes little noise, every thing is so artificially managed to
destruction; yet alas, it is the common profession of this time. How far will
these times bear with a profession of Gods will? How far will Christ's honor
and mine consist? Here the soul wastes its strength: If there be any intense
through action now on foot, it lies here, so to shape the course and posture to
the right and left, that the man may take in all worldly advantages of both
sides, along as he ^^es. There is much art in this, but it is all cursed: 'twere
well if the man had less policy, and more integrity. There is much advange in
this, but it comes to nothing: the plague of an hypocrite is upon this
condition, which will eat a man out, if he had all the world: There is more of
heaven in a plain heart in a moment, then this man sees in all his days. The
advantage of through action is this:

A man gets much of Christ, much grace, much glory. Some men's religion is a
principle of juggling with conscience and the world, it is a temptation upon
thousands at this day; these lose what they seem to have, Christ and all grace
quite: Christ kicks off every Judas quite, that kisseth him, and kisseth
enemies to him too, for his own advantage: but a soul that cleaves thoroughly to
Christ, has much of him, the dispensations of Angels. Stephen shined like an
Angel, owning Christ in the face of deadly and bloody opposers. External
dispensations cannot be stood upon; how Christ appears to honor the persons of
men, that will go to the grave with him, is more uncertain; they have the face,
the tongue and the food of Angels, when it may do them good, and torture devils
that vex them. External concurrence is sure for the thing, though uncertain
for the manner: Christ does number our hairs, at all times: but what does he
do then when the head is going to be cut off? He does make all our darkness
light, that which is upon nature, state, person. Christ is with us always,
according to an external goodness, one way or other. They have Rosemary and
Bays, or some sweet thing or other in their hand, in the view of all, that go
to the grave with Christ.

But internally they have much of him indeed, that cleave closely to him. What
a box of ravishing odors did Christ open to Mary's soul, which did perfume his
body and go along with him to his grave? Can any one explain the depth of
divine love, wherewith her soul was filled? That was heaven in hell: What Is
heaven? but the love of Christ without measure, powered into the heart. To
hearten on Abraham to follow the commands of God thoroughly, to forsake Chaldea,
Babel, and all the confusion of a blind proud generation, and to go to the land
of divine ordinance, observe how God heartens him, Thou shall have exceeding
much of me without, and within; I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward. And this promise repeated to him and his ^^sterity in all straits and
dangers. Can you measure that love which exceeds all bounds? Through action
makes through reception: through action is a soul giving up all to Christ,
against all opposition from men. When we give all to Christ, he gives all to
us; and what a deal is Christ's all? I have all, says the Apostle, when he
wanted for Christ's sake, All: What all? A divine all. When you speak of your
all, (i.) of all you have, it rises sometime to a great deal, to many
thousands; but what Arithmetic will express Christ's all? Shall I call his
estate thousands? millions, millions of millions? I shall mis-call it; 'twas
never told, never guessed, nor never will, by all those exquisite beholders and
enjoyers above; it is infinite: Can any finite creature guess, what
infiniteness is? Can you tell the stars? all their numbers, all their
influences? Then may you tell all the smiles, kisses and embracements, which
Christ gives to such as follow him to death. This is Christ's all; he sits at
the right hand of God, embraced with that glory he had with his father, before
the world was, and embracing all with the same glory which are with him.

COLOS. 1.23. If you continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel.
Terms in themselves have been considered; their intimation also, may be
usefully taken up, which is, that man advantaged is an uncertain creature in a
good course. The state of man is a hid thing, what he is, what he will be: a
man looks well, and yet that poison lurks in his body, which some years hence
gathers about his vitals, and pales him, that friends scarce know the man, he
is such a changling. Nothing lurks so secretly as sin, not a man that knows
his heart to the botome, it is deceitful above all things, who knows it? A man
smiles upon a holy course this year, and frowns and breaks out against it
next: So much is hinted here, [if you continue] in the faith, and be not moved
away. Man advantaged, is an uncertain creature in a good course.

Light is a brave advantage, to a steady course: Demonst. 1.
We set our compass by lucid bodies, by the Sun, and by the Stars, and know
whither, and to what part of the world we are going, which setles our mind,
and makes our journey sweet, and our labor and travel lasting. Dubitation
tires; every step is irksome, when a man knows no^ whether he be out or in his
way; and yet where no dubitation is, the soul tires. When light unto
information, when light unto persuasion is made, concerning the way and the
end, the soul is still in danger to turn off: If ye continue in the [faith]
(i.) the truth ^e have understood and believed. Pravity at some height, will
be^ ^wn conviction, spurn against an Angel in the way; turn for Tarsh^sh, when
it knows it should go another way.

They were glad when they saw his star, there was vision, and consolation, a
light of life; one would think now none could kill this, and yet pravity at
some height, will put this to death, a consolatory light. They rejoiced in his
light for a season; here is light and joy, light and life, add yet this dies,
this brisk sparkling wine vapors away all its own spirits, and dies. This truth
lies in the Text too; be not moved away from the [hope] of the Gospel, (i.)
that word which makes hope, and sets the soul at heaven door; and can one be
there and not joy? Hope sets the soul like Moses, within sight of the Holy
Land: Can a man see heaven, and not joy? A man may not see heaven, and yet joy.
In whom, though now you see him not yet believing ye rejoice, etc. But can a
man see heaven, and not joy? Can a man enter within the veil, and yet not joy?
And yet when at the border of Canaan, when at heaven door, there is danger of
turning back; yea, when something of heaven is given out at the door; some
tastes of the powers of the world to come, may come to de distasted.

fairest, the sweetest of ten thou^^nd. Now it is a strange stomach, that
disagrees, and nauseates (...) ^hrowes up that which is pleasant to every
palate that has tasted it, as well as to its own when it did eat it. And yet
such strange changes there are naturally, and the like spiritually, a throwing
up, and a throwing off, of that which has had its demonstration and
commendation for virtue, to some of all sorts in the world, [to every creature]
under heaven. [Which ye have heard] and which was preached to every creature
under heaven. A man advantaged with his own experience, and with the experience
of all others, may notwithstanding run against all.

ye are clean, but not all. Satan when he comes finds much in us, and of this
takes hold, and draws aside. A Christian is near heaven, but not quite in it;
past danger when quite in heaven, and not before. Some work about a Christian
is complete, some again not. The work of justification is now complete, but the
work of sanctification is not yet complete: the guilt of sin is done away, but
the filth of it is not, and this rusteth the wheels, and makes man in his best
state vanity, a light and an uncertain creature, as in his being, so in his
motion. The point in hand is necessarily true, (i.) so that the thing which I
say, cannot be otherwise; that man advantaged is an uncertain creature in a
good course.

Levites Concubine lay forced to death, and her hands, says the Text, lay upon
the threshold of the door, Judge. 19.27. so do many souls; Satan forces them to
death, at the door of good; their hands, as it were upon the threshold of Gods
House, so near entering in, and yet there Satan, with one wile or other, forces
them to death. Ignorance generates prejudice, and now you shall see a blind man
fencing to keep off Christ and salvation from coming to his house. 'Twould make
a man's soul bleed, to hear, with what weak things many ignorant hearts are
kept off from making so much as profession of some courses that are good: they
are fools, or knaves all, that go in such ways, meaning such persons as strive
to come nearest the rule of the Gospel. Persons are studied, not the way that
they go in: the men are giddie, and of no account, therefore away with what
they profess; this is the proprium of a weak brain. If Christ himself were
present, this man would stumble at him, and lose his soul, rather then he would
take acquaintance of such a silly outside. Christ has his glory within, so
have Saints, and the way they walk in. [The entrance into it] as the Wiseman
says, gives understanding to the simple: Taste how good Christ is in his
ways; begin the life of Christ and the Gospel. No, I will not: Ignorance
begets wilfulness, and now Christ knocks no more.

but one thing gains a Sinner, that is, the beauty and sweetness of the Lord
Jesus. High spirits shut their eyes, and shut their mouths; they will stand in
no capacity of remedy, they will not come near such a person, nor such a place,
not they. Why? Christ is there. Let who will be there, I will not. This is
rebellion in open act, and the Psalmist explains the nature of it, It Is a man
setting his heart awry, and such a soul surely can never move well; a Watch set
wrong, cannot be steadfast in following the course of the Sun, and time of the
day. And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a
generation that [set not their hearts aright] and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God, Psalm. 78.8. A heart set awry, is a desperate disadvantage to an even
course: where such a temper is, men should think of the patience of Christ, his
love overcomes a stubborn soul. O that goodness and mercy should wait to
embrace a froward heart, that will not continue, no not begin good!

Hypocrisy the greatest of all. A double minded man is unstable in all his
ways, and yet he has many, more then any sinner besides. An hypocrites soul,
is like some wild Downs that have many cross ways upon them, some this way,
some that, but none to Christ, and therefore the soul loses it self, but cannot
fix. An Hypocrite is one that observes the winds; not sweet gales within, but
gainful gales without, from the world; his principles put him upon
uncertainties; he is ever about to sow, but never sows, the wind still turns so
cross: when, or where he will have a harvest, I know not. Things must be
equally poised, to make steady and certain motion, and in this an Hypocrite is
more disadvantaged then any man, for he has a great sail, and a little
bottom; a great head, and a little heart; great broad wings, and a little
light body, like a Butterfly, and as steady in his flight. Have you not
observed the flight of a Butterfly, how in and out he is? The reason may be,
because body and wings carry no proportion; 'thas wings big enough, and broad
enough for a body of some bulk, which wanting, it cannot master and steer its
course steady in the air. Sinners have their proper punishment here; as all
sins have one common punishment hereafter, to wit, hell, so they have their
proper punishment here. I may say of all sins but Hypocrisy, that they are
simply a not coming to Christ, but I may say of an Hypocrite, that he is one
come and gone, seemingly come, and really gone, and Cains curse is gone after
him, he ranges in forlorn places, and things, having seven more forlorn spirits
in him then he had. Truth and integrity, is the soul of the soul; this is quite
dead in an Hypocrite. A lie will choose a lie; the heart a lie, will choose any
lying principles, and ah what a many lies be there now in the world! I am
afraid of men's integrity, lies are so generally taking and mis-leading now:
the spirit is as the things it strongly cleaves to.

Hitherto we have spoken to persons disadvantaged, surely you will tumble up
and down in your course, till you tumble to your place, if Christ show not
mercy to you. I will now speak to you, which are advantaged persons with gifts:
Remember the point, such are but uncertain creatures in their course: Trust not
in your advantages, for the certainty and continuation of your holy course. No
man's light is so big, but Satan by his proper force, or by divine commission,
can blow it out; a soul in the dark, whither cannot the prince of darkness
lead? Sampsons eyes out, and a Philistine, a wicked person, may rule him. Parts
looked upon, make the soul blind; and leaned upon, make the soul weak; for the
man leaves a staff, and leans upon a reed, he will certainly fall, and yet he
will not believe it, till he is down. Self is a gaudy thing; things that
glister dazzle sight; sight dazzled, the man will move madly, you will see him
run headlong into the sea, and think it green grass and woods. When a man
looks upon self, the Devil always lends him spectacles, and his glasse-eyes
are always a bad guide; things looked upon through his medium, are commonly of
false dimension, too big, or too little.

It Is sad to hear, how confident some are of the steadfastness of their
motion: I will die rather then I will do this or that. Though all men forsake
Christ, yet will not I. Thou know not thy self, consider how naught thou art
now, although so and so advantaged for good; as temptations shall strengthen
upon thee, so will thou become worse, thou will give backward and backward
still, till thou becommest stark naught. Some persons upon view of self,
conclude they shall go currently on, for they find they get victory over such
a sin, and over such a temptation, and the like. I would speak to this, I am
afraid you know not the nature of corruption; it is like the sea in its motion,
it will seem to lose ground, and decline such a part of the earth much, for
such a space of time, and of a sudden again, by a little advantage of wind,
come tumbling in, and spread over as much earth as ever, and more. Again, you
know also this is its property, when it leaves one point of the earth, it will
break in as far or farther, upon another point. It falls out often, whilst
persons are treading down some external acts of evil, the soul rises and
swells with conceit and fancy of its own worth and goodness; here is a Babel,
a Christian blasted before finished, mouldring whilst building; these buds
wither, because they want earth; their end is naught, so was their beginning,
had they seen it. Such cannot hold out steady, whose spirits are lifted up
with some poor glisning snail creepings of their own. Poison that breaks out
in the hands and face, and struck in by some art, is not cured, but a thousand
times more dangerous. It Is the case of many; malignitie breaks out in their
tongue, in their outward man, in such and such broad base courses, which do
disrepute them, and by some pains and art, they stop these filthy issues, and
strike the poison inward into their heart; cease drunkenness and
debauchednesse, and now become proud; of rakels become civilians and
justiciaries. God I thank thee, I am not as such and such, no drunkard nor
whore-master. No, thou art worse, further from the Kingdom of God, further
from persevering and finishing a good course, then they are from beginning of
it. A man that thinks himself the better fitted for flight, for any poor
waxen wings of his own, will when highest, like Icarus, melt and fall, and be
drowned.

Things that would move very steady, must rise very high; the upper region is
quieter a great deal then the lower, and better for steady motion. As the
soul rises above the world, above its own indowments, above all without and
within it self, and sits fully and clearly in the arms of Christ, so is the
steadfastness of its motion; Christ's arms do not tire, his hands do not
shake, he carries Venice-glasses full of choice liquor, and breaks not one, nor
sheds not a drop out of any one. How many souls has God put into Christ's
hand! and yet he has not lost one soul; no nor one soul has not lost one
drop committed to him to keep. Satan is at our right hand continually, but he
cannot come so near Christ. We cannot carry our hands steady a moment, he
does so jog it, and the more we struggle to grasp and get into our hand, the
more he jogs it; but the more we can empty out all into Christ's hand, the
further still from Satan's power, and so consequently safe. This age surely is
so whimsicall, so drunk, so staggering, and falling, because it leanes so much
upon its own brain, and so little upon Christ. They that wait upon the Lord,
renew their strength, they run, and are not weary; they run steadily to the
last, till they have quite outrun sin, Satan, and all molesting. It Is sure,
sweet motion, when Christ's arms still are only the Chariot-wheeles in all
things. I wonder this advantage is no more studied. Christians complain of the
unsteadinesse of their course, and the unevenness of their walking, of nothing
more. It Is a sweet thing to use prayer much, it is the steadiest wind we can
sail by, if there be any steadie wind below; but rest not in this, but in him
whom you mention by prayer. Do [thou] keep it in the thoughts of their
hearts, to go on thus willingly. Prayer is here used for perseverance, but the
person mentioned in prayer, and not the prayer it self, is rested upon for the
thing sought. Do [thou] keep it in the thoughts of their hearts.

COLOSSIANS 1.23. From the hope of the Gospel.
HOpe is a glad expectation of good; something at a distance pleasing, now and
then smiling upon the soul, and the soul upon it. Man since his fall, has
but little in possession, not enough to quiet his heart a moment. When I say,
man has but little, I do not mean of the things of this life, (though all
this world be nothing) he has but little of God. Many have nothing of God;
they that have most, have but drops, and a thirst for flagons; in suite for
much, enough to stay and quiet, Stay me with flagons, this is the panting of
perfection here; and when the soul can conclude its suite takes above, and can
sweetly lie down and look for a return, then it hopes.

Joy comes not in by vision here as it does above, but by expectation: fallen
things as they lie, can glad no understanding man to look upon. All the things
in this world, will not make up matter sufficient for a smile, if rightly
understood: one may gather it from the composed countenance of Christ, all the
time he was upon earth. This world is a big vast room, full of broken
cisternes, and man the prime vessel, most broken: such a forlorn sight, can
it be matter of joy? And yet there are no other prospects here below; take what
house, what place, what advantage you will, to look abroad upon things here
below, you cannot look besides ruin and desolation: that this shall be
repaired, and all these broken cisternes mended and filled, and all made to run
eternally into my soul, this may do something upon the soul, when it can
rise and reach so high, and this is hope. My [flesh] shall rest in hope. Hope
is a soul at rest concerning all things within and without, concerning spirit
and flesh, that they shall be all perfectly well.

The soul of man naturally sits up much now; distracted creatures, can take
little rest; this is not well, that is not well, all will be worse: the world
will sink, and I shall be undermost: you may guess by despair, what hope is.
Despair is a soul wracking it self with what is, Job 13.14.
and with what will be: It Is one taking his flesh in his teeth, torturing and
tearing all, under his own apprehension of things. God is gone; he will never
return; if he do, 'twill but be to send me to my place. Hope is the
correction of these distempers. God is hid, he is not gone; I shall see him,
though not now; every bone that is broken, shall rejoice; every filthy issue in
my soul, shall be dried up. I will wait upon the Lord that hides himself
from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him: this is hope, hope has the
command of her self, but will not have the command of God. She has every
thing that would rebel at her foot, but Christ in the highest esteem, of any
of his daughters. Can he give bread? Will he give a crum to me? No, I shall
eat this morsel and die, groan this groan, and my heart strings will
break: You never heard hope speak such a word; she is a child that speaks
just like her father. Our God is not come indeed yet, but he will come, and he
will not tarry: though he pulls down quickly, yet he takes time to build up, and
this time hastens. Despair looks upon mercy at a stand, hope sees it coming,
and coming a great pace. My beloved comes skipping upon the mountains. (i)
Certainly coming, and swiftly coming.

Hope has but bad external feeling, but all other senses most acute. She can
see a great way, hear a great way, and the like. In a dark day, when fogs are
never so thick, she can look through them, and behold the land that is far
off: When she is in the belly of hell, she can look toward Gods Temple. When
burdens press, that sense has nothing but torture, nothing but devils to
shake hands with, yet then she can see a God, amongst a thicket of Devils,
though she cannot come at him as she would: though I cannot come to him, he
will come to me where ever I am; though thousands incompasse me, yet I will not
fear, that is, I will not despair of one to come to relieve me. Hope will
carry more burdens then any grace, without sinking. In perils by sea, in
perils by land, etc. In poverty, in nakedness, distressed in all kinds with a
witness, but not cast down. Hope is never cast down; she will cast down
any thing, men, devils, but is never cast down her self; Hope is a hardy
long-lived grace, 'twill live in famine, when 'thath not a bit of bread; 'twill
live in sickness, in war, in death; The righteous has hope in his death:
Hope was never known to have her heart strings break, it is semper vivens.
Death is the King of fears, and yet it pales not the countenance of hope; hope
walks in the valley of the shadow of death, and fears none ill, (i) expects no
hurt: Hope can fee no ill, no hurt in any thing, not in death, not in the
grave; that house is something dark indeed, but I shall not always lie there,
says hope. Thou will not leave my soul in grave; though thou kill me, I will
hope in thee; though thou bury me, I will hope in thee: I shall rise as Christ
did, this vile body shall be changed, and made like Christ's glorious body, and
then set for ever where his is. The flesh does rest in hope.

Hope is conversant about no ill, but about all good, and most about that which
is noblest, it is appetitus excellentis boni, cum fiducia obtinendi: therefore
is hope so often put for heaven, it does so often go to heaven, and is so much
taken up there. Looking for that blessed hope, and for the glorious appearing
of that great God, and our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. and so by
the Author to the Hebrews urged. To lay hold on the hope that is set before
us. You see hope is put for heaven, and the reason is, because so much
conversant there. Hope feeds delicately, she has a table below, and this is
nothing but the word of Christ. My soul hops in thy Word. She has a table
above, and this is nothing but Christ himself, and the state he wears above;
this she looks upon often, and smiles to her self, when no soul alive is
aware: Rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. The two terms of hope, are
hell and heaven; she goes from the one to the other, and in this way turns
the one into the other, and this is all her work; she goes into every house
of mourning where Christ is, and takes exact notice of every distress
corporal and spiritual, and then bids the mourner be cheerful, all tears
shall be wiped from thine eyes; there is a house eternal in the Heavens,
though this crack and moulder, and there thou shall sigh no more. Hope is that
good Angel, that carries Lazarus and lays him in Abraham's bosom; it is that
grace which makes heavy afflictions light, long afflictions short, by showing
the soul what they work about, a far more exceeding, and an eternal weight
of glory. Hope can speak nothing but Heaven, and glory, to a distressed heart.
I conclude as I began, Hope is a glad expectation of good, (i) of all good, but
especially the highest and the noblest good.

Drooping hearts, think of this point, how useful is this grace for you? you
have taken a house by the borders of hell, continually affrighted with evil
spirits, that walk up and down in your souls, and yet you love to dwell
here. Terrors take hold sometimes, it is a heavy stroke, then the soul
refuses comfort Sense of fin is good, but its a wound of it self, that must
be carefully dressed often with the leaves of the tree of life, 'twill rankle and
kill else. Sinner, do thou know thy state? Yes. Do thou know it exactly?
Yes. Why, whither shall thou go when thou die? To Hell. Have thou no hope of
any other thing? No. Why would thou stand still all this while, and let thy
soul bleed to death? Was there no Balm in Gilead? No word in all the book of
God that might speak matter of hope to thee? Despair in strength, is very
peremptory in conclusions, but never deliberate in examinations of grounds.
It Is a soul so tossed and tumbled between Satan and conscience, day and night,
that it has no power to ponder any thing. Pressus ab exemplo, discat sperare
secunda.
Thou shall go to hell, O my soul, when thou die: Why? I have sinned. So
did all the Saints that are in Heaven when they were in earth; as now thou art;
did not David sin much in life, and yet what a brave hope had he in death? Sin
enough in life, to make him a type of Satan, for blood and unmercifulness; and
yet hope enough in death, to make him a type of Christ. Thou will not leave my
soul in grave. Yea, but some persons sins, have a very sad consideration over
others have. This is a truth, but no sin or misery must have any such
consideration, as to sink the soul.



The Heathen rage. The Lord of hosts is with us, says the next verse. Hold
fast, I come quickly. When it is as much as ever one can hold, trial being so
strong, then Christ makes have, and salvation is near. This principle well
laid into the soul, would make one hope to the end, hope to the last man in a
battle, to the last breath in a sickness. Jacob comes hindermost of the
company. Christ comes after all means are done. Isaac, which signifies
laughter, is a child of old age: Christ comes out of a withered womb; the
man-child that makes us laughter, comes out of means given up as barren. When
Christ throws a man down, and throws him very low, then is he about to raise
him. When Christ kills, then is he ready to make alive. If this were received,
who could despair? Who would not hope of life, when every one gives him over?
Yea of eternal life?

Tophet, these are the dismal complaints, which those restless souls below
throw out, as they role to and fro in that fiery furnace. Despairing sinner,
Satan is fallen in with thy conscience, to conjure thy soul into this
condition. Thou art in hell upon earth, as that other phrase is, of her that is
dead while she lives. Tell me. How do thou sleep? How do thou eat? How
do thou walk? How do thou talk? How do thou look? Is not thy moisture
turned into the drought of summer? Thy body turned into skin and bones? Alas
for thee, poor soul, God never made such a way as this to Heaven, it is Satan
and thy own despairing heart, one evil spirit tormenting another, just as
they do below; and the design is, to seal the soul up for wrath: despair
is the black seal of the bottomless pit.

Lay all this together now, and do but think how unkindly you deal with
Christ for all his love and pains, which has done so much for the
tranquillity of your life, to make you hope here, and possess hereafter.
Christ has taken upon him your debts, there is not a sin that ever you
committed, not a trespass against any rule, but he will be accountable for it,
and in your stead, and all to make you hope. Some friends will undertake for
part of ones debt, to make one cheerful, and this is much love, too much to be
slighted; but then there remains something behind, and that sads and sinkes
the heart. How shall I pay that? Bleeding soul, Christ leaves thee no debt to
pay, no sin to answer for. It Is lively set out in that Parable, Luke 18.32. O
wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desire it;
should not thou also have compassion on thy fellow servants? What should make
fear, when all is discharged? If I did know it were so. Do thou not desire
it should be so? Would thou not have all right and sweet, between God and
thy soul, rather then any thing? Yes. Why, this may be a demonstration to
thee, that all is right and even, between God and thee. Did I not forgive thee
all thy debt, [because thou desire me?] God forgives debts to Christ upon
exact satisfaction, but Christ forgives debts to us, upon complaining of them,
and groaning under them, and desiring their discharge; upon a heart panting to
be clean, the voice goes forth from Christ, I will be thou clean. Panting
languishing soul for mercy, thou have obtained mercy; thou desire to be
clean, why thou art clean; Shall Christ do all this for so little, and wilt
not thou hope, and cheerfully expect the sweet of that which he so freely gives.

Finally, Do but think, what a double miserable life thou will have in these
times, if this grace of hope lie ruinous in thee, through any wile of Satan.
Thou will be as a Ship without an anchor, tossed terribly, and no possibility
of staying thee. Which hope we have us an anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast. If a man cannot stay upon God in distress, he can stay no where; a
soul that can stay no where, will hardly stay in his wits, when storms grow
very great. What is by ordination a center and rest for such and such a body,
a light body, or a heavy body, that and no other thing will give rest to it.
Christ is by divine ordination the center of souls; were there a thousand
rocks to cast anchor upon, yet no rock like this, the soul will not rest
upon any else. Their rock is not as ours, themselves being judges. All men
find this by experience, that what ever they pitch upon besides God, to stay
and relieve themselves, it does not do it. O that the war were ended, that the
war were ended. Fearful soul, if this war were ended, thou have a war within
thee, which will never end, till thy despair end: fighting without, and
fighting within; others killing my body, and my self killing my soul: what a
woeful life is this! Hope alive, this is the sweet course of the soul, to wit,
when all is black, deadly, and dismal without, then the soul draws the
curtain, and withdrawes from all these lower rooms, and walks in upper
chambers, where no noise is, views the City and Country above, and the
inhabitants and privileges thereof. Hope enters within the veil, Heb. 6.19.
Yet I know a Country where no war is, an inheritance where no plundering is;
neighbors and Citizens that do not kill one another, but love one another
dearly; that have not their swords in one another breasts, but each other and
Christ; there I shall be quickly, and the sooner, that these miseries below are
so heavy on me.

COLOSS. 1.23. From the hope of [the Gospel.]


WE have considered the grace of hope in it self, and have found it a sweet
flower, as any grows in the garden of God: we are now to consider the stock
out of which it springs; the mold that likes it, The English word, Gospel,
notes, Good speech: spel formerly signified speech. Gospel, quasi God spel God
speech and that is glad speech indeed.
and out of which it grows, is the Gospel, (...), it signifies a glad word or
message. When God smiles upon the soul, then the soul smiles in its course:
our death or life, sits upon the lips of Christ: as Christ speaks, the soul
opens or closes, lifts up or hangs down the head. Thou have made my mouth like
a sharp sword, a polished shaft, says Christ of the Father, Esa. 49.2. What a
womb the Gospel is! it brings forth twins, two, and the greatest that can be
thought on, death and life; it is a polished shaft, not simply a shaft to kill,
but a polished shaft, to make death in order to life. The Gospel is a womb
that brings forth twins indeed, earth and heaven, heaven here; it is like the
Hebrew women, quick of delivery. They were Gospel-words, which God spoke to
Adam after his fall, when he spoke about the seed of the Woman, and these words
re-instated him in earth, and in heaven, he had lost both else. His soul sunk
within him, which made him hide and run away, and these words fetched life
again to the soul, and the man again to his place. Gospel is a grand
blessing, a glad word, a God-speech.

Our Sun was set at noone, and yet no more to have risen in this Horizon: God
after our sin, had shut up his loving kindness in displeasure, and all this
world was to lie under all the wrath of God, to all eternity, without one good
word, without one good look; man the glory of the world, was proclaimed a
Traitor, Absaloms doom was upon him, Let him see my face no more; in this case
no Mediator durst appear, not one of all the Angels in Heaven would know man
after his fall, for any favor: the King had withdrawn himself, and all his
train, he had bounded himself in universally like Abasuerus, that none might
come to speak to him for favor in man's behalf, upon pain of death, no not
concerning any matter of mercy toward man, he that should come about any such
thing, came upon peril of eternal death: yet in this desperate strait, Christ
like Esther puts forth, and takes his life in his hand, pleads with wrath it
self, for a few, that they might be kindly entertained again, kindly thought
of, and kindly spoke to: if thou must have blood, take my blood, only write
down with it a few names in the book of life, a small company to be kind
unto for ever, to look pleasantly upon them, and to speak sweetly to them
here, and for ever hereafter. That which cost Christ so dear, surely is no
small favor; he gave his blood, for a good word from God to man, a good word
therefore from God, is certainly a great favor, for Christ lays not out his
blood for trifles, as sometimes we do.

it shines into the heart, that is the expression of it which the Apostle gives,
2 Cor. 4.6. But God which commanded the light out of darkness, has shined
into our hearts. You may discern a moate, a hair, the smallest thing that is,
by a shining light; the Gospel discovers beams, moats, yea these perfectly:
Then shall thou see [perfectly] the moat that is in thy brothers eye. Take in
but Gospel Light, and lay aside thine own conceited light, and thou shall see
every thing exactly, in thy spiritual state. The light of the Gospel discovers
thoughts, and intentions of the heart, it divides between the marrow and the
bones, it shows how the soul is joynted, marrowed, how every sinew and string
lies, and what oil is in the vessels to supple them, and make them last,
whether any or none. The heart is called the hidden man, and it is hid indeed,
from all creatures in the world, from the man himself: that is a notable light
that gets into a dungeon, a vault deep under ground, that is full of damps, and
makes discovery there of all the mud and dirt, of all the frogs and toads that
lie there, and yet such is the light of the Gospel; where ever it comes, though
into never so dark a soul, it lays open all very exactly, that is, to
conviction. He that is unlearned comes in, and he is convinced of all, and
falls down, says the text; it tells a man all that ever he did, and very
exactly. A true glass, is of worth: All light flatters, but the Gospel. That Is
an ointment indeed, which takes off all scales, and makes perfect sight in any
one, and this is the property of the Gospel; to whom soever it comes, though
an idiot, as the original is, he is convinced of all; it is spoken as the
natural property of this light, man cannot hide any thing from it.

it shines into our hearts, and gives the light of the knowledge of [the glory
of God;] it discovers man's glory, to wit, his soul; and the glory of God, to
wit, his heart and his soul toward man, two such properties as are not to be
found in any light. The glory of God is his face, all other light discovers but
his back parts, or if it speak any thing about the face of God, it is as
veiled. To see the King is a great favor, but to see him in state, that is a
great friendship indeed. There be many things have glory, which if any one
could give one eyes to behold, we should account it a great privilege; if any
one could set me, as Satan would have set Christ, to behold the kingdoms of
this world, and the glory of them, as is there expressed, I should be ready to
think it a great privilege, and yet all this glory, not comparable to the
glory of God; all these things that glitter here below, are but the dust of
that gold above, but some old cast garments, which the King lays at his feet,
and gives to some poor servants and slaves, they are but as cast-rags, given
to diseased creatures. The glory of God is not to be expressed: the Gospel helps
us to Paul's vision, to behold unutterable things. The face of God is his glory;
the face of a man is his glory. Distinguishing propriety, whether such a one be
a brother, a sister, a father, I can tell you when I see his face, which is
glorious to me when I behold. The Gospel gives a distinct knowledge of God, by
this, and by this alone; I am enabled to look as it were in his face, and to
discern in what relation I stand to him, and he to me, whether I be his
child, and he my father, or otherwise. Mercy considered in such a latitude, as
eternally to save, is called the glory of God; condiscension to the creature
offending, taking him up in his arms. It Is called the glory of a man to pass by
a fault, to abide sweet when others are bitter, to smile and embrace, when
there is no invitement, but all discouragement; this is called the glory of a
man, and this is called the glory of God. The Gospel and no light else, holds
forth transcendent condescension in God; by all other light, we conceive of
him as one that is austere, as one that will not yield a whit, as one that will
have the utmost farthing, his own with advantage, or inflict death. The Gospel
holds forth all sweet condescension in God, it sets him forth, as one inviting,
come, blind, halt, as one waiting to be gracious, thirty, forty, fifty,
threescore years, to the last hour, and yet giving a penny to him that came
in last, as well as to him that came in first; it sets him out as one that goes
about to folkes-dores and knockes, sinners do you need any mercy? do you need
any thing for your souls or bodies, to make you blessed for ever? you may have
it for nothing, Milk and honey, wine and oil, tried gold, and royal
apparel. The Gospel sets out God as one that expostulates with man, about the
matter of his good, Why do you lay out your money for that which is not bread?
And why will you die? The Gospel sets out God, as one beseeching man to be
reconcild, as one that delights to exercise loving-kindnesse, to make it his
work, his daily business, to forgive sins, and to bring souls to heaven at his
own cost; this is transcendent condiscension, and this is the glory of God in
the eye of a poor sinner; this makes him shine more glorious then any thing in
the world; and all this, the light of the Gospel discovers, discovers in us;
has shined [into our hearts] to give us the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God.

more deadly to some persons, then the powerful words of the Lord Jesus? What
is more inraging at this day, then the shining light of the Gospel? Our misery
is great, the cause apparent, we shut our eyes against the light. The Prince of
darkness shall rule; this is the vote of thousands. Where Satan raigns, do you
expect any other but a hell, rending and tearing, howling and yelling. Brave
England is turned into a hell, oppressing, racking, rending weeping, wayling,
and gnashing of teeth, and why? Certainly the Prince of darkness raigns
amongst us; have you a glimpse of that feind in all this our hell and misery? If
there were indeed a true love of the Gospel amongst us, could there be such
fighting abroad and at home amongst us as there is? As light is precious, it
conquers; as light conquers, pride falls; pride fallen, the Lion is a Lamb,
Lambs rend not, nor tear one another. We rend and tear one another, name,
state, all that is dear, and would be to one another as the very devils are. Ah
Lord! Is this a Christian Land, a Land honoring the Gospel? Does it conquer
us? Is the Spirit of the Gospel in us, whose hearts burn like hell in pride and
malice against one another? The hand of the Lord is upon an hypocritical
people, get it off who can. You say you love the Gospel, and yet think the Land
too good for them that faithfully profess it: He that hates his brother in his
heart, is a murderer; a bloody spirit is in you, a bloody hand of justice is
upon you, if this right not the innocent, and publish the hyporcisie of this
generation to all the world, then say, that Christ has not spoken by me.

Would the sword were sheathed, says many: would it had done its work, say I.
We needed through launcing, men's baseness comes out freely: it is a mercy to
know who loves the Gospel, and how. How long will England bleed, ere good blood
appear? Will that good blood be so little, as not enough to hold life in the
State? O that will be sad! Sinners, look about you, you that dissemble with
your light, are the plagues of the Land: do you call whom you will, troublers,
this will be found the truth which I have said, you are the troublers, and the
destroyers of the Land, and the ruin of all will be charged upon you. Know the
symptom of a dying State: when death is seized upon the vitals, and black
vapors beat up strong against the brain, we cry draw the curtains, shut the
windows, keep them dark, they will be mad else. Light is scoft at now, never
more, this makes thousands cry, draw the curtain, shut the windows, keep
souls dark, they will be mad else: and this is the glory of thousands, that
they keep where they were, and shut out light: it is I fear a deadly state.
May not thou come as far short of truth, as thou judge others to overshoot
themselves? Do thou think that none hit the white but thee? Are not errors
on the left hand, as dangerous as errors on the right? Is not a cold frozen
soul, a soul settled upon its lees, as base a prizer of the Gospel, as a
wanton that is too lavish?

I have but one thing more, let love be returned. Does God give grand favors,
return answerable to him. The light which shines sweetly and gloriously upon
you, let it gain your souls to God. Does Christ speak kindly unto you?
Speak so to him. Does Christ speak for your hearts, to lay them in his
bosom, and for no other use? How can you deny him? Give Christ your heart,
it is no great favor, yet Christ accounts it so, because it is your prime jewel:
Christ does take things according to your account, which is transcendent love:
what you account your jewel, that Christ takes for one. If you make a sin, a
jewel dearer then any thing, yet if at the call of the Gospel, you sacrifice
this, and offer it to Christ to do what he will with it, kill it or keep it
alive, he accounts this for a great favor, a jewel; What you indeed and in
good earnest account great, that does Christ, when in plainness and in
simplicity you give it to him. Isaac was esteemed by Abraham a great favor
from God, and when he was willing to offer this again to God, 'twas taken by
God as Abraham accounted it, a great favor. The Sun loses none of its rays,
by all the course it runs, none darkened nor spoiled, but sets as big, as
glorious, and as smiling, as it did arise. Shall we darken any beam of that
light, which shines upon us? Shall we sad the face of that Sun that smiles
upon us? And yet so we do, when Christ cannot gain us by his beams of love
which shine upon us. Consider how long time the Gospel has been amongst you,
and how little good it has done. O that a heart should be so cold, that twenty
or thirty years lying in the Sun, will not warm it. Hold a multiplying
glass, upon the Sun that shines upon your souls, and see what this will
do: say to thy soul, How many precious Gospel-Sermons have I heard! and how
many thousand thousand secret words in them! how have these ecchoed, with a
sweeter report from one within, then they were at first speaking from the
person without, which delivered them! how many sweet Gospel-words! yea, how
many sweet Gospel-workes, have I had! how many heart-liftings heavenward, and
yet down again! Has any body such a cold heavy heart as I? It Is good to
complain of ones heart much for its badnesse, to him that can make it better:
it is good to complain much of this badnesse, badnesse under goodness, prime
goodness, badnesse under the Gospel. Cold-hearted sinners, thus taber upon
your breast, when you are alone; if any thing warm, it is well: if nothing
will, draw the curtain, and take leave of friends; if the Sunshine of the
Gospel can by no means fetch heat in thee, thou can not live long, if thou
would give all the wealth thou have, the fruit of the body for the sin of the
soul.

COLOS. 1.23. Which was preached to every creature.


BY creature here, is meant the noblest creature, to wit, man: it is an
expression borrowed from Christ the creator, Go and preach the Gospel to every
[creature,] Mark. 16.15. (i) to all men, make no distinction of persons, nor
Nations; go into every house, Jew, Gentile, and proffer peace, tender life
unto every dying soul. The expression in hand, speaks of this as done,
wherein lies the difficulty. Which [was preached] to every creature. An
expression like unto this you have at the sixth verse of this Chapter. Which is
come unto you [as it is] unto all the world. These compared, explain one
another. By the coming of Christ, the wall of partition between Jew and Gentile
was broken down, and their privileges made common for any, and according to
this tenor was the preaching of the Gospel; so that the tenor of Grace
enlarged, and generally dispensed to all sorts of persons, Jew and Gentile, is
said to be the preaching of the Gospel to every creature. Besides, there may be
more in the expression: though there was not in the Apostles time, an actual
tender to every individual person under Heaven by preaching, which elsewhere
seems to be prophesied shall be; yet the sound of that grace which was thus
generally preached, went into all the earth, and so their words at second hand,
unto the ends of the world. Have they not heard? Yes; their sound went into all
the earth, and their words unto the end of the world, Romans 10.18. which makes
the meaning of the expression in more words to this sense: Which was divulged
in the tenor of it for all, and in the rumor of it to all.

David becoms a leader of all sorts, every one that was in distress, and every
one that was discontented, etc. 1 Samuel 22.2. Saving grace has a universality
in it. Look to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth. The brazen Serpent
was lifted up in the Wilderness, to be looked upon: it did secretly hint to
that unworthy people, that God would not always tie himself to them, but give
mercy a larger compass, that not only Israel, but those that were dogs, and as
the brutes of the Wilderness should have a Savior lifted up among them to
look upon: our Savior, in his own expression, gives this explanation: When I
am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me; not only Jews, but Gentiles. The
Serpent that is now lifted up, Lions, Tigers, Bears, Wolves, all the beasts of
the vast Wilderness of this world, from the one end to the other, may look
upon; Look to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth.

to give eternal life, to whom he will: not a soul so black; so speckled, but
Christ can cleanse him, as white as snow: no sin, no evil spirit so strong,
but he can bring him under; he is able to subdue all things to himself, men,
devils, sins, etc. he shall change your vile bodies, and make them like his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is [able to subdue all
things to himself], Phil. 3.21. no condition desperate to Christ; he can give
sight to one that is born blind, he (...) change the spots of the Leopard,
plague spots; all things touching the fallen condition of man, are possible to
him, 'twas spoken you know by himself, upon a sad fight, which none of Christ's
Disciples could do good to, to wit, one rended and torn by Satan, which Christ
cured with ease. There be many thousand impossibilia to us; yea, in us; not a
sin in a man's soul, the least, but is impossible to us to subdue, because in
our nature: Can a Leopard change his spots any one of his spots? He may lick at
them, but can he remove them? It Is as if Christ had said, Can a sinner take out
any stain in his soul? he may lick at them, by prayer, and the like, but he
cannot remove them, because as a nature to him; yet I can do it; as if Christ
had said, I can take out any spot, out of any cloth, out of any part, soul or
body; He is able to save all that come to God by him.

John, when he had discoursed largely according to what latitude and compass
he wrought, for the salvation of souls, he puts it to this conclusion: I can do
no less, says he, for this is the will of my Father, that [every one] that
sees the Son, and believes on him, might have everlasting life; if it be the
tatterdst, the forlornst creature in the city, that looks pitifully upon me, I
must look pitifully upon him, if he hang about me for soul favor, I must in no
ways cast him off, but take him out of the jaws of death, and carry him in my
arms to eternal life. What is the will of the Father, is the will of Christ;
the will of Christ naturally, not artificially, in a way of self-denial, and
contest, as the will of God is said to be a Saints will; so that what the
Father would have Christ own, Christ cannot but own, for the same Spirit is in
him, and in the same measure; and therefore you have him setting himself forth
by the Prophet, just as I do, as one bound by that Spirit which anointed him.
The Spirit of the Lord, [is upon me] and he has anointed me to preach unto
these and these, and to comfort [all that mourn]. a Christ does not say, the
will of the Lord is nakedly revealed to me, how far I shall show mercy, and how
far not; but the same Spirit that speaks to me, says he, is upon me (i.) in
the same measure that it speaks to me, it is in me, and so necessitates me to
obey, or captivates me, as my own nature, and as my own affection. God is
captivated with love, toward all captives; so am I, says Christ; he would have
all to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth; Jews and Gentiles; so
would I too, says Christ; the same bottomless sea of love that fluctuates in
his breast, is in mine; the Father and I are one, and often Christ uses this
expression, when he speaks about love to the creature.

How can you escape the damnation of hell? as Christ spoke to this generation.
There is no art to make the soul set open the everlasting doors, like telling
him of the King of glory, which would come in. I conclude so, because it is the
art the holy Ghost uses. Mercy held out in the extent of it, is the King in
visible glory: drunkards, swearers, adulterers, set open your everlasting
doors, the King of glory would come into you, he would forgive your sins
against the light of Scripture, your sins against the light of nature, your
beastly sins, I, those wherein you have been worse then beasts, your sins
against your own bodies, as well as against your own souls; Love would get her
self a name upon you, by cleansing and kissing of Swine, by laying a Toad in
her bosom, by bringing a devil out of hell to heaven. Can you spit in the face
of this Love, now in the sight of all this congregation, and turn to your lusts
again? Mercy comes to all your doors, she falls down at all your feet, will you
tread upon her? Mercy shows you what she would have you do, Christ humbles
himself to the dust, lays himself at all your feet, if you would but do the
like to him, not a soul of you should perish.

We hold out to you now, the riches of grace, if it work kindly, you shall know
it by this, the soul longs to be partaker of it: this grace must be nourished;
if longing die ere it obtain, the soul is guilty of stifling the Spirit. What
buds in the soul will blossom, do but keep it in the Sun: all that are weary
and heavy laden, have ease; all that are oppressed with the devil, are healed:
it is the thing we are upon. If this grace work not kindly, the soul hardens it
self in its sin. If love be so large, I may go on in my sin yet a while longer,
and do well enough at last; God rejects none, not young sinners, not old
sinners; I will make as much as I can of my sin, and lie as long as I may in
the lap of Delilah; if I must part with it, I will part with it at last, when I
must part with all. Death is seized violently upon this soul, he vomits his
excrements. Would a Judas speak worse then this man? I will keep my
covetousness and treachery as long as I can, if I must leave it, it shall be
at last, when I leave this world, my master and my hope for ever. You cannot
imagine the depth of guile that is in our hearts naturally; no man will say so
much as before said in words, but thousands say it in deeds; say what we will,
what we can, of justice, of mercy, of the latitude of these, yet sinners will
drive on in their own courses, as long as liberty, strength, and life will give
leave. These hearts are dead in trespasses: Let what Sun will shine upon the
dead, it warms them not; these sinners are twice dead; dead naturally, and dead
voluntary; they have tasted of the sweet of their ways, and they get much
wealth and pleasure by it, and they are not children, to part with a reality
for a fancy.

These are whole, and need not a Physician, our work is quickly done about
these. Burdened souls, you are the proper subject of mercy, and of this
discourse, the call of this doctrine is to you: Come every one of you to
Christ, and ye shall have ease, he excludes none: Come unto me, all ye that are
weary and heavy laden. A loded soul is self-condemned, he cannot stand under
the sense of sin and wrath; alas, who can? A soul self-condemned, has a halter
about his neck of his own making; but do not hang thy self: the King of Israel
is very merciful, he hangs none that comes to him as thou do, with a halter
about his neck; hold a parley with him for thy life, thou may bring him to
what terms of mercy thou will, almost. Bid Christ make Propositions of peace,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? If he say that he will have thee do this,
and do that, deny thy self, and follow him, pluck out thy right eye, and cut
off thy right hand, and the like tell him, that through him thou can do all
things; give me thy self, and I will part with any thing; lend me thine hand,
and I will rise, draw me, and I will run after thee. Nothing is vile to me, but
that which thou forbiddest, nothing dear, but that which thou command; only
let me touch the hem of thy garment, let me take hold of thy skirt, and I shall
accomplish thy will and mine own.

This request cannot be denied: Make this conclusion, and feed upon it, under
all desertion and temptation. Christ is engaged, furnished, yea, about this
very design, to give himself to thee. Christ is engaged for thee by petition;
thou have put up many petitions to him, and he has put them up all to God, he
could do no otherwise; for he is by place an Advocate, to mention and plead
such cases, as are moved to him. Christ is furnished by concession, for he is
heard in all that he asks: my Father hears me always. We ask many things and
miss, because we ask amiss: Christ always asks well, and speeds well:
therefore conclude of relief. You that mourn after Christ, [he will] send a
Comforter. The command of God is upon Christ, [he shall be] a light to the
Gentiles. When Christ ingages himself by petition for any, God does always
engage him by concession, and by accomplishment for it. See thou do this poor
soul good, my Son: here is for him, according to all that he needs, let it be
laid out upon him according to all thou say, will make him happy. Must he
have my Spirit? my comforting Spirit? will no less, nor no cheaper thing make
him smile? will not a little Saffron mixed with some spirituous liquid, make
him laugh? No, must he have my Spirit? my Joy^s then here it is. But be sure, my
Son, that thou give it him. The injunction of God is upon Christ, He shall be a
light to the Gentiles. God does trust no Doctor, no Apothecary, none but Christ
himself about drouping souls; and he puts into his hand, cordials of infinite
price, and says, that he shall give them, and his blessing with them; that he
shall be, not only means of light, but Light it self, to dark souls; that is,
the blessing of means, as well as means.

That Christ is about and upon giving himself to thee, O soul, I will
demonstrate to thee thus: Christ has looked upon thee, this is the first thing
a man does, when he intends to bestow himself upon any; Abasuerus viewed the
damsels first. The Son has looked upon thee; that the Son has looked upon
thee, is apparent, for the beauty of his countenance has taken thee, and thou
would fain have his Image to wear in thy breast, and if all thou had would
buy it, how willingly would thou part with it? the words which fall from
Christ's lips, are as marrow, and those which suit thy state, as marrow and
fatness. Surely the King has looked upon thee, and more, he has a liking to
thee. Thou love him, thou may conclude therefore, that he loved thee first.
We love him, because he loved us first, the man makes love first. Christ wooed
thee long, ere he thus far gained thee, though thou take no notice of it. Nay,
more then this, Christ has bestowed love tokens upon thee, surely he is
bestowing himself to thee. Christ has given thee by us his messengers as
Abraham's servant, a golden eare-ring, bracelets for thine hands; by the word
whch we preach, he has given thee his Spirit, thou breathest as Christ does,
very sweelty. I do not smell it. No, one cannot smell his own breath, when it is
sweet, only when it stincks much; but others smell it, in every room where thou
come.

Would Christ were mine! Is not this the period still, of thy expression, at
the end of every discourse? Such an one has got so much and so much, says one
to thee; do not thou reply? would Christ were mine, and then I had got more
then he. Do thou not gasp only after Christ, when thou fetchest breath
deepest? That Is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, which makes sighs and groans,
which cannot be expressed; he and thee sigh together; one in another, and one
after another. Love is mutually set, the contract is made, only it is not
published to the world; some deliberate time is used about this.

It Is a distinct thing from being Christ's, to know that I am his, and that he
has bestowed himself upon me; and all the wranglings, quarrellings, and
gain-sayings of Satan, and a man's own soul, will not be quite dead, till the
soul be quite in the bosom of Christ. When one argues from the beams of the
Sun that there is a Sun, me thinks the cavillingst spirit of unbelief that is
should lie still. Had no body ever taken notice of any ray of the Sun appearing
in the soul to argue from, only the word of grace pressed, and the man that was
all the days of his life a vile wretch, beholding his own necessity, and the
riches of goodness, and laying hold upon it, he were bound to believe that
Christ accepted of him, and bestowed himself upon him. I beseech you weak
souls, know two things, and you cannot but be strong: Know the riches of the
Gospel, and know the obligement of the Gospel; it tenders mercy, 1. freely, and
so it 2. must be owned; and so owned, though with never so much weakness, or
with never so many temptations, yet that it should be effectual to your
salvation: the touch of Christ's garment did the cure.

COLOSSIANS 1.23. Whereof I Paul, etc.


It Is for some special emphasis certainly, that the Apostle does here
articulate his person, with his name, I Paul; only we are various at guessing
at it. Some think he points at the signification of his name, (...) cessare,
which signifies to cease. As if he had said, I that am stopped and ceased from
destroying the Gospel, and now made a publisher of it. Divine love can quench
hellfire, check violence, stop and turn a man when in the height of rage
against Christ. This bloody sinner, had a remarkable stop, by a word of love
from Heaven, Why do thou persecute me? Upon which his name was changed, to
print and perpetuate providence, from Saul to Paul, (i) one stopped and ceased.
No cords so strong as love, a madman cannot break them, when catched with
them. Paul was a madman, a devil, yet catched and tamed presently, by a sweet
voice from heaven. If you would conjure a devil quiet, if you would quench
hellfire in any ones breast, if you would make cords strong enough to hold a
Bedlam, imitate Christ, speak as one from Heaven, in the sweetness and
strength of the Gospel; lay a mountain of love in the mad-mans way. Why
sinner? Why will thou go over Christ? This will (...), cease his course.

Others think the Apostle points at the signification of his name, as a Roman
name. Paulus, from the adjective Paulus, which signifies little: as if the
Apostle had said, Of which great mysteries, I that am little and poor in
gifts, in place, in esteem, little and base every way, yet am made a
dispenser; and so an expression of great humility. The more grace, the less
in our own eye. The sight of God is humbling, his majesty and glory is such,
that the soul necessarily falls at his feet. The lesser and lower in our own
eye, the greater and higher in Gods; all that he raises, is out of the dust:
out of the dust he raises seed to Abraham; and out of the dust he raises
officers to look to this seed; out of the dust he raised our Savior; and out
of the dust he raises those Saviors, which are in his stead, Leaders in
Israel. He gives grace to the humble, (i) much grace, grace enough for the man
himself, and many more. Christ does plow and sow altogether in low grounds,
these prove very fertile. Mountains are cursed: if proud men be drawn out and
set high, it is to be hanged by their preferment, as Haman.

I think both significations may be eyed in this speech, and the Apostle
considered as one much admiring the way of God throughout, that would look
toward one so much, as to entrust him with the care of all the Churches, who a
little while since was set against them all; and now turned from so great
wickedness, yet possessing but little goodness, to discharge so great a
trust. That I should be turned, is wonderful; but that I should be so employed,
is more wonderful. The freeness of God, in all his dispensations of grace and
place, should be matter of admiration.

Thou have been very pleasant to me (says David to Jonathan) Thy love to me is
wonderful: This he spoke with an eye to all the love he had received from him,
which is the right frame of the soul, in order to Christ and his: Thou have
been very pleasant to me, O Christ, throughout my course, and thy love to me
has been wonderful, to my soul, to my body, in person, in office, in every
condition. They are in a perfect frame above; the spirts of just men above, are
all in a rapture, because of all the love that shines upon them; there is not a
beam over-looked; not a beam shines upon any soul in Heaven, but it is
observed much, and warmes him much; our hearts are in frame as they arise, to
this. Heat is the right temper of the soul; I wish thou were hot. Heat is
active, activitie is a soul gathering up all the goodness of God, and feeding
upon it, and then is the soul healthy and prosperous, and not otherwise. The
constitution of grace, is somewhat as the constitution of nature, it feeds upon
variety, but variety of God; God in riches, God in honors, God in every
thing: if God be missing in any person, in any dish at the Table, it stinkes.

Heat has resolution: divine resolution tires not in duty, though never so
great. Then is the soul well, when it faints not in the praises of God. Heaven
is up-hill; and to skim off the cream of every creature, and to carry it up to
Heaven, and to present it to God, is hard work: to find out God in every
thing here below, and carry him home to Heaven, and set him upon his throne,
and admire him, is great labor; and yet divine resolution does this, does it
in order to all divine dispensations, throughout the term of man's life, and
lays not down the work; no, lays not down the work to all eternity. I will
mention the loving kindness of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has
bestowed upon us, and his great goodness toward the host of Israel, according
to the multitude of his loving kindness, Esa. 63.7. Nothing is so numerous as
sin, and mercy, but yet of the two, mercy is more numerous. The world has
not so many sins in it, as mercies; and to act divinely in order to all
these, to play upon a Lute, which has I know not how many strings; to string a
man's soul, with many thousand thousand mercies that befall him, and to play
upon this sweely all ones days, and never lay aside the instrument, this is a
hail constitution; and yet all this but duty, divine president is extant.
Divine presidents of this nature, are doubly binding: what any Saint of God
ever did as a Saint, and in order to the rules of sanctity, that comes to me
with double authority to be observed; and therefore is the Scripture cited,
and the cloud of witnesses as another superadded motive. Presidents of
sanctity, speak not only the precept to be obeyed, but the possibility, and
honorabilitie of the precept, to be obeyed.

understand the loving kindness of the Lord, nor never will: he is cursed to
the dust, as the seed of the Serpent, to go upon his belly, upon his appetite;
and upon no higher principle, through this world; to feed only upon dust, and
upon no nobler thing, for making a God of this world. You wonder at the plague,
and at the sword, but this is the greatest judgment in the Land, that no man
sees the mercy that shines upon him. All the judgments that are in the Land,
are but to cast shadows upon mercies, that you may see them well, and carry
them and your souls to Heaven together. There should not be a judgment more
among us, did you see mercy as you should: there should not a man more die, did
loving kindness live in our hearts. The heart of this Land is eaten out with
long tillage, God now dungs it, that things may grow well. It Is so with our
souls: Our hearts are eaten out with vanities, nothing will come up that is
divine, not spring up as high as Heaven. God pluckes up all, to pluck up your
hearts to Heaven; 'twill be well if this be effected, although it be not till
all be dead. When all is dead, if then a man's soul grow alive to God, blessed
am I, though there be but this one thing alive of all I have. England is dead,
God is burying it. Our hearts are quarred with fullness, and become stones; no
music can be played upon a stone. God makes music to himself with justice,
seeing we can make none to him with mercy: he sets us to throw stones one at
another, hard heart against hard heart, to dash out one another brains, to
kill a company of men, Canini appetitus, of a dog appetite, whose belly is as
the grave, and as hell, which cry, give, give, but never return.

England am made a mirror of mercy, a thousand thousand wounds, and yet not
dead; What pen shall I take, and what book? Where shall I write this love, that
it may be ever in Gods eye, and mine own? Do you see such a spirit stirring,
for the glory of Christ? We fall in person, we fall in purse, and we fall and
flat in spirit too: nothing rises in any man that I see, but that which throws
all down, Pride and self. Ego magnus, not, ego Paulus, I great, not I little
and low, this may be every man's motto. Big spirits are the worst in the world
to stoop, and to take up every thing of Gods, and give it to him. Big proud
spirits, admire themselves: such as are taken up with admiration of themselves,
can never be good at this duty of admiring God. Look over all the Kingdom,
and people in the world, and tell me a people more pinned to, and doting upon
its self, then we are. What a Clergy! What Magistracy! What an Army have we!
So big, so acute, so perfect, as not to be expressed. This puts by the other
quite, what a Christ have we! how strong! how wise! how gracious! Do ye hear
men's mouths filled with this, with admiration of Christ? What ornaments do I
wear in my soul, or upon my outward man, but Christ has put them on all?

Paul here, admire the goodness of Christ, in all the goodness that is upon
you? That you are stopped and ceased from wickedness? That you are turned to
Christ? Yea not nakedly so, but turned into noble services for Christ?
Entrusted with many Talents above your brethren, for the good not only of your
selves, but many more? I would willingly admire this, if it were so; but alas
for me, mad-blind, as those wilful Pharisees, and Scribes: this is a sad
condition. There is no recovery of sight, when the eyes are struck out.

If this be not thy plague, there is the more hope; for God will take the
business in hand to make thee see, in a more strong way then now it is done by
me, if all means have not been used already; as what a potent course is taken
up in this case, Hosea 11.3. I taught Ephraim to go, taking them by the arms,
but they knew not that I healed them, I drew them with the cords of a man, and
with the bands of love, and I laid meat unto them. God will one time or other,
take hold upon thy conscience, and lead thee about from mercy to mercy, and
point thee to them particularly, one after another. O ungrateful soul, I did
this for thee, and I did that: I saved thee from breaking thy leg such a time,
from breaking thy neck such a time, from such a desperate sickness, such a
time, etc. Thus does God to persons that are asleep in ingratitude, to awaken
them, and thus he does to them that are dead. Go and tell David, [I took] thee
from the sheepfold, etc. After that soul miscarriage, God set one to talk
with him, with a witness, to tell him who raised him, and to what, and what
use was expected of all. God will thus speak within to thy conscience, sooner
or later. If this be the potent remedy of ingratitude you speak of, I have
had this already. I cannot sleep sometimes, these things are so whispered in
mine ears. Why, better want sleep, then want instruction from Christ. Does it
not yet do the thing? Why, beg him then to seal thy instruction. God speaks
once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not, then he opens the ears of man,
and seals his instruction. Sealing instruction, is so much of Christ given
forth to the soul in his word or works, as leaves the image of Christ plainly
upon the soul. A thing is sealed, when there is such an impresse made, as
leaves the image of the seal upon the paper. Then can we see the image of God
plain without, when it is plain upon the soul within: when one sees two
Suns, then one wonders; it is so spiritually: when one can see Christ within,
and Christ without, such are the souls that admire all the kindness of God.
The Apostle saw two Suns; he looked upon himself as a converted man, and
then as such an entrusted man with office: a man cannot see God without well,
unless he can see him within.

Christians, (and here be a sweet company of you) this work I see by the
course of things, falls to your share, look that you discharge it well, this is
my charge upon you. Christ has no active creatures to gather him honey, and to
bring it home to his door but you: there be some wild Bees, that gather a
little honey, and of a scurvey wild undigested nature, but they go and hide it
in holes of the earth, and in hollow trees, I know not where. How do you
bestir your selves, Christians, in gathering of honey for Christ? The garden in
which you are, was never fragranter with flowers then now. Not a man you meet
with, but you may wonder he is alive: not a stone in the street you tread
upon, but you may wonder it is not colored with blood: not a limb you have,
but you may wonder it is not cut off: not a good Minister, not a good
Magistrate, but you may wonder he is not cut in a thousand pieces; how
ponderously and warily should we go up and down every where in England now,
after all the great things that have been done in it, that we do not tread
wonders in the dirt? What a time, what a place do we live in, and what
advantages have we to bring in rich treasure to the crown of Christ, and so
consequently to our own crown? And think then what hearts you have, which are
frothy and wanton now. Fatherly providence has made every mercy a thousand
times bigger then 'twas, that you may see it as you should: do you do so
Christians? Our house is sweeter then 'twas, husband sweeter then he was, every
thing is renewed, a new gloss from an immediate hand put upon every thing;
it is strange that things that are so varnisht and inlaid from Heaven, should
not divinely take us. I am jealous of you Christians, I am jealous of you, that
yet Christ is a great loser by you, in the glory of his Name. Divine heat is
wanting in you, though God has rubbed you so much and so long, till he has
rubbed off the skin. A man may discern where ever he comes, that the goodness
of the Lord is not in your mouths, is it in your minds? You froth at mouth,
and bespatter every one that comes near you with it, that one had need down
upon his knees to God, to wash his soul from the filth that comes from you:
these things are against you Christians, but I spare you: Think but what God
has done, and what he is now adoing, and then think what hearts you have,
that can be frothie now.

COLOS. 1.24. Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you.


Duty with its issue lies here together, it brings forth twins, but not
like each other; misery in the discharge of it, joy in the end. The better the
instrument works, the worse liked of the world, and the worse used, this is
sorrowful; but the more blessed of God to a gracious success, this is
joyful. The child that comes last out of the womb of duty, is a pleasant
child, [Now] I rejoice in my sufferings for you. The instrument that
faithfully wrought, beaten; with these stripes many were healed: Paul lived to
see this, this made him forget misery, whilst in it, for he was in bonds, when
he spoke these words. Duty at last is sweet, it comes off with Heaven, though
Hell dog it for a time. Now I rejoice.

Esther sighs, mournes, groans, and then feasteth and rejoices at last: it is
a true emblem of Christianity, it is clothed with sackcloth a great time, but
changes garments at last. Blessed are all that die in the Lord; Persons when
they end, actions when they end, though they end in blood and death, yet if in
the Lord, in the discharge of duty, they are blessed with sweet success, they
eat the fruit of their travail; 'twas so to Christ, it is so to us. Success
is the crown of action, a crown from God here; Can a soul wear a crown from
God here, or any where, and not joy, though a great while a putting on?

This point must be understood. When I say duty ends well, it must be
understood, duty faithfully discharged. Hypocrites are very doing, but action
never comes off well; what ever joy they have in the beginning, they have none
in the end; how much soever they sit up and work, yet they lie down in sorrow;
what fires and sparkles soever they kindle, go all out ere they go out, and
blast and not bless the soul at last: this is a universal truth, made so by
the hand of justice. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, and compass your
selves about with the sparks, this ye shall have of my hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow, Esa. 50. ult. Christ crowns no hypocrite neither here nor
hereafter, neither action nor person; all that is unsound, rots. They shall not
eat of the travail of their soul, how painful soever their travail be, but
die in travail, their hope is cut off: an hypocrites livery, yea his legacy,
is nothing but a deaths-head; obedience faithfully discharged, ends well; where
ever this ends, if it be in a prison, or any where else, it is with joy.

Obedience is rejected, because of its issue, it is a damnable fault: they die
in travail that are married to Christ, therefore I will never be married to
him; he clothes his Spouse with mourning garments, and her coat is edged at
end still with deaths-heads; I will never be married to him! then thou can
never come to Heaven, he brings none but his Spouse thither. Though Christ do
not use his Spouse ill himself, yet he suffers others to do it; there is
nothing but blood and death in the way of God, I dare not set step in it. Many
speak this in their heart, their not obeying, is a demonstration of it. A sad
temptation is strongly seized upon you, if it hold you, you are lost; the
fearful of this sort are shut out. There be troubles in every course under the
Sun; do thou find none in disobedience? Then the more is to come. Blood,
and death, and hell, are at the end of thy way, Sinner; and yet dare thou to
keep on in it? Surely thou art not so much fearful as wilful. Instruction
cures distemper, when it is but of mere weakness; when the soul waits to
turn in with Christ, and yet cannot; but where it is otherwise, lay open as
much danger in one way pleaded for, as in another way pleaded against, yet the
man will hold on his course, which speaks the soul engaged by will, and not
so much overborne by weakness, and then there is no entrance for right
principles. I would let these alone which have shut themselves up, till Christ
break open doors upon them, and speak to a generation more ingenuous.

Men that are candid, love to do things that will end well: then set upon the
works of Christ. If thou be a Minister, preach Christ faithfully, who ever
oppose; if thou be otherwise of any other rank, practice the will of Christ
sincerely, what ever thou suffer. Things may go harsh a time, but Christ will
bring about a season, (...), now I rejoice, that ever I did this, and that ever
I did that for Christ. If Christ do not bring about such a time here, he will
above. O how joyful are they above, that ever they had hearts to suffer for
Christ here below! Now I bless God that I lay in such a prison, what a mansion
have I to make me amends? Now I bless God that ever I was hungry, that ever I
was naked for Christ, what precious meat, and what glorious apparel have I,
to make me amends? 'Twere enough, if the now of a Christians joy, did not come
till after this life: but shall a Christian have one here? Let truth and
conscience keep company in storms, and I think I may assure any man, a sweet
calm here, let men and devils do all what they can; but let these two be
parted, there will never be a season of joy, real joy; the soul is betrayed,
that has any other opinion or practice. The righteousness of action should
only be eyed by us, as for other things, skin and bones, and goods, and such
like lumber, should be all ventured in this bottom. I am for Christ, if I
mourn all the days of my life, and have not one tear wiped off till I come
to Heaven, all is one: so one should set out, setting Heaven at the furthest
distance that can be thought of, and then a man meets with it often, long
before he accounted; in this prison, or in that dungeon, where one would look
for hell rather then heaven; so did Paul. Now I rejoice, etc.

COLOSS. 1.24. Now I rejoice, etc.


PAul was in prison when he spoke these words: so considered, bravenesse of
spirit sparkles in every syllable of the expression. Now I am in the mouth of
the Lion, now I am in the belly of Hell, now I am in the face of Devils, now I
own Christ, and triumph in all that I undergo for his Name. Divine
magnanimity we are to stand upon; it is a soul in all conditions openly very
stout, and very amiable, in the pursuit of Gods will. Disadvantages are many in
a Christian course, in none more: magnanimity knows none, it is one that can
make a Trumpet sound admirably, where there is no echo; in a pit, in a
dungeon; in his coffin, in his grave he will sing, and make his chains
Late-strings; among the dead he is alive, now I rejoice. You have a Latin
Proverb of war, Mars communis, war is of various event, sometimes against
one, sometimes with one: so I may say of the war of a Christian, it is Mars
communis, sometimes we come off well, sometimes we are taken and chained,
sometimes the battle is so hot, that all run away: Magnanimity stands to it
then, fights alone; she is often a prisoner, but never a runaway; one is
enough, to wit, Christ, though all else run away; or how ever disadvantaged
otherwise, yet upon this advantage, she stands to it alone, and fights with
many; yea, fights and sings, thunders and harpes: you have the voice of great
thunders and of harpes joined together, Revel. 14.2. The servants of the Lord,
fighting and thundering against Antichrist, and yet harping and singing. Est
virtus omnia ad gloriam ferens. A virtue that mouldes and shapes all things,
good things, bad things, prisons, chains, blood, all to divine triumph.

Magnanimity is always very stout, but always very amiable: when she
breaths and collects spirits, she does not curve her brow, frown and fret, and
the like, but smiles in the face of cruelty it self. Michal scoffed David,
and stoned him with her mouth, but David smiles and dances. Paul in chains at
Rome rejoices, now I joy. In the belly of Hell, Jonah prays, yea gives
thanks, I will sacrifice to the Lord with a voice of thankesgiving; salvation
is of the Lord. And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon
the dry land, Jonah 2.9, 10. As the verses go, and are conjoined, one would
think they did carry this brave sense, that as soon as God did behold Jonah
in this brave posture of spirit, not only big with prayer, but with praises,
even in the belly of the Whale, that then he spoke to the Whale to give him up,
that then he spoke to Hell to give up that person to Heaven, whose spirit and
action was there before. There is an amiablenesse of person, and an
amiablenesse of action, and Magnanimity has both; she sets the countenance
right, the eye right, and the hand right: when she is stout, it is in the
truth, and for the truth; she pursues a noble game, and abhorres all evil
means to catch it; to get Earth, to get Heaven, she will not be bribed; when
there is any base carriage in a business, none more ignorant of any such
thing, then a Christian truly magnanimous. Christian magnanimity is borne of
humility and simplicity, and hunts after nothing more, then the encouraging
of the parents of which she came, but this she pursues to the utmost. Things
that are of the truest and highest glory, these does a magnanimous Christian,
Nervis cunctis incumbere, intend with every sinew: all things that are simply
sinful, or but of mean account, come not into his thought. It Is virtus
tendens ad maxima, a Christian that struggles to be of all Christians the
chief, for humility, for integrity, for faith, for love, for fruition, for
emission, for taking in of Christ, for laying out for Christ. A Christian
indeed magnanimous, is the greatest Merchant-venturer to the the other world that
is, he is mighty in stock, he has many millions of brave spirits in his
blood, and trades them out all for Christ and Heaven, in long voyages to come
home rich; he has no hand but to good, but to this he has hand and heart, and
nothing can fetch off either. Then answered I thus, and said, The God of Heaven
will prosper us, therefore we his servants will arise and build, but you have
no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem, Nehem. 2.20. A Christian
indeed magnanimous, has truth in one hand, and life in the other, and this is
his Motto, Take one, take both. This is his Motto every where, in liberty, in
bonds, and this he speaks and smiles, (now I joy.)

Vzziah, that when he was strong, that is, externally strong, that he was
lifted up to his destruction. This Prince after his great victories, fell upon
the worship of God, and carried it by his own greatness as he pleased, (which
is a plague proper to pride, to be spiritually and desperately wanton; to
creep into the Temple, and to confront God as highly as may be.) And the Text
tells us of Azariah, and fourscore brave Priests of the Lord that withstood
him, saying, It pertaines not to thee, O King, to burn incense, but to the
Priests of the Lord, which are consecrated; go out of the Sanctuary, thou
have trespassed, and it shall not be for thine honor. There were fourscore of
these magnanimous spirits then, would there were fourscore thousand of these
now in the Christian world, they are much needed, to withstand violence against
the worship of God, against the privilege of Ministers and people. Blindness
hardens men: fools will as soon strike with a club, as with a twig, as soon
stab with a knife, as with a straw, every one that bows not down to the Idol
of their fancy: this is stoutnesse to destruction, as the forecited Scripture
speaks, and it is pity it should destroy any but such as are guilty of it:
and yet it will, if not withstood. What a doleful condition would all have
come to, if those few brave spirits, had given way to all that the King in the
blindness of his heart would have done! A Christian indeed magnanimous, is he
that stands in the gap in a time of wrath, and none else: this man is a
Phinebat, an Azariah, one that stays the plague, the sword, the wrath of God,
that eats upon us, and would eat us out all, unless some such brave spirits
appeared abroad, and at home, in the field, and in the City. You can do no
service to quench the fire of jealousy, that now burns, unless you get more
fire in your hearts. Life and death is in the balance, and the scales stand,
which scale will weigh down we cannot tell; only this I can say, this grace
of Magnanimity put in that scale where the life of the Kingdom lies, would
turn the beam presently, and life should weigh down death; peace and
prosperity, ruin and desolation. It Is pity that brave spirits are no more
smiled upon; some such buddings of hope are now and then, but they are blasted
again; men are alive a while, and then dead. Persons which are in such a
condition, that are pretty well one while, and at deaths-dore again another
while, men have still fear lest some vitals wast in such a state, which is not
yet discerned. England, if death should cure all thy diseases at last, for want
of a little life, what a doleful giving up the ghost will this be! Whither
would thou carry thy cold offspring, that they might grow more warm? To
such and such plantations beyond the Seas? Between thee and them is a great
gulf, and it may be, they that would go to them shall not, and they that thou
would should come to thee will not: they that stay in the City, famine may
devour; they that go to fly out, a sword may cut off; A Serpent, a Lion, or
a Bear, sword, famine, or plague, may divide all between them, within door and
without. Surely, England, thy giving up (if ever that sad day come, which the
Lord grant it may not) will be with such ghastly groans, with such hideous
shreechings, with such tabering of breasts, and tearing of hair, with such
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, as scarce ever any eye saw, or
ear heard, since wrath and desolation began among the Gentiles.

Wherefore call upon thy self, O England, and call upon thy Physicians for
Christian magnanimity: tell them what death thou fear, and what grudgings
of it thou feel already in several parts. Where there be palsies, and such
diseases, which are by cold, which be numbe and dead the parts, there rubbing
is good to fetch heat and agilitie. Rub one another frequently, exhort one
another daily, strike fire in one another breasts, admonish, reprove, but do
all in love. Passion generates passion; wildfire is not magnanimity, this
burns all, it does not save all. Magnanimity springs out of love; it is a
stout spirit candid with the sweetness of Christ, and made a Lamb and a Lion,
as Christ was; a Lamb, when among sheep, to be led by them; but a Lion, when
among Bears and Wolves, to awe and lead them. Magnanimity is the perfectest
temper of Christ, in all this world; it is a Lion lying down with a Lamb, and
doing it no hurt; and a Lamb playing upon the hole of an Aspe, and receiving no
hurt: it is one that can do no hurt, but can and will do much good; it is one
that fels himself like Christ, at a very low rate, to do good to all.

COLOSSIANS 1.24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you.


(...)
SUfferings both external and internal, the word imports, such stripes upon
the flesh, as did affect and afflict the spirit, that did make passiones animi,
soule-passions. There is such an affinite between the body and the soul, that
it is hard to separate them in suffering, yet a divine hand of God, who is
father of spirit and flesh, makes burdens pinch more upon the one then upon
the other, as pleases him Paul's cup was eminently proportioned to Christ's,
'twas to fill up that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ; and
Christ's cup had those ingredients, which made his soul heavy to death, they
did deeply affect, not only his flesh, but his spirit.

Body and soul were as Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil, and God makes
chains to couple both together in misery, and pinches that part most that is
worst, puts double bolts upon the leader to sin, that is the soul. What God
joins, he would not have us to part, what we join, he will not part; we join
body and soul in sin, and he does not part them in suffering, not in the best.
Christ can distinguish between these two in the matter of affliction, and so
lightly touches the flesh, that it shall never trouble the spirit, but then man
usually despises the chastening of the Lord; yea, the best are apt to do so.
[My sonne] despise not the chastening of the Lord. God puts such twigs in all
his cords for his children, that he makes no wantons of them: when they joy in
sufferings under one notion, they shall sorrow in them under another: When they
joy in sufferings, it shall be against sense, and against reason, not as if
they did feel a little, but as feeling much, only apprehending the issue, how
glorious and how precious that will be. Bonds and chains are so heavy, as to
make our joy a pure joy; the misery of Saints is so ponderous, as to press
their joy pure, to make it a joy of faith, not of sense in the least, body and
soul being both in pain.

You squeese out the spirit and purity of things, so does Christ. Christ does
so affect the body and soul in his dealings, that if any grace act forth, it
shall be pure grace, such as is fed with no low principle. If joy work, it
shall be from faith, not from feeling: if faith work, it shall be from the
word without, not from any thing that it feels else or sees, without or
within. Our heights are necessitated, with one medium or other. When our souls
are highest, they are wound and screwed up to it with much pain, and then when
raised to this height, 'twould not be down again for all the world, but
kisses the rod, chains, prisons, any bitters that work about so sweet, so
heavenly a life, as to joy purely in Christ.

The nature of divine trials, is the thing that I would stand upon, how the
arrows of the Almighty are shaped, now sharp these are, which he shoots at
his people, they pierce through all, body and soul. Wherefore is life given to
him that is in misery, and light to him that is in bitterness of soul, Job
3.20. These expressions aptly suite the point I am upon, and do open the
nature of those trials, that befall the godly: they have misery, that is not
all, they have misery wrapped up into such bitter pills, as work upon the soul.
That Is strong physic indeed, that sets all a trembling and casting, body and
soul, yet such God gives those he loves dearly: in bitterness of soul; the
expression is very emphaticall, like that to Elymas, in the gall of
bitterness; it speaks a state steeped, and soaked long in misery, till soaked
quite through; every sinew stretched, every bone put out of joint, no whole part
within nor without; not a thought lying still, nor knowing where to find a
pillow in any room of the soul, to lie down on.

God makes no distinction of persons here, I mean in the point that I am
pursuing. All things come alike to all, alike sweet, alike bitter, alike for
quality, alike for quantity; a vessel of honor filled as full of sorrow
here, as a vessel of wrath, waters coming into the soul. [I am] feeble and
sore broken. I have roared for the disquietnesse of my heart, Psalm. 38.81. None
but evil spirits are broken and tortured below, they are all cursed creatures
that roar there: but here good as well as bad, are broken all to pieces; all
roar here, wicked men, Saints, brave Spirits, I am sore broken, I roar. What
a dreadful din and noise is all this world over! One would think one were in
hell whilst here: in every County, in every City, in every house; no door
sprinkled for a passover in this point of sorrow, sorrow at the heart. The
arrows of the Lord are [within me.] No house so walled, nor so high here, but
God shoots into it when he will: he moves in order to all trials with the
godly, as he does in order to all judgments with the wicked, according to an
absolute will. When he will, he takes up whom he will amongst the wicked, and
trusseth him up so or so, quarters him, and hangs up his quarters, makes him
less or more notorious, as he pleases: so when he will, he takes up whom he
will of the godly; prisons, chains them, till the Iron enter into their soul,
sets them up as a mark, and shoots them clean through. Why have thou set [me]
up as a mark to shoot at? Job 7.20. And this a mere exercise of prerogative
will, which Job could not understand at present, but did afterward. Though God
has made over much to man, yet has reserved this privilege to himself, to
have his Range in this great Forest here below, and to shoot at what he will,
at what goat he will, or at what Deer he will, and at what part of this Deer he
will, at the heart, so he does not make an incurable wound.

And this Christ can do, and this may be the reason of his privilege. He
wounds as he pleases, because he can heal as he pleases; shoots the body, and
shoots the soul of his people, because he can take out the bullet where ever
it lies, and heal that part as perfect, yea perfecter then ever 'twas. Poisons
that gangrene and eat upward and inward toward the heart, Christ can stop
their secret motion, and draw out the poison at the pores of the soul, at the
eyes, at the mouth, in spiritual breathings, and kind soule-sweatings,
pantings, mournings, and turn this poison that drops out of these pores, into
a precious spirited liquid, and bottle it up as a cordial for himself to
drink of, and to delight his palate withal for ever. The rarest spirits, are
extracted out of the strongest poisons, and Christ wants no skill to do it; he
is an admirable Chemist, and therefore takes whom and what he will, to try his
skill upon. There are no such poisonous things in the world, as sin and
punishment, especially when they meet together in the soul, and yet then
Christ can extract such a spirit out of both, as all this world shall hardly
match. Christ can bring a body down to the grave, and raise him up again, and
make his bones like Behemoth, like bars of Iron. David found it often: Thou
have renewed my strength like an Eagle. So Christ can bring a soul down to
Hell, and raise it up again to Heaven, yea bring him up so full of Heaven,
that not one of a thousand, not one of forty thousand comparable; and what
Christ can do in this point, he does when and as he pleases. Mibbor s^^on.
He brought me up also out of a horrible pit, out of the mirie clay, and set my
feet upon a rock, and established my goings, Psalm. 40.2. Horrible pit, a vault
of hideous noises, says the Original; Christ can bring a man down to such a
condition, as if his soul were in a vault, where are all manner of hideous and
doleful noises, and yet then raise the spirit as into Heaven, where all manner
of melodious and reviving noises are.

lips upon, for the next to drink: it is no other then what he gives to the
best of his. Misapprehension makes burdens intolerable, which is heavier then
ever Christ intended to any Saint. When any twig in the rod stings the soul,
when any thing sticks and presses hard upon the spirit, the conclusion is,
wrath made this rod, and 'twill kill me if I had a thousand lives. These are
our conclusions, merely ours and Satan's, Christ has no hand at all in them.
Fatherly displeasure, is love, a God setting himself against your sin, not
against your persons, he has embraced these with an everlasting love. Satan
visits much when the soul is in pain, 'twere well if good hearts did know
when he comes; his counsels, his prescriptions, are all desperate; when the
heart is heavy, then he shows such the nails of that hand that is upon them,
how long they be, and how hard they pinch, and what deep dints and black and
blew marks they make, (i) he makes an exact collection of circumstances about
every stroke of God, with his own comment in the margent. As to instance; Love
does strike her beloved ones indeed, but does she strike so strong, so long,
so deep? Does she strike and not stroke a jot? Not with her own hand, nor no
body else? Does she wither every other womb of love, when she leaves bringing
forth her self? It Is a frown of God, it is a pang of death upon the soul,
certainly thou can not recover it, says that cursed spirit. One would
construe the Devil under a notion of simplicity in this, (there may be
charity to the Devil) he is so under justice himself, that he can see
nothing else, and this is the strength of the torment that is upon him: but yet
then he is to be judged no fit leader in such a case as this, when he has to
do with spirits in a better station then himself.

The works of God are wonderful, especially such as reach the soul, and need
to be read over often, ere a man venture to make a positive conclusion upon
them, that this and no other is the meaning. Afflicted Christians, you are too
rash, too venturous, pain puts you into passion, that is a very mis-judging
condition. You judge things before the time; this in small matters is no small
fault, nor of no small evil event, but what is it when a man does thus about
the greatest acts that relate to him in all the world? The tranquillity of the
soul is embarked, in a right judgment of things; let Satan, your own passion,
any wile whatsoever, overturne this, and you shipwreck and sink your
consolation irrecoverably: therefore study long, pray long, wait long, ere
you draw up a judgment upon that handwriting, that is in the wall against
you. Do as that Heathen, judge others better able to interpret the handwriting
against you, then your selves. And if you would have the exact meaning of this
strange stroke or that, do as he did, send for the most experienced
spiritual man in all the world, Some (...).
and let him rather then thy self, make a judgment upon that hand, that
writes bitter things against thee. Open thy breast and say; Sir, do you see
any plague-spot in my breast? (one cannot look very well in his own breast,
it is so high) open it fully to another. Pray Sir, deal faithfully with me: Do
you see any plague spots in my breast? There be spots there, are they the spots
of Gods people or not? How black be they? How broad be they? How many be they?
If thou will make many curious questions about thy state, and drive things to
an exact disquisition, be sure that thou take one by thee, better able then thy
self to guide thee, or thou will condemn the innocent, and execute thy self.

Judgment settled, and something may be spoken to the man, to do him good.
There are two considerations, which may much relieve, when trials pinch the
soul; it is for some through and noble good to the party, and for some through
and noble use for Christ. The throne of iniquity is struck at, the head of the
Serpent is trod upon: powers within, are Satan's strongholds, things which pain
and shake these, come to Satan's bedside, and holds a knife to his throat,
where he lies, tumbles, and sleeps. The Grenades which are cast into the
soul, burn the devil in his bed, they burn the branch, yea they burn the
root of sin, it is an axe to the root. Sin considered as it lies lodged in the
heart, is the root of it, therefore says the Apostle, Covetousness is the
root of evil, it being as it were the heart to all other sins. Exorbitant
affections, which lie all within, these are the roots of all the sin you act;
that which is so ordered and steeped, as to affect these disaffected passions,
strikes at the root of sin. See thou a man pricked in soul? Stand still; thou will see pride come down branch and root. Seven Devils turned out; a floare
thoroughly cleansed, dross purely purged away, a man made clean every whit,
outside, inside, all fair, in the eye, yea in the vote of Christ, yea in the
vote of Christ to the soul it self.

And now and not till now, is a Christian fit for noble service, thus thoroughly
dead, and thus thoroughly raised. Pride slain, all her children, that is, loose
affections murdered in their bed, the meek and pure spirit, crowned with a
vision of God, you may send this dove forth any where, he will come home with
an olive branch in his mouth. Set this soul about what work you will, that
belongs to a Christian, and he will do it truly; and if it be to cloth the
naked, to relieve the oppressed; heel power out his soul or state to the
needy, and he will do it with tender bowels, because he has needed them
himself, and has tasted how sweet they are. When the soul goes forth in
action, then is action done nobly indeed. The Lord is with them that uphold my
soul, says David; and we think he points at Jonathan, when he had scarce any
else to cleave to him. When every ones heart was as Iron, Jonathan loved David
as his own soul; Jonathan had been put to it, he knew what 'twas to be in
strait for his life, so unfatherly was his father, and therefore he proves a
brave spirit for this noble service, to save the life of David, to raise him,
and Christ in him, to his throne: he was all heart and soul in it, and God was
with him. God is doubly present with a man, which he has much exercised, which
is an incomparable advantage, to all divine usefulness. No man can speak so
feelingly, so healingly, as he that has much of God speaking in and with him:
this is the man of a thousand, that can speak words in season, like apples of
gold in pictures of silver, that can lend legs to the lame, eyes to the
blind; that can comfort those which are cast down, with the same comforts
wherewith he has been comforted from the Lord.

COLOS. 1.24. And fill up that which is behind, etc.


THe afflictions of Christ are twofold: in his person, in those which he
personates; the former are accomplished, the latter are yet accomplishing.
Christ's will and himself are one; such as strike his will, any part of this,
or any lover of this, would strike Christ himself, if he were now present.
Christ is plain, he calls actions as intended, not as pretended. The second
Adam names things as the first when he stood, according to their nature; what
is against truth, is in the nature of it against Christ, who ever be the
professor of it, and therefore so accounted, yea, and so openly called. And
fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ.

And fill up] the word in the original is compounded, (...).
and full of emphasis; it signifies re-action or re-passion, the doing or
suffering of a thing again, to do over that which some others have done
already; readimplere, as one translates. The measure of suffering, that tends
to satisfy for offense, and ransom man from the wrath of God, Christ has
filled up to the brim; the cup was big, but Christ poured out blood enough to
fill it: one would have hoped that all suffering work belonging to a
Christian, had been done then. No, it is not, says the Apostle, I do iterum
implere, rursus implere, fill up again, the sufferings of Christ. Malice lives
still, Christ is crucified afresh in his members: Christ does bleed in my
veins afresh, says the Apostle; if there were any drop of blood left behind,
when he bled upon the cross, now it is fetched out through my sides.

How implacable is the fury of man! the fury of God was stopped when Christ had
bled to death, and 'twas not his will that ever Christ should die any more, or
that any one should die more for Christ's sake; but yet the fury of man lives,
and that would have Christ die over and over, iterum iterumque, again and
again; 'twould have every house pulled down and burned, that Christ gets
into: 'twould crucify his image, his picture; 'twould make him bleed as long
as this world lasts, yea, to all eternity, therefore do wicked spirits in hell
blaspheme and tear his name, a work which they will never leave, though it
continually add to their plague; and yet these do but show the nature of all
malicious men on earth, which are everlasting bloodhounds, which spend
perpetually upon the sent of Christians, upon the sent of Christ, in any earth.

Malice should be looked upon as it is an implacable thing; and men in whose
breast it is, should be looked upon as they are, fire-shovels fetched from
hell, to carry everlasting fire from house to house, from place to place, where
ever Christ is, to burn him out of this world quite; to burn him again and
again, till there be none of him left, not a finger, not a toe, not a hair.
We are much given to wondering, we know the reason of things so little: to see a
man drink blood, and never be weary of drinking such a fulsome drink, it is
strange to us: yet it is the property of that fire that burns in the breast of
the man, to make an unquenchable thirst after this red Wine; it is a damnable
disease that the man cannot help, nor no man upon earth for him; every good
body must keep out of his way as well as they can, I know no other remedy; the
man will set abroach any ones blood, Paul's, Christ's, any one that looks like
either. Christians have a blessed keeper, or else how rare would they be in the
world? Bless God that there is a good man left in the land at this day, in the
midst of so many blood-thirsty. O how much are good hearts put to it every
where, by this generation! Mourn over both persecutors and persecuted, they
are both in hell fire.

Ex (...) pro and (...).
The word may signify to suffer for another, pro-implere, to fill up in
another stead, according to his appointment. Christ is gone out of this world,
and he has left Christians in his stead, and all his prime trust and business
with them, to do it for him, to accomplish his will, to walk in his steps,
and to take in good part what befalls them in this way; Christ's business left
to Christians, is comprised in that expression of bearing his cross: he did
bear his cross himself when he was on earth; now he has left it to his
people to bear it for him, to tread in his paths, and take such lodging and
fare at night as falls out. When Christ died, he left but one child to keep for
him, but that one a precious child, to wit, Truth; and this so to keep as
never to let it die, what ever die. I can do nothing against the truth, but
for it. I can do any thing, suffer any thing, that truth may live, I can die,
I can drink off a cup deadly full, deadly big, which will hold all my blood to
fill it. This is our president in the Text. I fill into the same cup that
Christ did, says Paul, and the same liquor, red Wine, the blood of a brave
Grape, the blood of an upright heart, and this for his sake. At what height we
are to be for Christ is considerable, at the same height that Christ was at
for us; we are to rise to the loss of estate, honor, life; Neither count I my
life dear. Life is the prime Jewel of nature, it is the union of two great
estates, body and soul; it is of more worth than raiment, i. then all outward
things: and yet this of no worth, and of no price in order to truth. I account
not my life dear. I am about the work which Christ was, filling a cup that is
deadly big, that will hold my lifeblood to fill it, and yet it is nothing to
me, no grief; if it be any matter to me, it is matter of joy. Now I joy to
fill up that which is behind, etc.

Think how brave you should be, and how near you are to it, or how much you
are below it. Paul's trial is at the door, God has armed your enemies, they
have instruments of death in their hands; it is your goods, your houses, your
Cities, yea this is not all, it is your blood too that they thirst after. Can you
proffer your breast to the Spear, to save truth alive therein? sad things at a
distance are made nothing of, this is the strength of our misery: death may go
up and down in the West, but it cannot come this way. Why should any one dream
so? Sin and justice will meet any where: in a City walled with Brass, up
among the Stars, if sinners can seat themselves there. Has all the
provocation been among poor blind souls, which never had the knowledge of
God, nor scarce any means to attain it? And is there no provocation to be
found among you, children of light? There be strange lightnings before death:
people will sit up in their beds and call heartily, and talk cheerfully, as if
there were no death near, and it may be at the same time death in their
extreme parts, in their feet, and in their nose. Thou art in thy sick bed
London, and art thou sure it shall not be a deathbed to thee? death is upon
thy extreme parts, upon this County, upon that County, upon this town, and
that City, is there no danger of the heart? The evil day is not far from
men, because they do put it far from them. Death is in all our souls, can
it be far from our bodies? so far as never to come at them? What man among
us has life for Christ as he should? is not death seized upon our extreme
parts, those persons that should be as our nose to smell for us, in things of
weight, dead; those persons that should be as hands and feet for us, in matters
of weight, dead spirited? examine your selves all in this point, and from
hence, prophecy (if you will needs) peace, or war, to your selves, and from
nothing else; though this way of prophecy be not infallible, yet it is as
likely to foretell what is to come, as to prophecy from such and such events
past.

(...) vicissim and (...).
The word signifies vicissim implere, to do a thing in ones turn. Christ has
taken his turn, and suffered his part in the will of God, and now my turn, as
if the Apostle had said, is come, to do that which belongs to me. The cup is
very big, it will hold Christ's blood, and the blood of many more, to fill it
up: Christ has poured in his share, and now I am to come next and power in
mine, and who is to come next after me, Christ knows. The word so read, the
order of divine trial is hinted unto us. Gods people are not all in prison at
once, some are in at one time, some at another; some are in for so many days,
and then let out again, and then comes in others. The devil shall cast some
of you into prison, and ye shall be there for ten days. The cup of affliction
goes round the Table, every one drinks of the water of affliction in his
course. Christ is not every day about sad work, Job 7.1.
but takes set days. Is there not an appointed time unto man, says Job?
Tsaba, Militia, a warfare to every man? a bloody season for every man? so it is
read by some. Misery hereafter, comes like a deluge, drownes a world together
at once, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; but evils here, go forth in
form of a visit, visits are at set times, and to set persons, now to some, now
to others, we do not use to visit all our acquaintance at one time.
Nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit [their sinne] upon them,
Exodus 32.34. Here is time and person singled out, every day is not a black
bloody day to every one: we do not all roar together here as they do below,
but several days are divided among several persons, and several years
among several Kingdoms: now it is a day of evil to one man, to morrow to
another; so many years bloody to one Kingdom, so many to another. Bitters are
as sweets, dished out by course.

Peter was, who should have set days apart to wrestle for him? If all were an
eye, then where would be hearing? so may I say in this case, if all Christians
were wounded at once, and killed at once, where would be Linen to bind up
their wounds? where would be shrouds and coffins? and who would make graves,
and carry them thither? The wicked will not; they know not to compassionate the
righteous: they can wound the righteous, but they have no heart to bind them
up: they have hearts to make them mourn, but none to wipe tears from their
eyes; their very kindness is cruelty. Tender goodness orders the great
hardships of Saints; when their cup is mingled by hard hearts, Christ has one
tender heart or other standing under the devils elbow, which he sees not, to
drop in some sweet to make the bitter go down; one Ebedmelech stands under
the tyrants elbow, to moderate the misery of Jeremy. The overruling hand of
God is in this, of which there can be no reason given but his tender goodness;
for every righteous man is abominable to the wicked, and when they fall upon
one, they would fall upon all, and there is enough of them to dispatch all, but
that the Lord of his mercy hinders.

merciless yet, says Christ. Another day a poor man comes to desire such a
favor of this man, as tends much to his maine support, and it is denied: yet I
cannot write this man merciless, says Christ. But lay a Lazarus at his door,
a creature that has his skin full of holes, and an hundred hundred months
crying all at once for mercy, in one man; lay a Soldier at his door, which
has so many wounds in his head, so many in his back, all gaping, crying and
mourning, with tears of blood, for compassion; bring a prisoner to his door,
let him cry and gingle his chains: Sir, I lie upon stones, and I must live
upon stones too, if you give me no bread; my food is sighing, my drink my
tears, my bed iron chains, show mercy Sir, show mercy, or I perish; let this
man be in a Kingdom where there are many of these Golgothaes, and Aceldamaes,
a field of blood, of skuls and broken bones, among many groaning, and tumbling
to and again, with their bowels out, holding up their hands, Sir be merciful,
I beseech you be merciful, and do what you can to relieve me: No, I will not.
Now says Christ, write down the man for merciless. What shall I say of this
generation? they are mourned to, and yet lament not, I have spoken to them,
says Christ, I have mourned to them, but words, tears, stir not: when the
most speaking things to move compassion move not, then are a people written
down for merciless. They have not remembered the afflictions of Joseph, or
condoled, gnal Sheber, over the breaking, or the tearing to pieces of Joseph,
so it is very lively alluding to the state of Joseph, whom his father thought to
have been torn with wild beasts. When the extremity of misery moves not the
least compassion, the tearings and rendings of Kingdoms, Towns, Estates,
Persons, then God writes down men merciless: Ye remembered not the tearings of
Joseph. When persons see the anguish of the soul of Joseph, as one with
death-pangs upon him, and yet compassionate not, this is written down, We saw
the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; we saw
his heart-blood, as it were, ready to come out, and yet we had no heart to
pity, surely we are judged as merciless wretches, Genes. 42.31.

The order of trialls, hintes the order of judgments: sinners look to your
selves. If Saints have their sad boutes, their bloody days, surely you will
have your turn too. Men that love their sins, love not to hear that ever
they shall be whipped for them. Evil is acted with confidence, that it shall
never be judged, he that sits in Heaven does not regard since the beginning
all things are as they were; I have bin a sinner this twenty years, and yet
all is well: This is gross folly, Christ laughes at it, but we should mourn,
that men have no more grace, he sees that your day is coming, yea, he sees
that you cannot avoid it, whilst in this state, and therefore makes no more
haste to take hold of you. A creature that is fast in any Engine we lay, we
make not have to come and break the neck on it, and kill it outright, because
we know it is fast, and therefore we come slowly. Security is Satan's deadly
Engine, you are fast in the bonds of iniquity, justice is sure of you,
therefore it does not make haste to come and break your neck, and to dispatch
you utterly. When your day comes it will be a bloody day indeed, a day as long
as a year, as long as eternity; a day that will never have night. When your
prisoning and chaining time comes, your chains will be everlasting, your bout
will be long, mercy makes Justice therefore the longer a coming, but if you
presumptuously abuse this mercy, even this mercy shall be shortened; common
mercy is shortened to desperate souls, as it is lengthned to common penitents,
when they do but commonly humble themselves, that is, as poor brutes, as in
the case of Nineve: And therefore you have a day of the Lord mentioned by the
Prophet Zephany, as hastened; the great day of the Lord, and hastening greatly,
to such a Generation of sinners, as now I am speaking to, Zephany. 1.14. The
great day of the Lord is near, it is near, it hastes greatly, the mighty man
shall cry there bitterly, it is a day of wastnesse, men's blood shall be poured
out as dust, and their flesh as dung the whole Land shall be devoured by the
fire of his jealousy, and he shall make a speedy riddance of all them that
dwell in the Land. Your day when it comes will be like this day, a day of
dispatch that will make riddance of you wholly, body and soul, and if you
slight this that I tell you now, and go on in your sin, know that this great
day of the Lord hastes greatly: sinners, it is near, it is near.

But sinners, merry sinners; can you tell how near it is? How near your sad day
is? No, you can look up into the Heavens, and when the Sky looks so and so,
you can tell what the next day will be; and it is so, says Christ. There will be
storms to morrow; and they are so; 'twill be a wet afternoon, and it is so. And
observe how our Savior makes use of all this, to a proud secure Generation,
Yea, and why even [of your selves] judge you not what is right? Luke 12.57. you
can judge thus and thus, and judge right, respecting the Heavens, why can you
not judge thus of your selves? Intimating 'twere possible if men did but
observe themselves, their hearts; and their lives, as they do other things; men
if they would do this, they might be able to give a near guess, when a storm
or a black gloomy day is near them. Look sinners round about you, do you see
nothing in your lives that looks like blood and death? Do you feel nothing in
your consciences that speaks a storm a breeding? The worm that never dies
begins to live, crawle, and stir, here: do thou feel it know terribly now
and then? what and continue in thy sin? why, hell certainly is not far off.
One may smell some fire, sulphurous matter burning, one may smell it, and if in
the next room, one smells it so hot, that one can hardly endure the room. The
fire below is brimstone: do thou not smell it in thy conscience? How hot is
the smell? so hot as thou can not endure that room? why, then the fire is
fast by: thou art in the next room to Hell.

Consolation issues from this point to all godly people under the Lords hand:
your turn is come now to pledge Christ; he drank to you in a bitter Cup a
great while ago, and a great many far better then you have pledged him, and
you are honored to do the like. It Is a great honor to drink of the same Cup
that Christ did, Can ye be Baptized with the Baptism, that I am Baptized
with? and this asked when they talked of great honor.
to fill up that which is behind of his draught, let what will be in it, things
never so bitter, it is wholesome, it is healthful; life is in our deadly Cup, the
bravest life springs out of our cruellest death. If this be not enough, think
on this: it is but thy turn, 'twill be over quickly; the Cup will be taken out
of thy hand and given to another. Thou art sad but for a season: And now for a
season, if need be, you are in heaviness, says Peter: there was necessity
thou should be in heaviness for a little time, and how long this time and
season is, the Scripture tells us; it is but a momens, and then it resolves it
self into everlasting consolation.

COLOS. 1.24. The Afflictions of Christ, etc.


AFflictions are from God immediately, or from man: God strikes sometimes and
uses no hand but his own, it is least considered when so, but not least of
importance, for God has some great design upon the man, when he strikes
every stroke himself. Sometimes God stands behind Shimei, and lets fly at a
man, and wounds deeply, and then it is not so easy to see him, because an
earthen breast-work is before him. Sometimes he appears in the front in person
himself, like Goliath, and makes the encounter by duel, hand to hand with the
Creature, the creature smites and God smites, Name, State, Flesh, and Spirit:
God would feign be seen and known of the soul, when he does thus; if it
cannot be, he lets the creature lick himself whole if he can.

Afflictions from man immediately are here meant, and not such as are from God
immediately. Creatures of the same kind, are used to spit in one another face,
to scratch and tear one another: a Cat, a Cat; a Dog, a Dog; a Man, a Man.
Creatures of the same kind (to say no more) are used to tread upon one another
toes, to afflict one another. All earth bears thorns, choose out what earth
you will, sift it how you will, appoint it to what you will, to be a pillow for
repose, a breast, a bosom, a bed of flowers to solace in, yet there will grow
up thorns and prick. Creatures one by creation, one by redemption, yea one by
mutual election, differ, fall out, afflict one another: man afflictes man,
that was Paul's case here: saint afflicts saint; husband afflictes wife, wife
curses husband; things made and chosen of purpose to delight, sad: thorns will
grow in ones bosom here. You cannot take a rose to smell to here, out of any
Garden but has prickles, unless the Rose of Sharon. All is vanity, yea
vexation: all below us, all equal with us, only that all excepted, which is
above us, which only is indeed all; and in him is light and no darkness,
sweet and no bitterness, in that earth grows no thorns.

Man afflictes man, yea man oppresses man, that is affliction in strength,
malum multiplex, a manifold evil, which is the signification of the word (...)
which is here used; it is translated by some compression, a den of thieves, a
nest of hornets, many afflictions in one, or under one (...), Heb. 11.25. simul
malis vexari, to be vexed with many evils together, it is spoken of Moses, who
cast himself upon oppression with Gods people in Egypt; which expression sets
out fully what oppression is, it is some vital wounded, some maine part trod
upon, as name, state, body, soul, something brutishly bruised and torn, that
maims or marres livelihood, internal or extenall; some such thing trodden to
death, as has many little ones in the belly of it: it is a Kid killed and
seethed in such liquor, as should nourish many, in Mother-milke: it is a
Mother-mercy destroyed, whilst in travail for the good of the whole. Good name
is a Mother-mercy, many are nourished by it, so is estate, so is the body, so
is the soul; all these travel perpetually in this world, for the tranquillity
of the whole, and of the maine, to bear up great things, Heaven and Earth, the
glory of God, and the welfare of every relation, wherein such a creature
stands: any of these therefore torn and ripped up, whilst thus in travail for
the good of the whole, is cruelty and oppression.

Oppression speaks injury, but no small injury; not the dashing ones clothes
accidentally, or intentionally as one goes by, but it always notes something
that dashes the person in one main thing or other; it is a Dog that flies at the
throat, at something. that is vital, and tears that; at something that tends
to throw down the person and welfare of such a creature. It Is a diabolical
quality insinuated by a cursed spirit, whereby one creatures being is too
blessed in the eye of another. Men one in birth from the Earth, yet wisdom
has ranked them variously upon it, some higher, some lower, some have much,
some less, all have wisdoms portion, and therefore it should be accounted
enough, and content, but it does not: one man's mansion is not fine enough,
another not big enough; one person better beloved, better endowed, better
succeeded; if he were dead, dead in esteem, or dead in being, all these deep
waters would turn, and run into my cisterne; if Abel were dead, if Jacob were
dead, if Mordecai were dead, then I should be all, and have all, I should be
the only favorite in the world, and so quietly abide. [Yee kill] and desire to
have, and cannot obtain, James. 4.2. oppression is a bloody spirit, striking
still at something that is vital, at the person, livelihood or life it self,
if one will not fall without the other. It Is an evil springing from the root
of all evil, to wit, covetousness: ye kill and [desire to have.] It Is a man
of the Earth, says the Psalmist, and he would be alone upon it, though there
were no Rivers and houses in it for delight, but such as he has made with the
blood and bones of all such as live near him. That the man of the [earth] may
no more oppress, Psalm 10.18. the word oppress, signifies to terrify, and
so you have it noted in the margent, intimating what an oppressor is, it is a
brute that terrifies all that come near him, to eat or drink by him, that he
may have all alone, and what he cannot eat or drink he puddles and spoils.

Oppression is made, vi, aut dolis, by force or by fraud, man can use both as
he is advantaged, and as his game lies. Parts internal are all subdued, by
that lust which rules, and taught to tumble and set this or that poor innocent
soul, for their master: Innocence sleeps the most securely of any thing,
dreams of no affrighting things, of no injurious usage, but from Dogs and
Bears and Wolfes, from beasts, not from any man: innocence thinks every man,
a man; not a Fox, nor a Serpent, nor a Crocodile; where as an oppressor
conjureth his wits, his parts, his practices, and so himself, into all these,
to catch his prey. Therefore is an oppressor imblazed by the Scripture in a
Lion couchant, as one lurking for his prey, as one whose words are Oil, yet
sharp spears, as one who shootes his Arrows in darkness, and hits privily
the upright in heart. Overreaching is oppression: it is strong parts setting
their feet upon weak, and wringing blood out of a brothers Nose: it is
grinding the face of the poor; words and dealings which are the face of a man
to the World, all by craft and wile ground to such dust as to choke and cheat
the man, that utters them. What fraud cannot do, force external is pressed to
second. Oppression commands all within and without, to squeese out her will
where she fastens; it turns Judges into evening Wolfes, Kings,
Nebuchadnezzars into Beasts, and gives them Nails like Eagles-clawes, that is,
makes them turn all their external advantages, to plume and prey upon whom
they will: It does as the Devil where he reigns; there is not a power in
Hell, but he makes a fleshhooke on it, to tear and torture and fulfill his
bloody will: so not a faculty, not an office not any vires within or without,
but by oppression are all made tormenta, killing instruments, and to know none,
no not one like himself, a man, no not one like God, but chain him and rack
him. Thy Princes are roaring Lions, thy Judges are evening Wolfes, they know
not the bones till the morrow, Zephany. 3.3. Here are all powers external and
internal combined and seconding one another.

They are great mountains that do crush; Who art thou O great Mountain before
Zorubbabell? great spirits, and parts, in great place. The Devils children
should be all strangled in the womb, or else they prove very long lived: we
should not have had so many bloody oppressors at this day, if pride had
seasonably been bewailed.

As your naturalia, so your praeternaturalia get such nests, as to maturate
themselves: oppression maturates it self in high places, there it can do all
it will, strike full blows, home blows. Oppression maturated, is the
crying'st provocation in a Land, and brings down the cryingest judgment,
Civil war, a body tearing out its own bowels; see Zachary 11.5.6. Thus says
the Lord, feed the flock of slaughter whose possessors sl^y them, and hold
themselves not guilty and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I
am rich, and their own Shepherds pity them not, therefore I will no m^^^
pity the inhabitants of the Land, says the Lord, but lo I will deliver the
men every one into his Neighbors hand, and into the hand of his King, and they
shall smite the Land, and out of their hand I will not deliver them; which
words mean civil war, as the learned interpret, which is the greatest
judgment of all external judgment; doubly torturing, for brother to sheath
his sword, like those Levites, in the bowels of a Brother, Father washing
hands in the blood of children, and children washing hands in the heart-blood
of Fathers; we may guess our sin by our punishment; oppression set us
together by the ears, oppression corporal, oppression spiritual, our
possessors to wit, Prince, Peers, Prelates, did slay us as the Prophet
speaks, body and soul, and held not themselves guilty. Their steps trod in,
wrath will continue till it end us all, and God will not deliver.

Matter of admiration also issues from this point. Let Us admire two things,
the badnesse of men, and the goodness of God. When we see any
praeternatural's, any thing that nature did not properly intend, any
monstrosity in a thing, if it be but in a finger, in a hand, in a toe, much
more if in any maine part, which maims the shape, and almost varies the
species, we wonder much, as to see a Dove with a Bores tuskes: to see a Lamb
with a Serpents tail: to see a man with a mouth and a throat as wide as a
Sepulcher, and a Tongue in it, a fire of Hell; and the spittle under the roof
of this Tongue, the poison of Aspes, etc. We wonder at what nature did never
intend; should we not much more wonder at those monsters which grace did never
intend? such grace as works toward man. We meet a thousand thousand such
monsters forementioned in a spiritual sense, and never make one thought stand
still a jot, divinely to consider it. Spiritual monstrosity should affect us
much, to behold so noble a creature as man, and his noblest part, to wit, his
heart, turned into a beast, all his inside like a Wolf or a Bear, and only
his outside, and scarce that, like a man. The worse some are, the better others
should be to make it up, that God may not be altogether a loser, in the
greatest and costliest works of his hands. A tender heart will admire, sigh
and bleed over a hard. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets,
here is a pattern worth the following. Christ beholds a company of bloody
tyrants, stony-hearted hypocrites, and he admires, sighs, mournes over them:
'twere but the discharge of our duty, to mourn over this malicious bloody Age
wherein we live. O England England, thou that have oppressed to death many brave
Prophets and worthies of other ranks sent unto thee. When others kill and
crucify Christ, we should sit like Mary and weep over them.

We should admire the badnesse of men, and the goodness of Christ. Creatures
in our own skin, and of our own form, and yet Wolfes and Lions; how great is
the power and goodness of Christ, to preserve his people amongst such! These
wild beasts differ in their property from all: more boundless, more restless
every way, the more should that power be admired that keeps us. Other
creatures of prey, keep their place, to wit, the desert; where no noble
creatures trade, is there range; they keep their time, the night is their day.
Thou make darkness and it is night, wherein the beasts of the forests do
creep forth, the Sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them
down in Dens, Psalm. 14.22. They are wild creatures, and they keep a wild
place, and a wild time; when and where they may find prey proper, without
injury to more noble creatures. These wild Beasts before mentioned, go forth
at all times, when the Sun is down, and when the Sun is up; into all places,
into Cities, into Houses, up to men's bed-chambers, and pull persons out of
their beds, and suck their blood. O the providence of God, that keeps thee,
London, from these Beasts of prey! that has saved thee and thy little ones,
from cruel oppressors so long! This providence is lengthned, and the mercy is
by so much the more strengthened upon you, the more to be laid to heart. How
often have these beasts of prey in great droves, and with open mouths been
driving this way, and the Majesty and the justice of the Lord has appeared and
preyed upon them that would have preyed upon us, fulfilling his word, He shall
break in pieces the oppressor, Psalm 72.4. As God remembers his word, so we
should remember him, and write down his Noble acts upon our doore-posts,
bed-posts, heart-posts, to all which these beasts would have come for their
prey. These great acts of God prove mercies to men, as laid to heart; evil
will return, and they which have been so often driven back, will be
irresistible at length, if he be forgotten which has done all this for us.

COLOS. 1.24. For his bodies sake, which is the Church.


ALL Christians in and under Heaven are related, knit in one body by one soul,
to wit, the same which breathes in God, his holy Spirit. Sacred society is
glorious; the Peers of all the world in a body robed, and the great King of all
the world in the midst of them; such a fight as mortal eye never beheld: His
train reaches from Earth to Heaven, the foremost are in Heaven, when the
hindmost are here: I helped you to a Scaffold to view the forepart the last
day, I would do the like now, to help you to view the latter; that part of
the train, which is going in at the everlasting doors, but not yet quite in.
You may see a great deal of State at the door of Heaven, in the very hindmost
soul of that company, which are going in there. That part which is gone in
with the Bridegroom is mighty great, so is that which is going in. An
innumerable company of believers, conflicting with an innumerable company of
enemies, longing and waiting for the full redemption and liberty of the Sons of
God.

The hairs of our mystical head grow not thin, no not in this climate, which
is the most unhealthy, they are thick and bushy. Can you number the hairs of
your head? then may you number that company which Christ has upon earth. Can
you number the Stars of Heaven? Look up to the Heavens, says God to
Abraham, and see if thou can number the Stars, so shall thy seed be; which
is fulfilled, as appears by the author to the Hebrews. Therefore sprang
there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the Stars of the Sky
in multitude, and as the Sand which is by the Sea shore innumerable, Heb.
11.12. The hairs of our mystical head are many, yet all of one color, black
as a Raven, that is, beautiful and flourishing. Gray hairs are not here and
there upon this head; the Militant Church is for quantity great, a Nation; for
quality, holy: the foundation of this Nation, Christ: the cement, faith;
something above the revelation of reason, something above the revelation of the
best parts, something above flesh and blood. Peter, there are strange carnal
apprehensions of me in the world, as if Christ had said, how do thou
apprehend me? My apprehension is vital, Thou art Christ the Son of the
[living God. Observe the reply of Christ. Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona; Bar
is a Chalde word, and the same with ben an Hebrew word, which signifies a
son; and Jona signifies gracious, and as some translate a Dove; so that it is
as if Christ had said in our language, Blessed art thou Simon, son of grace,
son of that same Dove, which descended on me, flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock will I build my Church, Matthew. 16.18. Ben, which is the Hebrew
word for a son, is as much as the word building, with us; because the son
is the building of the family: our Savior interprets so much himself, in his
allusive words, upon this Rock will I build my Church: and Jona signifying
gracious, the metaphor is the same in sense with the former, that Christ's
building here below is a gracious building, foundation gracious, to wit,
himself; every stone gracious, Bar-Jona's, an innumerable company of
believers; I John saw a great company which no man could number, (...)
and all sealed; the cement of this building holy, to wit faith, a holy faith,
a most holy faith, as the Apostle calls it, Jud. 20. Conflicting with an
innumerable company of enemies. The Sea is a big body, yet tossed perpetually;
so is the Church of Christ upon earth; it is a body very big and very good, and
yet it is not so big, nor so good, but it has as big, and as bad a body to
encounter it. We are here troubled with Frogs, and devouring vermin, and the
pit out of which they come is bottomless. The gates of Hell are wide open
against the Church of Christ here, though they cannot prevail against it: they
that take away men's souls, come forth freely, in what numbers they will, and
go what compass they will here, all this world over of an instant, and get at
which hand they will of the best people, when about the best work; they will
take the wall of the Noblest souls, and when about the Noblest work, get at
their right hand. The Sons of God were assembled, and Satan stood at their
right hand. The locusts below go forth by Troops, they are so populous in
that land of death. My name is legion, for we are many. Though but one speak
when a poor soul is tempted, yet the train that attends upon this one, is
many. I believe this room is full of infernal Spirits, and that not a soul
of you now present, but have a legion of them at your right hand jogging of
you, though these gates of Hell are not suffered to prevail. If there were no
intermixing of Satan's family and Christ's in this world, if those evil spirits
which he has at home by him, did never come abroad so far as into this
world, yet those that are here resident, and wear the same skin and clothes
which Christ's family do, are very many. They that persecute my soul are many,
says the Psalmist. And he speaks of incarnate devils, devils resident in our
flesh, and in our earth. A door is open to me, a great door, says the
Apostle, and there be many enemies; how many? that he could not tell, nor no
body else, but him that set them on work. One door open, and many devils at
it to shut it again; many devils at one door, so at every door of hope that
a Christian has open to him: surely Satan's strength is great here, that he can
begirt every holy person, and every holy action upon earth, and yet this is the
condition of the Church militant. Elishaes condition shadows the state of the
Church militant, mentioned, 2 Kings 6.15. An Host compassed the City with
horses and chariots, in so much that the servant of Elisha cried out, Alas
Master, how shall we do? we are begirt with innumerable companies of mortal
enemies, many thousand deaths wait for us at every door; and this is the
state of the best men upon earth. This makes longing and panting for [full
redemption;] which is the property of the Church of God upon earth, 't would be
in Heaven. There is a voice in Rama, and it is all over Rama, mourning, and
lamentation. Rachel weeping bitterly: if you ask her why? She will tell you. I
have many sons and daughters, sweet children all, and yet not one but very
hardly handled, sore shot at by deadly archers; many are slain, and are not,
and the rest abused and vilified as the offscouring of all things; torn with
Lions, and little worms gnawing and eating up the carcass; pulled down by
great ones, and when down, trod to death by base ones. Rachel has not a child
but sits like the Shunamites in her arms, sighing, groaning and mourning,
because of one wound or other, within or without; and I cannot remedy any of
this, says she, and this cuts me to the heart; my children are slain in mine
arms, slain with the breast at their mouths, yea ripped out of my womb.
Would my children were all in my husbands arms, says Rachel, then they would
all be safe: would he would send and fetch me and all mine out of this
plundered country into his own city, then all would be well; soul well, yea
and body well. The world hears little of this noise, it is so inward, but it is
the panting and beating of every good man's pulse and bowels in a degree. We
which have the first fruits of the Spirit, (where these fruits lie, is the
noise) we groan [within our selves] waiting for the adoption. For the
adoption? This they had already. The meaning therefore is, for the full
fruition of what they were adopted to, which is explained in the following
words, to wit, the redemption of our body. The soul goes first, to the society
above, the body last; all is perfect when this comes, therefore is this only
mentioned: which notes that the militant Church groans and pants after a
perfect state, every one sighing and bleeding inwardly, inwardly earnestly,
willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord, 2 Corinthians. 5.8. This was shadowed by David's ascent to Mount Oliver, And David
went up by the ascent of Mount Oliver, and wept as he went up; and be had his
head covered, and he went barefoot, and all the people that was with him
covered every man his head, and they went up weeping as they went up, 2 Samuel
15.30. Christ, which David typified, and all his followers here below, are
going up sighing, and panting, and mourning to that mount above.

Jerusalem which is above, above the world, and above Satan, is the mother of
us all: that body which Christ has upon earth, groaned, traveled with you,
and brought you forth; this womb which bare you, those pappes which gave you
suck, are now wounded with a thousand wounds, do you see them? The hair of
your mother is torn, her bowels ripped up, her blood runs in every high way; O
all ye that pass by, have ye observed it? Dogs lick the blood of Jezabel,
yea, the blood of Rachel: the Sword of the wicked sheds the blood of many a
gallant man. England, a great Park full of dear souls, the pales now plucked
up, the game of Christ shot at by every base person; many a brave Heart fallen,
only a few Fawnes left, women and children crying and ringing their hands for
their husbands and fathers: do you hear them? Mother, where is my Father?
when will he come home? Sir, where is my husband? when will he come home? And a
less for them, he is at home already, at his long home. Heathens rage on one
hand; mothers, children angry on the other hand; the Boar is abroad, the Fox at
home; one pulls off the tender Grapes, the other squeeses and suckes their blood;
the work is one, the tails of all the wild beasts in the Land are together,
though their faces seem to look several ways: one shoots at the body,
the other at the soul, both poison their Bullets, the venom whereof feeds that
Divine justice which now fights against us all, as if it were resolved to
consume us all, for ought any one amongst us all can yet see. Is not the Church
of Christ in England militant? Men, Devils, yea a God fights against it, for
the pollution in it. Christians, you are witnesses of all this: what do you in
secret? do you mourn for the tearings and rendings of Joseph can you do it?
do you move according to your condition? Military? fight with prayers and
tears? do you find any aptness this way?

I ask this, because displeasure sinkes deep sometimes, and drinks up all
Divine moisture in the soul, the womb of prayers and tears closes, withers,
and dries up; God secretly says, pray not for this people; and then good
hearts pumpe and pomp, and nothing will come. Abraham had some such secret
check surely, when he broke off struggling so strangely for Sodom, when God
seemed to be upon such an yielding vein; secret providence certainly was in
it, that he might not yield so far as to null peremptory resolution, which
was to make an end of a generation, whose iniquity was full. God felt Abraham
holding him, and cries, let me alone; but Abraham did not feels God holding
him, nor cried, let me alone, Lord, let me pluck a brand out of the fire, let
me quench Hell fire once with my tears. Christians, I beseech you observe your
spirits, the welfare of all is in this point I am now upon, and not in your
great Armies abroad, which you so much look upon; if you feel God tying up,
and straitning your souls, in regard of a Sodom which you struggle for, a
Land that looks as if it were ripe in all wickedness, and far worse in some
circumstances then ever Sodom was, cry, Lord, let me alone, let me draw
buckets, let me make my Study, my closet a Bokim, a place of tears, let me
quench a fire, that has almost burnt a brave Kingdom to ashes; let me save a
Nation, a populous Nation, thousands, and ten thousands, thousands of
thousands, from swimming to hell in their own blood. If I shall not pray out,
yet let me chatter so in thine ears, that fifteen years may be added to the
life of three Kingdoms, to set themselves in order to go hence, to be
pilgrims and wanderers to any other part where thou will.

Thus do your duty, and then submit. We should be affected with our condition,
but not cast down. A state of hardship generates discontent, and now Satan has
set Heaven and Earth on fire. A man may have a Heaven in his soul, when a Hell
in his body, if submissive still to the will of God: but when fightings without
make fightings within, repinings against providence, because it does not jut
and jumpe with my will, now all is slain, and not till now; Heaven and Earth
on fire, body and soul killed with a canon from Hell, and all the powers of
darkness crying victory. Do Serpents sting? murmr not; remember where
Christ's church is, of which thou art yet a member: it is in the Wilderness yet,
and but going to Canaan, and such places are full of hurtful beasts. Be not
overcome of evil; then misery dissolves it self into sin, then God is
stung, and thou will have secret blows for this indeed, where men cannot pinch
thee; thou will have salt thrown where the spring of unsoundnesse lies, and
then thy Spirit will burn within thee for something. We should not only be
submissive to, but joyful under the cross of our Lord Jesus. You cannot tell
how much mercy it is, to be any of that body, of which Christ is the soul; if it
be but a foot, a bare foot, and still in the dirt, still upon pricks, briers,
and thorns; to be any of that company that is traveling to Heaven, though the
meanest, the hindmost, the most misused, etc. But you will know when you come
there.

The cross keeps off some from being of the Church militant, they cannot
militare, they had rather die then fight, and kill what they love more then
Christ. Sin effeminates the soul; love any lust more then Christ, and you
will die ten thousand deaths, rather then strike a stroke in good earnest
against it, or discharge one Piece with a Bullet, against that fort where your
heart lies. Satan deals by stratagem, sinners look to your souls: he can
kill none that take up Arms against him, and stand to it; he either betrays
affection with trifles, and makes the soul yield, and so stab conscience, and
swear a damnable peace: or else he terrifies the soul with corporal dangers,
and makes men flee, and all that flee in spiritual warfare, die every one, are
cut off eternally by the pursuer. When there are fightings without, there are
fears within, When I came into Macedonia, my flesh had no rest; troubles on
every side, fightings without and fears within. Men now love their flesh, Paul
in this had no rest, no neither in his spirit; he had stood to it upon pure
principles; He wants fellows in this age of the world wonderfully; The Church
of the Lord Jesus travels, groans, dies, for want of them. This generation
will have more then the advantage of truth, to encourage them to set forth, to
wit, the advantage of time, quiet time. Deluded souls, when will this be? you
so dote upon your skin, that you have quite forgotten the state of Christ's
church upon earth, it is militant. You will live in Egypt, that you may see no
war, that you may save your skin, your pomp, your wealth: this your wisdom
is your folly, Egypt shall not save you, the Sword shall follow you into Egypt,
into your Egyptian huts, and coverings. Read Jeremy 42.13, 14, 15. But if ye
say, We will not dwell in this Land, etc. No, but we will go into the Land of
Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the Trumpet, nor
have hunger of bread, and there will we dwell, etc. Then it shall come to
pass, that the Sword which ye feared shall overtake you, there in the Land of
Egypt, and the famine whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after you in
Egypt, and there ye shall die.

COLOS. 1.24. For his bodies sake which is the Church.


THe word notes a company called out of this world, and the scope according to
which it is used here, carries it in its full breadth, to comprize all the
blessed company, both which are in Heaven and in earth; this general society
was shadowed by the general Assembly at Jerusalem, and is called by that name
by the Apostle, Heb. 12.23. Ye are come to the general Assembly, the Church of
the firstborn. This Catholic company is great, and far divided, some in
Heaven, some in Earth, some in this part of the Earth, some in that, and yet
all have but one spirit, and therefore essentially the same, and what is done
for the good of one part, necessarily redounds to the good and glory of all. He
is of a public spirit, that lays out for the good of a City, of a Kingdom,
and the like, thousands will bless him, generations yet not borne will bless
God for such instruments: but he is of a public spirit indeed, that lays out
his state or blood for the good of the Church of Christ, many thousands in this
Kingdom, in other Kingdoms, all the Earth over, all Heaven over, will bless
him.

This general assembly comes all out of one loine, and divide themselves into
two bands; one turns to the everlasting Hills, 'tother to the Plains and
Valleys of this world. There is a Lilly of the Valleys, and a Lilly of the
Hills; there is a Church on Earth, and a Church in Heaven. The great King whom
we subject to, has a Chapel of ease, a Church in his house; the condition of
this is far different from that here below: the Lilly of the Hills is another
gets Lilly then that of the Valleys, the pursuit of each shall be distinct,
which will demonstrate the condition, how it differs. The Church which Christ
has in his house, is a society of perfect spirits in perfect rest, triumphing
with Christ over all enemies. The Congregation above is very big, thousands,
and thousands of thousands, from all parts, quarters, and countries, yet all
perfect, not one dwarf in grace, in Heaven, not one Zacheus, a person of a
little stature; there are no spirits of little stature in grace above, though
it be all our case here; every one is as tall as Christ to any ones beholding;
I cannot tell else how to interpret that expression of the Apostles, Ephesians. 4,
Till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. They that are come to that unity and society above, are all complete,
their measure is the fullness of Christ; their demensions, his stature, so
tall, so big limmed, so fair, and so accomplished to look upon. What a
perfect man now is Christ in Heaven! of what a brave stature in grace, and in
glory! an Absolon, without spot from the crown of the head to the soul of the
foot; so are all that Noble society which are with him, without spot or
wrinkle, and therefore called a glorious Church. That he might present it to
himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
etc. Ephesians. 5.27. the word here translated spot is (...), which signifies such
spots as are in garments by dashing and dirting, outside spots; they have no
spots within nor without above, not in their skin, not in their clothes, nor
any such thing, that is not any thing like it; the same measures of grace
within, the same without; the same Robes of State that Christ wears, they do;
the mantle of Elijah is put upon Elisha. Our perfection, now is per proximum,
by a proxey, as another wears such a complete habit within and without for us.
And thy renown went out among the Heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect
through my comeliness, which I have put upon thee, Ezekiel. 16.14. Whereas beauty
and perfection is here imputative, it is there inhesive, every one in his own
person, and in his own state, inside, outside, renowned and perfect for
beauty, in their own comeliness; they are joint with Christ: we are joint
heirs with Christ here, we are joint partakers with Christ there; we have
joint crowns, joint thrones, joint perfections. Christ does not wear a crown
above for this Saint, and for that Saint, he does not personate any Saints
condition in glory, but every Star there has its own glory, every Saint
wears his own Crown himself, no ones condition there for blessedness and
happiness, is only personated in Christ, as all our conditions are here, in
order to that State above, but all joint partakers with him, and every seed its
own body, which is a glorious State indeed, and makes a glorious Church, as
the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.27.

It Is a perfect society, and in [in perfect rest]. That glorious Church above
keeps a perpetual Sabbath: you know the Law of the Sabbath, both in precept
and president, enjoined a total, complacentiall, and perfect rest, i. a
cessation from all labor, and application with all delight to sublime and
supreme things. Whilst this law was in president only, and yet unwritten, it
held out this complete rest; God did not nakedly cease from his work, but
refreshed himself in the things which he had wrought. On the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed, Exodus 31.17. Now what this refreshing was, see Exodus
20.11. The Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it. This was his
refreshing after his work, he had a total and complacentiall rest. According
to this president did the precept afterward strictly run, as you may read
Exodus the 20. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord, in it thou shall not
do [any work.] How far this extended you know: they were not to do any
ordinary work of their calling, no not necessary works for life: they were
not to gather Manna on the Lords day, though Manna was all the food they then
had, and had it but from day to day. The godly which lived under this Law, and
knew the strictness of it, would not perform funeral rites for our Lord
Jesus on this day, as you may see, Luke 23. last, They viewed the body of Jesus
upon the day of preparation, and prepared Spices and Ointment, but rested upon
the Sabbath day, according to the Commandment. This total and strict
cessation from all labor was upon pain of death. Ye shall keep the Sabbath,
for it is holy to you, every one that defiles it shall surely be put to death;
whosoever does any work therein, shall surely be cut off from amongst his
people, Evod. 31.14. This was for aversion and turning away from things
forbidden: on the other hand, application to Divine things, and to holy
employment was as strict: every thought was to be consecrated to God, and this
with divine intention, with delight; the strings were to be set very high and
to hold it, and to make delightful Music. If thou turn thy foot from thine
own pleasure, and call the Sabbath a delight, Esaias 58.13. All these things do
but shadow the condition of that glorious Church above, they rest from their
labors; and this rest is a perfect rest, they do not [any work,] as the
expression before is: they do not so much as dress their own meat, no nor
gather in any thing for meat, all is dressed to their hand, and set before them;
Manna is potted up, and stands always before every one, not any sinew, not any
thought painfully stirs about livelihood, all are intensly, but very
delightfully applied to the vision of God, to the contemplation of the Lord of
this Sabbath, the grace of redemption that brought them from hence thither, to
so transcendent a state. Their rest above, it is as total as complacentiall, as
Gods was; look how he rested from his work, so does these from theirs. For if
Jesus had given them rest (i. Joshua) then would he not have spoken of another
day, there remains therefore a rest to the people of God; for he that is
entered into his rest, he also has ceased frrom his own work [as God did
from his,] Hebrews 4.8, 9, 10. Now God totally rested, and then was totally
filled and refreshed, with the contemplation and sanctification of what he had
done; he rested, and was refreshed: so do they above, they do rest and are
refreshed, cease from all labors, from all that speaks the least pain, and
then they refresh themselves with the contemplation of God, and what they find
laid up in him for them, and so are these times called by the Scripture, times
of resting, they do rest from their own works and are refreshed with with
Gods, (i) with the vision and contemplation of him, therefore is it added
there, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord,
(i) from the beholding and contemplating him and his person, in whose presence
they stand, who is the Lord of that great rest.

Triumphing together with Christ] That glorious society above, of which we now
speak, is a Church triumphant, all displaying their banners, all Heaven over,
as they that have fully conquered all enemies. Sin is quite dead, death and
him that has the power of death, dead: O death where is thy sting, O Hell
where is thy victory? this is the triumphant language in every ones mouth
above. Here we are in continual combat, in perpetual war, detesting legue
truce, but not able to conquer: but there all are conquerers, and wear their
Crown and Lawrells, and make a show of their conquest openly, as Christ. David
has slain his thousand, etc. Many such triumphant expressions are above, for
every little one there is as David, and sing his songs. There is a petty
transient triumph here in the Church militant, but it is only as it now and then
reaches their state above, in any degree of conquering enemies. And I saw as it
were a Sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten victory over
the Beast, and over his Image, stand on the Sea of Glass, and having the
Harpes of God, and they sang the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song
of the Lamb, saying, Great and mighty are thy works Lord God Almighty, just
and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. Revel. 15.3. this hints to us the
manner of their triumph above, (for Saints do the will of God on earth as they
do in Heaven) The Lamb sings too: they sang the song of Moses [and the song of
the Lambe] The head triumphs, and then all the members; Christ triumphs in
himself, and all that glorious company triumph in him. Coloss. 2.15.
And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly;
triumphing over them [in it, (...) in himself, so is the original, and so
it is translated in your margents; Christ viewes all the slain; death and him
that had the power of death, the old Serpent with all his seed, and triumphs in
himself; all the rest of that royal company triumph in him, as the jaw bone,
stone, and sling, with and by which they have slain Goliath, and all the
Philistians heaps upon heaps. Salvation to our God which sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb: and all that stood about the throne Angels, and
Elders, etc. said, Amen; blessing and glory and wisdom, thanksgiving, honor
and power, and might be to our God for ever. It Is a heavenly practice this, and
spoken of the Church Militant, as imitating the Church triumphant, and as
guided by one and the same Spirit, endeavoring to do the Will of God on earth,
as the the other part of the same company do in Heaven. You know the state of the
new Church, is shadowed out in the book of the Revelation by Heaven, and all
the lineaments of it, it comes so near to it. The very first draught and
model, Revelation. 4. J was in the spirit and a throne was set in Heaven, etc.
As Moses was made to come up to the top of the Mount near Heaven, and God,
says the Text, talked with him from Heaven, to show him the pattern of the
first house: so John was taken up into Heaven, and God talked with him in
Heaven, and shaped his pattern of this last house and the affairs of it by
Heaven, as that which should come nearer to it, then any yet had done. But this
by the way.

Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and yet the Lord be
merciful unto the souls of men, this is the general rule by which men walk.
Above flesh for our blood, we cannot move; 'twill sink Persons, Kingdoms,
'twill make the society below wonderful big: What a Congregation has the
Devil in his house, but not one at rest, all at work hard, tearing, rending,
and rosting one another, and yet have no meat nor drink, but the flames and
fire in which they work. Have any of you a mind to be of this Congregation?
No, why then do you pursue your flesh? your will? sense? self? sin? this
sin, that sin, any sin, that will serve your turn in these bad times?
The temptation of this time is terrible, not a soul almost but undone by it.
Heaven and earth shake, Church and State crack, the Grave and Hell gape, the
glory above forgotten, the dread of these crush parts, brave parts, yea that
which has gone for brave grace, to nothing, to worse then nothing: many
Christians like Cackarells change color, white all the winter, like those
fish, and spotted at spring: what with the blood and filth of bodies, and the
blood and filth of souls, ah Lord! what a stink is there in all societies,
all this Land over, and yet no body holds his Nose? all is sweet as long as any
course may be stumbled on to rise, and be but to flea the skins of the dead,
to go fine: will this bravery be admitted above?

Where do you find a soul that longs and pants, because of all these things?
O that I were of that glorious Church above! That I did know to what Officer of
that society to speak, to help me in there! If any so inquire; I will tell
thee: go to Christ, he is the door by which all enter: he will serve thee as
he was served himself, he was Baptized and the Heavens opened; Christ will
Baptize thee with the holy Ghost and with fire, and then the Heavens which
contain him till the restitution of all things, shall open and receive thee.
Thou must be contented to be Baptized with Christ's Baptism, his second
Baptism; after both there was a Heaven opening: At his first Baptism the
Heavens opened, but did not take him up and take him in: at his second Baptism
they opened again, and then they received him, and contain him. Thou must be
contented to be Baptized with Christ's last Baptism, if need be to leave all
as he did, a very Heaven if thou have it, as Christ did; riches, honors,
pleasures, blood, life, to follow after Christ: After such a Baptism, the
Heavens will open also, and take in thee into that glorious society above.
Christ surely is prized but little, therefore his Congregation is so small
below and above. The sin of the Jews is become the sin of the Gentiles, my
heart trembles to think what will become of us: What ever we talk of Christ,
and boast of his Temple above and below, we bid basely, for all. Though Christ
will take nothing for any thing he has, yet you must come to him with all that
ever you have in your hand, and lay it at his feet; think nothing too good
for him, so you may but have him: here is now, state, wife, children, yea here
is body, soul, self, do with all what thou will; drown all, burn all, if
thou will, only rake the ashes when thou have done, and find my soul, that
Jewel of Jewels, which cannot be burnt any where, but in thy displeasure, and
put it in thy bosom for ever: This is a Gospel frame of heart, and miscaries
not: all the Jewels which Christ wears in his bosom above, are raked out of
ashes here below, out of mere nothings. His beloved is one, but one, a Phoenix,
and it comes out of ashes, learn to lay all in the dust, if you would have
Christ take up all, and lay it in his bosom. All that he takes up in his
bosom here, he sets down in glory above, to triumph with that glorious
company there.

COLOS. 1.25. Whereof I am made a Minister.


DIaconos, a deacon] the word is a title given to all sorts of Officers almost,
in Gods new-house, as signifyng that which is behoofull to them all, especially
them that dispense soul vital things, diligence, promptness, speediness.
Soul dangers are all desperate, what is done for relief in this kind, must be
without delay, or else all is eternally lost; the Basilisk blastes and burns
every green thing it comes upon, and makes death to every creature in a
moment, his poison is so fiery strong: Satan is such a Serpent; not a Dart he
throws, but it is so fiery, that it is mortal presently. [In the day] that
thou eatest thou shall die: eatest what? any of the Serpents poison. [Thou]
shall die, the long-livest creature in the World. [In the day] thou eatest, (i)
in the hour, in the present moment, although the long-livest creature, the
Serpents poison will dispatch thee. Our patients who are spiritual Physicians,
are all poisoned, strongly poisoned, their intrailes are afire, our work is
the giving of Antidotes, they must be speedy, death is marching so speedily and
so directly to the heart. All this World is afire, it lies so near that below
it; every house in a blaze; there are such lightnings and blastings from that
region of darkness, that not a soul upon earth but is black burnt, and in
danger to be consumed: they had need bestir them that work about quenching
internal flames, which take hold here: this is our work to quench Hell fire.

Two things are incomparably swift in bringing forth, corrupt affection and
Divine wrath. The time is so little between conception and birth, in order to
sin, that it is not mentioned, Lust when it has conceived brings forth sin.
The Apostle does not say that it brings forth in so many Months, or in so many
years, two years or the like, as Historians say the Elephant goes; but when
'tas conceived it falls in travail presently, and the soul cannot sleep till
it be delivered. The wrath of God is just such another womb, conceives and
brings forth presently, internally or externally, upon soul or body, or both;
a spark of fire no sooner takes, but it burns presently within the house,
though you do not see all the out-parts of the house in a blaze presently; a
house is a fire a great while, before all the Town cry, Fire, fire. Wrath
kindled but a little (as the Psalmist speaks) in Gods breast against any man,
it burns presently against him, though not visible presently, it sulters and
takes more and more hold secretly, and breaks forth all in a blaze in a
shorter or longer space, as tempests and winds arise, and as wisdom will.
Spiritual Offices are shaped and enjoined in order to these nimble bearing
wombes: Go quickly make an atonement, wrath is begun, said Moses to Aaron. If
wrath be begun, as if he had said, I know the nature of it, 'twill quickly make
a dispatch of all, therefore bestir thee, be a Diaconos, a diligent speedy
Officer, take a Censer and fire from off the Altar, and put out one fire with
another.

The nature of our Office, hintes the nature of your condition, it is very
dangerous; of a sudden, sinners, you are undone: it should be laid to heart.
Sinners are damnable venturous, not knowing the ways of God; they make nothing
of sin, and yet the wages of it is death, and paid presently. The soul
froward and wilful, of a sudden dispatched. Say unto the children of Israel,
Ye are a stif-neeked people. J will come up into the midst of thee in a
moment, and consume thee, etc. Exodus 33.5. Christ is our Breath and Life, when
resisted our Breath and Life departs, and leaves the dead corpse to be stretched
out, coffined and buried, when justice will. Christ and the soul parted, this
is death; other things, as laying the man in his Grave, and such like, these
are but businesses about the Funeral. Sinner, Christ woes thee, do thou
regard him? He tells thee of the Harlot thou have in thy bosom: does thy soul
rise against him? Why, turn thy face to the wall, draw up thy Legs in thy
bed, thou will have a death-pull presently; conscience will sting thee ere thou
art aware; and now Christ is setting foot in stirrup to be gone, he is now
throwing off the dust of his feet, as a preparative to departure. Christ has
put the Knife now to thy throat, yea more, he has stabbed thee to the heart,
and thou bleedest inwardly, what will thou do to stop and heal this wound?
Did thou dream of a dart in thy heart, ere thou had done thy sport? to be
shot from Heaven in the act of sin, in the bosom of Delilah?

But it is not so with me: though I eat forbidden fruit now and then; yet it
agrees well enough with me, it does not make tumblings and ruptures in my
bowels. Death seiseth not upon all alike; some go away in a swone.
Insensibility is the deadliest condition of all. Christ disregarded, the soul
is disregarded, in the hour that one is the other is; whether it now roar or
be still, all is one, Christ is, departed, there is no divine Life in the man;
you see but a corpse, not a Christian, which will be buried out of Gods sight
quickly. The wind blows where it lists, how it lists; of a night, of an
instant it turns and blows against one, that was with one, and drives the
Vessel upon Rocks, and splits all. A sinner is nobly and sweetly entreated
for a season, this despised, the old one leaves the nest, he cannot hatch what
he sits upon, and therefore that stranger which has blown upon the eggs,
and chilled them with handling, let him suck them too now, or tear them, or do
what he will with them. I beseech you sinners know your day, your hour: if
the Sun would kiss you, kiss him; He wooes heartily, yet not in ordinately,
as some Lovers do, that will never give over, that die when they cannot
obtain. Christ kills others that will not love him, but never kills himself
with love; he can of a wooer, become a slayer of you, and all in one day, yea
in one hour. Wherefore receive that holy word, Luke 12.36. Let your Loins be
girded about, says he, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto
men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding, and when
he comes and knocks they may open to him [immediatly.] If you think out of
pride and stoutnesse to make Christ wait your leisure, till you have taken
your fill of forbidden things, and gone on as far as ever Nature and Life could
let you go, you will be deceived; Christ will in this case leave knocking, and
only mark the door, and be gone. Some are hard to vomit, there is such a
concinnity between the stomach and what filth is burnt to the coats of it;
twill go hard with such. Some cast up presently as soon as nature is
offended. So do you says Christ, open immediately, what I knock for to be
delivered up, deliver it up imediately, I will not wait. Christ makes short
quick work in the Earth, when he has to do with mere earth, that will be no
more.

COLOS. 1.25. According to the dispensation of God.


DIspensation] the word means domesticke distribution, (...) from (...) a
house, and (...) to distribute. Which makes the sense run thus, according to
that family distribution which God has made to me. The holy Ghost
distinguishes gifts, into good and perfect; both come down from above, but
under a diverse notion; the one as common to all the World, the other as proper
to his Family; they are good gifts in themselves, which bade men have, their
health, their wealth, their learning, all good gifts, but not perfect gifts,
they want one thing, as our Savior spoke to the young man in this case, and
this one thing the maine of all, to wit, the special love of God, fatherly
mercy rapt up in them. Family distribution is fatherly goodness, special
mercy, a perfect gift. Choice indowment is man's blessedness.

Jacob were blessed, but Joseph was a Nazarite amongst his Brethren, says the
Text, (i) culled out by special providence from all the rest, and choicely
endowed and imploid; the very cream of Love dished out to him. The precious
fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the precious things which put forth by the
Moon, and the chief things of the ancient Mountains, etc. And observe here
the prime blessing is brought up in the Rear, that which makes all other gifts
perfect, and the favorable acceptance of him that dwelt in the bramble; the
favor and love of God wrapped up in every thing we have, is that which makes
them full mercies, and this had Joseph: Deuteronomy. 83.16.
he had top favors, blessings came upon his head, upon the top of him that was
[a Nazarite] from his brethren. This kind of providence died not with those
persons and times, but lives still in an Evangelicall sense. Christ goes
through this World and picks out here and there one from among his brethren,
and makes him a Nazarite, indowes him with choice mercies, Family
dispensations, bespangles him with such Jewels as they wear above in his own
Court; riches of the body, and riches of the mind, and inlayes them all with
the good will of him that dwelt in the Bramble: This was prophesied then when
the Patriarchs had their special indowments, and touched in their kindness,
the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc. and unto him shall the gathering
of the people be, Gnammim peoples, Gnammim.
binding his foale unto the Vine and his Asses colt unto the choice Vine, Genesis
49.11. Christ does gather and select still, even among the Gentiles: As far as
us Gentiles do these words look. To him shall the gathering of the [peoples]
be. Not one people, to wit the Jews, but peoples, Jews and Gentiles. A
choice Vine Christ finds out amongst us, Trees of special virtue and noble
blood and spirits above all Trees, and ties his foale to these, unites himself
to this body, by the same spirit, by which he so endowed and ennobled that
ancient people of the Jews.

Choice indowments being man's blessedness, and this sesable, that which God
gives now, I would fasten this nail in the temple, with a word of use. come
down to the conservation of the whole; the natural Heavens will descend, the
supernatural will too; Christ, though at the right hand of God, will come
down, and sit at your right hand, and guide you, and impart the things that are
above to you; clothe you in the habit and fashion of that country, if sought
to, and desired. But the plague is, our hearts are carnal, and lust only
after low things; we place blessedness in our belly, and worship Dagon, Dagan
frumenti Deus, a belly-god; The Apostle alludes to this, where he says, Whose
God is their belly. Red pottage lusted after, the birthright is nothing. How
affection works, is not heeded by you, yet your life is in it, and it goes to
the heart of God to see how you lavish and lay it out, for that which is not of
any nobility or worth, in order to such creatures as you are. Wherefore do you
spend money for that which is not bread? not white bread, not living bread, not
that bread which came down from Heaven, not such as the family above feed on.

You that feed on such mercies owe much to God; I will touch this, and
conclude. You that are like Joseph Nazarites among your brethren, separated
from thousands of your own flesh and bone, and made great, endowed with Noble
gifts, and employed in Noble works, to attend upon the great King of all the
world, as his only favorites, your should do as Joseph. Go, says he, haste
ye to my father, and tell him, thus says thy son Joseph, God has made me
Lord of all Egypt, come down to me, tarry not, Genes. 45.9. divine mystery is
in all this, and it hints your duty; go haste you to Heaven, and tell your
father what honor is by the Lord Jesus bestowed on you, that he has made you
Lords over all Egypt, over all your lusts, which did keep you in bondage, that
he has put his own ring upon your hand, and his own Gold-chaine about your
neck, and made you secundi, the next to him in all the world, and only in the
Throne is greater then you; it is a sweet thing to be going often to Heaven, and
telling there how much we feel of it upon earth. Choice endowments call for
choice duty, as we are winged we should mount. There were choice vows under
the old covenant, Deuteronomy. 12.11. Some choice offerings that upon some choice
mercies received, they performed to God. You have received choice mercies, make
choice vows, (understand me Gospelly) make sweet Gospel raptures of all Noble
favors received. Your Roman dames had some Jewels worth millions; which they
called uniones, because they were incomparable and had none like them,
singulars, such as had no fellows, and these they bequeathed when they died,
as an inheritance to posterity, they were of so great worth. God has given
unto you such precious Jewels, uniones, singular gifts, such as cannot be
fellowed in many of your brethren, wear these Jewels every day, (though it was
the fashion of the Roman dames to wear their uniones upon great days) hold
forth all your choice gifts, choicely, to the great glory of Christ. My Dove,
my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice
one of her that bare her: [the daughters saw her] and blessed her, yea the
Queen, and the core thines, and they praised her. The Church of Christ is here
set forth as a choice one, for all endowments and glory, and as holding forth
all this to the admiration of Christ, and all beholders. The daughters [saw
her] and blessed her, the Queens and Concubines praised her.

COLOS. 1.25. Which is given to me for you, etc.


THere are two occult things in providence, which when well apprehended, make a
serene sweet life; to understand still wherefore God takes, and wherefore he
gives, what bitter and sweet mean; blindness in either, loses God, God lost
in his dealings, the soul loses it self, a man knows not in this case where
he is, nor what he is, whether a Saint or an hypocrite, a man or a beast: In
both these, this servant of Christ was acute: the perishing of the outward man,
the flourishing of the inward, he could explain both. All things are for your
sakes, 2 Corinthians. 4.15, 16. there he speaks of what misery he did bear, here
in the text I stand upon, he speaks of what honor he did bear, and he
understood well the end of both, both for the Church of Christ, for you, i. for
the prosperity of Christ, in the hearts of all believers.

Family distribution is with this design, that all the family may be the
better for what any one has. An elder child that can tell how to hold a dish,
has a great full mess, that all the rest may sit round and eat out of his
dish. Wisdom folds up many things in one, many virtues and influences in one
Sun, for all the world: such a Sun is Christ, set for the fall and rise of
many. We are in Christ's stead, and so the savor of life and death to many. We
are Ambassadors in Christ's stead, and present Jewels allowed us from our
Master to any, especially to his Spouse, for you, i. you that are married to
the Lord Jesus; Thus I think the expression imports. As if the Apostle had
said, Great endowments and gifts are for the Church primarily, for others
secondarily, and subordinately, in order to the use and welfare of the Church,
some way or other.

Which way the heart of God bends is observable; Christ does peculiarly and
principally apply himself to Saints, the center of divine donation, is the
heart of a Christian; all that goes from God to any, does but hover till it
come here, the marrow and juice of every creature, of every gift, is squeesed
out into this vessel. If you see Angels sent forth, those glorious gifted
creatures, you may stand still and prophecy where they will turn in, to
Abraham, to Lot; they may go along by others, but they turn in and host here.
The choice communcations which descend from Heaven, they bed themselves in the
breasts of Gods people, they may hang and hover in the brains of others, but
they enter into the hearts of none but these. The life of Christ is the spring
of all parts; the gifts which you see shine in any; they are but springs from
this fountain, branches of this Vine, and observe which way this Vine creepes,
about whose house sides it goes with its branches, into whose bowls he
squeeses their blood, It Is for you, says he, this is the blood of the new
Testament, which was shed for you. My beloved is gone down into [his garden] to
the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather Lillies, Cant. 6.2.
After Christ are we directed to go, to carry all excellencies we have where he
does, and lay them down all where he is, in you; and therefore observe that
clause, Luke 10.6. And if the Son of peace be there, then stay, otherwise
away, and carry all away with you.

When things lie in suite, and in petition, before they come forth thus into
actual exhibitions, you shall see the truth of the point in hand demonstrated,
which way the heart of God bends; in all cases of this nature Christ does
especially and peculiarly apply himself to Saints. Thou will make [their
heart] to prepare, and thine ear to intend, Psalm. 10.17. speaking of the meek
and humble. Observe how peculiarly Christ applies himself to some, Thou will
make [their heart to prepare,] if their heart stand not fit to receive noble
favors, thou will make them stand fit; if it be not humble enouh, hungry
enough depending enough, thou will make it do all these; thou will overcome
all unaptnesse in these souls, yea all unaptnesse in thy self. If sin and
baseness in these creatures present themselves in thine eyes, and make some
impresse and influence upon thee, against having to do with them, yet thou will make thy self to look toward these, yea to heed them intensly, says
the original, Thou will make thy self to intend. Mercy pleades with justice,
when God has to do with his, and makes him come off, yea come down and
condescend, to stoop and take a lame creature by the hand, and lay his ear
close to his head, and speak encouraging words, to put the soul in heart to
speak and speed. Hester, what is thy request? and what is thy desire? come into
my presence, I have nothing but is for thee: he lends her legs to stand upon,
countenance to look upon him, spirits, and mouth, and tongue to speak; makes
her to prepare, and then makes himself to forget the confinement of himself
to other things, and to intend her. Which is a brave demonstration of this
thing I am upon, that Christ does peculiarly and transcendently apply himself
to Saints. You have a like place, Psalm. 18.6. [My prayers] came into his face,
into his ears. Other folks prayers come but to Gods ears, and there they
vanish, but the prayers of Gods people come into his ears. The expression
notes, how the ear and heart of Christ are specially and peculiarly applied
unto his people.

peace and fidelity with God. Parts and principles miscoped, render the person
worse then they that have none, more heady and high minded, and now the man
sets himself in a way that is not good, and this goes to the heart of God, he
often complains of this. The more God is enraged by any course, the more
severely he smites the pursuer. Hypocrisy is punished with pride, envy, and
security; and now is a next neighbor and a familiar worse then an open enemy,
more bloody. I was a reproach among mine enemies, [but especially among my
neighbors,] Psa. 31.11. vicinis valde, to my neighbors very much, or most of
all. It Is of desperate issue every way, to soul and body, not to soder in scope
with Christ.

Christians should suck this honey-combe well, a fathomelesse depth of
sweetness is in it: the bent of Christ in all his dispensations is toward you,
his heart hangs after you; affliction, prosperity; war, peace, Magistrates,
Ministers, Paul, Apollo, Cephas, life, death, all is yours, for you. Things now
thwart much, man against man; nothing against you. We look too low to suck
the sweet of this point, and to be at rest in troublous times. Inferior agents
look one one way; another, another way, and answerably oppose in their motion,
and kill in conflict, and yet the first intention lives and obtaines. The scope
of the first agent in all should be eyed, and rest. What is Christ about? To
destroy his people? to destroy his glory? Against whom, or for whom is he? Is
he for Babylon and Babylonish wretches, which now war against us? Is he so in
his intention, and in his purpose? possibly this or that particular action, as
we scan it, may look like as if it were for them; but is the prime scope of
God for them in all he does? does his heart hang toward any Babylonish brats
now afoot? abroad or at home? If you think so, read Jeremy 50.31, 32. Behold I
am against thee, O thou most proud, says the Lord God of Hosts, for thy day is
come, and the time that I will visit theel, and the most proud shall stumble
and fall, and none shall raise him up, and I will kindle a fire in his Cities,
and it shall devour all round about him. How ever actions and proceedings seem
to smile upon evil men, yet let this bear us up, the scope of all is against
them. I am against thee. i. in my intention and plot. And contrariwise, however
sad and black things may look in man's view, in order to Christians, yet their
scope and their intention is for them: Christ is for his Churches, and for his
Saints in all his designs. This was that which Joshua desired to know when he
was in some fears, which way Christ heart did bend when his Sword was drawn,
whether for them, or for their adversaries, let me but know this, says Joshua,
and I shall rest, let things work how they will, Joshua 5.13, 14. And it came
to pass when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lift up his eyes and looked, and
behold there stood a man over against him with his Sword drawn in his hand, and
Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our
adversaries? and be said, Nay, but as a Captain of the Host of the Lord am I
now come, etc. Or for our adversaries, coarctatoribus, for them that straiten
us, which word speaks full to our condition; there be a great many bloody
wretches abroad, which straiten us exceedingly in all our mercies, which pen us
into so few Counties, and into so little trading; yet it should be enough for
us to know, against whom the point of Gods drawn Sword is set, whether against
their hearts, or ours; whether to make an end of them, or of his people, which
party Christ takes; if you think he takes their side, no, Lo^ki, it is
vehemently denied, which is expressed by two words, nay but, or nay because, as
a Captain of the Lord of Hosts am I come, there is negation, with its reason
added, which is strong negation.

You may suck this point not only to establish you against fears and dangers
now apparent, but to furnish you with all excellencies that Christ has.
Sampsons heart was set toward Delilah, and she knew it, and made use of it to
get out all, to strip him of all; not a secret about his Nazariteship, but she
gets it. Now we know the bent of Divine affection, that it is specially toward
us, we should make use of it to get out all the secrets of wisdom and
holiness, that are in Christ. So you know Christ when he had fished out this
to the botome, that Peter's heart did indeed bend and incline specially toward
him, he makes use of it to draw him out to special and Noble service for him.
Do thou love me says Delilah, then show me this, and that; so said Christ
to Peter, Do thou love me? and is all thou have for me? then let me see it,
Feed my Lambs, and feed my Sheep: so do thou say to Christ, Do thou love me
O Christ? and does thy heart bend principally toward me? And is all thou
have, and do, for me? Then let me see it: feed my poor soul with
knowledge, it is very ignorant: feed my poor soul with love, with joy, it is
very low and sad. If what thou have given this Minister and that Minister be
for me, why do I profit no more by them? my Teachers drop precious things, but
I like a broken ci^^erne hold nothing. And if my mess be in their dish, why
cannot I put in my spoone, and take it out? If thy bosom O Christ be a lodging
intended for me, hung stately and perfumed sweetly for me, why cannot I lie
there always? Clouds and mists are scattered by the force and motion of
celestial bodies; you that are celestial creatures; it must stir up the grace
of God in you, and move and act the forcible acts of faith at the Throne of
grace, if you would dispell the clouds that hide God and great good from you.
Vain belief destroys us; not one Christian of a thousand settled in this,
that the Heart of God is toward him, and therefore has no heart to go to him,
to make use of him, no nor cannot rest upon him for any thing.

It cannot be that the heart of God is toward me: all things go against me.
Sin prevails, conscience stings; breaches within, breaches without;
lively-hoode dies, feathers fall off apace, I am almost quite bare in the nest;
I know not where to get clothes to put on my back when these be done, no not
where to get bread to put in my head, when this in my hand is eaten. My wife
mournes, my children cry, friends frown: livelihood did I say? nay Life it
self because of all these, is almost gone: it is as much as my heart strings
will hold, I sigh so often, and so deep, and can the heart of God be toward me?
can all be for me, and all against me?

The Heart of God how it inclines, cannot be gathered from the hand, no not
from the Tongue of God. When a man would make demonstration of his state by the
hand of God toward him, he had need weigh things well, the wheels that go
over have so many eyes, and look so many ways, one shall be deceived also.
God can speak against a man and do against him, (as you call against) and yet
all that while yearne in heart over him, and working about great things for
him, he can speak against Ephraim a dear child, and yet at the same time
remember him, yea remember him earnestly. Since I spoke against him I remember
him still. Affection is subordinate to fancy, memory, and more noble powers:
persons and things kept in memory, and fancy; these powers will work, and keep
bowels beating still, but when persons and things are thrown out here, out of
the memory of God, then a man's condition is forlorn indeed, and never till
then: thus Saints are never. Christ speaking of sharp troubles, killing and
bloody trials, says, Fear not him that can kill the body; and then comes on
thus, to show the tender providence and bowels still work, in such times when
we think not. Are not five Sparrowes sold for two farthings? and yet not one
of them is forgotten before God, but even the hairs; of your head are [all]
numbered fear not therefore, you are of more value, etc. Precious persons
sometimes, according to external condition, are of no worth, spoild, bought,
sold, for naught, five of them for two farthings, and yet not these, not one
person, no not one hair of these persons forgotten (i) not without the
compass of tender bowels; their hairs numbered, when upon their head, and
when they fall off their head.

It Is not safe to calculate kindness by the mere motion of outward things, or
of ones own heart. Straites and trialls put weak creatures to it, Christ is
not extreme to observe in this case. Divine compassion dies not so soon as we
think: it is an everlasting thing, it is a child of mercy which indures for ever.
God in all cases of transgression looks upon Christ strictly, then his fury is
ceased; this ceased, whatsoever God does is consistent with bowels, tender
bowels. The bitterest things that befall us should be so construed, by looking
still to Christ as God does. The Lord speaks of the piercing Serpent, and
Leviathan the crooked Serpent, and the Sea Dragon, Esaia. 27.1, 2, 3. and all
these in his Vineyard, and suffered them all to make terrible work, and yet
when he comes to redress this says, that fury was not in him all this while;
they did quite mistake him that did judge these sad afflictions, the fruits of
a heart turned against them. Make use of these things to keep your hearts
settled in the truth of this point, that the heart of God specially bends toward
you, and then milk out the sweet of it to all occasions, so all conditions
will be sweet to you; death it self, Life.

COLOS. 1.25. To fulfill the Word of God.


THe final cause of Divine distribution, is here doubly set down,
substantially, and circumstantially. What is given is to be imparted: to whom?
To Saints; to you: how much is to be given to them? All that is given unto us;
this last circumstance is pressed in this last clause, as the other is in the
former, we must (...) fulfill the Word of God, (i) preach fully the word of
God. The same word is used, Romans 15.19. and so translated; From Jerusalem
round about to Illyricum (...), I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ.

to fulfill the Word of God, 1 Cor. 23.27.
(i) to accomplish his mind who thus made his will. By the last words of David
were the Levites appointed, at such certain years to their work; so by the
last words of Christ, was this work put upon our shoulders; Whereof J am made
a Minister [to fulfill] the word of God (i) his last word of institution. The
dying breath of Christ, we breath in your faces: the nature of this I will open
to you, what it is naturally, what accidentally. Naturally it is pure, perfectly
pure. There are three regions of Air, and although one purer then another, yet
none perfectly pure. It Is a division that pleases Scholars, Pure.
but the substance is one. So we may distinguish in this matter in hand. There
be three Regions in that Air that blows and breathes upon our souls, the
breast of the Father, the breast of the Sun, the breast of the holy Ghost, all
pure, perfectly pure, these are personally distinguished, but one in essence.
As things are, so they breath Lungs and inwards rotten, and breath is
answerably corrupt; clean things come not out of the mouth of unclean,
wickedness proceeds out of the mouth of the wicked; persons when they are
dying, their breath is most of all impure, all parts within are so overrun and
ruined with filth; Christ was dying all that time he lived among us, and yet
sound in all parts,; holy, and so breathed to the last, he gave up his last
breath in Hell, and yet holy and heavenly: and therefore very apt and punctual
is that expression of Solomon [Every word] of God is pure, Prove. 30.5. Christ
never had any filth in his mouth, the fountain that gave spring to that
outlet was so pure; he never spoke a sinful word: if every word of Christ
was pure, then his dying words were pure, his words in Hell Eloi, Eloi, etc.
And yet this is not all the emphasis of that Text, every word of God is
Tserupha, purgatus, purified, Surmo purgatus. 'Twas a Hell that Christ did
speak in, all his time here below, if this Hell did do any thing, it did purge
and not pollute his words, he learned obedience not disobedience, by all he
underwent; it set him more in Heaven, and made his expiration from more
inspiration, his breathings forth in this world, from stronger gales from that
world above, and made his last words, like the last words of that sweet singer
of Israel, doubly sweet: How transendently sweet are all those expressions in
the Gospel of John, which he spoke as preparatory to his end*

Pleasant.
It Is very pleasant: it is so to every sense, which nothing else is or can be, such
is the constitution of man and things now. It sounds pleasant, tastes pleasant,
looks pleasant, etc. The breath of Christ casts a dew [thou have the dew of
thy youth] that hangs the Locks of man with silver drops. The Air in some
Countries does color and varnish the hair. Words in season are like Apples of
Gold in pictures of Silver, these are shining things indeed, and proper to the
sight, such are all the words of Christ his last words were very seasonable
words without which, where would have been this Ordinance, and these words,
which now you partake of? the gales that come from Christ's mouth, are all
seasonable; let this wind sit which way it will, and blow how it will,
sharply, or mildly, it is still seasonable; Christ is wisdom, and wisdom never
breathes unseasonably, and such words are as the Sun, irradiant beyond the
glittering of gold, or sparkling of Pearls, to the internal eye. Wisdom
makes the Face, the Tongue, the Lungs, yea the breath shine, which is a wonder.

Ephraim is derided for feeding on wind. Can one taste or eat wind? Yet such
is the breath of Christ's Lips, that one may feed on 't, like the Dewes of the
holy Land, and make a very good meal, it is so sweet to the taste, and so
nourishing to the state of the soul: the breathings of Christ's Lips are beyond
expression pleasant to the taste. How sweet are thy words to [my taste!] I
cannot express it, as if the Prophet had said, yea sweeter then the Honey to
my mouth: Psalm. 119.103. they that write of Honey, tell us of several sorts,
which the Be makes at several seasons, and answerably differ in their
sweetness, and goodness. There is a Honey which they call Flower-honey. which
is made in the Spring and prime of the year, from choice flowers, and this is
accounted the prime Honey, and that which they judge best to nourish young Bees
withal, when they are first put to work, to put them in heart. The breath of
Christ is Honey-dew, his words are combs full of Flower-honey; gathered out of
the Garden above, and admirable to put young and old in heart. There is a great
dispute about Honey-dewes, whether they come from the Earth, as exhalations
from it, as other ordinary Dewes do, or not: some affirm it to be nothing else
but a pure sweat of the celestial bodies, an unctuous gelly, from the benign
Stars, and therefore called a Heavenly liquor, and say, if it could be taken
as purely as it falls from the Heavens, before it comes into the corrupt Air
in which we breath, 'twould be much beyond that which we have, it would be a
sovereign Nectar, to cure all diseases, it would fetch from death to life, and
immortalize men. There may be something in all this, though not so much as
authors would have us think; and yet if all this were true, it is too short to
set out the thing in hand. The honey dew we speak of, it is no exhalation from
any thing here below, it is indeed, nothing else but the sweat of Heaven, an
unctuous gelly dropping down from that bright morning Star Christ, the sweat
of his celestial body, and indeed is sovereign for all diseases, to fetch man
from Death to Life, to immortalize men; Christ's Words are Words of eternal
Life.

Kings 13.21. and he cried to the man of God which came from Judah saying,
Thus says the Lord, for as much as thou have disobeyed [the Mouth of the Lord]
Observe the circumstance of aggravation, and have not kept the Commandment
which the Lord thy God commanded thee, but came back and have eaten bread and
drunk water, in the place of which the Lord did say unto thee, Eat no bread
and drink no water, thy carcass shall not come into the Sepulcher of thy
fathers. He had cried against the Altar at Bethel, and against Jeroboam; this
he discharged well, but he was also not to eat nor drink in that place, to
have nothing to do with any there, because of their pollution, and this also he
observed well a while, as appears by his stout Language to the King; If thou will give me half thy house J will not eat Bread with thee in this place. But
he was fetched back by a flattering Prophet, and did eat and drink in Bethel;
and so went against the Mouth of God. The Prophets obedience was partial, his
carcass fell for this sadly: it is our case, at best, for the general. Such
whom sin does not wholly sway, neither does truth. Those that are against the
Altar at Bethel, are for eating and drinking in Bethel, for countenancing
something forbidden about Gods worship; men's carcasses pay for this and will,
till they know how to account of every tittle of what a God speaks; till we
become faithful executors, of the will of a dying Savior, we shall die.

We live in a very unhappy time; we are spectators of sin and justice in
height Men prize their sin above their blood. But as sin is feated, so it
will abide: if sin be feated in the heart, it will abide there, till all the
blood of the man be spilt on the ground, yea, till all that which is ten
thousand times more noble then this, to wit, the soul, be lost. I will tell
you the property of the Word of God, in order to such a foul, as still keeps
his sin, it is though sweet in it self, bitter to such; searching, piercing,
tormenting. The word of God is quick and powerful, sharper then any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and this he spoke in
order to them which abode in the stubbornness of their heart, and flighted the
promise of perfect rest, in that Canaan above. The heart strongly engaged to
evil, truth is very piercing: he that so loves sin that he slightes the rest
above, he shall have no rest here. You cannot imagine the sad boutes and
fearful expectations, that unsound souls have, and yet this must continue,
because the breath of the Lord like a River of Brimstone, keeps in this Hell,
as it does that below. The breath of Christ which you spurn against, by your
spurning, lights a fire, and shall serve to burn you, though it will not to
lead you. Christ puts to the sword all they which yield not, burns and blows
up all that he cannot take. Did not our hearts burn within us whilst he talked
with us? The breath of Christ is hot, it burns within men according to that
degree of unbelief and resistance it finds, in every one, without respect of
persons. Did not [our Hearts] burn?

Sinners consider these things and repent, suck in the dying breath of Christ,
charge folly upon your selves. Who is it that speaks to me? what would he
have? who is it within me that answers, and what answers does it make? There
are fleshly reasonings, and carnal motions, take heed of them. Everybody will
plead for it self, the body of death will do so, which is the death of the
soul, but methinks the Word of God should silence all; If the voyee that
speaks to us were considered as such a voice, surely it would. In what posture
your souls sit in an ordinance, is all in all; If you think I speak these
things as a man, as Paul says, that it is only a man's word, you will hush
your souls asleep again, as soon as gone from the presence of a man: and
yet ingenuity would honor man's voice. The beast that spoke to Balaam that
beast, was honored to speak with man's voice, and that was thrown in Balaams
face, that man's voice from a beast would not calm his madness. The dumb Ass
spoke with [mans voyce]. But when man is honored to speak with Gods voice, and
to forbid your sin and your madness therein, will you on for all this? how
much more will this be thrown in your face? Consider with what voice we speak,
and for how little while this Oracle speaks in this earthen Tabernacle, and
see how it will work. To day if you will hear [his voyce]: this Tabernacle in
which his voice is and speaks, lasts but a day; to day, if you will hear his
voice sinners, do; to morrow the tent will be removed, the veil will be
drawn, the Oracle will besilent, his voice and our own too, will be gone out
of our Mouths, and hid from your Ears.

COLOS. 1.26. Even the Mystery.


THe carryage of Christ since the fall is here hinted, he does work and
speak above our reach; when he goes, he makes a path like a Ship in the Sea,
that no man can find any thing after him, not a step: when he speaks, his
words are a great deep, a Sea bottomless (i) of such vastness in all noble
property, that no man can mouth them nor utter them after him, but stand dumb
and silent; they are as the title says here, (...) which is compounded of
(...) and (...), they do (...) occludere shut up the Tongue and Lips of man,
that he can say nothing. Divine prerogative we are to stand upon, There is a
power opening and shuting things of eternal consequence in order to man in
this life.

This power is purely spiritual: action is used to close the Eyes of the dead,
but it is invissible; man's doom is written in the wall, and no hand seen; nor
caracter legible in order to the man concerned, though all big and plain, and
he spelled and personated in them, because Organs within, enervated; in which
case man has Eyes and sees not, Ears and hears not. They that see are made
blind, but do they know how? action is used in this sad work, but can any one
explain it to sense? for the time when it was done? or for the thing it self
that is done? when went the spirit from me to thee? The poor creatures eyes
are out, but when was it done? did the man feel it? can he tell the agent or
the instrument that did it? or what wheel in the Clock is cracked, that the
motion goes so false? The nature of this spiritual occlusive act is this, two
spirits run their course, at last one is finally left, and so in the dark, and
able to see nothing according to the spiritual nature of it, so as to stir any
noble operation in the soul: Faith, a Ridle; Self-denial, a Ridle;
Regeneration, a Ridle, a going into ones Mothers belly again; the death of the
body of death, the Resurrection and the Life, all these great things of the
Gospel, strange things, and like the talk of a son to a barren womb, laughed
at. The s^uting up or the opening of the Kingdom of God in order to any, is a
transaction only by the spirit, cannot enter into the heart of man to
conceive, but God has revealed them to us [by his spirit] for the [spirit
searches all things, the deep things of God.] There is an internal
caelestiall virtue, coacting with the soul, the giving or the suspension of
which, is man's only advantage or disadvantage, to understand Gods Will; the
suspension of internal influence, keeps the soul spiritually dark, what
ever other advantages it has, and shuts it out from the Kingdom of Heaven.

This spiritual occlusive power is feated in Christ. For Judgment am [I] come
into this World that they which see not might see, and that they which see
might be made blind. Concerning spiritual judicature, it is proper to me,
there is none good at this work, but I says Christ; to cast amist before the
Eyes of the mind, and to darken the light that is in men, this only I can
do: to cast a mist before the Eyes of men's bodies, this devils may do, and
such men as give themselves to them; but to cast a mist before the Eyes of men's
souls, and to darken the light that is in them, and to make the things of
eternal Life mysteries, and mere ridles, this is only Christ's work. Christ
can put out the Eyes of a Sampson, darken the greatest lights, and confound the
greatest parts, that is speak ridles and parables at every word, things
unexplicable to the most learned men; he can carry a dark Lantherne between
the Egyptians and the Israelites, make a cloud to go between both, and to be
dark of one side and light of to'ther: Christ was in the midst of that
project, it is often said in the Book of Moses that he was in the midst of the
cloud, that is, he was the only author of that great mystery; 'twas no art of
Moses nor Aron, nor any man else, but Christ. Christ has a Kingdom, but it is
not of this world, it is of that little World within: he has the Keys of every
room within you, he and he only opens and shuts these everlasting doors, and
at what hour he will: every wheel in that curious artifice within, has its
motion or check from him: the spirit we speak is of his ^nction, it is in
fullness given to him, to make every knee bow or break, every eye blind or
seeing of things in Heaven, of things in Earth, and under the Earth. This thing
is better expressed by the Prophet, then eye can, The Key of the house of David
will I lay open his shouldiers, so he shall open and none shall shut; Isai.
22.22. Revel. 3.7. The donations of Christ are absolute, not such as ours which
may and often are overborne; the Eyes he closes, none can ever open; the Trees
he curses barren, none can ever make fruitful, dung as long as they will; the
things he hides from men's eyes, they can never see more; his spiritual
occlusive power, is as his power apertive, absolute, and above control. He
is the only absolute at opening or closing the Eyes of the dead.

Shut up under unbelief? in the valie of a shadow of death, fearing evil, the
destruction of all? Darkness makes fears the Oracle within speaks
doubtfully, and the best Life hangs in doubt; the Malefactor has his book, and
cannot read for his best Life, the caracters are so old and so mysterious;
this is a great wound in the spirit, and it is a wonder to me that any one can
bear this and bear up; yet so remiss are men, till things grow ragingly
desperate, and remediless, nothing is considered. Terrified sinners, Christ
has tied a handkercher about your Eyes, you are upon the Ladder, ready for
execution; can you read your neck verse, or not? Legit ut clericus vel non?

A Gospel sense of misery, is the first step to remedy. Light is made to shine
out of darkness; God closes the Eyes, and then opens them. I am at the door
of Heaven, near the Kingdom of God, my night will have a day, according to
the course of of the Sun, it will be so. Let faith thus work, and thou will be
blessed speedily. God makes light to [shine] out of darkness; when he would
make a shining State, he usually makes it very dark first; very dark and
very sad; and then reveals light very clear, and makes a very shining bright
Heaven. The order of the Sun what course it goes, what long nights it makes in
some parts of the World, and then what long and glorious days, should be
remembered and expected; this way comes in our blessedness here. In a dark
condition, when one cannot do as we would, we must do as we can, make
advantages of little things. Sampson being dark and stark blind, made
advantage of a little boy; do thou, said he, lead me to this place or that, to
the pillar where the house bears; so must you poor dark souls, which are
stark blind in the best things, makes use of such little things, as before
mentioned to be led by, till you come to find Pillars, great Pillars whereon
the house bears, to do great exploits.

It Is sweet to consider that sacred concealements are but for a time, and this
time set by wisdom. [Vision] is but for an appointed time. That is a secret
and a mystery to us, which to Christ is vision [the vision is but, etc. and
shall be so to us; in his light we see light: and in cases of danger and
extremity, he does hasten. When we are in a chariot of our own conceits, a
fiery Chariot, and Satan running away with us, Christ says to his spirit, go
join thy self to that chariot, and interpret; and now behold a nation is
borne in a day; a World borne of a day, a World of light; a Heaven borne of a
day, of an hour. It Is yet more sweet, yea, most sweet to consider, when we
can do nothing at all for our relief, neither the greater nor the lesser, not
make use of a Lad to lead, when we cannot make the least motion toward the
light, it makes motion toward us: the Sun finds out us, it finds lost persons
and lost comforts; it bares it self about unto every one; who does draw the
Sun to this place or that? Christ is called (...), 2 Pet. 1.19. you read it a
day Star, the Latins rightly render it, Lucifer, because it does lucem far,
Christ does bear about light over the World to every one that sits in
darkness and needs it.

COLOS. 1.26. Which has been hid from Ages, and from Generations.


THis expression means not totum but tantum, not altogether hid but very much
hid, over what it is since the revelation of Christ in the flesh. A full
comment upon these words are those of the Apostles to the Ephesians cap. 3. v.
4, 5. Whereby when you read, you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ, which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men, as it is
now revealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets by the spirit. Ceremonies were
but a shadow of good things to come, as great a distance between their
condition and ours, as between shadow and substance: their fruit had much
shell and little kirnells: we have no shell, yet the kirnell bigger and sweeter
to. The sensual helps they had, spoke for the most part no farther then sense.
What all those carnal Ordinances did spiritually mean, we have in express
words, and these words explained and applied, with greater power and glory then
ever, from the spirit of Christ. Mercies have their demensions, they differ in
grouths. The drops that fall from Heaven, are of several quantities, Christ
has in his hand blessings of several sizes, some bigger, some lesser; two
talents, five talents, ten talents, concerning the glory above, it is disputed
whether it be graduall, but concerning the glory of a Christian here, it is a
resolved thing that it is graduall: there is migration in our glory here, going
from glory to glory, from strength to strength; Milk and strong meat, babes
and full age, crumbs and Flagons, love and abounding in love. Our Kingdom
comes, our Kingdom here is a coming Kingdom.

Mercies are all shaped by Love, it is the property of Divine Love, to higthen
dispensation still, till she has lifted the soul beloved fully into her
bosom. Grace it is in the beginning little, a grai^^ of Mustardseed, in
progress great, in the end, all; to wit, Heaven which is all now does Love
fully possess her beloved, and now she rests and not till now; beyond Heaven
there is no gradation, no step higher; Love has got her full end, which is the
full possession of what she makes out to, and now rests. Love shapes Mercy so,
as fully to bring about her end, and that is to bring the soul she loves into
her bosom, to the full fruition of her self, of whatsoever she is; you may
see this demonstrated in Christ: the Father loves him, and he gives him mercies
greater and greater, and never leaves till he has lifted him fully into his
bosom, to his right hand, (i) the fruition of all, John 5.20. The Father
loves the Son and shows him all things that himself does, and he will
show him greater works then these, that ye may marveile. My Father has given
me great things already, but he will give me greater, for he loves me; and
this will drop and drop till it has dropped out all, it will never rest till
it has brought me into his bosom. The love of God carries the same property
and proportion to a Christian, and this makes the grouth of a Christian
necessarily, as the grouth of a Crocadile, of which it is written; that he
grows always, so does a Christian, till he be transplanted into Heaven.

fool, he knows not his state, what he has nor what he wants. Blind men
it is observed, do not dream so much as men that see, because fancy in the day
has not so much nor so lively impressive employment to set it at work in the
night; but blind souls dream more a great deal then they that see; This is
one of their dreams among many; I have enough grace to bring me to Heaven I
hope, and I care for no more, I love not to be pragmaticall. Some make a great
deal of stir and run mad; it is extreme naught this, I like it not. Answ. this
is one extreme, but there are two extremes, and virtue in the midst of them;
do thou eye the other extreme? Some die with heat, others die with cold. Thou
see others too hot, may not thou be too cold? grace in the true knowledge
of it is inviting, it is like some Liquids drinking makes thirstinesse and
longing for more drink; every degree of grace possessed, makes discovery of
greater degrees not possessed; One Chamber of Christ has a window looking into
another far bigger and more glorious. Thou art entered into one thou say;
do thou look into another more glorious, and long to enter into it? if thou
be a stranger to these things, thou art a foolish Virgin, that possibly have
knocked at the door of Christ's house a little, but art yet indeed entered into
no room; when Christ had opened the nature of spiritual bread unto his
followers, that they did indeed understand it, they fell a longing presently
for more; what they had, discovered much more behind which they wanted, and
therefore cried Lord evermore give us of this Bread.

Hebrews, and must be mine to you. Despite is a spiritull act, deliberate
disaffection to the loveliest things. The posture of our spirits we least
look at, and this Christ's Eye is most of all fixed upon. External carriages
are all measured, and titled from the heart. God rules in the inside of his
enemies, he unbowells this Generation, and Christens it in blood, according to
its spirit. We offer despite to the spirit of grace, we tread under foot the
blood of the Lord Jesus; can we tell whether this iniquity will be blotted out
till this Generation die? The heart fired against truth, abides so; it is part of
that unquenchable fire below; God allows Satan to be fueler in such a soul,
till they both come to burn together in hell. Love lost, Christ cares not for
the person, let him be what he will, if he be the greatest man in the World,
he will burn to death in that fire, which burns in his breast against Christ.
Our love now to be least, when greatest love is tendered, can you imagine that
this iniquity will be quickly forgotten? great hear makes great thunders, it is
so now; the Sun of love shines mighty hot, and now wickedness thunders, and so
will Justice and righteousness too; believe it.

COLOS. 1.26. But now is made manifest, etc.


THe word notes two things, appareo et splendeo, vision, and shining vision,
that is, according to Gospel speech, still in the letter and in the spirit, the
understanding of words which one reads, by works which one feels; a voice
behind one, interpreting that before one; circumcision outward in the flesh,
and this explained by circumcision inward in the spirit. There is a narrative
and an operative light; that which makes one talk well, and that which makes
one walk well; that which enables one to produce books for his authority in
discourse, and that which enables one to produce his soul and his life for
authority: here is my soul and my life, read if it be not so as I say; let
men and Angels, all the World read if they will. The Manifestation which our
Apostle speaks of here, is the latter, for he speaks of such as is proper to
Saints, which is Divine demonstration, the person an Epistle, known and read
of all men. [Yee] are our Epistle known and read of all men, 2 Cor. 3.3.

Divine demonstration notes two things, exscriptum and inscriptum, and Christ
makes both. The written word is Gods mind copied out, exscriptum, a summary of
his eternal counsel, in order to all without him: man is the principal party
concerned in this, but unable to apprehend the counsels of God, though copied
out to him; Christ therefore gives concurrence in this work, and the first
thing he does in man is, he makes apprehension (i) he enables the
understanding to copy out Gods copy, to make an exscript from his, and so to
hold out a clear and glorious Idea of Gods mind, and what he would have, to
all inferior powers; to make a draught and survey of the Kingdom of God, very
lively to sacred fancy. This exscriptum is Scriptum digestum, the written word
digested, and beholding by it as in a glass Gods mind unto satisfaction, an
Idea of Gods mind by means hereof, is made in the soul so lively, and
answers so exactly, as face to face; this is the first work of Christ, for the
good of a poor soul, which is called a copying out of his fathers bosom, and
pointing us by the hand to Letter after Letter. No man has seen God at any
time, but the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him, Joh. 1.18. (...) (i) plane ac dilucide declarare, to open a
thing very clearly and gloriously; Like the Hebrew word Higgid, Genesis 41.25.
noting such a showing as is by leading by the hand.

inscriptum. When Christ has made apprehension in the soul, the next thing he
makes is affection; he does eternally seat things revealed, in all the
passions of the soul, and in each distinctly, as principles are proper to
them; some in love, some in joy, some in fear, etc. and seats principles
deeply in all these passions, and makes them all for him, and to vote him up
still as chief over all, within and without: this is called in writing (...)
not with Inck and Pen but with the spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3.3.
in Tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart; and yet this is
but a branch of that manifestation mentioned in my Text, (...) and the same
word is used in the front of the Verse (...) manifestly declared. Christ's
internal manifestation, is our external manifestation, that which enables us
to hold forth our light in Life as Saints. This demonstration is most sweet;
Divine light is pleasant all along its course in the soul, in every room of
the soul, as in the understanding though a very out-roome, but most pleasant
when seated in the will and affections, these in-roomes; then it is full of
embracings; then the soul pursues his light, and is pursued with kindness
from Christ's internal presence. Divine-Light is very sweet in speculation, but
a thousand times more sweet, when drawn out into conversation. He that has
my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he shall be
loved of my Father, and J will love him and will manifest my self to him. He
that has my commandments and keeps them, etc. To have the will of Christ
and to keep the will of Christ, are two things; the one points at light in the
understanding, the other points at light in the affection, which necessarily
resolves it self into action, and upon this is entailed the sweetness of
Christ's presence; this is he that loves me says Christ, and he shall be
beloved of me and my Father; this is demonstratio demonstrata, the builder
banqueting in, and warming of the house he has built; this is the mystery of
the Gospel, and manifested to none but Saints.

COLOS. 1.26. But now is made manifest [to his Saints.]


What was a mystery and what was hid, is still so to all but Saints, but now
is made manifest to [his Saints] What a long night some have! they have Job's
wish, they give up the ghost in the womb, and their eyes never see the Sun, no
not when he shines brightest. Gospel Light is the clearest, plainest, and yet
this is hid, unless to a very few. If our [Gospell] be hid: the most are
finally left. Never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, although ever
making at it: that is a sad expression ever learning and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

never leaves nor forsakes some; though in the fire, though in the water,
though in the belly of Hell, yet he comes to them: others he never comes near,
let them be where they will, do what they will, pray, or cut themselves like
Baals Priests. It Is all day in some parts of the World, it is all night again in
other parts; such is the set and fixed course of the Sun about the great
World, and such likewise is the motion of the Sun of Righteousness, about
the little World.

Man's will.
therefore there can be no wrangling or discontent in this matter, on no side.
The will of the wicked is at an utter, and at a final resistance of Christ,
they bid the Almighty depart: for how long? for a week? for a month, and then
come again? No: he is in good earnest, for ever, as one that does not like
such a man for a Husband of all the men in the World, and therefore bids him to
come no more. When Christ comes to any soul, he comes a woeing, to gain the
soul for his only solace and delight; a wicked soul has no mind to this, he
has so much love to his lust and to his own course, and therefore if this be
thy business says he to Christ, depart for ever, let me see thy face no
more; it was Pharoahs Language to Moses, and yet Moses representing the person
of Christ to him; and Pharaoh in that, does but represent to us, the person and
practice of every wicked man, what he says to Christ and the spirit, and to
all that is holy, he would see nor hear of these no more; he loves
darkness better then light, and would never out on it, nor never have light
brought near him. This thing is accomplished by God the soul would have a
final parture, God at a final distance, that so he might take his fill of
sin, and it is so: J will see thy face no more; thy night shall be as long as
thou will, black and dark for ever, hence forth sleep on and never open thy
Eyes more.

Now man's will is fulfilled and Gods will too: for such sinners, Gods Will
he swears the eternal death of them, and he cannot go back. When souls
are so wicked to bid him depart for ever, he lays this much to heart, and
remembers it well for ever, yea, every repulse of this Strength, Length, and
Nature; yea, and all the circumstances about it; and opposes to this sinful
will, a righteous will, of as much Strength and Length: he swears a revenge
which has no revocation; he sets himself at a final distance from
repentance, as the sinner has Read Amos the eight and the seventh, the Lord
has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will never forget any of their
works. This is spoken in order to Isreal's end; and what is spoken in order to
many, has its force in order to one. J will never forget any of [their
works.] Such persons as I have woed, and labored by all manes to espouse to
my self, for such to put me off, yea to cast me off finally, I will never
forget this, says God; I will set them at as great a distance from me, as they
set me from them; and if there be any excellency in me, it shall run out all
this way, in strength and length of Justice: this is paying the utmost farthing.

Is it J? is it I? There are children of perdition now, such as are lost for
ever, such as of old are ordained to this condemnation we have spoken off, to
wit, a final dissertion. It Is hard to determine who these be, because we have
not Christ's skill in this point; yet two things there are which more eminently
hint such a state, Hypocrisy, and Malice. 2 Pet. 2.
Further authority concurring to this is that of Peter, where he discourses of
Hypocrisy largely and very sadly, yea very prophetically, as pointing at these
times wherein we live. He speaks of such who had escaped the pollutions of the
World, by the knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Verse. 20.
and afterward were entangled; and he speaks also of those which did generate
these monsters, to wit false Teachers, Hypocritical Prophets, such as Baalam,
and then panells altogether, Fathers and children thus. Wells they are without
water, Clouds carried about with a tempest, to whom is reserved the mist of
darkness for ever. Truth has lost its power; it is a stinking carcass, and
no Christian, whatsoever he says; Verse. 17.
and this stinking carcass is to be buried for ever, in such a grave as has
no resurrection. Love to truth is lost, and therefore no eyes can be found to
see it, so as to embrace it and practice it; other things stand in the way and
make a mist, that the man cannot see this nor that, not he; Hypocrisy raises
this mist of darkness, and such fogges and mists as spring out of this, often
times abide for ever. That which is here named the mist of darkness, or the
thickness of darkness, (...).
is translated in Jude blackness of darkness, tenebras densissimas denotat,
it notes says the Critic the most thick darkness; the mist of the night,
which makes the greatest darkness, such thorough which no sight at all can be
made.

Thessalonians, tells them, they had suffered such things from their own
Country men, and compares them that did it, unto the Jews which crucified the
Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, who pleased not God and were contrary to
all men, forbidding to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, filling
up the measure of their sin always, [whose doom observe] for wrath is come
upon them to the uttermost. The allusion here made plainly shows, that these
bloody wretches were men of parts, noone Devils, as one of the ancients calls
them, or midday Scorpions: it is written of this creature, that he is most apt
to strike and sting at noone, when Sun beams are brightest and hottest upon
him. Innocent blood shed by day light, speaks conscience feared, and
conquered, and this is the last power that gives up in the soul; Divine Life
is quite gone when this is gone; the last breath gone, is not sucked in again.
Conscience twisteth cords and binds the sinner, to keep him in from his
sins; but when all the cords he makes, yea, and himself too, are broken by
the sinner, then is the sinner given up as a Sampson in sin, one
unconquerable, and so left for ever. Consider sinners what fire burns in your
breast, and with what fuel, and you may guess whether it be unquenchable fire
or not, of the nature of that below, which by decree is to burn for ever: you
are persons of parts; the great dangers we speak about, lies most amongst such
as you. Truth is hindered in its course every where by you, within and without,
in your selves and in others; for you to be oposites and adversaries to all
men, to all good men and to all good things, persons and things of the noblest
nature, it is very sad: write Lord have mercy upon such wretches, at their door;
wrath is come upon them to the utmost; (...) to the end, that is, which will
make an end of thee: thy soul burns with such a Fever as will kill thee for
ever. This generation has a deadly countenance in my eye; men's hands are
something tied up now by common distress, but with the tongue we are killed
all the day long; men spit blood which is a sad sign, and they most which
pretend most to more then ordinary knowledge, and yet are brute beasts as the
Apostle Peter speaks in many things, and speak evil of things they know not,
2 Pet. 2.12.
who says he, shall utterly perish in their own corruption. This is so
certain that it is called an evident token of perdition, by the Apostle.

Matter of admiration and thansgiving, might also be sucked from this point, if
we had time to lie longer at the breast; though all men forsake Christ, yet
shall not Christians utterly; one might go this way and make sweet Music. Our
mercy is eternal; our miseries but for a moment. Christ does but hide his
face, when he seems most out with us; he does not cast off, nor put away, he
hates that in order to his Spouse: though he give her to the Rod, yet it is not
to the black Rod, to a fatal stroke. Our prime mercies are married to us,
which is as sure as the being of any thing will afford; a marriage Knot holds
we know, till the very being molders, which thing should take us much: it much
took Solomon that God had spoken well of his house for a great while. The
eternity of mercies, is that which makes them Heaven: such is the Sun that
shines upon you Saints.

COLOS. 1.27. To whom God would make known.


THe title of the Gospel, the subject, the object, the end of it, are all in
this verse before us to consider; some of these, other verses have led us to
the consideration of already, they will be passed by here; others present us
with fresh entertainment, and there we shall sit down a while and feed. The
Gospel is named according to its nature, a mystery; Moses veiled to a carnal
Jew, Christ veiled to a carnal professor; a Sun shining full in the face of
thousands, and yet only seen by one or two of them; one in a Tribe, two in a
City; one in the midst of many, and yet seen but by one: There is one in the
midst of you, whom ye know not, whom ye [see not,] that's the original, John.
1.26. This is a mystery indeed: this title was given in the verse before, and
then opened.

The subject of the Gospel is here specified, and amplified: specified, to
wit, Christ, Which is Christ, etc. The Gospel has Moses virtue in her bosom,
he had one sat in his bosom which did wonders; wither and restore. Put thy
hand into thy bosom, says God, and when he took it out his hand was leporous
as Snow. Put thy hand into thy bosom again, says God, and he did so, and
behold his hand was turned as his other flesh, Exodus 4. 6, 7. Moses had a
notable one, which sat in his bosom; the same has the Gospel, and can do as
he did, to wit, put hands and hearts into his bosom, and make them leprous,
and white as Snow; that is, make persons see their filth, and cry out, unclean,
unclean: and then can put these very leprous creatures into his bosom again,
and bring them out white and ruddy, incarnate Roses, as that of Sharon in the
Gospel: the Gospel is the poole, that has no less then an Angel, the
Angel of the covenant stirring and healing cripled creatures in it; it is
Bethesda, a house of effusion, of the bravest liquid blood and spirits in the
world, to wit, Christ crucified, this is the subject of the Gospel.

Christ the subject of the Gospel is here amplified by his Throne, and by the
revenew belonging to it; Christ's Throne is in the hearts of his people, which
is Christ [in you] and this is a mystery indeed. This world lies in
wickedness, it lies overflown with the deluge of sin and wrath; the Dove
has an Arc in which she rides and flotes above this deluge, to wit, the heart
of Saints; here he abides till this deluge be dried up, and the curse of the
earth taken away, and all things restored again, and then he will resign his
Throne to his father. Christ is specified from his Throne, and from the revenue
of it, which is great and honorable; a vast estate, which is called here riches,
to whom God would make known what is the [riches] (...), which is not from
Pluto to note riches which are from beneath, of which commonly the devil is in
some kind the author; but the word notes here heavenly riches, of which God is
not in some kind, but in all kind the author, and therefore called riches of
glory (...) of splendor, fame; the state of a Christian lies in oriental
Pearls; all his goods, lands, beds, hanging; all full of sparkling precious
Stones, all riches of glory.

The end of the Gospel is here set down doubly, ultimus, and ultimatus.
Salvation, and that which is necessarily conducing and subordinate to this, to
wit, affection and affiance; the one of which is named in the end of the verse,
hope, and set out in state, as it fastens upon its highest and last object
Christ in Heaven, the hope of glory. The other is mentioned in the beginning of
the verse, and called, (...), desire to know, affection to divine revelation
above all things, to be well acquainted with the glorious mystery which belongs
to faith and salvation; to all which the will of God has given concurrence, in
order to us Gentiles, after a special manner. [To whom God would make known]
what is the riches of the glory of this mystery, etc.

Would make [known] (...) the word signifies desirous to know. Longing passions
stir, when the soul is made alive. A Christian is a hungry thirsty man: He
bares always, and yet travels always, ever bearing, and yet ever budding and
blossoming, as some Apple Trees which have buds and blossoms upon them at the
same time when full of ripe fruit. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life: his affection, action, his motion Heavenward has life in it,
everlasting life, it is as a tree that is growing, above ground or under ground,
upward or downward, in root or branch, always. It Is an expression in opposition
to an hypocrite, or one which bears much one year, and dies the next. His
love withers, it does (...), fall off, as the Apostle expresses it, as blasted
blossoms. The affection of a Christian does not so, it is as that tree of life
in Eden, pleasant, fragrant, growing always; yea (it is that tree of life)
Christ in the soul, Christ in you.

The dishes at Wisdoms table are all very delightful, and all carriage and
entertainment there is very drawing, which is the ground we run still after
him. In this mountain shall the Lord make a feast of fat things, a feast of
Wine on the lees, of fat things full of marrow; and to hint to you that none of
these are cloying, but very inviting, he adds, Wine on the lees, well refined,
Esaias 25.6. all Divine distribution, how fat, how rich soever, are so refined,
that they delight much, but not satiate nor surfeit a jot, that one may sit at
Table always, and feast always, as they do above: they have such an art
above, to renge their Bread, and to refine their Wine, and to order every dish,
that they are always feasting, and always taken, and ravished, not at any time
cloyed with their dainties. All the soul dainties which we have here below,
are cooked and ordered above; the Manna of the Israelites was from Heaven ready
cookt and dressed for any ones eating, and so sent down to earth. I will rain
Bread from Heaven, says the Lord; it came down Bread, ranged, baked, all done
above; ready for any ones nourishment below, without any use of man's pains or
art: so does all our soul dishes and dainties; yea all our soul rayments and
ornaments, laurels and privileges, all that belongs to a Christian as a
Christian, is shaped and ordered in Heaven; and this is the reason that all are
still taking, inviting, and making appetite more strong; what ever one have, or
what ever one knows, yet still to desire (...), desire to have and to know
more.

It comes to pass also from the pleasure of Christ, he loves to lie by
streams and springs, where waters bubble up and run continually; he loves
brooks to run always by his doors where he lodges, as the Poets of old and
men of high fancy, they delighted much to lie by springs and fountains:
therefore Christ calls for praying evermore, and rejoicing always; he loves to
have salt water and fresh, tears and triumphs, fresh motion of soul still
spring out. Therefore when he comes to refresh thirsty ground, he does not
content himself to say, that it shall have the former and the latter rain,
and dewes from Heaven every night, though this be much, but that the parcht
grounds shall become a poole, and thirsty lands [springs of water,] Esaias 35.7.
it shall be thus: his pleasure is to live by wells and springs, pooles that
bubble up continually.

is the reason of that expression. They that seek afto^ the Lord shall praise
him, Psalm 22.26. Such as are inquirers and searchers, Genesis 45.27.
and mourners after the Lord, their hearts live; that is, solaced, abundantly
cheared; it is explained by that speech of Jacob when he saw the Wagons which
Joseph had sent to transport him, his heart livd again, that is, he was
abundantly cheared and comforted. If this Scripture be not clear enough read
Psalm 84. verse. 6. Who passing through the valley of Baca or Mulbery-trees,
make [him] a well. This is spoken of them which were traveling toward
Jerusalem, thirsting after Ordinances and spiritual means, and the rain
filled their pooles. Such hungry souls which are as empty ponds, gaping as it
were to Heaven with wide mouth for replenishing, the Heavens open and fill
these. Rain signifies grace and the ministration thereof in the Word. Drop
down ye Heavens from above, and let the sky pour down righteousness, Esaias
45.8. that is, let Christ pour down grace upon souls that are as thirsty
Land, which are as Daniel, persons full of desires.

As desirers to know and gain, are such blessings to themselves, so to the
Land wherein they live; transparent things are not only their own beauty, but
the beauty of things that are near them: the sparkling of a Pearl is not
only its own beauty but the beauty of the ring and the finger on which it is.
Christians that know, and desire still to know, that know and follow on to know
the riches of the glory of the mystery of the Gospel, these are precious
stones, living stones, as Peter calls them, sparkling Pearls, which are not
only their own glory, their own prosperity and safety, but the glory,
prosperity, and safety of the Land wherein they live. Run through Jerusalem,
through every street thereof, and see now and know, see if there be a man that
executes judgment, [and seeks after the truth] and I will pardon Jerusalem.
Interpret these words which way you will, they are strong to our purpose. If
you think they mean moral truth, and execution of justice man to man; then
thus I infer, if seeking and thirsting, and diligence to be clear and
perfect this way, be a safety to a Land, and that faithful Magistrates, and
civil Governors, be the protection of a State, much more faithful Christians
and diligent Saints, that search and seek after the highest truths, and the
execution of the highest justice, the fulfilling of the first Table of Gods
will, are a grand blessing to a Land; but I think the words cannot be taken in
such a strict sense, all their Laws were Divine, rightly understood, a totum
homogeneum, given by God, and suited to that brave body, and not to be divided,
no more then Christ's will is now to be divided in any thing which he has
expressly prescribed. By truth therefore is meant Christ and his will, all that
belongs to him in order to us; and by seeking truth is meant labor and
diligence, as longing Christians exactly to know and do the will of God: this
very phrase is used by the Apostle to the Romans, There is none that seeks
after God, they are all gone out of the way (...) exquirere, the word notes
diligent and painful searching out of things, through search till what is
searched after be found out; but thus these did not do, and therefore were
blind, and as full souls they were idle, and overly in the seeking after
truth; and so suitable was their light and life, and therefore cast off. How
contrary to right judgment, and to the welfare of this Land are they that
seek not after God themselves but seek after lies, and hate and persecute
them that do otherwise, and labor to possess authority that such as are
desirous to know more of the Lords will, and are earnest endeavourers to do it
better and better, are the only overthrowers of the Land, and therefore worthy
to be thrown out on it. It Is against reason and against nature, as well as
against religion: Bees throw out drones out of their hives, but do they throw
out them that are diligent, most diligent to bring in most and best honey? Men
that thus speak and act should be thought of as they are, and made to taste of
the fruit of their bad zeal, the Land would soon be a sorry place for thee, if
such as thou hate were out on it. What is hungring and thirsting after the
world, ripping up the bowels of conscience to find out more mysteries of
iniquity, more crafty wilds in trading and traffiquing for gain? diggers and
searchers in the earth, plunderers of Saints, sanctity, conscience, and Christ;
are men of these spirits the only safety and the only blessing of a Land? God
forbid it should enter into any soul to think so.

Such as would be desirous to know and cannot, must remember this one thing,
the heart must stand right to do, or else the former cannot be; desires to
know springs from integrity of intention to do. My soul breaks for the
longing it has to thy Commandments at all times. David's spirit was set for
action, the influence of this made that strength of affection, soule-breaking,
and soule-longing. There be many damps and earthquakes in an unsound spirit,
these put out lights, flames and blazes. A heart unsound, has love bending
still some other way, then to that truth to which it seems to pretend; water
that has fit and full passage under earth, will not spring and bubble up above
it. Our Savior speaking of trying times, says, that the love of many will wax
cold. When earthly things are going, the heart (as it is earthy, and
hypocritical) will be most greedy after them, and die in order to the pursuit
of Divine things, to save the life of carnal; let us all take heed of this.

I Will speak a word to a case of conscience, and conclude. I am desirous and
industrious to know, and to get Divine things, but I can make nothing of it. I
am ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth. To this I
answer, Honey dewes you know fall in very small drops, so small that it is too
big a word to call them drops, if I knew what else to call them; distillation
as Balm, very small. In the wars which Alexander managed in Jury, the holy
Land where this Balm grew, history says the whole Army thought it well if
they could gather a spoonful in a Summers day: So if we can in the length of
our whole life, by all our travel and industry, searching and seeking, get but
a little of the Balm of Gilead, a little more of the knowledge and love of
Christ then we have, we should account it well, and not dejectedly complain.

COLOS. 1.27. To whom God would make known [what is the riches of the glory of
this mystery, etc.


ANy mercy, any thing that is or imports the least kindness to man now, may be
called riches, riches of glory, at such a great distance is man now from God.
But the Gospel is great riches, to wit, as much as man has lost, and more; it
sets man as high as ever he was, and higher, which is riches of glory indeed,
considering how glorious once man was. It must be a great deal to set up a
broken man; but to set him up higher then ever he was before fallen is glorious
riches, i. unexpresseable.

The Gospel in the intention of it is nothing but love. A voice of joy, a
voice of gladness, a voice of the Bridegroom, and a voice of the Bride, a
voice of them that shall say God is good, and his mercy endures for ever,
Jeremy 33.11. This is the Gospel, and you see that there is nothing in it but
joy and gladness: the Gospel is a salutation of love, of the sweetest love,
it holds forth bosoming love, i. marriage love, a voice of the Bride, and the
Bridegroom, says the text, i. the strongest love, glorious love: it holds
forth love not to last for a little while, but to last as marriage love, yea to
last longer then that can do, mercy enduring forever, says the Text, which is
rich and glorious, that will hold its strength and its warmth; its a breast and
bosom worth the being in, that will never be cold.

The Scripture uses three words, which will fitly serve to open this
expression in the Text, what glorious riches the Gospel is. The Gospel is
(...) Christ kind to man, or a word holding forth man friendship, which no
other subject beside does: that's a rich and a glorious book which when I open,
smiles upon me as such a creature, and no where else to be read the like. Man
is a very miserable creature, and yet as miserable as he is, nothing speaks to
him, no volume writes about him, but only the Gospel; not with any matter of
hope; any other Volume no sooner opened but man reads his doom in every line.

The book of the creatures opened, which is a great Volume, and yet not a line
in it that smiles upon man; nay any one may better look into the book of
creation then man; man no sooner looks into this Volume but all the creatures
fall a bleeding presently, as having espied their murderer: thou have
murdered me says one creature, and thou have murdered me says another, and
this is the bloody tone to the very teeth of man throughout all the creation.
The gronings of the whole creation are thrown as it were by each creature in
the face of man, they all hold up their hands together against man and say,
this is he that has destroyed us. There is not a sinner upon the face of the
earth, but is in some degree in Cains case, beset with all the creatures, every
bush ready to fly in his face, to scratch and accuse him; all the creatures are
out with huy and cry after man as their murderer, which was the reason why
Cain was so fearful everywhere he came, the whole creation was up in an outcry
against him. Man is the prime creature miserable, and yet the prime creature
cried out upon to be more miserable: man is not miserable enough yet; let me
overwhelme and drown all says the Sea let me not leave a man alive says the
deep. Let me open my mouth, and eat up all the men in the world, says the
earth. Let me break forth and burn all, says the Heavens. There is a strong
propensity in all the creation, to make an utter end of man, without the least
compassion toward him in any breast. There is a joint conspiracy in the
creation, just as there was in Noah's latter time to swallow up all, and the
creation shall obtain its will upon all, the wicked world at last, and when
that time comes you shall see what Gospel is in the creation; not a dram of
mercy shall any wicked soul find; so will Heaven, and earth, and the deep
conspire. And as for the Law, that is a Volume which heigthens all this cry,
and avers the justice of the creation in its cry, and cries out for blood
stronger then it. Not a dram of any compassion to be found in the breast of any
thing toward man, no not scarce in man to man, Acts 21.1, 2. The Apostle after
he had escaped shipwreck, wondered to find man-friendship, (...).
being cast upon the Island of Melita, the inhabitants there, says he, made a
fire for us, because of the rain, and because of the cold, and they showed us
no little man-friendship; he wondered, having escaped the Sea, that the people
of the Island had not eaten him up, and therefore the words that follow are
observable, When we came to land then we knew the name of the Island, Melita,
quasi Melifluae insula, i. an Island flowing with honey, because he had found
flowing mercy, double kindness by Sea and Land. The Gospel holds out this
man friendship, it is a Volume full of compassion to man, so does the Apostle
express it, Titus 3.4. But after that the kindness of man-friendship of God
our Savior appeared; expressing the Gospel.

The Gospel is (...) a volume that holds forth Christ, not only as
compassionate, but as very facile this way, and that is riches of glory indeed.
Love and kindness, in order to any but Christ, are wrought things; there is a
great deal of art to make some persons smile; and it is so generally in point
of kindness and mercy; there must be a great deal of art used to any but
Christ to bring them to it; men must be heated and warmed again and again, to
make them beath and bend strait to my purpose; but Christ is facile this way,
Titus 3. But after the gentleness (...) or facilenesse of God our Savior
appeared. (...).
Christ is gentle and facile toward man, ready to be brought on to do him
good in the saddest state, the word is so translated Galat. 5. The fruit of the
Spirit is gentleness. Christ gives and forgives very much, and he does it
without much (...), easily, cheerfully; it is his meat and drink to do his
Fathers will, yea and it is his meat and drink to do our will so far forth as
it does conduce to righteousness, and unto holiness; it is his meat and drink
to give us meat and drink, although it be his body and blood. Love comes from
Christ just as showers from Heaven, and not as water out of a pump. I will come
as the forms and the latter Rain says the Prophet, and every word of this
Gospel, and not such another word in any other Book to be found. As the forms
and the latter Rain (i) very naturally. Love comes from Christ just as leafes
out of a Tree; those leafes you read of in the Revelation, which are good to
heal, bud out naturaly, and that but an illustration how love comes from
Christ, it grows and buds out of it self where no body can by any art fetch
it out; and then when buded out, smiles and looks green upon men: truly this
is riches of glory indeed, and yet thus do the greatest acts of mercy come
from Christ to man. The Apostle to the Hebrews mentions a great act of mercy,
and he mentions this very circumstance with it, to wit, how facile it comes.
But God willing more abundantly to show his love to man and immutability of his
counsel, did make an Oath. To this great act of mercy solemn swearing, to
seal and establish man, God comes off very willingly, or with much strength of
affection, and so the word is read sometimes; he was strongly carried this
way, to swear to establish and make weak hearts strong; God was in such a
temper in this very act, as he was when he gave up his life: J have a
sacrifice, and O how I am pressed together within my self till it be sacrificed!
which expression shows the great willingness of Christ, to drink off that
deadly Cup. You have the same word used where the Apostle says love
constraines me. This is the riches of the glory of the Gospel, it holds forth
compassion with much strength, (i) bowels sounding very loud: The Apostle
fastens upon this circumstance, to no to the kindness that comes from God to
be exceeding riches, because it goes forth so facile, Ephesians. 2.7. That in Ages to
come he might show the exceeding Riches of his grace in his gentleness or
facilenesse toward us. This does note exceeding riches indeed, that Christ
should be facile in kindness toward man that arch Rebel.

The Gospel is (...) which is an expression used by the Father of his Son,
(...).
to set forth that infinite rest he had in him for person and action as our
Mediator, it is a term that notes such large affection as is competent only to
God, such as is a Heaven to him. The Gospel holds forth Christ in this very
frame of love toward man, even as one in Heaven, when he thinks of bringing
man thither, which spirit is called a thing of highest glory, Luke. 2.14.
(...), glory in the highest things? what are those highest things? Peace in
Earth. And what next? (...) rest and solace in men, which is a high thing
indeed, and may well be called one of the highest things of glory, that God
should find rest in man. As God speaks of Christ, so does he of those that
are in him, this is my beloved Son in whom J (...) solace my self, have had
my Heaven from all eternity. And such a thing is it now for God to look in
Christ toward sinners; it is a Heaven to him, it is his rest to lie in the
bosom of a sinner, to lie in the place where his Son lies, though in a
Manger, which is riches of glory indeed, riches which make glory; It Is the
pleasure and the grace of God to save, and so is the word translated, 2 Thessalonians.
2. Where it is used in order to the wicked, having (...) pleasure in
unrighteousness, etc. You may imagine how much the Word does import being used
to set out a sinners love and strongest affection to sin. What a pleasure is
a wicked man's sin to him! Can you express it? why so says God, it is to me
now to look toward poor lost man, and to sit down in his soul. The Word is
used by the Apostle elsewhere, it is my hearts desire that Israel might be
saved, etc. Just as if the Apostle should have said, it would be my Heaven that
Jsrael might come to Heaven, it is my Heaven to think that ever they shall have
Heaven, and O that they might be called; and he speaks there but in the
strain and spirit of the Gospel, the riches of the glory of this mystery that
I am opening, the heart of God and the heart of Christ now to man.

(i) as one in Heaven, a proffer of Life in Life or with Life: and so are all
the dispensations of the Gospel typified, Revel 4. A throne was set in Heaven,
to set out the things of Heaven. Let poor sinners know what is the riches of
the glory of this mystery, and enrich themselves by it. Blessed are they that
know the joyful sound, which words point at Aarons bells; his going into the
holiest of all, made a joyful sound to them that could understand it; it
pointed at Christ offering up his life for us, and yet doing it as it were with
Music, cheerfully and delightfully. You have had this mystery explained all
along my discourse; do you understand it sinners? then enrich your selves with
it.

The Sun is the riches and glory of all the World; such a Sun is the
Gospel of Christ; desire that this Sun may shine into the little World; if
the Sun did not shine in this great World, it could not enrich it nor glorify
it. The Apostle speaks of this very thing, to wit, the Gospel, and under this
Metaphor of the Sun, and he uses such terms as signify in apparition and
illustration. But after that the kindness and gentleness of God appeared,
(...) the word is used to express the second coming of Christ, and that will
be bright and glorious indeed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. (i) in apparition, for otherwise
it had been of no force to those effects which he there mentions, a like
place, 2 Timothy 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior
Jesus Christ who has abolished death and brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel. It is plain by these following words, that the apparition
here spoken of means in apparition; death could not be otherwise destroyed,
nor immortality be brought to light. And the learned agree that the word notes
a mighty shining light that searches every corner of the heart: is the light
that you have of such illustration? has it brought life and immortality to
light ( i a holy life) that never end. There is a great deal of light now in
the World, but when we look how it illustrates it self we are sad, because
it comes to no more ordinarily then the light of a comet that falls, and the
matter that bore it resolving it self into a filthy stinck, to the great
disgrace of the Gospel, to the death of brave persons and Kingdoms. What is it
that makes such bloody work in the Christian World now but this, that the
riches of the glory of this mystery, does nothing in men? this has made a long
night to our brethren the Jews, and is like to do the like to the Gentiles.

The Gospel being riches, prize Christ and his Ministers; let them be glorious
in your eye, which bring glorious things. Know which way the riches of glory
comes to you, it comes but by one gate. Which puts me in mind of a story; In
the County of Saba which signifies a mystery, when Frankincense was brought
into the chief City thereof, it was ordered by the Priests that it should come
in but at one Gate upon pain of death, to wit that which they had consecrated
for that purpose. It Is of lively use, the riches of glory come in but one way,
by Christ and by the Ministry of his Word, and therefore keep open this Cate;
if all the money in your purses will do it, if all the blood in your veins
will do it, let all go rather then this and the Gospel; when this departs
the glory departs, the riches of glory departs.

There is but one thing that is eminently accessory to the destruction of the
riches of glory, and that is hardness of heart. The Balme-Trees when they had
wounded them to get the virtue of them to drop forth, they laid Wool upon
which the drops might fall, that so they might be sure to save it; so to gain
the riches of the glory of the Gospel, to save the drops that fall from Christ's
mouth, you must lay soft hearts, tender and fleshy hearts; otherwise you will
die poor and miserable, notwithstanding all the riches of glory that are
amongst you.

COLOS. 1.27. Among the Gentiles, or in the Gentiles.


(...) Ethnic, This is the word in the original by which we are called, it
may be from (...) two words which signify a mind accustomed to some thing, a
heart evil and only evil, that is, stout enough, and such neither can nor
will be made otherwise: it speaks a nature of sin, a body of death, one in
the flesh and led by the flesh. I will discribe a Gentile to you generally and
particularly: it is one uncircumcised in flesh and spirit, that has not the
external ordinances of Christ, nor the internal efficacy, this is to speak
properly and fully a Gentile, though where the latter is wanting under the
fruition of the former, such are called Gentiles. For that he has brought into
my sanctuary strangers uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to
be in my sanctuary to polluate it; Ese. 44.7. they which are called here
strangers were Gentiles, and their condition is described, they were
uncircumcised in heart and flesh, and this to speak properly and fully is a
Gentile; one that is beside all culture, that that is without the visible
Church, and without the invisible grace of such estate. There is a Gentile in
the flesh, and a Gentile in the spirit, and a Gentile in both. The Apostle,
makes this destinction and in these terms. Wherefore remember that ye being
in times past Gentiles in the flesh were called the uncircumcision by that
which is called the circumcision in the flesh, which is made with hands Ephesians.
2.11. They were Gentiles in the flesh as well as in the spirit, they were such
that had not so much as that circumcision which was made with hands, much less
that circumcision which was made without hands by the spirit.

A Gentile in the spirit, is one ignorant, without God in the World, that is,
without the knowledge of God; it is explained so by another expression like
this, that at that time, ye were without Christ, being Aliens, Ephesians. 2.12. And
by another expression to them that are without the Law as without the Law, 1
Cor. 9.21. that is, such as had no knowledge of the Word of God, nor did
acknowledge any such thing as a rule of life, but their own blind traditions
and customs. Gentilisme is a mere Chaos, a little World lying all in
confusion, darkness upon the face of the deep; the understanding which is as
the face of the soul, blind, not able to find out God in his Word or Works,
what in essence, or what in existence, what he is or what he does, in Heaven,
in Earth, in the soul of man, nor what he will do, though all these expressed,
and told of at large; a Gentile in spirit is one that cannot see God nor feel
after him, that can use neither head nor hand, no reason nor sense divinely;
one that fits in darkness, and cannot stir any power internal or external,
toward the true God. One that fits in darkness, which is an expression I
think in allusion to the Egyptians, who had thick darkness, such obscurity
of darkness as the original says that they saw not any man his brother,
neitheir rose any man from his place for three days mittacheaif de sub se, not
from under himself, or not from off himself, and these were Gentiles, and in
this, I think, the lively type of all Gentiles, who are in such thick
darkness spiritually, that they sit stock still, not one can arise from of
himself, to apprehend any thing out of himself, and above himself; that
which he worships is himself, the imagination of his own brain; his zeal is
seated in blind principles, and this is his God that he knows no God. As I
passed by and beheld your devotion, I found an Altar with this inscription, to
the unknown God, and these were Gentiles, and this blind principle was (...)
Inn^itten or written in them, for the Altar was but an emblem of their heart,
they did hold out by this what was in them, to wit, a God adored, but no body
could tell what, no not they themselves, any further then self; some carnal
fancies hotly pursued, and after no other light would they search with brain
or sense. The Apostle reproves them in this scope, though you have not the Word
of God yet you have had the works of God; if you had pursued these, as blind
men that use their hands in stead of their eyes, and make a good shift to find
their way, you would certainly have found out God to better purpose, then this
inscription quotes, and then relates the story of the Creation, viz. who has
made of one blood all Nations, if happily they might feel after him, (...) the
word notes touching or groaping with the hand, not able to employ
understanding, nor sense about the Word or Works of God, to find out God,
which is just the state of a brute, and so are the Gentiles shadowed to be in
Paul's vision; there were all manner of Beasts, in the sheet that was let down
to him, but nothing else.

A Gentile in spirit is one blind and obstinate, he shuts his eyes against
some things and none must open them, opens his eyes to other things, and none
must shut them: he loves darkness, better then light, and no body must stir
nor wake his love till he please; this obstinacy is well expressed by Christ,
Mat. 18.17. if he [will not] hear the Church, let him be as a Heathen, an
Ethnic which is the same word, with the Text I stand on; if he will not
hear, let him be accounted a Gentile; a Gentile, is a wilful person. Let a
man be in Church State, and under-light, yet if wilful in sin, loving
darkness, and against light, he is as a Heathen, that is, he is a Gentile in
spirit, he is formerly and really a Gentile, only he is not outwardly called
so, he is not called so by men, but he is so by God. The Jews, the greatest
amongst them, the Scribes and Pharisees that instructed company, although of
the Jewish Church, and eminent in Office, yet as obstinate and raging opposers
of Peter and his Ministry, are called by the Spirit of God Ethics; and in the
second Psalm, where the Prophet speaks of Heathenish great ones opposing
Christ, applied it to them as fulfilled in them, Acts 4.25. when they were let
go they reported to their own company, that is, to the rest of the Apostles
and Disciples, all that the chief Priests and Elders had said to them, and
when the Apostles heard it, they lifted up their voice with one accord, and
said, O God which has made Heaven and Earth, who by the mouth of thy servant
David have said, Why do the [Heathen rage] and so forth; and there calls them
Ethnicks Gentiles, and because of this, that they were wilful and raging in
their blindness and wickedness against Christ. This property also of
stubbornness was lively shadowed in that Type of the Gentiles forementioned,
there were such and such kinds of beasts in the sheet that was let down to
Paul, and [wild] beasts, says the Text, to note that this is one eminent
property in an ethnicall spirit, wildness, headiness, obstinacy in his blind
course.

Spiritual gentilisme is opened; have I not done two works at once? opened the
Doctrine, and opened your condition? are ye not Gentiles in heart, though not
so called? truth should be owned whether with us or against us, or there is no
remedy: confession of sin is a necessary Gospel requisite, sinners can have
no mercy without it; if ye lay not open your sin to God, twill lay open you
to God, Angels and men; and a soul laid open by the word, is one found out in
the fact; when God has found out and seized upon a sinner, for him then to
deny the fact or seek to break away from him, as one that breaks bolts, by
being more boisterous in sin, this man will die for it, and not have pardon, no
not hope on it, he will not have his book; there is not the least tender of grace
to the soul, whilst convictions are strangled, but treasuring up wrath against
the day of wrath, to burn hornets in their nest, seeing they will not come
out: convictions stifled is like Powder in a mine, that when sprung it blows
up all, and no fire so terrible as this stifled fire, for renting, and tearing
the soul. A man's soul discovered by truth, God has found out the man, the
effect will be this, the man will now prove a dear friend, or a desperate
enemy to Christ, the vision of convictions make a man fall at the feet of
Christ, or flee in his face, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Wounds that go
to the heart, if they let not out corruption and pride, they make men desperate
and bleed them to death desperately; a proud man stabbed to the heart by the
word, if it be not sanctified to let out his pride, he will spet the blood of
his soul, in the face of him that wounded it.

Are you Gentiles in heart? then be so in name; do not miscall yourselves. It Is
a thousand pities that many are called Christians. You do only but flatter
them, that flatter themselves enough, and too much; you help hug souls to
death. The name of a Christian given to such a one that has not the nature of
a Christian, is satan's chariot, in which he has carried thousands to hell
asleep. Let persons and things be called as they are, let us name things
according to their nature, let Divinity have its name, Morality its name,
Barbarity its name. You give men their several distances, as they stand ranked
by a common providence one to another; but we do not give men their distance
as they stand all rankt by special providence, in order to God and the highest
greatness. Let us follow Christ in this, say, some are near, some are far
off, some are in the Kingdom of God. The Kingdom of God is [in you] says he
to some; it is near you, says he, to others; it is far off from you, says he, to
others. Let us give all persons and things their due distances, in order to
God, as they discover themselves. Do not waste breath vainly, to make a gale,
a pleasant gale, to blow souls faster to hell, Iitten gnatsabeth Prove. 10.10.
which are sailing thither but too fast of themselves; He that winks with his
eye causes sorrow, says Solomon, dabit dolorem, he will give sorrow; he that
puts out his own eyes, and others to, he will give a great deal of sorrow to
others, and yet keep a great deal more for himself; and yet this is common,
blind lead one another neither knows whether.

Make not a bad condition hopeless, it is not so in it self, here. A Gentile
simply as a Gentile, was without hope, because out of road of God. Enter not
by the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not,
Matthew. 10.5, 6. but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, said
Christ when he sent forth the word. The preaching of the word is the means of
life, to whom this is denied death is concluded, the people necessarily perish,
where this vision must not come. This was our condition but it is not now; the
channel of love is turned toward us, not from us; life is come amongst us, as
the expression here is, the riches of this mystery among the Gentiles, or in
them, says the original. The expression notes effectual mercy is now
revealed, an efficacious proffer; a light of life shines amongst us, such as
makes sight, and makes blessedness to us as much as to the Jews; so is this
expression explained, Matthew. 4.16. it is called (...) a great light, and that
which they did see; they which sat in darkness [saw] great light, Matthew. 4.16.
All this was shadowed in giving the promise to Abraham before Circumcision, and
before the Law, to note that the Uncircumcision, to wit, the Gentiles, should
be partakers of the promise, as well as the Circumcision: And the Scripture
foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen, through faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham, that is, before the Law, saying, in thee, and in thy
seed, shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Gentiles, you that see your
selves such, Dogs, Wolves, Lions, effectual mercy is tendered to you. You that
lie in the high way and villages, blind, lame, halt, you are invited; the
others had their excuses, some had bought Oxen, others Farms, others had
married wives; the meaning is, covetousness and voluptuousness, carnality did
cut off the carnal Jew, and nothing but this will cut off you too. Undervalue
every thing in order to Christ, which now invites you to him: the creature has
our hearts, which is a strange act, a man stretching out himself for the
grave. The lust of the Gentiles spoils them; it was shadowed by the Prodigal;
if any of you be come to your selves, like him, to return and look after
Christ, you may find grace and mercy as he did; If you find your hearts
averse, Christ will by his Word, if you attend it, persuade them. And he
reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath, says the Scriptures of Paul, and
persuaded the Jews [and the Greekes] Acts 18.4. the Spirit of Christ, is a
Spirit of persuasion now, to the Greeks, that is to the Gentiles as well as to
the Jews. Persuasion, notes the power of the Word, the Word carried to the
heart, and this Christ has engaged himself to do, Hosea 2.14. Gnal libbah.
Therefore behold I will allure thee, and bring her into the wilderness and
speak [comfortably] to her, the word is, to the heart. I will allure her, and
speak to her heart. God in them engaged himself to us, and stands obliged now
to every poor soul that complains of his averseness to Christ, to allure
these souls, and to speak to their heart.

COLOS. 1.27. Which is Christ in you.


AS there is an external society, body with body, so there is an internal
society, spirit with spirit. God is a spirit and suits his society; he moves
about corporeals, but holds communion and fellowship only with spirits, draws
out himself here, his face, and his heart; that is communion, where one draws
out his heart. If any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercy, Phil.
2.1. the latter explaines the former, what (...) the communion of the Spirit
means, to wit, such an internal operation, as whereby the spirit of man is
made like the Spirit of God for bowels and mercies, and so for all other Divine
dispositions, a drawing out his own heart, and his nature in ours, partakers
of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. There is (...), and (...), a communion of the
Spirit, and a communion of the Divine nature I think the terms are
expository, and note the Spirit so effectually operating in the soul of man,
as imparting its own nature to it; such an operation or communication of
Christ as this, is called Christ in us, because he leaves his Image and
similitude in us; as you say sometimes of children, his fathers spirit is in
him; and this is spoken similitudinaliter not formaliter, because of that
similitude and oneness of disposition, that is between father and child. God
was in Christ, that expression points not at the Divine essence, nor cannot be
proper speech so applied, but at Divine existence, noting how the persons in
the Trinity do act one in and by another; Christ's being in us, carries some
proportion to this, and is so applied by the Apostle. The eyes of our
understanding being enlightened, that we might know the exceeding greatness of
his power to usward, who believe according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought [in Christ] when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19. God
was in Christ, that is, he did put forth an exceeding great power in him, and
by this wrought in and by him exceeding great things, raised him from the dead;
so says the Apostle, Christ is in us; what is that? why he does put forth an
exceeding great power in us; and by this raises us from the power of sin,
satan, and self, and enables us to walk as spiritually alive, that is,
according to the will of the Spirit of Christ, and not according to our own
lust; Divine communion at such a height as makes union and similitude to
Christ, speaks Christ in us according to the Scripture using of this phrase.
No act that Christ did for us, but there is a (...) a communion of the virtue
of it in us; life, death, resurrection, ascension, that is, an importing of the
same Spirit and power that did all these in Christ, according to such a
measure, as to work similitude to all these in us. That I may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his suffering, or the
participation of his suffering (it is (...)) being made conformable to his death,
(...) configuratus, made together in likeness, one shapt and formed by
another, so exact, that there is a consimilitude, one form in two, as it were;
consimilitude with Christ, is Christ in us.

The expression being opened, do but note one thing, what a forlorn seat
Christ chooses in this world! great ones choose seats suitable to their rank,
places of great worth, rich, fertile, pleasant. You may see the course of great
ones in this by Lot, he chose the plain of Jordan, which was for fertility and
pleasantnes like the garden of God, Genesis 13.19. Christ chooses the poorest and
the meanest place in all the world; the poorest and meanest place in all the
world, is the soul of man, this is poor in extremity, poor and naked, Revel.
3. your souls are stark naked: your bodies have some covering, and some
estate; but your souls are destitute of all, not a ragge of covering, not a
farthing of estate, utterly destitute. That which makes wealth and worth upon
the soul, is the beams of loving kindness shining upon them, and these are
utterly gone from the soul. My loving kindness will I not utterly take from
you. It Is a speech of dread, and hints what is our state naturally; Christ is
utterly gone from the soul, not a beam of loving kindness shines upon it.
There is nothing (to speak properly) within or without, that estate, but that
which has loving kindness wrapped up in it; things thus considered, man is the
poorest creature in all the world, in the front of wrath, not any thing he
has, within or without, that has a beam of loving kindness. What Job
speaks of some externally, that may be said of him, and of all us internally
and naturally considered. He called them children of fools, yea children of base
men, Job 30.8. Beni beli Sem, children without name, that is, without any
worth. As some are externally of no worth, so are all of us internally,
consider our condition naturally, and our souls are namelesse souls,
worthless souls: if you will give a name to your souls, you cannot in
justice give them any name that imports any worth, but such as may import
worthlesnesse to the utmost. The prodigal when he came to see the poverty of
his inside, said, call me not by any name of worth, let my soul go namelesse
of any such title, I am not worthy to be called [thy son.] We may not be
called possessours of any thing naturally, no, not heirs to any thing that is
Divinely good; we are creatures of no hope in our natural condition, nothing
in possession, nor nothing in reversion, and yet such beggarly creatures Christ
uses to sit down in. Meek sitting upon an Ass, Math. 21.5. An Ass is the
poorest and the despisedst thing one of them that is, and yet this Christ
chooses to make his seat. Base things of the world, things which are despised
has God chosen, says the Apostle; and as if this were not enough to set forth
the worthlesnesse of the things he chooses for his seat, he adds (...) and
non existentia, and things which are not, that have no existence; our souls
are so far from any bravenesse of being, that it is most proper to say, they
have no being at all; if you will call your souls any thing, call them things
which are not; and yet in these things which are not, that is, of any worth,
does Christ look him out a seat and dwelling, Which is Christ in you.

The seat which Christ chooses is very mean, and very unclean, which is the
second particular, which speaks the forlornnesse of a thing. Poor people and
poor houses when cleanly, are desirable; but usually poor persons are nasty
and filthy too; which makes them loathsome to us; and yet Christ chooses the
poorest and the filthiest places for his seat. Your uncleanest part is your
inside, the soul is the sink of the man, very excrement, very rottenness;
Psalm 5.9. wickednesses; Havvoth.
the expression notes extention, not a room in the soul, but foul, very
foul; so that it is more proper to call every faculty, and every operation,
every organ, and organization wickedness, then wicked. You have Elihu setting
out this to Job notably; Why is thy spirit turned against God? and then
speaking about the spirit of man, sets it out to the life what it is: it is
filthy, says he; it stinks, it stinks abominably: this is the case of every
man, says he. What man is he that is borne of a woman that he should be
clean? he puts no trust in his Saints, Job 15.16. Nithgnab. Neelach.
the heavens are not clean in his sight: how much more abominable and filthy
is man abominable and stinking? The same word is used, Psalm 14.3. and so
translated in the Margin, stinking: and this does agree notably with the type;
the grave, which is called the heart of the earth, does but resemble the heart of
man, and there Christ took up his seat and his lodging; and what more filthy
than the grave? it is stinking, nothing like it, stinking abominably; and yet in
this does Christ take up his seat, his rest, his solemnest rest; no place that
is so solemnly possessed and taken up as the grave; the seat which Christ has
here is a grave; our souls are a Golgotha; and yet in no place does Christ so
solemnly seat himself, as in the soul of man.

It Is a mean place, it is an unclean place that Christ chooses to sit down in
here, and yet this is not all, it is a place much haunted, which is the last
particular, which speaks the forlornnesse of a place: you take but a fancy that
this place and that is haunted with evil spirits, and you will not sit down
in such a place for all the world: this is real and no fancy concerning your
souls; there is no place in all the world, hell excepted, so haunted with
evil spirits, as the soul of man, that room within us. Come out of the man
thou unclean spirit, says Christ; and Christ asked him his name, and he said my
name is Legion, for we are many; but how many? that the devil himself could
not tell, or would not, Mark 5.9. The invisible world is more populous then the
visible: you have an innumerable company of evil spirits haunting one soul:
the numerousnesse of diabolical spirits infesting the soul, is hinted by that
similitude of our Savior, comparing them to Fowls that flock to their prey;
Some fell by the high way, and the Fowls came and gathered it up, says the
Text: Rev. 16.14.
There be flocks of Crows, and Rooks, and Ravens, and black foul in the air.
And then, they are called Locusts in the Revelation, a creature more populous
then any: History writes of them, that they foresee a famine, and then leave
such parts, and flee in such a mighty company, that like a great thick cloud
they darken the Sun for a great compass, that whole countries of people see them
as they flee, and fear lest they will light where they live, and devour all.
There is another title given to diabolical spirits, to note etheir
populousness in the pursuit of the soul of man; the devil is called
Beel-zebub, an Idol, or God of flies, intimating that those evil spirits that
haunt our souls here, are as thick as swarms of flies. There is another
Scripture that speaks to this point, Math. 7.21. This kind goes not out, etc.
There are it seems diverse kinds of evil spirits. The result of all is this,
Christ uses a very forlorn seat in this world.

There is a necessity of this, if he have to do with us: for there are no
other seats to be found here. It speaks the great condiscension of Christ, and
should be taken notice of by us, and mentioned to his honor. [Meek] sitting
upon an Ass. Consider or this expression how divine condiscension is observed
and extold. Had not Christ been very meek and full of humility, he had never
stoopt so low as to take a dwelling in us: the word you translate meek is
(...), the Latin word parvus comes from it, which signifies little, meekness
and humility is that which does little one. The great God, oh how does he
little himself to come to live in us! how does he obscure his glory to lie in
a Stable, and in a Manger, brutish filthy places! and yet those did but typifie
where his internal lodging, as God, is, to wit, in a stinking, loathsome,
hellish place, the souls of men; the highest, the perfectest purity, to seat
himself in the perfect'st impurity; The Apostle when he speaks of something a
this side this, he calls it humbling and debasing himself: he humbled himself
to the death, yea to the grave, yea to a spiritual grave, not only to at base
place for his body, which was quickly over, but to a base place for his soul,
to wit, our souls, which grave lasts a great while. Thou will not leave my
soul in grave: yes, it is left in our souls; and what is this but a grave? a
place of rottenness? a continent of devils? an uppermost, though not a
nether most hell? Can a hell praise God? Can the grave praise Christ? The
Scripture seems to put an impossibility upon what I exhort to. I am exhorting
the grave to praise Christ, that he would come there: if it be possible let
the grave praise Christ, let your souls which are the spiritual graves of
Christ, open their mouths and make a resurrection of him and of his love, that
lies there. Take up Hannah's song, The Lord kills and makes alive, he
brings down to the grave, and brings up; the Lord makes poor and makes
rich, he brings low and lifts up: He raises the poor out of the dust, and
lifts up the beggar from the dung-hil to set them among Princes, and to make
them inherit thrones of glory; for the pillars are the Lords, and he has set
the world upon them, etc.

O grave I will be thy victory: and the Apostle applies this spiritually, and
cheares the godly, the grave, death, and hell, they are all within you, and
there lies Christ, and he will be the destruction of all; though your souls be
as the grave, full of rottenness, full of filthy smells, a thousand times worse
than any grave in the world; yet he that sweetened the corporal grave by lying
in it, he will sweeten this before Christ has done with the soul; he will not
leave the least ill favor in it, not any thing that is sin, or looks like
it; not any evil spirit, not any wicked spirit shall fifth you, haunt you; he
will make the place where he lies even as pure and perfect as heaven: what is
that which kills good people in this world, but when the grave opens and they
see their misdeeds, and smell how loathsome they are: you see the grave open,
you must also think who lies there as it were buried: you must as she Martha.
look for the living amongst the dead, and remember what Christ has said, That
he will be the victory, and rest, and cheer your souls with this; has
Christ conquered the greater hell, and will he not conquer the lesser? has he
made victory over the grave, in which he lay under infinite wait of sin and
wrath? and will he not make victory over that grave, where some sins lie and
no wrath? Certainly he will turn the grave into a Palace, and furnish it
royally, and so hang it that it shall do any one good to behold it. The soul
is Christ's in-room, and he is very curious about this; all appurtinances to it
shall be like the possessour of it, very exact, there shall be nothing called
lignum, as the Roman Dames were wont to say, that is, meare wood.

COLOS. 1.27. Hope of glory.


DIvine things at a distance have their influence upon the soul; a word of
heaven sets the soul a longing and looking after it, and this is called hope.
Hope speaks an heir under age, knowing his inheritance, and expecting
possession; writings are thoroughly read, propriety plainly found out, evidence
about the man, yea evidence in him to show: Christ [in you] the hope of glory.

As corporal nourishment passes through several concoctions, and the last
the noblest, so does spiritual nourishment: Hope is the last concoction of the
soul, the last digestion of words and works, by which pure blood, spirits,
substance and strength is delated and defused all over the state. The Scripture
makes three concoctions, as Nature does corporal, and Hope is the last;
Tribulation works Patience, Patience Experience, Experience Hope: and now the
spirit has spirit, has it self, strength, setlednesse, therefore it follows,
and hope confounds not. Providence toumbles the soul, and the soul toumbles
providence, and the first result of this is patience, the second result
experience; what God is at present; and in the breast of this sits hope, what
God will be, and smiles: till things work to this last issue, the soul is
confounded, as the Apostle speaks.

Hope sucks the sweet of the words and works of God to the bottom: that which
lies in the bottom of all, God says and does to a Christian, is heaven, what
ever lies utmost; the end is eternal life still to a Saint, what ever things
are a this side. Things look variously sometimes to a near sight, and
explicit repugnancy betwixt words and works, between such an end, and such
means ordained to it, and yet all in an ultimate interpretation, carry an
exact subordination to the souls highest good. Hope is a great Peer privy to
the depth of wisdom, to the intentions and resolutions of God, and to the
harmony of all changes and turnings, how, when, and where they will meet in
such a blessed end, and lies, and bathes, and sports her self in the
consistances of all varieties with and toward her prime good: it is a grace to
which felicity is always in view, a halcyon that finds out a quiet place upon
the most moving and boisterous body, to wit, the sea.

Hope, it is a soul free from a Consumption, fat and merry, eats not out its
own spirits, nor its own marrow. Some kind of Spiders eat out the Dam which
sits upon them, as soon as hatched: so do the thoughts and apprehensions of
some souls kill the mind and spirit that brings them forth, they are such
poisonous and eating things, they are so venomous, so fiery, so dark, so
gnawing, so void of heaven, of any glimpse of it, and so full of hell, I reckon
upon my afflictions from morning to night, says Hezekiah, and I have cut off
mine own life; his soul hatched such thoughts in time of distress, as did
gnaw out the bowels and. life of it self, that affliction became as death,
and death as hell, which is the property of despair and unbelief, to render
persons as destroyed and damned already, as that expression is. As there be
souls damned already, and in hell already, so there be souls saved already,
and in heaven already: in heaven, whilst looking for it, apprehension of it in
Christ so strong, so clear, what ever accidentals turmoile the outward man the
while. Accounting that the long-suffering of the Lord [is] salvation, 2 Pet.
3.15. it is a soul that has so clear an apprehension, of the issue of all
sufferings for Chirst, that the issue of them is in him already: what he
expects is to him already in a degree, in judgment and account, judging that
the long-suffering of God [is] salvation; yea not only in judgment, not only
in strong evidence and conviction, but in sweet contemplation, delectation and
fruition, for it is a grace that speaks the love of God shed abroad in the
soul; and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed: why? because the soul
now has a good part what it hopes for; Because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given to us, Romans 5.5.

Vanity; upon thy heart, Thou have deluded me.

I know not what will be the issue of these evil times, death is gathering to
the heart apace, to the heart of Kingdoms, Estates, and the like; if it be
there already in order to your souls, truly Justice is quick with you, and
you had need look about you. In swoning fits cordials be necessary, something
to be taken inwardly, that is Christ, he fetches life and hope: Christ [in you]
the hope of glory. Sinful fearful wretches, there is nothing in you, but
nature and the old man, therefore are you so weak and wicked in your course,
so dreadful in apprehension about the end. Men would do much sometimes in
their own strength, when a lively word takes hold on them, (but this cannot
be) never considering how desolate all within is. Your eyes are not in your
head, as the wise man speaks, that is, they are not in your heart, you see
nothing within as you should. When conscience is fired by the word, you think
to do this and that presently and then all will be well; and then fail in the
action, and so increase the flame. Conscience when a fire must have something
dropped in to it, (things done without are nothing) to wit the blood of Christ.
Not a sparkle of hell is alayed without blood, without the blood of Christ, or
the blood of the soul. Application of remedy must be as the distress lies,
your hell is within you, and Christ must descend into hell, to do a sinner
good, to set his soul in rest and hope, he must go into the World, to save
it, (...), Heb. 10.5. Christ must come into this World, and then into the heart
of man that is in it, into the great World, and then into the little World,
which he is willing to do, and so expresses himself, Heb. 10.5. When be
in-entereth the World, sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have
thou fitted me. Christ is fitted and ready to make in entrance, and this
in-entrance is that, which makes peace and hope in the soul. Christ centered
in the heart is at rest, when Christ is at rest in us, we are at rest in him.

COLOS. 1.27. Hope of [Glory.


It Is hard to open this term, yet it will be meet to make at it a little: if
one can but get a glimpse of glory by humble industry, it will be worth the
while; a little of Heaven and for but a little while, as Paul had, when on
earth, it is very sweet in our sad and forelorne state. Glory is absolute
perfection, as things come short of this they are defective, all defect
destroys glory, as glory is strictly and properly taken, so it is here: there
be several glories: the utmost of every such a being, is its glory. That may
be called glory in order to a Plant, or a Brute, which may not be so called in
order to man, his being is so vast, and so receiving, unless this vast being,
be filled up, and every vein and rivelet run as many fadome deep as they should,
and as they did, when first made out from the fountain, man cannot be said to
be in glory. And therefore to speak properly, glory is a garment which God
only wears and such as sit in his bosom, who have there that which is else no
where, the utmost of such vast beings; this is general.

We must by the command of our Text, speak of glory precisely in order to man,
and what that is you shall see in Christ, who brought man's glory from Heaven
for him, and in the person and nature of man, wore it here, though the World
could not see it, a curtain of flesh being drawn before it, but the Saints
then living, saw a glimpse of it in him. And the word was made flesh and dwelt
amongst us, and we beheld his glory as the glory, of the only begotten of the
Father full of grace and truth, John. 1.14. The first Adam lost his glory;
Christ held it, though the World far otherwise, and far worse then when Adam
lived in it. What was Adams glory? The Image of God. What was Christ's glory?
The same: full of grace and truth. Were we but full of grace and truth, we
should be in glory, in Heaven here as Christ was. What was Christ's glory, is
our glory: his fullness was in way of unction and Office, and so shows and
assures, what is, and what shall be our glory.

Glory is holiness and joy, in fullness: therefore is Heaven called a holy
Heaven, Psalm. 20.6; Christ's fullness fully imparted, grace for grace; The soul
come to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. The glory of the
eyes, is to see, and to see perfectly; and so of the ear, and so of every
other Organ Sin has rackt the soul and pulled every lim out of joint, bu^
they are set again by Christ here for a little use, but not so as they shall
be; we go lame, and go in pain, our very holiness is halting and afflicting,
there is no glory in that. So far as we come short of the Will of God
habitually or actually, we come short of glory. We all sin and come short
of the glory of God. The expression notes what is glory, to wit, full
congruitie to the Will of God, such a congruity as excludes all sin. Our
inheritance is undefiled (...), 1 Pet. 1.4. it is unspotted and cannot be
defiled; the word used in the original, is the name of a precious stone too,
which do what you will to it, you cannot blemish it; throw it into fire, it is
taken out still more bright and clear; such is our inheritance and state
above, a glory that has no in-glory or dis-glory, nor nothing can make
disglorious; can any spot the Sun, though they should throw dirt at it? not the
shadow of sin above, or imperfection, nor can by any diabollical art be
made; there be that set their mouths against Heaven, Psalm. 73.9. that
blaspheme the Tabernacle of Heaven, and yet cannot spot grace and truth here,
much less can it be spotted above. Every one goes all clean above, inside,
outside, and nothing can defile either, they are of such an amiantous nature:
there is no having and then losing above.

Jf ye keep my Commandments ye shall abide in my love even as I have kept
my Fathers Commandment and abide in his love; these things have I spoken unto
you that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. Could
we walk in Christ's Commandments as he did in his Fathers, we should live in
his bosom here, and be embraced with such embracements and raptures as he was.
If we had Christ's holiness, we should have Christ's joy remain in us, and
then our joy would be full: these things have I spoken to you that [my joy
might remain in you] that is such a joy as I have, that has no want nor no
expression, it is so full of glory and so full of sweetness (for that is the
reason Christ gives it such a name my joy, because the nature of it is
unexpressable in our terms, or in any Language amongst the Sons of men) in a
suffering condition, when the soul holds tite in obedience, through the power
of Christ it comes then mighty near Heaven, and then observe what it has, it
has Christ's joy, joy full and beyond expression, joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Full, joy is full of glory it is the spring of the Year, all things
green and flourishing, smiling and singing. These things hint their state above
and what glory is, it is fullness of holiness and joy; as the one is
proportioned to Christ, so is the other, we have his stature and his measure in
both, brimfull. Our state here is a state of reception; and therefore asking
and praying continual work; their state above is a state of plenitude, and
therefore praying and asking work quite over; ask and you shall receive says
Christ; ask that your joy may be full, John. 16.24. Ask that asking work and
begging work may be over; there be no beggars in Heaven, no not for joy,
though that be a top mercy. Defect in joy is from the distance of something
that the soul reaches at; there is no longing in Heaven; that which we
account a mercy here is an affliction there: to thirst and pant after such and
such Divine things, such and such heigths and depths of grace, we account it a
great mercy to find our souls in such a frame here; and yet this would be
misery above; there is no panting nor thirsting after any thing, because no
distance of any thing that is blessed; there is no darkness, no twilight, no
cloud of a hand breadth all that Heaven over, to hide any thing from any soul
to sad him; all there, have all plain and open to them, abundance of
Revelations, a Hyperbole of Revelations, it is the expression of him that was
there a little while. (...).
Least J should he exalted above measure, through the abundance of the
Revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7. it is abundance of Revelations indeed, for it is a
personal beholding of God, and that is a Hyperbole of Revelations you will all
grant, and yet it is very true, and me thinks very plainly set out Exodus 33.17,
18, 19, 20. at the eighteen verse this is Moses request, J beseech thee show
me thy glory; observe how God answers to this at the 20 verse. thou can not
see my face; by which is interpreted what is meant by Gods glory, to wit, his
face; what Moses before called Gods glory, that God himself, when he comes to
English it to us, calls his face: but what then is meant by Gods face? why this
also in the next words God himself interprets, There shall no man see [mee]
and live, expressing his person, so that the glory of God according to Gods
own interpretation is a personal beholding of God, and this is a hyperbole of
revelations indeed, and that which makes a hyperbole of joys indeed [thou]
shall make me full of joy with [thy countenance] Acts 2.28. which is a place
parallel with the former, and points at the personal vision of God, which and
which only makes full joy to the soul of man.

COLOS. 1.28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

29. Whereunto I also labor striving according to his working, which works
in me mightily.


THe call of God, by whom, to whom, and to what, are the generals expressed, and
amplified in these two verses. The call of God now, is by men, whom we preach,
and whereunto [J] also labor.

Sin is punished, weakness condescended to; immediate commerce was our
life, it is now our death; we cannot see God, nor hear God and live (take both
in a parallel speech) but we shall do both: 'Twas shadowed by the mediation
of Moses, who talked with God upon the Mount, and in the Tabernacle; (which
shadowed Heaven; as our spiritual Tabernacles now do) Face to face as a man
talks with his friend, Exodus 33.11. there was very immediate vision and
commerce; though not personal, yet as near it as it was possible for our
frail condition to bear, to be strongly preaching and confirming what Christ
our Mediator will one day bring us to again, in that holy of holies, that
glorious Tabernacle, where now he himself officiates.

The call of God is by men, to men; by some selected, to all in general; whom
[wee] preach warning [every man and teaching every man. Earth to earth;
Potsherds strive with Potsherds of the Earth; we must beseech and entreat
every one, and with every degree of patience; we must be beggars at every ones
door for Christ, for earth to go to Heaven, and if it will not be, earth must
shake off earth against earth; we must shake off the dust of our feet against
Adams sons: Earth is used to save, or to destroy earth, Goliath is killed with a
stone, a little heap strikes down a great. Goliath some think may signify a
great heap, which if so, name and person did agree: and David who was but a
little man, and with a little stone, strikes down this great person: Earth
kills earth, and earth buries earth, earth rings the Funeral of earth: by us
though poor earthen Vessels, Christ sounds and sets forth who are dead
eternally.

You know the call of God by whom it is, and to whom it is: to what it is, is
the next general, particularly to be spoken to. We are called to a perfect
person, and in him to a perfect condition, That we may present every man
[perfect] in Christ Jesus. Divine vocation is in opposition to diabolical
avocation; we were called from God by Satan, and God called us to him again,
simply, and circumstantially (i) not only to him, but as fully to him as ever,
to be (...) toti dilecti, wholly beloved:

Having thus divided the verses, we will begin with the first clause thereof,
whom we preaeh. The original word (...) whom we exactly show, or fully
declare, (...) in this composition notes a superlative, and is to intend the
expression like as it does Luke 12.58. where our Savior says of conscience,
that it should not only (...), but (...), That is, thoroughly draw, or
perfectly draw. The word thus opened, that which I would stand on is this, That
Gospel administration makes exact illumination. the Gospel has a peculiar
Idiom, nothing speaks so plain and so full of every thing concerning man, as
this does. It Is (...) as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14.9. a word very
significative, (i) very plain and very full; every administration humane,
conducing to illumination, speaks darkely, and by halves, no language yields,
vox been significans: therefore are they which lean upon these helps children
of darkness, notwithstanding all their light, their hearts and lives full of
lies, a lie is in their right hand. (i.) In that wherein they are confident
they are intelligent, they understand nothing: Gospel adminstration makes that
which the old Testament calls (...), Col. 3.24. Noting certain knowledge.
and the new Jadang Isa. 6.9.
Perception, a looking through things, (i.) it makes every thing transparent,
manifest quite through, outside, and inside. Ye see indeed, but perceive not:
it is as if the Prophet had said, ye do not Gospelly apprehend; your reception
makes not perception, not vision quite through as does the Gospel: therefore
is the light of the Church of Christ compared to a stone most precious, as
Jasper, Crystal. He carried me away in the spirit, says John, and showed me
the great City, holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven, having the glory of
God, and [her light was like to a stone most precious] even like to a Jasper
stone, Revel. 21.11. Like to this is Cant. 6.10. Who is she that looks forth
as the morning, fair as the Moon, [cleare as the Sun!] By all which Metaphors
is made manifest, that what light the gospel gives, is very clear.

will not enter, Rectum non potuit ingredi, 'twill not go in; they were so
crooked, that right things and straghit things could not be made to go in:
Thus you complain, and thus you see God complains; he is sensible of
painfulnesse and successelesenesse as you are. The Metaphor is taken from dense
obdurate things, as stones, earth, which are such things of all other, that
light can make least entrance into. The earth is the most deading and repelling
body of resplendency of any body: They that are but a little way under the
earth, are darker many fathom, then they that are under water, because
Sunne-rayes can enter this body, and make light down to the bottom, though
very deep. As it is with bodies under earth, so it is with souls: worldlings,
earthy wretches, your souls are under earth, you are in great darkness, and
light cannot come at you. The things under which your souls are, do so dead
and dampe it out; incarnall souls there are great damps, which put out all the
light that is brought in; know therefore what God complains of: God burdened
with any soul, that soul can be in no good condition; a soul in utter
darkness, I mean, in such darkness where no light can come, is abused both
by fancy and conscience; deluded, tormented, and final and fatal wrath brings
up the rear. In darkness, fancy is a brave light, an approved guide; and alas
what conception of divine things this makes! Christ is I know not what, and I
know not from whence, any thing that the soul will, any thing that sin will
to make a long life for it self in the soul. We know whence this man is, but
when Christ comes no man knows whence he is, Joh. 7.27. What a strange
Chimera is Christ to fancy! a big nothing! to carnal apprehension Christ is
such a one as comes no man can tell whence. Fancy raises things so high, that
no body can see them; this tumor in the spirit, it is such profound wisdom,
that it turns man into a fool, and God into nothing. The fool has said in
his heart there is no God. He does not speak such words formally; but his
fancy resolved, and his conception of God rightly expressed, speaks God no God
(i.) they speak such things of God as are inconsistent to such a holy being,
and so destroy God.

God murdered, his blood cries in man's conscience; moral light is made to
torment, when Divine light cannot enter; The higher rejection of God, the
greater guilt falls upon Conscience; this is not all: The light a man has in
this case, shall not serve him so much as to shift with, to evade the Huy and
Cry of Conscience, but be armed against a man, and quickly to take hold on the
Felon so guilty, and very resolutely, and irresistibly give the soul up to
conscience, shift how it will, or how it can. Shimei was a rough-spirited man,
and hid from the Hue and Cry of his own conscience some space of time in that
business about his dogged carriage to David, wherein he resisted some divine
beams: but what they were, and how many, and how big, and bright, I know not:
all his carriage in that bad business he called perverseness, and against his
Lord and King; and was himself of the house of Joseph, and therefore it is
probable had some principles of light more then ordinary distilled in that Line,
and yet all those black circumstances of ill carriage toward David, not seen
by Shimei a great while; at last they all revive, and Shimei's light quickened
upon him, and by how much the greater in it self, the greater now against him,
and gives him up, will he, ^ill he, to a tormenting conscience. The words of
the Story are these; and speak all that I have spoken, and more. Shimei came
voluntarily to David as he passed over Jordan, one of the first of all the
house of Joseph, and falls down at David's feet, Do not remember that which
thy servant did perversely that the King should put it to his heart, for thy
servant does know that I have sinned, 2 Samuel 19.20. Did not Shimei know that he
had sinned before now? that he had rejected David as King, and so in him
Christ? No doubt: but he made shift to hide things from Conscience till now,
now his light was quickened and strengthened upon him, and would serve to darken
things no longer, but to brighten and to clear them, and so irresistibly, and
with strong hand to give him up to the pursuer; and thus will all your light
serve you, who reject the clear light of the Gospel, and rest in other dark
lights.

The light a man has and abuses, to keep out more and better light, Christ
will make this in the conclusion, to give up the man to conscience; now is the
man delivered up to the adversary indeed, which is called in the original
(...), from (...), contra, and (...) vindicta, such an adversary as does make
revenge against one; when your carnal light has delivered you up to
conscience for abusing of it, conscience will be a revenger against you, 'twill
revenge the quarrel of Christ, according to all that he has against you:
Vindiction of Conscience, ah, what a thing it is! it is a Granado shot into the
house in the night when all are abed and asleep, which awakens with a witness,
breaks open, tears open windows, doors, eyes, bowels, and fetches the sleeper
out peece-meale, and does Satan's work to his hand, and makes a slaughterhouse
at home, and then brings every thing ready quartered out, and lays all piece
by piece, joint by joint, faculty by faculty at hell door, as near Infinite
Wrath as it is possible for things to be laid in this life. None kills so
cruelly, nor buries her dead so forlornely, so near Hell as Conscience does.

You that find the truth of this point, that Gospel administration has
maturated understanding, made your light exact, you will be very blessed
souls, you will be very quick in application of divine things, and
proportionable in the fruition of them, blessing of them, you will not set
short in duty nor rewards. At what hight we are in the understanding of Christ,
we are in love to him; if perfect in one, so in the other; if perfect in light,
perfect in love; if perfect in affection, perfect in action; for love is fire;
fire does ascend all of it, every spark; and therefore your burnt offerings
were called gnola, ascension, because they did all ascend in a flame. Full
Light will make you gnola, an whole ascension, holocautomata, a whole burnt
offering; all ascending in a flame to Christ, that did so for us to God. Divine
Light carries Energy with it, all tools and instruments whereby all faculties
and organs are made answerable to the eyes it opens; it makes not a blind man
open his eyes and lie still, but opens eyes in order to legs and arms, and all
other joints; when God opens eyes, he opens cares, opens all: David is a
demonstration of this, and Christ. Sacrifice and offering thou would not,
Charitha.
but mine ears have thou opened, dug open. Eyes were dug open, and ears
together; when David knew what God would have, his Light warmed and opened his
heart, and made that obedient unto it: and so Christ, if you apply the words to
him, when he opened his Commission at his journeys end, when come into the
flesh, and into this world, and unto offering age, to Priestly maturty for that
Office, and saw what kind of offering God expected, not such offering as under
the Law, the bodies of beasts, but his own body, his Light inflamed his heart,
and he proclames his Commission, what body he might offer, a body have thou
prepared [me;] and he longed to give it to its intended use, when he knew the
intention of God concerning it: there is a proportion to this, in all the
revelations of the same light in our hearts; Christ puts his honor here upon
us as he does above; as we shall have what he has in heaven, so we have in a
degree what he had on earth; his spirit, and his peace, his light and his life:
our life is said to be hid in him; it is bravely typified I think, Numbers 27.20.
Put some of thy honor upon him, says God to Moses, concerning Joshua; their
Unctions were communicative under the Law: to shadow that, so should Christ's
Unction under the Gospel be communicative unto us; you will be a whole
ascension, which have a whole light; and he that ascends wholly to Heaven,
must needs have a sweet and blessed life on it.

COLOS. 1.28. Warning every man.


(...). The word here used may be pursued strictly, according to what it
signifies as so compounded, or it may be considered largely, according to what
it signifies, as so in several Scriptures used. The composition of the word,
notes a putting of a thing into the mind from (...) which signifies the mind,
and (...) which signifies to put. Divine words reach the heart, they put
themselves into the mind, and into the soul. This resolution of the Text
makes resolution to that question, Job 38.36. Who has put wisdom into the
inward parts, or who has given understanding to the heart? The words of Christ
do this and nothing else; these do (...), put things into the soul, wisdom
and understanding into the inward parts.

The words of God have the advantage of their matter; they are pure. Justice is
of Majesty, what shines with the beams of this is strongly impressive; O how
forcible are right words, says Job, that is words made up of rightousnesse,
and thus are all Gods words necessarily, his breath is as himself pure. Breath
is a very internal thing; this stinking speaks something filthy in the inward
parts. God is light, and [in him] is no darkness. Satan comes and finds
nothing [in me.] No impurity, no unrighteousness in God, he must needs
therefore breath purely. Purity is of great Majesty; when Adam bore the Image
of God, his words were as thunder to all the creation; his words, yea his
looks went through and through. Purity and Majesty be joynd together, Cant.
6.10. Clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners; what is pure, is
of great power and Majesty.

The words of Christ have the advantage of their form. God opens his mouth in
righteousness, and in wisdom. Some have good breath, but not good brains and
gutterals to shape it and utter it. Children come to the birth and cannot be
delivered, or else delivered too soon, untimely births are not taking to look
upon none lodge such in their bosoms. Indiscretion turns the point and edge
of things that otherwise are very penetrating. The words of the wise are like
goades and nails, they go into the heart: wisdom takes the utmost of all
advantage, which is very forcible, she sits her down in the center of a
business, and takes into her bosom all the small lines that do circumstance
it, and so makes her motion in every thing effectual, heart-reaching, and
heart-working. The heart is put for wisdom in the old Testament, and I think
for this reason, because wisdom is that which brings in all to the heart,
words, works, that which makes every thing like goads and nails, piercing, or
like honey dewes, so king, melting. Behold God is mighty, and despises not
any, he is mighty in strength and wisdom, Choach leb Job 36.5.
it is strength and heart, or strength of heart. Wisdom is that which brings in
things in strength to the heart, and so makes it strong upon the heart.
Strength and wisdom are joynd together here, things that we say or do are of
strength, as this conjunction is kept, which is never separated in order to
God. No word of God, no work of God, but uttered and wrought in wisdom, which
makes all his words like goads and nails in entering.

The words of God have the advantage of their end. They are spirit and life,
that is, they are intended above all words, to be spiritually forcible, they
are appointed to be the Sword of the Spirit, that by which one spirit should
reach another; the Spirit of God, the Spirit of man and e contra. And take unto
you the Helmet of salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God. The Sword (...) from (...), says a critic, that which fetches blood
with delight; that which joys to go into the veins, and into the heart, the
seat of life. Things move delightfully to their end, to that scope and center
to which they are appointed. The center of the word is the soul of man, the
words of God sink down into the ears. Let these words sink down into your
ears, says Christ, they are directed from one spirit to another; they may
knock without, but they will be restless, till they get in, into affection,
or else into conscience, into the marrow and joints, which are the inmost
things of man; an in-roome they will have, Spirit will to spirit; the Spirit
will use the Word, which is to be a Sword according to Divine appointment;
being put into his hand as a sharp weapon, he will joyfully sheath it in the
soul, in one part or other of it, how painful soever it be to man; he will
wound the spirit, prick the heart, let it be never so deep. The words I
speak, says Christ, they are spirit and life, that is, they are so
instituted, to be of spiritual interpretation, and spiritual impression, to
prick the heart, yea, to run it through. The weapon in the hand of the
Spirit, is suited and fitted to its end, to its appointed work; it is very
sharp, and very long, (...) romphaea, so it is called, Revel. 2.12. jaculum
oblongum, a very long dart to make through work, save or slay; and therefore
is this rod of Christ's mouth called a slaying weapon, Esaias 11.4.



That which I would stand on is this: this point in hand me thinks has not
yet demonstration enough, I would have you lend me one demonstration more: Do
you find this by experience, that the Word of God reaches your hearts, and
puts it self into your minds, and souls? our condition is very dolorous, it is
dark night, and yet no man can tell how our night goes away; we cannot tell
whether it be mid night yet, or what: I am afraid it is not near day yet,
because every ones doors are shut, and fast asleep; many ghosts walking,
which is very affrighting; yea, the holy Ghost walking, and knocking much at
men's hearts, heads, estates, ready to knock down all, and yet cannot get in
where he would be. England, when will thou thoroughly let in the Word of God?
thy veins are very empty of blood now, is there no place yet for truth? Some
consumptions make the stomach nauceate, as others make it voraminous; though
all parts be empty, yet no desire to take any thing in, to any purpose, but
only sip a little, which notwithstanding the consumption continues, and the
body decays and sinkes apace: it is so with a body politic, as it takes in
Christ and his Word, so is it in a languishing, or a flourishing condition. The
civil State, and the Divine, do as the soul and body sympathize; as the one
prospers so does the other, it was noted a great while ago worthily by good Mr.
Fox, upon the burning of some Christians in Norwich, the same year there
followed such a fearful fire, as almost burnt down the City: where note,
says he, that according to the state of the Church so is the Commonwealth, in
adversity or prosperity: burn Saints, and Christ will burn Cities, Countries,
Kingdoms; it is considerable therefore to observe, how we take in or cast out
the Word of God. The Word is nigh thee England, it is very nigh thee [tis in
thee] as that expression is Deuteronomy. 30.14. it is so nigh thee England, that I may
go on to say to thee, as he there does to Israel, The Word is not in Heaven
that thou should say, who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it down
to us, that we may hear it, and do it: neither is it beyond the Sea, that
thou should say, who shall go over the Sea and bring it to us, that we may
hear and do it; but the Word is very nigh thee, so nigh thee that in a sense
it may be said to be in thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou may
do it, that is, formally it is in thee, but not really, ministerially, but not
magisterially, according to naked aspect, not according to energeticall inspect.

I will open this latter to you. The Word of God gotten into the heart
magisterially, is the heart strong in love with the Word, in love with the Word
because the voice of Christ, the voice of a husband; The friend of a
Bridegroom which stands and hears [him] rejoices greatly, because of the
[Bridegroomes voice] John 3.19. You may see under what notion Christ and his
voice is taken; as he is a Husband, a Bridegroom, and his Word as it is the
voice of this Bridegroom. The Word got within the heart, marries the soul to
Christ, that is, makes love to Christ above all; and now 'tould hear more
words from his mouth, his first words are so sweet; could ever hear his voice
and never be tired; the friend of a Bridegroom [standeth] and hears him. No
posture is painful, no continuance of time tiresome, that is, not of the
Spirit, though possibly it may be of the flesh; twould hear him to day, to
morrow, for ever; [rejoyceth greatly] because of the Bridegroomes voice, (...)
gaudio gaudet, by joying or in joying, he joyeth; he is in good earnest, his
joy is a real joy, a joy that takes the whole heart. The Greek word also
signifies to bid farewell; the Word of Christ got into the heart, the
Bridgroomes voice heard in the soul, makes such a joy and such a delight, that
the soul bids farewell to all sinful mirth, and calls it madness; yea, it
bids farewell to all other delights comparatively, and calls them vanities,
empty things, if not sinful things, vexing things, and so polluting at second
hand, if not down rightly naught and polluting at first hand, as soon as ever
touched. He that touches pitch is defiled with it: some things are so naught as
to touch them defiles, to think of them, or speak of them: other things may
be touched and handled, provided we go no further, but if hearted; if they come
into the soul, they vex or bewitch, and so will not out again without
becoming sin. The Word of Christ got into the heart, bids farewell to all
joys fading, to all joys that will bid the soul farewell, that does not bid
them farewell first; it makes a joy transcending other joys, and so no need of
them; and not only so, but a joy sufficing, such a vast being as the soul of
man is: for the soul does not cast off old delights, upon the mere excellency
of some new found out, that some of later invention does something more
content; not upon this ground nakedly and simply does the soul cast off old
sins, for there are returns to the same filth, unto men's old sins, and yet
going foreward to new too, these two are consistent in a bad state; the heart
does worsten it self still as it goes forth to any thing more carnally
contenting; and being made worse, twill at last take up its vomit, eat again
an old sin, by the strength and punishment of a new, and so hold what he
has, and go back and sin over former sins again, with more
senslesnesse, and with more presumption than at first he did commit them: and
the reason is, because in old and new delights, he misses still something that
he aimed at: but the soul does cast off former delights utterly, upon such a
present excellency of delight and joy as does suffice and fill up the soul:
now the Word of God got into the heart, the voice of the Bridegroom heard in
the soul, or with the soul, it makes a full joy, such a joy as beside or
beyond which the soul knows none, nor desires none. John 3.29:
This my joy [therefore] is fulfilled, said John: [therefore is fulfilled.]
Wherefore? why that as a friend of the Bridegroom, he could stand and hear
the voice of the Bride, spiritually hear Christ, ear and heart his words,
take in, and take down the drops that fell from his mouth. Though they are but
drops that fall from Christ's mouth here, in comparison of what falls from his
lips above; yet they are so big that they fill the soul, every Grape of this
Vine ounce grapes. There is a grape in foreign parts, which because of the
greatness of it, is called an ounce grape. Every grape of this Vine, to wit
Christ, is an ounce grape, every drop from his mouth, an ounce drop, of so much
juice and liquor as fills the soul with joy; and the soul filled once, then
it does indeed bid farewell to all joys and all delights, parts with all
parting things utterly.

If you find that the Word is of no spiritual force, that it does not go into
your souls, Christ in this case must be move'd. Divine institutions are not
necessarily successful; all means are so ordered that the soul in the midst
of them should look up to Christ. The word and Christ, as well as the
creatures and Christ, are separable here below; though not above, and joined
together by faith and prayer. Many brave things may be spoken to us from the
word, but we can receive in none, unless we have a higher help then the mere
Word which we hear* There arose a question between John's Disciples, and the
Jews about purifying; John answered the question briefly and pithily, A man
can receive nothing, unless it be [given him from heaven] meaning not
extraordinary graces and gifts for office, nor ordinary as a Christian, John
4.27. Receptions and takings in of divine things, these are high things indeed,
gifts from heaven. We may bring many brave things and lay them at your door,
at your ears; but the taking in of these into your heart, this must be given
you from heaven. And blessed him that had the promises, Heb. 7.6. it is more for
a person to have the promises, then to have merely the Word preached to him.
Abraham was one that had the promises, and yet he needed a super-benediction,
to make all promises blessings to him, something from heaven, to make all the
words he heard on earth, heaven to him; how much more need there a blessing
from heaven attending men which have not the promise as Abraham had, but only
the Word sounded to them? The spring is in God still, therefore let no man
mistake himself when he looks upon the Trunk. The Word is but a Pipe, and
conveyance of the Spirit: All my strings are in [thee.] To have springs in our
souls, to have words turned into works, working words, we must with the Spouse
look up to God: Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to
thy voice [cause me to bear it] Cant. 8.13. It Is the complaint of many poor
souls, that the Word is of no power in them, that it gets within such and
such, and they are melted and delated, and run out in strength of love to
Christ: Why tell your sad story to Christ as the Spouse does, the companions
hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it: such and such can ear and heart
the Word, cause me to do so too.

COL. 1.28. Teaching every man.


DIscipline is suited to the state of sinners; some are obstinate unruly, in thy
filthiness is [lewdnesse] Ezekiel. 24.13. to such belongs warning, that is,
Blaming: Warn the unruly, says the Apostle. Obstinacy is not a first, but a
last growth of sin, it notes a sinner of so long standing; a senior in sin,
one almost ripe for wrath. The Word must be sharp and keen when hearts are
hard, to make their own way, because the heart will not yield and give way.
Reprehension is not to go alone without instruction; whom we warn we are to
teach. Men are obstinate, because ignorant; as reprehension is proper to men as
unruly; so is instruction proper to them as ignorant: the one does but lop
sin, the other does grub it up by the roots. Christ aims in the Discipline
he uses, at the rooting up of sin: he has a double property in his breath,
he does blast, and then bless; blast by reprehension, and then bless by
instruction, by breathing in right principles.

The nature of a Christians cleansing I am to stand upon. Gospel- purification
is full: expurgare, purge out filth; filth is not detected and then cloakt and
hid again, dust is not swept together, and then laid behind the door, but
thrown out. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
arms, and [he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say
destroy. Their enemies in Canaan shadowed the enemies in our heart, which
Christ did not only detect, but thrust out; he says to his Spirit and to
ours, thrust out sin, purge out therefore the old Leaven, kill and carry out
the dead, and it is so; Christ's words are actions; what he bids, what he
commands his Spirit and our spirits to do, they do; opposition is strong
between Christ and Satan, and yet the spirit of Justice guides him in all that
he does to the most unjust and cursed things in the world: Christ does no other
to Satan and sin, than they would do to him; they have killed Christ, and
thrust him out of the world, out of the great world, and they would do so also
to him in order to the little world. they would kill him and thrust him out of
the heart. This, and no less, is in the nature of sin, and without
possibility of any thing else; and therefore compared to Thorns, and in a type
named children of Belial, seeking to de-throne David: yea to take away the life
of David, (i.) Christ, and therefore are but justly served so themselves. But
the sons of Belial shall all of them as thorns be thrust away, because they
cannot be taken away with hands, 2 Samuel 23.6. Belial signifies perverseness,
sine jugo, non ascendens, things that are without yoke, or things that will not
ascend, such things Christ does make to descend.

Christ does (...), repurgare, he does purge out, and then repeat this act for
perfection sake. It Is in grace as it is in nature: there is in nature an
expulsive power, and this can repeat it self till all that offend be thrown
out, and nature fully quiet and at rest. Grace can do thus, it has an
expulsive power to throw out sin, and it can repeat this act, till all be
thrown out, and Christ quiet and at rest in the soul; Veestroph.
therefore is Gospel cleansing called repurgation, Esaias 1.25. I will turn my
hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy filth. The word is repurgabo, I will
purge and purge again, till I have taken away all filth, and made all pure,
and therefore translated purely purging: I will warn and warn again, warn
and teach, line upon line, precept upon precept, till all be out that Christ
dislikes, and all in that Christ loves, till darkness be quite dispelled, and
the son of righteousness risen. Righteousness for the nature of it, is as
the Sun, pure, and making the mind and the soul so; and therefore does the
Apostle Peter use this phrase, to stir up your pure minds, (...), 2 Pet.
3.1. minds as pure as the Sun, so the word signifies, which is by much
purging: the widows child that was brought to life neses seven times: and
Naaman the Leper, he washed him seven times, and their legal sprinklings were
seven times, all pointing at this, that grace in its course, does double it
self; warn and teach, make clean and perfect work.

Christ does purify to and for himself, this necessitates full purification;
when he takes any soul to refine, the pattern to which he works is himself.
Warning will not do it, to make us like such a pattern; there must be
warning and teaching; a throwing out of filth, and a bringing in of grace;
single action will not make the soul like Christ. The force of reprehension
drives only at negative grace; warning catries the strength of prohibition,
forbids some evil; when this is laid down, I am not like Christ; he was not
only negatively good, but positively; he had no guile in his mouth to be
warned of; but this was not all; to say that his lips were not foul, or were
not sore, will not express their glory; they were as a thread of Scarlet, as
the expression in the Canticles is, they had a positive glory and beauty, Grace
was powered into his lips, Psalm. 45.2. And therefore not only warning but
teaching also is necessary, to suit our state to his, to make us like him: some
acts to cast out, and others to bring in; we are clothed with [change of
raiment; it is a brave expression, Zach. 3.4. Iniquity is made to pass away,
and then something is brought in the stead of it: and unto him he said, behold,
I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with
[change of raiment. Warning and Teaching are change of raiment, they speak the
complement of a Christian, full purity, sin removed and grace in the place of
it, and this necessary, because we are shapt to such a pattern, to wit,
Christ; We are renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created us.
Col. 3.10. The mould according to which things are made spiritually new, is the
exactest of all. Christ's own image was the pattern in the first creation, and
this is the pattern in the second creation; if 'twere any pattern else, our
purity might abate of fullness, and yet answer the authors intention. Christ
does purify to and for himself; but this later I will not touch.

Lazarus, a man regarded of none, so diseased as curable by none, and yet has
both from Christ, favor and cure. Christ can love where none else can; heal,
where none else can nor will. Power nor will are not disproportionable in
Christ, though ought so in us, in order to many particulars; let one lead,
the other follows always. Has grace begun with thee? 'twill finish; the love
of God in order to such an end, has the power of God wrapped up in it to
accomplish it; the word of grace, or the word making grace, is the power of
God, till grace be perfected, it is the power of God to salvation; as the least
seed by divine concurrence has a virtue in it that will carry it on to
maturity. Mourning hearts, think of the nature of Gospel-purification; it is
full, but know how it is carried on to this fullness, by multiplication of acts,
warning and teaching, and this multiplication continued; warning and teaching,
Participles of the present tense, which note continued acts: there is purgatio,
and repurgatio, a course of Physic, purging and purging again, things are not
refined presently; fire must rise to such a strength, and then continue such a
length, and this exactness of order, to prevent miscarriage, that the precious
metal desired may be fully attained, and not done to burn and consume it. Is
thy soul long a cleansing? call it mercy, not misery; God tenders thy frailty,
and the preciousnesse of the mettle, he is drawing out of the Ore; he would
lose neither thy person, nor his work; the refining fire is as hot as thou
can bear it; thy purges are as strong, and as often repeated as thy strength
will endure, unless he should purge away life and all.

This you may be assured, that how filthy soever you are, your purification
shall be full, the unction shall be as the conveighance through which its
made, your spirits shall be as the Word of God that cleanses it; and what
purer thing than the Word of God? You shall be clean through the Word, and
clean as the Word, pure as he is pure; this is bravely set out in a Metaphor
of gold by the Prophet Zachary, the Pipe gold, and the Oil conveyed in it
gold too. What be these two Olive branches, which through the two golden Pipes,
empty the golden oil out of themselves? Zach. 4.12. Golden Pipes, and these
have golden oil out of themselves: that which Christ does give out of
himself, out of his Word, and out of his Spirit, it is as himself, as pure,
and as glorious in the nature of it, and at last in the degree of it, according
to external view, so as that the one is called by all that look upon it gold,
pure and glorious, so shall the other.

Wine and Oil, warning and ^eaching, cleansing and healing, and I will pay all
Josiah's filthy garments are taken away from him by another, he is not at cost,
no nor at pains to do it himself; he gives nothing nor does nothing. Our
doing in our cleansing is defiling: if there do any thing appear in us tending
to put away our filth, it is not of us, it is not we, but Christ in us that does
it; he is all in all, as well as all for all. He bids this and that be done,
and it is so, his words wash us. Take away the filthy garments from him, set a
fair Mitre on his head, Zach. 3. Christ lays out all, and demands nothing,
which is admirable. Behold; I have refined thee, but not for silver, Esaias
48.10. I chose thee in the furnace of affliction, etc. If one refer this Text
to Egypt or to Babylon, it is of much life. When I did good to you in Egypt and
owned you, it could not be for gain and wealth, for ye had none, 'twas a
furnace of affliction, a state of oppression and bondage; for my own sake I
saved you there, and so I will in Babylon; and so he does every sinner: that
Christ does good to any sinner, purify, cleanse, and cloth him, cannot be for
any thing in him; because he chooses us, as the Text says, in a Furnace of
affliction, in a stripped condition, in a state of captivity. Captives have not
store of treasure to ransom themselves: this well deserves a note of
admiration in the front, Behold I have refined thee, but not for silver, I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

Finally, this may be assured thee, that Christ will complete thy purification
speedily, take speed as the Gospel does. The heart is deep, nothing in the
world like it; things of depth are not emptied nor filled presently, as men
call presently, but allow Christ the liberty of his own Idiome and dialect in
speaking, and so he is not slack, nor long a consummating the acts of mercy, no
he is not long in consummating the acts of Justice, though he be longer ere he
accomplish this then that a great deal. The Lord is not slack as men call
slacknesse, says Peter; and yet he speaks there about wrath, consuming wrath;
and yet he goes a great deal slower about this, being as I may say unnatural
to him, then about kindness and mercy, being things in which he delights. If God
be not slack as men count slacknesse, in consumamting justice upon wicked men,
surely he is not slack, as you poor sinners count slacknesse, in consummating
grace and mercy: impatient Creatures think a little time a great while;
unbeleeving Saints do this, as well as unbeleeving sinners. Do but allow God
so much time in order to all thine enemies internal, as Jerome of Prague did,
in order to all his enemies external, and I will assure thee in such a
compass of time thou shall triumph over them all, and cito vos omnes, vt
respondeatis mihi post centum annos, etc. thy strongest enemy cannot live above
an hundred years: once in a hundred year, men, devils, sins, vos omnes, as he
speaks, they shall all answer to you, for all the in^ury they have done to you,
you shall judge and burn them which have burnt you so long.

COLOS. 1.28. Jn all Wisdom.


What these expressions as conjoined with the foregoing import, and then the
terms of it in themselves, may both worthily fall under consideration; that
which they import as conjoined with the former, is, that the heart of man is
very hardly thoroughly wrought upon; all variety of action, warning teaching;
all duration of action, warning, teaching, terms Participly expressed, to note
the continuation of those acts; all art, skill, and exactness of action;
wisdom, all wisdom; all these used to reach the heart thoroughly, and to
bring a sinner home to Christ. The soul of man is with much difficulty,
thoroughly brought home to Christ.

Solomon speaks, the Text; no word (...) been significans the soul does
haerere in cortice choke it self with a shell: tears Sermons into particular
sentences; sentences, into words; words, into sylables; sylables into Letters;
strips expression stark naked from matter, and then hunts a shadow to hell;
this expression is used, Mark. 12.13. they sent to Christ certain of the
Pharisees and Herodians to catch him in his words (...), to hunt him his words
so the word signifies; that soul that hunts Christ and his Ministers in their
words, is hunted by the divill from the matter: a critical spirit has as many
doors to run away from Christ, and the power of truth, as there be words in the
Greek Lexicon.

evade; he can catch others very nimbly and get loose himself as nimbly. The
Serpent that dealt with Eve, could turn in and out, bend to and again, wrigle
every way at pleasure; that Serpent is in our bosom: it was an emblem of our
heart which will turn twenty ways, to evade the power of truth; that which
has such a property to bend every way, is not easily broken; things that will
bend double, will wave double and treble force ere they will break. The art of
evasion that the heart has to put by the sword of the spirit, and to save the
life of sin, is of great compass and depth, and runs it self into many
branches, which I cannot run after now: summarily see a little of this art
shadowed by the carriage of Saul, 1 Samuel 19.16. Saul had heard that David was
at his house, and sent him to kill him there, and Michal let him down at a
window, and laid an image in the bed, and told the messengers that came to
search, that David was sick, and thus turned the messengers away: and then they
were sent again to fetch David in his bed, that Saul might kill him in his
bed: and by this time David was gone far enough, and nothing but the image
could be seized on, which would endure wounds enough; and then Saul said to
Michal, why have thou deceived me so and sent away mine ememy? so when the
life of sin is sought for by the word, sinners can lay an image in the bed,
twenty excuses and pretenses to conveigh the sins which they love out of
sight, and so save the life of Christ's enemy. How pleasing soever sin be to
affection, it is ugly to conscience, because condemnd by Christ; man can baffle
one and mock the other. We read of mockers of God, and they are such as baffle
conscience with an image, so double and involve their motion before the pursuit
of truth, likes a Hare before Hounds, deceiving and being deceived; deceiving
(i) the force of truth is broken by wile; deceived, this the author to the
Hebrews explaines, the heart is hardened by this practice; least any be
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin; the heart hardened, is not easily
wrought upon, it is the worst stone that any Artist can meddle with.

seared, and then its not only passive in sin, but jointly active with other
depraved and corrupted faculties. Conscience seard, the man is become a devil;
to convert a devil is difficult indeed. Conscience seared, darkness now is
great, and the sinner desperate; the light that was in the man, is beeome
darkness (i) put out; the truth that was taken into judgment, into affection,
and according to some degree approved, is now disapproved; what was approbated
is now reprobated; generally so; all powers transported into malice, and
speaking jointly like that rabble, crucify him, let the clean spirit be not
only prisoned and tortured by violent action, but quite outed, and seven
unclean spirits come in the stead, that is, a perfection of evil. Conscience
once feared, the sinner is as I may say a perfect sinner. As there is a
perfection in good, perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect, and exhorted to
in this life, which notes a degree of attainablenesse here: so there is a
perfection in evil, a child of the divill perfect, as his hellish Father is
perfect; now we know he is according to all powers against Christ and truth;
understanding, will, conscience, a Creature transported, transformed into
malice, one without all remorse or reluctance in pursuit of the greatest
wickedness. All faculties do lie one to another mutually (...) recriprocally
as that expression is, and so conscience confirming, and making restipulation
to all.

The soul is with much difficulty indeed brought home to Christ, it is a great
deal of pity; there is facillity enough in the soul otherwise, it will take
in falsehood presently, easily; in a moment is the soul a convert to sin, to
the fowlest sin; Satan's births are quick; he showed Christ all the Kingdoms
in the World in a moment, says the Text, Luke 4.5. intimating how his children
grow very big in a moment; the wise man speaks to this likewise, that their
feet run to evill] and make have to shed blood, Prove. 1.16. evil is terminus
inde terminatus, its applicable to to any sin; the soul is facile to any
thing that is naught: blood, is a term that specificates, points out the
foulest, the horridst child of hell. Man is easily brought to draw weapons of
wickedness, and stab the body, yea, stab the soul of an other, to wash his
hands in the heart blood of another, and sport himself therein. Nature is a
greater advantage then education, in any thing: Christ carries it by
principles, Satan by constitution. Engines are needless, pains needless,
there is a current hellward. The soul is of great price, but not esteemed so
by it self; a man will sell his soul for a lie, and yet make the bargain
quickly. Satan loves a quick change, his commodities are deceitful, and off
best least considered, and therefore you have him showing Christ all the
Kingdoms of the world in a moment, says the Text Luke 4.5. as Satan loves
quick action, so does the deluded soul: for he is, whilst deluded, upon
Satan's wings; the soul in temptation is lighter then vanity; what should
poyse, to wit, judgment, is destroyed by will and impure affections: it is in a
gaudy chariot of Satan's that takes, and he may run with it any whither with one
horse with ease.

simul tempore, together in time, with the election of sin. Sin is ugly at
first like an Harlot, but by society and frequenting, besots, and infatuates,
and is more facily drawing then the man's own wife, although far more
beautiful: facility to sin, speaks the wards of conscience broken, the lock
of the Cabinet spoiled, all the Jewels of the soul lying common gifts and
abilities the servants of sin at pleasure, the heart past feeling, a beaten
highway to hell.

The soul is of great price; Christ makes this estimate from being, we are to
make it from property: who and how does the soul love, such is the loveliness
of it. The heart of the wicked is nothing worth says Solomon, Prove. 10.20.
Averseness to Christ is any man's wickedness, if the action be the action of
the greatest person in the World, it is his wickedness; persons are not
respected with God; actions are impartially looked upon above, though not below,
they are weighed in a balance as Job speaks; nothing scand with more
exactness then this, how much of Christ is in this man and his course: if this
were but received, the souls of some of you which hear me this day, would
bleed within you; Oh what will become of you wanton Londoners, which have so
much of Christ before you, and so little of Christ within you, who are quickly
any thing but understandingly and sincerely nothing? a Harlot is quickly
gained, there needs not much wooing about her; light souls make heavy
judgments: your spiritual crummes would be feasts abroad; you have no mind
to that food which thousands as precious with the Lord Jesus as you, would
bless God highly for: your sin makes many miserable, but your selves most,
though yet you feel it not: surely Justice has espied us all carnal, for
Paul, Apollo, for Cephas, for this thing for that, for nothing cordially but
our lust.

Sinners, can you consider your selves? can you consider this time? you of this
place? your advantages are great, do you know them? it will not be long ere our
glass be out, ere we meet before Christ; the Sword of Justice is at all our
breasts, all that you have heard will be repeated, all that you have rejected
will be chronicled with the blood of your souls, to bear witness against
you, as long as Christ and your souls are. Opportunity is more then eternity:
'tas not so much time in it, but 'tas more advantage; you shall answer for all
advantages, which are the waightiest things in the world; facility to Christ is
now doubly needful, soul hardening blows are struck apace, the Ax is to the
root, hypocrites are not so borne with now as formerly, but ripped up and carried
forth from the sincere, like Judas, and Ananias and Saphira; our misery is
mercy in this: sinkes are loathsome; yet it is well that Christ so works, that
baseness cannot hide it self: Drunken souls, and drunken bodies; pride,
covetousness, malice, blasphemy, all sorts of sins that lay hid a great
while, now show themselves in their colors; speedy action and through action
is now expected, upon pain of speedy and through detection and rejection.

COLOS. 1.28. That we may present every man [perfect in Christ Jesus.


THis term perfection is not found in some Greek copies, but read only thus,
That we may present every man [in Christ. It Is a reading very honorable,
compared with other copies, for it intimates that to be presented at the great
day in Christ, is all. You may call such a soul what you will that is Noble,
holy, unblameable, unreproveable in Gods sight; as this term perfect is
interpreted, at the 22 verse of this Chapter; or, if there be any term
amongst us more significative, you may use it and apply it, to him that is set
down before God in Christ; you may call him eximium adultum, a man come to
full age, a man singular, chosen out from among thousands by royal favor,
such a one in whom the eye of God can see nothing amiss, no defect, no
excess, no presence of sin, no absence of grace; a man come to his journeys
end; all this the original word will bear. As soon as one comes into Christ,
then a man's journey as a Christian begins; the soul that is thus come into the
Arc, when the Arc leaves floating and tossing the soul, and lands it self
and its fraught upon the mountain, in that place above, where God, Angels, and
just men made perfect are, then it is come to its journeys end, then is man a
perfect man.

All our perfection is in Christ. Perfection is of things above or below; both
are in Christ. There is a creation here, which gives all parts of a perfect
creature, and therefore called perfect; new; all new. Old things are past away,
and all things are become new, but this is not till the soul be in Christ. He
that is in Christ, is a new creature. A man whilst in himself, whatever parts
he has, or advantage of external tuition, he is an old creature, that is,
adhering to, and led by that which God of old condemned in the Angels and in
Adam, private will, self will and worth, which is the original of all evil
within and without. A man in Christ, that is, a man in the grace and strength
of Christ, renounceth this, to wit himself, his own will, which is the seat
and spring of all carnal lusts, and in no other strength whatsoever can he do
it; My grace is sufficient. The old man is bed-ridden, never goes out of his
chamber, never out of himself, what ever brave things you discern him do or
say; nor can. Perfection here is the through death of self, [I] am crucified.
Crucifixion speaks many deaths; head, hands, feet, sides, breast, all wounded,
nailed; it notes much pain, but through work; all powers and parts of self,
tortured, crying out eloy, much anguish and great earthquakes; but self at
last, quite giving up the ghost, [I] am crucified, the heart blood of all, that
may speak me, in any thing that is good, is out; and this through death of
self is wrought with no other engine but Christ; that with which self is
crucified, is with Christ, I am crucified [with Christ.] This is the stone that
slaies Goliath, that sinkes into the brain of the Giant. Our being in Christ is
the death of sin, and the life of grace; as Jonas being in the Whale was the
death of his pride; this makes personal action truly pure, that is of such
rise, and of such reach as fully suits the Gospel, and without which none can
be or act. The Apostle gives this bound to sanctity, if any be sanctified here,
it is in Christ, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2.

Divines call a perfection of parts, as a child has every finger and every
toe, every limb of a man, though these not grown to a man's maturity. Then
there is also perfection of quality, which Divines call a perfection of
degrees, when all parts and gifts are thoroughly come to maturity; the eye so
strong, and so clear as able to behold all things that are in God to bless
the soul; and so the ear hearing all things, the tongue tasting all things,
the hand feeling all things, that are in and from that blessed being, to make
the being of the soul like it: all this perfection is in Christ, and this by
the pleasure of God. It pleased the Father that in him should [all fulnesse]
dwell; grace, glory. Whatsoever God gives forth here, whatsoever he gives forth
above, Christ is the continent in which it is laid With thee is the fountain of
life, and in thy light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.9. There are streams and
broad rivers which run to souls here; the fountain of these is with him;
that is, the whole that God is to man in this world, or will be to man in the
world to come, which is explained in that which follows, with thee is the
fountain of life, meaning Christ, in thy light we shall see light. In Christ
we have all the blessedness that God gives in this world, and in him we shall
see, that is actually possess, all that God gives above. Therefore it is that
David says, All my springs are in thee, those that run above; and therefore
also are the rivers of pleasure there said to be at Gods right hand, the place
where Christ sits. In Christ we stand and see God here in every thing; in
Christ we shall stand and see God above face to face, that which we cannot do
here and live, no nor there out of Christ; in his light we shall be able to
master that great object, in his light we shall be able to see that great
light, that dazles all the creation to behold, and then has the soul all that
ever it is to have; all that ever it desires to have. With respect to this wide
scope I am upon, and affirming concerning Christ, is Christ called the heir of
all things, Heb. 1.2. Earth, Heaven, grace, and glory. The Apostle is yet more
expressly particular in this thing, and says, that we are glorified in him.
That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ might he glorified in you, and [ye in
him] according to the grace of our God, 2 These. 1.12. In him we are heirs, and
in him we are actual inheritors.

Perfection is hotly pursued by all, to wit, a complete state, though what it
is and in whom, be mistaken almost by all. The soul of man is the greatest
traveller that you have read off; if its travells could be written out, or if
any volumne would contain them, you would say so: as full of motion as there
be objects in the world and minutes in the day and in the night, to find out
one fully to bless it self in, and rest, but cannot, because Christ is
overlookt, and therefore dies in travel. Prudence will speak much of this in
many experienced persons, yet Christ never the more regarded nor sought after;
this is sad. Every cisterne is broken, every vessel full of leakes, says the
sinner, and yet he is found still stopping up these leakes, and going out
again to Sea, venturing Life, Soul, Heaven, all that ever is, in these broken
bottomes: I tremble at no state but this. Conviction abused, conversion is
farther off the man, then from him that is a simple sinner, that tastes no
bitter in any dish at the Divils table. Folly found out, and yet made further
trial of, the man will not, he cannot escape punishment; if the fool go on,
he will be punished. First-folly is pitied and discovered, that is, simple
simplicity, simple sinning as one would say, when a man does thus and thus for
want of knowledge: but when the fool is found out, and yet will on, he will
now die in his folly. Conviction is sanctified, when experienced emptiness of
the creature, makes the soul look out where indeed fullness is; when the
Canticles follow next after Ecclesiastes, when the soul with Solomon, having
found and confessed the vanity of the creature, falls a breathing and a panting
after Christ.

Balaam was convinced: stopped with a drawn sword from Heaven, and yet would on,
the Ass could not go, and yet Balaam would. God James and slayes things under
us, that we ride with our affections like mad men, and yet we have no mind to
alight and come off them: things we dote upon, God by some stroke or other upon
them, makes them speak in our conscience like that Ass to Balaam, why will thou on O my soul any further this way? death is before thee, the sword of
Gods displeasure is drawn, and at thy breast because of this wicked motion:
stop sinner now, stop now, cast thy eye an other way toward Christ, and see
what is in him, taste how good and gracious he is; no I will not, I will have
the the other bout, I will spurr a little farther, and see to the utmost, if I can
curse Jsrael and get that great pay proferd. There is a perfection of misery,
as well as of felicity, and this forementioned is it, when a sinner will pursue
his sin to the utmost, go to the end of long suffering, then wrath comes
inevitably upon him, and to the utmost: when the man says that his sin shall
outlive every object, ere it shall cease, and rides every horse to death, to
fetch and find out pleasures to keep his lust alive, then God says that this
lust shall outlive the man too, and then it out-lives all indeed, when the
soul is rid to death. As there is a never pardoning of sin till the soul
die, so there is a never subduing of sin (for these are necessarily
subordinate) till the soul die never a taking off the love of sin from the
soul, till the soul grow sick and die in love.

All perfection being in Christ, it is well onward toward all that need it, such
as are in distress for grace, or glory, should so account and be encouraged.
Sin is a very burdensome thing, when God opens the eyes: the aggravations and
multiplications of this by conscience, over-beare the soul much. When Christ
puts not in, how shall I withstand so many enemies, get off so much pollution;
what shall I do for this, what shall I do for that says the soul. Why think
on this, all perfection is in Christ, and because in him it lies ready for
thee. Every good and perfect gift, as the Apostle James speaks: thou need
dispensations which have a perfection of goodness in them; Christ has every
good and perfect thing in him, and because he has them; they are all ready to
be bestowed on thee, to be bestowed for nothing: every perfect good he has is
a perfect gift, and comes down says the Text when the soul does not fetch
it. Thou have many imperfections, and Christ has many perfections, and thou
can do nothing to get these; not one of these: if thou could do any
thing, they would not come this way, for they are al gifts, perfect gifts, and
come down upon us, and are not pulled down, as the next verse does there
interpret, of his [owne will] he begat us. As Christ does begin, so he does
finish all of his owne-will. Christ is given, which is, summum or perfectum
cardinale, and then every good and perfect thing in him must needs be so too,
gifts, and given freely with him as the Apostle speaks. Having given us
Christ, he will with him freely give us all things, Romans 6.32. it is not an
easy thing to bring the soul to belive every perfect good, to be a perfect
gift, to be as perfectly a gift, as it is perfectly good. There is an order in
grace, but no merit; first this thing is done, then that, but all freely;
through this medium and through that, as a Pipe, through Preaching and through
Praying, and through Hearing, but not for any of these: And therefore when a
soul objects this, and objects that, he cannot do this, nor he cannot do
that; I will answer as many objections of this kind, as any one can possibly
make; in one word; what ever you need, is a perfect gift, I cannot believe, nor
do no thing to make says, yet there is no cause of dejection; faith is a
perfect gift, more perfectly a gift, then in the formality of the thing
perfect: so may it be said of all other things, that the soul complains on;
grace has no merit, but order, which is this, when Christ would perfect a
soul in himself, he turns a man off, and out of himself; out of creatures
of Gods making, and out of creatures of the man's own making, out of his
prayers and all his duties; and this he does sometime, by letting the man fall
into sin, when proud of any parts or works; and sometimes in a more mild sweet
way, where nature is more meek and sweet; and then when the soul is turned
off, and turned out of all, he that is indeed all, presents himself to him, and
woes and wins the soul; I will be a husband to thee, says Christ, friends,
riches, honors, whatsoever can be desired to make one blessed; the great world
is han'gd upon nothing so is the little world, to wit, a Christian, brought
first to be nothing: in understanding but a brute; nothing in action but worse
then a brute, a devil, very poor, very poor in spirit, and then blessed with a
Kingdom; and now the soul that was nothing nor could do nothing for Christ or
against sin, can do all; having regnum he has proprium regni; having a
Kingdom, he has the proprium of that Kingdom, which is dominion over all;
he that is made a King and has a Kingdom, does not rule in this Town only or
that Town, but over all parts in the Kingdom; and this order Christ will move
in toward you that desire it; for this Kingdom and all belonging to it, is a
perfect gift.

COLOS. 1.29. Whereunto I also labor.


TO take souls from off themselves, and to set them down in Christ, bears
much by divine Ordinance upon our calling, and makes our work very hard, which
is noted in this term, labor, (...), the word signifies such actions and
industry as faints, wastes, and wears out all; such a labor as Solomon
speaks of, Eccles. 10.15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them,
because he knows not how to go to the City. This Emphasis of the word is
held forth to the Thessalonians, to work them to a reverend esteem of their
teachers. We beseech you brethren to know them which [labour] among you, and
are over you in the Lord, (...), which spend and waste themselves amongst you,
to take you off from sin, and self, and to set you down in Christ, in whom
only souls are fully and perfectly blessed. We are as Jonathans
armor-bearer; whither so ever our Master goes, we are to go after him, though
we creep upon all four. Your life is our death, your fatning is our leaning;
your Raven-black hairs, are our milk white. We are (...), 1 Timothy 3.2. Such as
wax white with painfulnesse and watchfulness; reading, praing, sighing,
mourning, and groaning for your good.

Coaction with Christ is no idle employment; he does not attempt small things,
neither is he of small strength to keep pace with such weak agents as we are:
it is hard work to draw in yoke with one that is double and treble in strength
above me. We are (...), workers together with Christ, he attempts the greatest
things that are, and the most desperate; the taking of holds, strong holds,
Canaanites, Hittites, etc. which dwell in Towns which are walled up to heaven,
and founded down to hell: he attempts the blood and death of all, the conquest
of this whole world; the general making such desperate attempts, and taking
only Rams-hornes, a sling and a stone, such a frail party as we are, you may
easily think our work to be desperate, full of pain and peril: Had man been
set to fight with man, one man with one man, that had been painful work; but
man is drawn out to fight with beasts, the fiercest beasts; with Lions, Bears,
Wolves, Serpents, Scorpions, yea, with devils; there was never such a fight in
the grand Circue at Rome. We wrestle with such creatures as have no hold-fast
to be taken of them, which have no arms, no legs, no flesh, nor bones; we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. We are drawn out to fight upon all
the disadvantage in the world, against creatures that are upon higher ground,
that have pitched field in high places, that have no flesh to be wounded, nor
blood to lose, that can make ambushments at pleasure, being the rulers of the
darkness of this world; this is the Rhetoric of the Apostle.

We are Stewards of mysteries: sentence is past upon us to dye according to the
Law which we have broken; only we have the benefit of our book; but this book
is written as books of such nature usually are, very mysteriously, with an old
strange Character; our work is to stand by and prompt souls concerning their
neck verse, which is very painful and trembling work: the book in which
sinners are to read for their life, is written with blood, which is very inward
and ominous ink. The Characters and Syllables suitable, when put together into
words, these words are spirit; The words I speak, says Christ, are spirit.
What is a more inward and hidden thing then this? and yet this are we to
interpret; our work is to be an interpreter between two of very remote parts,
that live as far asunder as heaven and earth, as heaven and hell, I might
say; between Spirits, the spirit of God and the spirit of man; one whereof it is
more proper to say, is in hell whilst out of heaven, then in any middle place
between. Transactions between God and the soul, are the deepest, the
weightiest, the intricat'st things in the world. A sinner is convicted,
sentenced, carried to the place of execution; his winding sheet wrapped about his
shoulders, his handkerchiffe tied before his eyes, his halter about his neck,
his sentence written upon his forehead, in this shall thou hang till thou be
dead; and yet possibly no internal intention concurring, or meaning the blood
of the soul: Divining in this case at the foot of the Ladder, what will become
of him that is on the top on it sitting trembling; whether he will be turned
off, or fetched down with a pardon, is extraordinary hard work to determine,
and yet bears not upon any extraordinary office; no Angel is dispatched from
heaven, to be an oracle in this difficult case, but it lies upon our shoulders
by ordinance. The Priests lips are to preserve knowledge. If there be any
divining in this extraordinary work, it is not by extraordinary, but ordinary
office; there is not one from the dead to tell who shall dye next; no one sent
from hell, to tell who is to come next thither. Things belonging both to the
death and life of the soul, are made manifest by our ministration, by our
labor; we are the Heralds of Heaven, the Trumpet of God, in which he sounds
Retreat and March, fight and victory, funeral and triumph; we are to sound sad
and doleful, sweet and joyful; to tell who are slain and who saved: our
Travells are to all remote parts that are, into Heaven, into hell, into the
heart of man where these two meet, to search the book of life, and the book of
death, to find whose names are written in the one, and to inform the persons.
Paul could tell Clement and others, that their names were written in the book
of life, Phil. 4.3. And whose names are written in the other, to wit, the book
of death; and to inform likewise the persons. Jude could tell who were of old
ordained to condemnation; we are to seek creatures lost in hell, which is hard
work to find, to search out things hidden in God, from ages and generations,
which is harder work.

the creatures in the world, are severally gifted, vertued, decked, and
adorned, to minister to, and work upon the soul: the words and works of God
have all a harmony in this, they all therefore are and abide, which otherwise
should all pass away, were it not to take and gain the soul: there is a
juice and Verdure, a spirit in every living creature, to incline it to serve
man, and so to by as his soul to God. The multitude of preachers to the soul
of man is great; some he had at the third hour, some at the sixth, some at the
ninth; God and the Creation were preaching to man from the beginning; all
creatures brought their full goodness to man's full view and use, to keep him
fully good, but could not: he fell asleep in the fore-noon, in the morning,
when the primest and sweetest sermons were made, that ever the ears of man
heard, and dyed in his sleep. We that come in laborers at the latter part of
the day, we preach to the dead; our work is to fetch the dead to life again,
to raise Lazars out of their grave, that have lain there long and stink; and
yet how unsavory soever, how impossible soever our work is, and seems to be,
we must upon the peril of the blood of our own souls discharge it: our labor
is spending and ending; we like Rachel dye in travel to bring forth sons and
daughters to Christ: and yet woe to us, we shall dye twice, if we hold not on
this labor, and this travel. Certainly Christ has put an high price on poor
souls.

I am sadded to think how mis-judging some persons are of Christ and their
souls: Does Christ milk out his breast to bastards? such as are base borne,
and no sons? Can he sum up naught, naught? many noughts to a great sum,
and to a great price? A naughty tongue, a naughty hand, a naughty heart, a
naughty conscience; all these naughty parts to a precious whole? I answer,
Christ does prize naked beings, the soul according to its esse, though it has
never a good quality in it. What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
high price is put here upon the soul simply as it is such a transcendent
being, beyond others: then again Christ sets a price upon things according to
what he can work them too; he can lay out cost and pains, man's meat, horse
meat, seed and grain, of this kind, and that; and plow in hope. Persons of art
and skill put a price upon this and that grass, which others tread under foot
as weeds and nothing worth, because by such and such decoctions they know what
precious things to bring them to. Nero put great price upon Thapsis a
gigantine, Fennel; his great men about him wondered to see him send so far
for it, and put such esteem upon it; but he did so because he knew how to
order it with Frankincense and other things, to take away the bruises of his
body. God has Frankincense by him, to wit, Christ; and though we be but as
Fennel a weed little worth, yet he can tell how to order us, and shape us,
so as to bring us to great maturity and price; and according to this, to wit,
what he can do with souls, does he put price upon them, though at present of
little worth: and therefore let empty creatures judge righteously concerning
Christ and their souls. Would Christ be at pains and at cost to lay pipes to
the cisterne, if he did not mean to fill it?

Be just in opinion concerning Christ, and merciful in practice concerning us,
and this is the last thing I have to say upon the point. Our calling is full of
wasting labor, very painful; easen it to us by your plyablenesse to Christ.
Sinners are full of sores, putrified from head to foot, and yet will not be
lanced nor dressed; this is the killing pain of all our pains, that all we do
is rejected: Ministers would not be gray headed so soon, nor die so fast,
notwithstanding their great labor, if it were but successful; but this cuts
to the heart, and makes us bleed in secret, that though we do much, it comes to
nothing. I am placed in an Hospital, where there are so many score Diseased
creatures, that 'twould pity any ones heart to look upon them, and yet when I
come to dress them, they all curse me in their heart; and one hides his
wounds from me, an other sees and swears he is as well as I, in as good a
condition as his Minister, and yet looks as pale as Death: as black in the
mouth, and in the eyes as if he were in Hell already; an other tumbles in blood
and filth, and says, this is his Scarlet-shute, he has no other habit to go
brave and gallant in: if he should not do so and so, he should die in the
neast, and wishes those hanged that contradict and trouble him: there is so
many filthy breaths and dampes in the places where we work, these are the
things that kill us more then our mere pain; there is so much conjuring in
the spittle where we are placed, and so many eyes stare and look so fiery and
ghastly, so many devils walking among the Tombs and Graves, where we are
laboring to roll away stones that lie at the mouths of them. These are they
that tear our Lungs, consume our Spirits. Our work dies, therefore we die,
not so much that we labor, as that we labor in vain; we can send none out
of the Hospital where we are Physicians, upon two Legs, but all upon four;
none go out well, all die under our hands: all the solemnitis belonging to our
company, are for the most part Funeral solemnities, going to the Grave with
the dead in trespasses and sins: our invitations are, Sir, mourn with me I
beseech you, for such a one that lies upon his eternal Deathbed, that has
Plague-spots in his breast, that lies raving, blaspheming, and much a do to
keep him in his Bed, to keep him from leaping into a worse, (if worse may be)
from leaping desperately into Hell. When our Ministrey petrefies, turns hearts
into stones, and these taken up and thrown at us, this kills us: the recoiling
of our pains kills us, when our peace returns to us, as Christ speaks. J
have labored in vain, spent my strength for naught, says the Prophet. When
we spend our strength to make men more naught then they were, this wounds our
heart, which should be considered of sinners; to kill ones self and ones
Minister too which would save him, what a bloody condition is this! the blood
of a Minister upon a man's soul, is more then the blood of many men; stubborn
souls, lay this to heart. When the Poet would cure drunkenness in the Heathen
Emperor, he said, remember thou drinkest the Blood and the Life of the earth,
meaning the juice of the Grape. So I say to you stubborn sinners, remember
when you break the heart of your Ministers by your stubbornness, you destroy
the Blood and Life of the World. I would I could say any thing to break the
Iron sinnew that is in the neck of some sins and sinners. Be a friend to us in
our work, and be a friend to your selves: come off readily, and speedily to
Christ, our work will be easy and your condition safe: hold us fight long, and
I know who will fall at last with a witness. The war between the house of
David and Saul was long, says the Text, 2 Samuel 3.1. the issue was answerable:
had that malicious stubborn man laid down his Arms, and readily yielded to
the Will of God, to Christ that came against him in David, he might have found
mercy, but he would stand it out to the last, and weary God and David his
servant, till at last there was no remedy, and then all David's Tears, Prayers,
and brave services that he had done took place and effect with a witness.
Make our life doleful, and Christ will make your death doleful, be as great
as you will: stay long in the birth and kill Midwife, and you will be delivered
in hell: ease us and ease Christ: for Christ striveth in us, we strive but
according as be striveth in us; as says the following clause in my Text,
striving according to his working, and therefore is Noah's suffering so long, in
his pains for that people, called the long suffering of God, 1 Pet. 3.2.
London, England, the blood of many Prophets is upon thee is this nothing? the
blood of God is upon thee, and God lays this to heart now: now he makes
inquisition for blood, he makes blood to touch blood, your blood to touch the
blood of them whom you have killed in their labor, by your frowardness and
wickedness to Christ and them.

COLOS. 1.29. Striving according to his working, etc.


STriving] This word seconds the explanation given of the former, that the
labor of the Ministry is very painful, it is a putting off all powers
external and internal to it, to the utmost, it is a strife, contention, running
for a victory, a fight, so the word is in several places translated. Fight the
good fight of faith. I have fought a good fight: in both places is the same
word that here is translated, strive: fighting, running for victory, they are
acts wherein the whole man intends it self, as in matters of life and death.
The work of our calling is in the former word, generally and summarily
expressed, in this word it is particularly specified, as it bears upon its
particular and proper cause. When we say such a one labors this satisfies not;
what is his labor? this question is answered by this following word in order
to our calling. Our labor is in some sense the worst, the sowrest; it is
contention, spiritual contention, (i.) a contention which has its rise not
from our own spirit, but from the spirit of God, and its termination in the
spirit of man. We strive not according to our own will, but according to his
Word and Spirit that striveth and works in us.

Contention has a bad and a good acceptance, the spirit lights on fire of
Hell sometimes, and flames out of the mouth and burns all that stand near, in
name, in whatsoever is dear; this is bad contention. Folly lurkes long in an
unmortified soul, at last gets a head, and then words without wisdom or
conscience toumble out one upon another back, as if they should toumble down
all that is before them, but they throw down him only from whom they come. A
fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes; and in
the next verse, a fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare
of his soul, Prove. 18.6, 7. If standers by can keep off the flame, this fire
burns no more houses then into which it comes. The flame that comes out of one
man's mouth, if it be not sucked in by another, only one tenement is consumed;
folly is full of humor, humor disguiseth every person and action, and
apprehends all for enemies, and so fights against, yea slayes with the tongue,
dear friends for deadly foes, that is, as much as in him lies. Folly generates
humor, humor is a bastard pride; now none so beautiful in any proceedings as
the man himself; other folks children are all untimely births, and misshapen
brats, and deserve all to be murdered with the mouth, and bit to death.
Butchery is some persons trade, neighbors children killed; quartered, and hung
out to sale every day for all that come by, and will buy; pride hardens, the
hear hardened, the man will run against any one with his tongue, till he can
get other weapons, and spot himself all over with the blood of the best man's
repute in the world, before his face. Contention is a murdering of a man's
offspring before his face, and throwing the blood of them in his face: thou
did say this, and thou did do that Pride hardens, 'tas this property in
every soul; many hearts quard, and become sulpherous stones, the devil takes
them up, and strikes fire with them, to burn all. Bad contention has always
a diabolical concurrence more or less; many things may charge and load the
Gun, but the Devil gives fire still and makes it off, and helps to fetch out
all that is within the man.

Contention has a good acceptance, good contention is an expliced zeal
against sin. Sins are of several sorts, some have their tongues cut out of
their mouths by conscience, and can nor dare say nothing of their course;
others have their tongue in their head, and can and will say much for their
sin, though they die in the place. Parts being considerable, such habits are
made use of, iniquity establishes it self by a law in such a soul, what one
can make it out to be de jure, it is a case to be pleaded, and the soul will
plead in these cases with man, and the man will plead with any man, that his
soul may hold its own, and sin keep warm where it is: parts and parties are
therefore now drawn out, and strong reasons brought forth; produce your strong
reasons, says the Prophet, Esaias 41.21. Productions of this kind, made
abortives by truth, truth in strength drawn out against that which is false,
enervating and silencing sinful disputes and practices, is good contention.
Thus did Nehemiah contend, Then contended I with the Rulers and said, why is
the house of God forsaken? what evil thing is this that ye do? did not our
fathers thus? and brought all this evil upon them? Nehem. 13. Man must not
move as a beast which knows not the ground he goes upon: action must have
authority, and the production of this authority is sometimes necessary; if this
or that be not valid by rule, it is to be condemnd by the rule; and this is
every ones privilege, that has ability and opportunity, by virtue of a
general or a particular call; by virtue of a general call as a Christian, to
resist sin, and error, which is a public enemy and traitor to the State
which any one may lay hands on; and therefore it is that Jude exhorted the
Christians to put hand to this work, as well as himself: when he wrote to
them of a common salvation, he wrote unto them also about a common enemy, and
told them that they ought to contribute strength against such as well as he;
it was needful for me to write unto you, and to exhort you that [ye] should
earnestly contend for the faith. You may think (as if he had said) that it is
my work only, to contend for the faith, and against that which opposes it,
but it is so mine, that it is also yours by a general calling; persons by the
advantage of a particular calling, draw a greater force into the field against
the common enemy, but others are bound to contribute what they have to this
work, as well as they. We are as men designed, and advantaged peculiarly, as
Generals to lead in this sad work, to which the Prophet speaks, Jeremy 15.10.
Woe is me my mother, that thou have borne me a man of strife. Jeremiah had a
particular call from the womb, to live as a Solamander in the fire all his
days; these as gifted and wealthy persons, raise more force, and bring a
greater strength into the the field then others can, but the work bears upon
all; The Apostle intimates it, in that he speaks as putting into this work
only as one, whereunto I also labor, and striving according to his working in
me.

James says; the spirit within dissents some person without, and therefore
spits in his face, when it speaks to him, that every one may know him, and
have as low an esteem of him as he has. Affection prejudiced, in order to the
person I deal with, and so opposition the fruit of an ill disposition, this is
impure contention. Fire of this nature is heavenly, when it springs from love
to the man, and hatred to his sin: sin is such an ugly thing, that it
becomes no body, no not a friend; it is a black spot, but not a beauty spot in
any ones face; set it where you will, cut it how you will; when love moulds
words to discover so much to the face of him that thinks otherwise; I would
not have any one that I love, live or die in any thing that Christ hates: This
is Divine contention, precious balm.

doctrine, for reproof, for conviction, 2 Timothy 3.16. Weapons drawn out of the
word, and so skilfully and reverently used, till pride be stabd, and conscience
speechless, and breathing out its last for the evil course it walked in; this
is handling the Word of God, and the soul of man, not deceitfully, but really,
and is holy strife; deckes set a fire not to burn the ship, but to blow up
them at top that would take the whole vessel.

Contention is not only to stop, but to turn a sinner; it is a travel, and
pangs cease not till satan be ruind, and Christ formd. Conviction and
conversion are two things; a man may feel the evil of his own way, and yet
taste no sweet in Christ's; vomiting is painful, the stomach takes great
dislike and offense at what it opened its mouth greedily to take in; one would
think in this case twere impossible that what is so violently thrown out,
should ever be savoured, and taken in again; yet not in this case, (therefore
in no case with some creatures) is there an abhorring for ever. Dogs will
return to their vomit, and sinners, but shadowed in that metaphor: spiritual
strife is to make certain the state of a Christian; yea, to give the ultimate
or utmost of this state; to make former vomitings, old sins, yea, old graces
(i.) graces in such and such a degree, to be forgotten; to put forward, and to
present every one perfect, in parts, perfect in degrees, which is the emphasis
and connection of the frontice term of the Text, That we may present every man
perfect in Christ [whereunto] I labor and strive. Holy strife tends to bring
persons to perfection, it is fighting a good fight; the issue of which is, the
soul able to lay hold of eternal life; able to let go hold of sin, of any
sin, and to take hold of any grace; of all grace, of eternal life. Running of
this kind is in its scope as others, to obtain, (i.) the glory of God and
salvation of the soul; our fight of this kind, is not only to kill, but to
make alive; to make an eternal death and an eternal life; to make an eternal
death to sin, and an eternal life to Christ.

David had his Sword by his side, how quickly was he overheated by a fool?
it is so in spiritual contests, when friends meet to argue, they are as
soldiers with their weapons by their sides; one fool now in the company, a
little folly thrown out over-heats and fires all of a sudden, and sets all
together by the ears, if Christ be not very gracious. Self must be first
slain in me, before I go to destroy any part of self in another; otherwise I
shall wound mine own soul, when I go to cure another; vainglory is
conceited, such a man is a reformer of all but one; this exactness, because it
cannot accomplish it self, turns into frowardness; and now he that cannot
mend all will mar all; the froward soul sowes strife, says Solomon, Prove.
16.28. These are the most dangerous persons of all: there is a strife of words,
and a strife of matter; reason, not passion, must only fight against folly;
this makes conquest and honor; strength and vigor of matter, not violence and
virulency of words and lust; in this latter strife we can do nothing that is
honorable to our selves, or benificiall to others; and therefore its a strife
utterly forbidden by the Apostle, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife
or vainglory, but i^ lowness of mind let each esteem other better then
themselves.

Yet let not what is honorable be condemnd with that which is dishonorable. I
am to strive with any to pluck a brand out of the fire; men come not out of
the arms of a harlot with ease; it is not divine strife, but diabolical that is
our plague at this day, and this in no man's heart more, then in theirs that
cry-out most of the divisions of the Land, sects, schisms, and factions. I
have not a word to say for any one that walks besides rule. That strife in
sacred things, which strikes at men's honors, liberties, and the like, is fire
not from above, but from below, and will keep persons and Kingdoms low; the
sword will never be turned into a plowsheare, nor want work in the world, while
this spirit lives. Our weapons in divine things are spiritual; if we make them
carnal, we shall abuse institution, and attempt to kill the King of the Jews
in the Cradle, to keep our selves King; truth shall no sooner bud, but have
its brains knocked out with a club; which has been the effectual argument of
Antichrist, these many hundred years; and the argument of Episcopacy now on
foot in the field, which has cost a great deal of blood to answer; and yet we
are necessitated to answer, as we are opposed; which should make us and
posterity for ever after us, to abhor such kind of strivings, to advance the
things that we think Christ's.

COLOS. 1.29. According to his working.


DIvine action according to its first cause, is here mentioned: First Christ
works, and then a Christian. Christ is the Prince of life; ye have denied the
holy one, and killed the Prince of life, Acts 3.15. That is the prime and first
maker and breather of life: as Christ is the Prince of life, so he is the
Prince of all the acts of life; that is, the preparations of the heart in man,
as well as the answer of the tongue, are from the Lord. Ere divine actions are
attempted, there are great thoughts of heart in a good man. How shall I move in
this action congruous to the will of Christ? a Christian travels still to bring
forth; now these travelings of the soul, as well as the birth it self, are
all from Christ; the training and exercizing of arms, as well as the fight and
conquest. He works the will and the deed of his good pleasure. There is a
first mover in order to the whole, and a first mover in order to the parts: the
will is the first mover in order to the parts; not an organ or faculty stirs,
not a thought works or sits up a moment, with any content about any thing,
till first the will will it: this first mover is not independent, not the
original of its own influence upon other faculties: the first mover in order
to the whole, moves the will, which is Christ; he gives the very desires and
inclinations of the heart to things that are heavenly; according to his
working, we stir and work, the expression means this, that what we are as
Christians intentionally or actually, in thought, word, or deed, we are wholly
of Christ.

Three words will comprise all that belongs to a Christian, though three
thousand words will not express it, efficiency, sufficiency, al-sufficiency,
and all these are of Christ. The first term comprises the very being of a
Christian, esse Christianum: A Christian precisely so considered, that is, as
divine life and soul is together, as one would say, and he is as Melchisedeske
without father and mother, without any propagator in all the world but Christ:
there is much variety of things in the world, and yet all of very known and
very low birth; some are borne of blood, that is, of very corruption, of very
filth and excrement, which we call a praeternaturall Generation; others are
borne of the will of the flesh; that is, of a natural Generation; others of
the will of man, that is an artificial Generation, as all your structures of
art and ingenuity, which are the birth of men's brains: but a Christian is none
of these births, he came none of these ways into this World, he is of God;
which were borne not of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God, 1 John, which is explained in the verses foregoing and applied
to God-man, to wit Christ, to as many as received him, meaning believers, to
them gave [hee] power to be called the Sons of God. The reception of Christ
makes the conception of a Christian; as soon as the Babe stirs in the womb,
as soon as love-thoughts begin to leap in the soul, toward Christ and the
things of Heaven, that very quickening is from the power of Christ. The Son
has power to quicken whom he will, and none else.

The power of Christ does make life, and makes this life more abundant, that
is, strong enough to show it self in every action as such a life, as such a
noble-natured thing. Not only our efficiency but our sufficency is of Christ.
The being of grace and the lively actions of grace, such a potent and vigorous
being. It Is common to mistake special things: a Christian man is a likely man
to act Christianly, therefore an able man, 'twill not follow: for life and
strength, are two things: a creature may have a specificall life, proper enough
to such a noble business, and yet not be able to do it. As some works and
actions are proper to a rational Life, to a creature endowed with reason, and
yet such a creature not able to do such works, because not endowed with reason
enough: 'tas efficiency but not sufficiency, 'tas not the maturity of its
being, the complement of its kind. The Apostle speaking of himself as a
Christian, and in the person of Christians, yea, and speaking all this as under
great advantages, yet disclaimes a sufficiency as such a person, to act like
himself; as a good man, to think a good thought; or as a good gifted man, to
preach a good Sermon; not that [wee] are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but [our sufficiency] is of God which makes us able
Ministers of the new Testament. 2 Cor. 3.5. sufficiency has its birth from God
as well as efficiency; one degree of grace, does not form another, but every
degree formed by Christ. There is the grace of being, and the grace of
strengthening: the sufficiency of a Christian to act as such a noble person,
bears upon the latter. I can do all things through Christ that [strengthens
mee] he does not say through Christ that has given me life, but through
Christ that gives concurrence and sufficiency to this life, in order to all
that is to be performed by it. The word strengthen which the Apostle uses in
the place before mentioned, is rendered by a very fit word (...)
in-strengthning or corroberation, as one would say, an Oak and an Oak: there
must be an Oak and an Oak, life and strengthening, life and life more
abundantly; this is the ability of the soul to all things: his making, and his
working and strengthening after made, which is called a workeing hitherto. My
Father and I work hitherto: we strive according to present working: not
according to first making: striving according to his [working] which works in
me.

able to all things. A Christian is strong in one grace, and weak in an other:
strong at one time, and weak at another: this is almost every ones case: there
is a state above all these ebbings and flowings possible, a general
sufficiency, a general Christian, an al-sufficiency, an abounding not in one
grace but in all, not at one time only, but at all times, in health,
sickness, in plenty, in poverty: a full Sea that has no ebb, at no hour in
the day, no at no season in the year; of such an estate as this does the
Apostle speak, 2 Cor. 9.8.9. God is able to make all grace abound toward us,
that we always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good
work. Wealth is an ambiguous term, when we say such a one has a great
estate; we ask, wherein? in Money? or in Land? or in Houses? in Wares? or in
Jewels, or the like? few persons have a great estate in all these, and yet its
possible there may be a general rich man, rich in every thing that is riches;
rich in Money, rich in Land, rich in Jewels, rich in Houses, etc. So there may
be a general rich man spiritually, rich in Faith, rich in Hope, rich in Love;
abounding in this gift, in that gift, in every gift, That speaks Christianity:
if there be any such, all-sufficient man, it is of Christ, being enriched [in
every thing] to all bountifulnesse] which causes through us thanksgiving to
God, 2 Cor. 9.11. if there be any general rich man, enriched to every thing,
as the Apostle speaks, he tells us to whom it must be acknowledged; to God.

All good is of Christ; habit, act; nothing is of us, in me dwells no good; no
man's state is hopeful till this principle be well settled in the soul. Mortal
Diseases makes sometimes but little symptom: it is so frequently concerning the
soul; Pride is a mortal malady, a soul that complements with Christ, about
his eternal condition, wants are so few in number, and so small of
consequence; the symptom of this is a senseless spirit at the Throne of grace:
God has many a lie told to his face. God I thank thee I am not as such and
such, J am in a very hopeful state over many are, for I do this and that.
There is a stroaking of self in and after some performances: sometimes God is
told of it, but often man: it is an implicit contradiction of the point in
hand, all is not of Christ, something is of the man himself: he observes his
crawlings in Divine things, and they are very glorious in his eye, but does not
observe the Toade in his belly that he crawles with, to wit, self.
Selfe-action has this property, a man is much taken with his own motion; some
Artists will pride themselves much in a piece they draw themselves, and will
plead for it much, though there be little Art or Workmanship in it in
comparison of that which some others draw. Swallows catch vermin as they flee:
when they flee high, it is after Flies: when they flee low, it is after Flies:
they live upon the vermin of their motion, and keep their wings so long and
so strong, with the imperfect animal they flee after. Christianity of this
property is common, but I like it not: the man's Religion is sometimes of a
higher and nobler, sometimes of a meaner and lower strain, as will best
correspond observers but still in its scope, one, to catch Flies, to live upon
some imperfect thing that is met with in the motion; and when no Flies can be
caught, neither by flying high, nor flying low, no carnal encouragement, then
keep the neast, the house, and do nothing. Christians that live upon the
vermin of their motion, are up and down, high and low, very uncertain in
sanctity and consolation, and this may characterise every man to himself, that
is not practically clear in this point, that habit and act are both of Christ.

By-things looked at, cannot bring in nor bear up, such a noble life as we
pretend to when we profess a religious life; this life is according to every
dram drawn from Christ, it is not from the speciousnesse of our own action,
nor from other folks encouragement. This time is full of straits, external
engagements byasse men much, about internal and external things; if this
temptation were over says one, I would take a better course. No thou would
not: courage to the things that are noble, springs not from any earthly
advantage; if all secular authority in the Land, should say, they would secure
thee, for any damage that thou should suffer, in pursuit of such a
Religious cause, yet would thine own heart fall off like the Jsraelites from
entering the holy Land, and thou would as they, step back, when at the door
ready to enter, who though Moses and Aaron bid them to enter, yet they fell
off: so though Parliament and Synod were at thy back, and did encourage thee to
enter, yet if thou have no other encouragement, thou will not step a step in
the ways of God; by the grace of God J am that J am, says Paul; let all the
men in the World be never so gracious to thee, yet will thou be as ungratious
as thou art, to the day of thy death, if the grace of Christ do not put Spirit
and Life into thee.

External inducement is nothing; that man's Religion is nothing that thinks
otherwise, and 'twill prove so to his shame and loss, if his eyes be not
opened to see it. If a man speak merely of a natural life, that is, a life as
a man, as such a creature, then a man may say of external good things, as
Hezekiah of health and strength, and other outward advantages, in these is the
life of my spirit: but if you speak of Divine Life, life to that which is
Heavenly; in riches, honors, friends, parts, in no exernall thing, in no
internal thing, but in Christ, is the life of my spirit; according to his
working, not according to my own working, shall I work for God, and for his
glory. Stratagents and wiles, is much made use of in these times of woe; Satan
uses it too: stay says he, till Parliament and Synod put life into thee, till
they do this, and they do that, ('it is good to honor authority, in that which
is proper to such authority) but so you may stay till the sword of Gods wrath
that is in the Land kill you all. Work according to his working within you,
and take heed of checking this, to wait for others working without you, to set
you forward; strangle the quicknings of the spirit, and expect quicknings from
men, and thou will be executed by conscience for the greatest murderer in the
World.

Our life bears upon the operation of Christ. Lets make Christ the fountain,
and then lets draw as much water of life from him as may be. You see how exact
and express the proportion is made, between Christ's operation and our life;
such operation; such life; we strive according to his working: therefore lets
set Christ at work hard, and get as much divine operation and life from him as
may be. Divine operation is the choysest mercy in the World; how full of life
is my spirit when in the Hands of God! when he has it working and moulding of
it! commend thy spirit therefore often into his hands, send him much work.
Spirits are so much employed and over-wrought in the World, that Christ has
little or no work sent him, no house nor shop to work in. A man? no: an image
stands before God in duty, a thing without a soul; no spirit sent to God to
talk with: no soul, no child of the soul at home, to tell where the Parent is:
children of the soul, I mean thoughts and desires, all sacrificed to devils,
at the end of the earth; and thus far from home must abide, and never be sent
for home, who ere come to visit them, though it be Christ himself: what Divine
operation can be in the soul, when the soul is so given up to gadd after
worldy things? Divine operation is a very retired act two great Pears in
conference and may not be interrupted (things in discuss, being of such great
concernment,) the Spirit of God and the spirit of man. Divine operation, it is
a vision from Heaven; of property like that of Paul's, that binds the soul in
order to all carnal objects that may make the mind gad; and in this vision as
in that is a voice, a still voice, Saul, Saul, sinner, sinner why do thou do
this and that against me? but this still voice, is full of life to the soul
that stilly listens, this operation of Christ silenceth that noise which is in
the soul, by the operation of other things, and then is there a voice from
Heaven to the soul, come up hither O soul, thou must be above this and that,
for the tranquillity and felicity of thy life. These are the operations of God,
in which is the life and Heaven of man. All divine operation has voice, the
word and the spirit go together still, Christ works and talks, makes peace
and speaks peace, makes war, and speaks it to conscience. You might know what
God is a working in your souls, he speaks it now and then very plain to
conscience: you that have ears to hear what the spirit says; the spirit
works, and then it speaks what it works; the spirit [saith] now and then in
still weather, if you listen now and then you may hear what it says. The
spirit and the word go together, one moves and quickens the soul by the other,
Hell-ward or Heavenward; the one should be much dreaded and the other much
desired; Divine operation is a thing of the greatest concernment in the World,
it is as the spirits in the blood; if the Pulse beat and work not, spirits are
all wasted, death is seized upon the state. Sinners, I know not how God works
in your souls, how he has stirred, or how he does: only know this, when he
leaves pulsation, that is, cease knocking, know that your life is departed:
the operation and the pulsation of God, is the life of the soul; the life of
the souls, is the blessedness of the soul; as I am lively and agile in
divine things, carried upon Eagles wings to God in all duties, so am I in
Heaven. Get as much therefore of this operation and life, as you can. I speak
this, because there is a great difference in Divine operation. There is an
operation that makes (...) to will, and there is an operation that makes (...)
all readiness of mind to will, 2 Cor. 8.11. Act. 17.11. they received the
word with all readiness of mind, speaking of the noble Bereans. There is a
great difference between Divine operations, and this makes a great difference
between Christian and Christian, one far more noble then an other; These
were more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with
all readiness of mind; there was not only (...) but (...). Willing, but all
readiness to will, all strength and life of affection to Christ and the
Gospel, which is the Nobility of a Christian: These are the Noble operations
that I would have you long and look after.

COLOS. 1.29. Which works in me mightily. Or, in power.


IN-operation simply, and in-operation extraordinary, are both to be stood upon
a little, to open this expression unto you; the one will open the first part of
this expression, which works in me: the other will open the latter part of
the expression, which works in me mightily, or in power.

In-operation simply considered, is a supreme act, making an eternal impresse
upon the soul, for life or death. Things have their advantage by position; so
they may be put that every one cannot reach them nor find them out; the heart
has this advantage, it is a hidden man, an inward creature. What you look upon
or touch, when you have to do with a creature of your own making, is flesh
and bones; but the manhood of this substance, or that which makes this
substance a man, is hidden within; so hid that none can reach, but by supreme
power of its own, or borrowed. Among these Nations shall thou have no ease,
but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and sorrow of mind, Deuteronomy.
28.56. The Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart: a stone may be stirred
and toumbled sometimes, when it is not broken: Consider the heart under this
metaphor, as the Scripture does, for some refractory properties of it, and this
stone that lies at the center of the little world, cannot be stirred, nor the
foundation of this little world shaken in the least but by a supreme power; The
Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart. Those internal operations which
make a wicked man's heart shake and tremble sometimes, they are from the Lord,
and when the Lord takes off his hand, the stone lies still again; lift and
pull whosoever will, as long and as much as he will, the sinner stirs not; which
is authority enough, that internal operation is a supreme act. If this be not,
Job gives further authority, and makes a higher instance. Consider the stone
that lies at the center of the earth, the foundation stone of the little world,
I mean the heart, as shaken, or as broken, and God does it; God makes my
heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me, Job 23.16. When a Christians heart
melts and is dissolved; take it in a refreshing sense, or take it in an
afflicting sense, supreme power does it: man cannot do this himself; a
sinner, a Saint, cannot move the stone in his bosom one jot; it is an Almighty
act that reaches the heart of any man; the Almighty stirs me within. Internal
operation is as I have said, a supreme act.

This act makes eternal impresse: Internal operation, is from a high hand,
and of high concernment; it is of everlasting force: the Spirit is called an
eternal Spirit, not so much in order to being, as in order to operation; the
things that this Spirit works in us and for us, are life eternal: the
workman, the workhouse, the work wrought in this house, are all eternal: the
Spirit eternal, the soul eternal, the works wrought here, the carvings or
cuttings, are eternal; unalterable; if Christ make but the least dint upon the
heart, I may challenge all powers in heaven and in earth to even it. Operations
external are not eternal; not a work you look upon without, though never so
great or glorious, but fades, and shall be turned into its fitst nothing; but
operations internal are eternal; what God does in the soul, is to last as
the soul; if he drop mercy into us, this drop shall last for ever, though all
the mercies without us may be gone in a moment: if he drop justice and wrath
into us, this drop abides for ever. God is called immutable, not so much in
order to being, as in order to action; and not in order to all action neither;
but in order to internal actions; such as are done about the soul. I am God
immutable and change not; Change not? in what? in esse? that is granted of all,
and needs no affirmation; no, this is not the thing; but in operari: and about
this many doubt. I have droped mercy into the hearts of the sons of Jacob,
and it shall never out; I have begun a good work, a good internal work, and
it shall last to the day of Christ; it shall last unto Heaven, that is for
ever; therefore is the Spirit, according to his presence and internal
operation, called the earnest of Heaven, and the scale to the day of
redemption; it makes impresse upon the soul so deep, that abides for ever;
the work the Spirit does in us, outstands the gates of hell; the Temple that
Christ now builds in us, not a stone, not the least pin of it, moulders to all
eternity, it is so wrought: it is so on the other hand, what he does internally in
point of justice, he does it to purpose. All the world on fire without, you may
sooner quench it, then one sparkle of the fire of Gods wrath, which he casts
into a man; this is an everlasting fire, an always punishment, as the Scripture
speaks; Bow down their back always, pointing at Doeg and Judas, and such
like wretches, that were internally punished. A man internally smitten by the
justice of God, his back is broke for ever: take Job but as he personates a
wicked man's case; forbear the application of it to himself, as he does, being
then in a temptation; let his person alone, but take the thing, as his
apprehension is opened fully in this point, to his trial for a time, and you
shall have him speak notably, of the property of internal operation, in order
to evil men. God is in one mind, when he is at work in wicked souls, one
cannot turn him; what his soul desires that he does, Job 23.13. If after
great provocation, workings and strivings without, by words and blows, he go
to work within, to fit the vessel for wrath; if this be now the will of God,
there is no turning of him, nor no turning of the point, nor edge of the tools
he works with; no terminating the effect short of the Authors intention: the
Trinity in their action internal, to express this property of it are called
agents hitherto. The Father works hitherto, and I work; observe about what
works Christ was, when he spoke thus; he was about internal action, to wit,
the curing of the cripple which had lain so long at the poole; which was a
cripled soul, as well as a cripled body.

Internal operation is of eternal force; this is general and indetermined:
therefore it follows in the definition, it is of eternal force to such an
express end, to life and death: that which Christ does within about the heart,
is vital or mortal, to dispatch the creature for his furthest end. To make
miserable or blessed here, is not the furthest end of internal operation,
though the furthest end of external operation. External donations which are
the works of Gods hand, their furthest end is to make a sweet condition here;
as riches, and the like, they will avail here. Money answers all; but they
will not avail any further then here, for the felicitating of man; they will
not avail in death, much less in judgment, to do man any service: but the
furthest end of internal operation, is to make cursed or blessed in death, and
after death in another world, when and where nothing else can. There be gifts
that be mere Spirit, which have not a jot of any carnal thing in them; these
we call internal; these are molded some by justice, some by mercy, and you
shall see what their end is, by an instance or two. God has given them a
spirit of slumber, Romans 11.8. Here he speaks of operations all spirit; God
has given them a spiris of slumber; internal works, and the Prophet tells the
end and issue of these; it is decisive, to dispatch them; they have a spirit of
slumber, that they may go away in a slumber; Shut their eyes, lest they should
see with them; stop their ears lest they should hear with them, and convert,
and be healed. Internal operation we see dispatches the soul one way or
other. Into whatsoever house ye enter say peace, and if that would not take,
speak death: These were but emblems of Christ's internal action. Into what
house or heart Christ goes to work, by his Word and Spirit, he makes through
work; the Axe is then to the root; it makes excision or circumcision at least.
All internal operation is to cut off sin off the soul. He is a Jew that is
one inwardly; Circumcision is that of the heart: When he goes to work
inwardly, he does excise or circumcise, and thus I have opened the nature of
internal operation.

The worst evil is curable, the greatest good attainable; this issues
naturally from this point, that there is such an engine to be found, that can
work inwardly. Our greatest maladies are those that are within; that one
plague that was upon Pharaohs heart, (to wit) the hardening of it, was more then
the ten plagues upon his outward man. Evils are not rightly weighed; this is
one of the greatest evils: they which strip us most of external things, they
are accounted greatest: no, they are not; that which gnawes upon the soul
after outward things are gone, is greater. There is death, and the bitterness
of death, as Agag said; the one it is a greater evil then the other by far.
The death of husband, wife, child, or the death of estate, is nothing, if it be
but a naked departure of these, if their ghost do not walk afterward in the
soul, if there be not after their departure a bitter tang in conscience, as
evilly got or as evilly kept; got with too little conscience, and kept with too
much affection; the cup of affliction, fill it as full as the world, or as
satan can, if God do not put one Ingredient in it or other, to make it off
with a tang and a touch upon the spirit, it is nothing: when a malady does fester
inwardly, and lights of some blood vessels that carries it more directly to the
heart, then it is a malady indeed; and yet in these cases there is hope, if
taken in time, because there are things inwardly vertuall and operative: so we
can say spiritually; the strongest poison that the soul has taken in, cannot
render the condition desperate, because there are things of an internal
virtue; operations that can reach the soul: Christ can purge the inward man,
and can let the inward man blood; with his Word he can prick the heart, any
tumor or swelling in it, and let out all the watery or fiery matter that is in
it; he can wound the spirit and then heal it; make clouds, and then expel
them; make darkness upon the face of the deep, upon the soul that deep part
of man, and then make a Sun rise in this horizon, in that more then half the
little world that lies out of fight: when more then half the little world is
drowned, when that in part of man is quite overwhelmed: yet then is not the
case desperate; nor should any soul give it up as so. Misery sometimes arises
to extremity; extremity is darkness without any light; a whole Army engaged
and routed; without fightings, within fears: the hand can do no more, the
head do no more; all faculties have pumpt themselves dead in the place: I
cannot think a thought to refresh me; the waters are come in to my soul, and
come in so deep, that I give up my self for lost. This poor soul has more
sorrow then is godly. Pressure is unkind, when it oppresses; oppression is not
always from another; I may be an oppressor to my self; and this is when I
write death upon my person, because Christ has written death upon all my
actions. Where thou can do no more, will thou give up thy soul for lost? if
this should be generally practiced, there would not a soul be saved. Waters
are come into thy soul, and thy heart is overwhelmed; and yet in this deep
internal distress, a Rock may be found, something higher then thee may
appear for relief, by a supreme hand. From the ends of the earth will I cry
unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed; lead me to the Rock that is higher
then I, Psalm 61.2. When the water is got in to me, and overwhelmes my heart,
yet then there is one higher, and taller then I, that can pull me out of these
deep waters; pull body out; yea, pull soul out, and save the heart when it is
overwhelmed.

The worst evil is curable, the greatest good attainable, I see by this point.
The greatest good in this world, is that which Christ most loves; that which he
most loves, is truth in the inward parts. We are taken with outward beauty,
and outward glory; Christ is not. All the glory of this world was showed to him
by satan, at once, and yet no temptation to him, affection not stird a jot;
internal glory takes Christ much, truth in the heart; himself seated in the
soul, is the greatest good in the world, to him, and to us; and this takes him
exceedingly. If the Devil when he took Christ and set him upon the top of a
high place, could have taken Christ and set him down in any man's heart, and
seated truth in the inward parts of any one, though it had been the poorest
person in the world; this would have taken him indeed: but Satan cannot do
this for Christ, neither does Christ need it from him, he can do it himself;
he works inwardly, at a greater depth, and from a more underived strength then
he; he can take Chariot in his Word, and ride over all the great world, over
all the little world, into every room of the soul; into joints and marrow,
and set down himself where he will; in conscience, in affection, in what
inward part he sees good; in some one part, or in all parts: that is the
greatest good in the world, when truth is in the inward [parts] (i.) not in one
faculty, but in all; not only in the understanding, but in the conscience, in
the affection, in every faculty; this Christ loves mightily, and what he loves
he can accomplish; there is no torture upon him, affection larger then power,
as it is usually with us. All power is given to him, to work without, to work
within, in Earth, in Heaven; that is, in the more internal and heavenly part.
He gives wisdom to the heart. I will give my Laws into your mind. By Laws
is meant all grace; and yet all this made a gift, and given into the soul that
desires it. Christ gives things into the hand, yea, into the heart, all
precious things, and derives them into all parts; and when all this is done in
us, and the like labored for to be done by us, in all others; then is
internal operation in power; or then Christ works in us mightily; which term
pointing only at a gradation in the same operation, has raveld out it self,
according to what is difficult, in unfolding the former.

A concluding Speech.
WHich works in me mightily] The concurrence of this power we have had in
our measure all along our labor, which I would should be much acknowledged to
Christ; by virtue of which we are now come to our period of this Verse, and of
the whole Chapter. Our pace in this long journey has been slow, that you might
all go along with me, in the well understanding and embracing of weighty
things; and yet how many notwithstanding our double industry are left behind,
in the blindness and mis-beliefe of their souls, I know not. If our Gospel
be hid, after all pains fully to lay it open, such souls have great reason to
fear themselves. Childbearing is no easy work to any, but doubly hard to
some; so that life out of death, may that which comes forth between the
legs, be called. This birth though but a hard-favoured child, has been hard
travel to us; 'tas made many a sigh and groan, many a heart pang and crying
out to God. What you will do with the child now borne, whither you will be a
Pharaoh or a Pharoahs Daughter to it, murder it or keep it alive in your
hearts, I know not. This I know, that no man can spill all the blood of any
child of God, some will stick upon you do what you can, to tell the murderer
at the great day. Sighs and groans are the tears of the heart, the heart
venting it self at the mouth when it cannot at the eyes and other lesser
pores: every drop that has fallen from our heart and head, from our Eyelids
or Eyebrows shall be all gathered up, and put as marginall notes along by all
our labors, and all put in one Volumne together; and this volumne put in your
hand at the great day, and opened Leaf after Leaf, and read distinctly and
exactly to you, and your souls made to attend, regard, and remember better
then here many of you have done; and when all is thus read over, this book
shall be closed, and this question solemnly put to you all; now O souls, what
have you profitted by all Words, Prayers, Tears, Sighs, Groans? As
Conscience can answer to this (for nothing else may then speak,) so shall your
sentence be, and I shall be called out to give witness to the justice of it,
and say Amen Lord Jesus, righteous is all that thou have pronounced upon these
souls. Our labors lost, if this were simply all, truly 'twere nothing; but
our labors lost, and your souls are lost; and yet what is loss to you shall
be gain to us, for we are a sweet savor to God both in them that are saved
and in them that perish. As we dress and as we water Trees in the Lords
Vinyard, so shall we have our wages, and not as these Trees bear; if Trees be
dressed and watered well, though they never bear well, we shall have a good
Vintage. You Londoners are Trees watered choisely indeed. It Is storied of the
Plane Tree, that at its first transplanting into Italy, 'twas watered with
Wine, to make it take and prosper in those parts of the World: you are Trees
watered with Wine; I cannot say that you have been so watered by me, I dare
not; but this I can humbly and truly say, that if our choicest strength and
spirits, may be named in stead of Water, Wine, or if the blessing which has
gone along with these Waters at any time have turned them into Wine, in vigor
upon your souls, then has God by me watered your Roots with Wine; and yet
if after such costly watering you grow not nor bear not, certainly such Trees
are near unto cursing; which sad effect that my Ministey should be an
instrument to hasten to this place, or to any soul, will make me to continue
mourning still in secret for you all, and so spend and end my days. *

FINIS.
TABLE.
MAn is in soul misery page 1 So naturally, judicially, universally p. 2, 3
Whether sensible of soul misery, moved: and what demonstrates insensibility p.
3, 4, 5 Christ snatcheth souls out of Hell P. 7 Christ moves swiftly,
thoroughly, preventingly, ravishingly to save p. 7, 8, 9 Whom Christ has
snatched out of Satan's power p. 10, 11, 12 That power which works irresistibly
to save the soul, with much ease can save our body p. 13 Ignorance makes
profaneness p. 14 Ignorance pollutes will, the practicke understanding, the
conscience, and is the Devils element p. 15, 16 The dark Church of England
spoken to p. 16, 17 Christ carries souls to Heaven p. 18 Christ saves
laboriously, fatherly, surely, p. 19, 20 Satan carries souls to Hell, and how
p. 22, 23 Demonstrations of Christ's Kingdom in this world p. 25, 26 Some not
far from the Kingdom of God, and yet never come there p. 30, 31 Love gives
forth preferment to all Gods children p. 32 God gives orderly, purely,
solacingly p. 32, 33 The folly of men that look after humane favor to rise p.
34, 35 The blessedness of them which are beloved of God p. 36, 37 What
redemption means p. 38, 39, 40, 41 Bodily bondage looked after, but not soul
bondage p. 42, 43 What a spirit of bondage, and a state of bondage are p. 43,
44 What men in bondage, and those which are out of bondage should do p. 45, 46
The choicest mercies come through the greatest miseries p. 47, 48 Grounds to
give God the glory of his way, let it be how twill p. 50, 51 52, 53 Great
things coming to us in way of hardship; exhorted to prepare for hardship p. 54
What sin means p. 55, 56 What reconciliation notes p. 56, 57 What forgiveness
of sin is p. 57 Christ is admirable in action, and in person p. 59 The
excellency of Christ's person makes the excellency of his action p. 60 How Noble
action proceeds from the Noble form of things p. 61 What Christ is in
compleatnesse, he is for believers p. 62, 63 Christ as the Image of God to man
explained p. 63, 64, 65 How to conform to Christ as the Image of God p. 66 No
representation for Divine adoration, but Christ: how nature attempts nothing
this way, and how fancy if it would, is disadvantaged p. 67, 68 God invisible
in action and person p. 70 That God is invisible in action, tremble before him
p. 73 Gods action is invisible, trust in him ibid. That God is in person
invisible, long to be out of the body p. 74 What firstborn notes. Birthright
an honorable thing p. 74, 75 They which have but a mere natural birthright,
spoken to; and they which have both a natural, and a spiritual p. 76, 77
B^avenesse of spirit to maintain privilege wanting p. 78 Every thing a this
side Christ a creature: things therefore should be feared, loved, trusted in,
as they are p. 79, 80, 81 Men are apt to conceive too low and too mean of
Christ p. 82 We set up things as we see them, and as we love them p. 82, 83, 84
Demonstrations of setting Christ above all p. 84, 85 A holy soul cannot tire
it self in the contemplation of Christ p. 87 There is variety, congruity,
transcendency of excellency in Christ p. 87 88 Three things that destroy divine
contemplation p 88, 89 It Is our duty and our consolation to contemplate whole
Christ p 90, 91 God does create, and new create in Christ ibid. All divine
action going forth in Christ is consolation to the godly; they may argue for
the choysest mercy upon this ground p. 93 Earth the room we live in here, which
is low, common, dark, filthy, p. 95 96, 97 As our dwelling is, so should we
expect to find things p. 97, 98 But one good neighbor in Earth ibid. The
works of God afford man a full soul employment p. 99 The soul is noble in
its acts, and Christ would lose none for want of employment p. 100 The soul is
remiss in its acts, Christ leaves this without excuse p. 100 Whence
soule-idlenesse about divine things springs p. 100, 101 Thrones, Dominions, are
explained p. 102 Christ has an unexpressable power by him at command, to
overruled this world p. 102 Angelical properties p. 103, 104 The pride and
folly of men that war against God p. 105 Christians exhorted to trust in Christ
because of his command of Angels p. 106, 107 All things must be for Christ p.
108 Many will dye by this law, that all is to be for Christ p. 110 Nothing will
be for Christ as it should be, when the heart is not p. 110 What speaks the
heart for God in action p. 111 Affection naturally is no whit divine p. 112
What eternity is p. 113 There is principium ordinis, temporis, and essentiae p.
113 Obedience must be suited to Christ's being and moving p. 114 Christ as an
eternal agent works in the soul p. 115 Christ being eternal, eternal
things may be had p. 116 In Christ all things consist, and what this expression
imports p. 117 118 What providence is, common, and special p. 119, 120
Consolation to necessitous creatures, that in Christ all consists p. 121 122
What to be observed to make Christ give out himself for sweet subsistence p.
123 There is store in Christ for all spiritual necessity p. 125 Grounds why
not supplied with much from Christ our head p. 127 Many spiritual
eonsiderations to quiet souls that are complaining for want of much of Christ
ibid. Christ as head: what his rule is, and where p. 130, 131 Men cannot bear
the rule of Christ p. 131 Two things demonstrate the heart ruled by Christ p.
132, 133 Several considerations to draw the heart under the rule of Christ p.
134, 135 The principality of Christ's Priesthood demonstrated p. 136, 137
Christ's Priestly Office to be made used of p. 138 Hard to convince men that
they trust in their wo^kes: two things discover it p. 136 Consolation in a
double respect issues from the Priestly Office of Christ to believers p. 140,
141 The superiority of Christ's Prophetical Office set forth p. 142, 143 Christ
teaches internally, eternally, instantly p. 15, 146 Whether taught of christ,
and what demonstrates it p. 146, 147 Christ has a general glory: a garment
without seame p. 148 Gold proffered to sinners that has no dross p. 149
Persons that would love Christ are excepted ibid. God fits one thing to another
p. 150 Gods way in this world is a tracing of man ibid. The Deity speaks out it
self in apt action ibid. Divine action is to make conviction p. 150, 151 God
will be even with men that oppose him p. 152 England to justify Christ in all
her misery p. 153 The folly of some in looking for great things: what fitteth
for great things p. 154, 155 A gracious heart is taken with Christ as chief
ibid. Judgment is clear, and love sincere in a Saint p. 155, 156 Persons
exhorted to consider who is chief in their souls: three things speak the
undervaluing of Christ p. 156, 157, 158 I cannot believe: this objection
answered to p. 159 Saints prize Christ as chief, and so does he them; the
benefit of this ibid. We are all by sin dead: the properties of spiritually
death p. 160, 161 Now trading is dead to think of dead hearts p. 163 Two
things tend to spiritual life p. 163, 164 Christ has in all things the
pre-eminence: what universal dominion means p. 165, 166 The power of Christ
to be laid to heart: proud sinners to trouble at it p. 167 As God has set
Christ over all, so should we p 168 Love sets Christ as high as God has set
him, over all ibid. The blessedness of their condition that gives Christ
pre-eminence in all things p. 169 How freely God contrives relief for man p.
170 Free motion, the purest, the noblest, the surest, the sweetest p. 170, 171
That Gods motion to sinners is free, should comfort them p. 172 It Is pleasing to
God to give grace, but not so to sinners to receive it ibid. Denial of free
grace has four aggravations p. 173, 174 Every thing is shaped to man
according to Gods own will p. 178 Things, below man, equal to man, above man,
are all shaped by Gods will p. 179 Though God, yet no man may pursue his own
will ibid. A man fast to his will, was first very loose from God p. 180 A man
pinned to his will has three grand plagues upon him p. 181 182 Very
comfortable in all conditions, that things come to us according to Gods will p.
183 God restless till fallen man relieved p. 161 It Is natural to God to show
mercy: he eyes the beauty of action, the necessity of action p. 161, 162 The
property of Gods motion is restless to good; the contrary to this is
diabolical, and yet in some men: evils of it p. 162, 163 Christ has all
fullness, reception and fruition unto the highest blessedness: this
demonstrated p. 166, 167 Though Christ have all fullness, yet empty creatures
care little for him p. 168 Some have no grace nor no good nature ibid. Grace in
fullness, the felicity of life p. 169 Christ's fullness is a Christians p. 170
We are to prize persons and things according to the worth that is in them p.
171 The properties of internal wealth p. 171, 172 If persons were prized
according to what is in them, and not according to other things, the world
would be rightly ranked p. 173 How to discern what is in men p. 174
Reconciliation defined p 176 We look after friendship, but mistake what
friendship is necessary p. 179 Victories speak not God reconciled p. 180
Bleeding souls spoken particularly to from the point of reconciliation p. 181
Every condition in this world has mutation p. 182 Sin, the will of God, and
the wisdeme of God, how they have their influence into the mutation of things
p. 183 Mutation preaches submission p. 184 Inward mutations the saddest p. 185
That things change here, should commend the life to come to us p. 186 The
greatest cruelty is amongst persons hypocritically professing Christianity p.
187 Profession a thing of course ibid. Conviction makes conversion, or further
perversion p. 188 We should not account our persons and fortunes secure because
we live amongst persons professing Christianity p. 188, 189 The grounds upon
which some are over credulous ibid. Me profession demonstrated in two things
p. 190, 191 The proper plague of hypocrisy is searing p. 192 What the blood of
the crosso means p. 193 All that belongs to our welfare contrived upon the
cross by Christ p. 195 Insensible persons neglect the benefit of the blood of
Christ p. 195, 196 Where conscience bleeds, the blood of the cross is of use
p. 196, 197 Christ's blood engages God to give faith p. 197 What is meant by
reconciling all things which are in Heaven, and which are in earth p. 198 The
Noblest creatures are beholding to Christ p. 199 The less may be said for sin
the greater it is ibid. Grace works unexpressible rest to usward p. 200 Grace
did work more compendiously then now it does p. 201 Mercy is infinite, and
works so ibid. Bounty should be admired ibid. The contemplation of Christ's
sweetness makes the marriage knot p. 202 Such as are stripped of all their
outward estate comforted p. 203 We are apt sinfully to forget sin p. 205 God
has espied that we forget sin, and he is rousing up our memory p: 207 A sad
demonstration that England does sinfully forget her sin p. 208 A sinners hand
to the devils plough, he may look back p. 209 To look back upon a bad life
is of grace p. 210 What alienation is p. 211 Alienation should be laid to
heart: it is sometimes eternized p. 213 p. 214 God very inclinable to embrace
that soul which is far from him p. 215 What a blessedness it is to enjoy the
presence and fellowship of God ibid. What an enemy to Christ is p. 217 Many are
now one against another, possibly all against Christ p. 219 Integrity has a
double universality in it p. 220 Adversaries of the Lord called upon to cease
their course p. 221 The prime seat of sin, where it is, and why so seated p.
222, 223 Whether sin be disseated, and what may demonstrate it p. 224, 225 The
greatest blessing in the world to get sin thoroughly out of the mind ibid. What
is to be an enemy to Christ with the mind p. 226, 227 Sinners last shift for
sin is, that they did it against their mind p. 228 Remedy must be speedy when
sinners set to sin with their mind ibid. What makes the action of a man
wicked p. 229, 230 Our life wrapped up in our motion p. 232 What to be done to
right things amiss in the outward man p. 233 What goes to make up a good
action p. 234 The grace of God unto life is in all respects free p. 236 God
invites universally, affectionately p. 236, 237 God pursues prerogative
altogether in his dispensations ibid. Not a creature that can engage God p. 238
The favor of God goes forth for nothing in man, but the wrath of God goes
forth always for something in man p. 239 Grace is free in reference to all
soul distresses p. 240 Grace free to carnal wretches p. 241 God in mean and
low ways brings about great things p. 242 Enemies of the Lord should tremble,
that Christ does great things by small means p. 244, 245 God should be
honored in his way of doing great things by small means p. 246, 247 It Is a hard
thing to be kindly affected with what others do for us: from what such an
affection springs p. 248, 249 The mortality of all earthly things p. 252
Wisdom will have no Heaven here p. 253 Every thing dying, and yet carnal
affection alive ibid. Christians poor in the things of this life, cheered p.
254 All thing dying here, but all things ever living above; should make one
long for that state ibid. Divine presentation opened p. 255, 256 The properties
of that presentation which Christ makes when he presents the soul to his
Father in Heaven p. 257, 258 The people of God cheered with this that they
shall be gloriously presented to God p. 259 Through abiding in the faith opened
p. 262 Some men's religion a principle of juggling with conscience p. 265 They
have much of Christ internally who cleave close to him ibid. Man advantaged is
an uncertain creature in a good course p. 266 267 What are advantages and what
disadvantages to a stedy course p. 268 269 None should be confident of the
stediness of motion from any gifts p. 271 Things that would move very stedy
must rise very high p. 272 What hope is p. 273 How joy comes in to the soul
ibid. The soul naturally fits up much p. 274. Hope has all senses exquisite
p. 275 Hope conversant about no ill: hope conversant about the Noblest good
ibid. It Is a heavy stroke when the soul refuses comfort p. 276 How to know
that all sin is discharged p. 279 What positions to be held, which secretly
induce hope p. 277 What a double miserable condition it is in these times to be
without hope p. 279 The Gospel is a grand blessing p. 281 The Gospel makes an
exact discovery of man, and of God p. 282 The Gospel loathed by us; the evil
of it p. 283, 284 Great favors given, we should return answerably to him p.
285 Saving grace has a universality in it p. 187 Christ has vast power to do
good, and he cannot suspend it, in order to a distressed soul p. 288 Christ is
upon this design of giving himself to the soul that would have him p. 291
What the word Paul signifies p. 293 The freeness of God in all dispensations
of grace and place should be matter of admiration p. 294 The Land full of
mercies, and full of nothing but brutes which tread upon them p. 295 The proper
work of Christians to admire the grace of God p. 298, 299 Duty at last is
sweetest p. 300 Obedience rejected because of its issue, a damnable fault p.
301 What magnanimity is p. 302, 303 The great need of magnanimity in these
times p. 304 The souls of Gods people as well as their bodies suffer in this
world p. 306, 307 Comfort when pains rage inwardly p. 309 A man should be very
long ere he make a positive conclusion upon some works of God toward him p.
310 Two considerations which may relieve much when trials pinch the soul p.
311 To fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, etc. This
opened p. 401 The fury of man implacable ibid. Malicious men fire-shovels p.
402 Christ has left all his prime business in this world to Christians ibid.
At what height we are to be for Christ p. 403 None should be secure: sin and
justice will meet any where; in a City walled with Brass ibid. Christ has
drunk of the bloody cup in his turn, the next is this Saint or that p. 404
Gods people are not all in prison at once, and why p. 404, 405 The order of
trials to Gods people, hints the order of judgments to the wicked p. 407 The
sufferings of a Saint but his turn p. 408 A great honor to drink of the cup
that Christ did ibid. All earth bears thernes p. 409 What oppression is p. 410
How many ways oppression is made p. 411 Great men incident to the sin of
oppression p. 412 The greatness of the evil of oppression, the cause of
civil war p. 413 The goodness of Christ to be admired, as delivering from
oppressors p. 414 The Church Militant described p. 415 The misery of the
Militant Church to be laid to heart p. 419 How Christians find their hearts
moved to wrestle for the land p. 420 The Cross keeps off some from the Church
Militant p. 421 The Church Triumphant p. 423 All cannot be of the Church
Triumphant p. 427 The soul that pants for Heaven spoken to p. 428 What Is done
for the souls relief must be speedy p. 429 Two things incomparably swift in
bringing forth p. 430 Of a sudden sinners are undone ibid. Forbidden fruit
agrees well enough with some stomachs p. 431 Family distribution man's
blessedness p. 433 We should not content our selves with common mercies p. 434
They that feed on family favors owe much to God ibid. Christ peculiarly
applies himself in all his dispensations; unto his own people p. 436 Toward
whom Christ inclines we should p. 438 The heart of Christ hanging toward his
people, they should suck this Honey-combe p. 439 How the heart of God inclines
cannot be gathered by his hand p. 441 Not safe to calculate kindness by the
motion of outward things p. 442 The word of Christ pure, pleasant p. 444 The
Gospel rejected p. 446 We are spectators of sin and justice in height p. 447
Who it is within us that speaks, and what answers we return p. 448 There is
a power opening and shutting things of eternal consequence in order to man in
this life p. 449 What Christ can do to a perverse soul p. 451 Sweet to
consider that sacred concealments are but for a time p. 452 Mercies have their
several demensions p. 453 Love heightens dispensation till the soul be lifted
to Heaven ibid. Growth not regarded speaks unsoundnesse of heart p. 454 We have
greater things then our fathers, and regard them not p. 455 What the
demonstrative light of the Gospel is p. 456 Some have Jobs wish, they give up
the ghost in the womb p. 458 The most are finally left ibid. Two things hint a
soul finally left p. 460 Gods people shall not be utterly forsaken ibid. A
Christian is a hungry, thirsty soul, and the grounds of it p. 464, 465 What is
a Christians game p. 466 Growing Christians a great blessing to a Land p. 467
Such as would be strong in affection, directed p. 469 What the riches of the
mystery of the Gospel is p. 470 Heaven proferd as in Heaven p. 474 Christ and
his Ministers to be prized p. 475 What a Gentile is p. 477 The danger of
conviction stifled p. 461 Gentiles in heart should be so in name p. 480 Mercy
for Gentiles p. 481 Christ in man, what it is p. 482 Christ chooses a very
forlorn seat in this world p. 483 Our souls are the spiritual grave of
Christ, and he will be the victory of this grave p. 487 What hope is p. 488
Our felicity lies in Noble principles p. 450 What glory is p. 491, 492 Gospel
administration makes exact illumination p. 496 Christ slain, his blood cries
in conscience p. 498 The vindiction of conscience p. 499 Divine words put
themselves into the mind p. 501 Where the word is magisterially in the heart
p. 504 What to do, when the word is of no spiritual force p. 506 Gospel
purification is full p. 508 I am so filthy, that I shall never be made clean:
this objection answered p. 510 The soul of man is with much difficulty brought
home to Christ p. 514 The several ways the heart has to keep off the power
of the word ibid. We should consider well to what our hearts are facile p. 516
How we are to put price upon the soul p. 517 All our perfection is in Christ
p. 519 Most in their pursuit after a perfect state mistake p. 521 The
employment of a Minister of Christ very laborious p. 524, 525 The soul very
precious to Christ p. 526 How to ease a Ministers labor p. 528 Bad contention,
what it is p. 531 Good contention, what it is p. 532 The divine nature of
contention, wherein it lies p. 533 The contention of most, void of divine
property p. 535 Efficiency, sufficiency, alsufficiency, in Christ p. 537
External inducements nothing to make one truly religious p. 541 Our life
bears upon the operation of Christ p. 542 What internal operation is p. 544
Internal operation, of eternal force p. 546 Our greatest maladies are
internal, and yet cureable p. 547 The greatest good, is that which Christ
loves p. 549
FINIS TABULAE.

