Approved, Good, and happy News From IRELAND:

Relating how the Castle of Artaine was taken from the Rebels, two of their
Captains killed, and one taken prisoners by the protestants.

With the arrival of 2000 foot, and 300 horse from England.

Also a great skirmish between the Protestants and the Rebels at a place near
Feleston, wherein the English obta^ned great renow^e and victory.

Whereunto is added, A true relation of the great overthrow which the English
gave the Rebels before Drogheda sent in a Letter bearing date the 27 of
February. to Sir Robert King Knight at Cecill house in the Strand.

Printed by Order of Parliament.

Ireland

Protest.

Rebel^



LONDON, Printed for John Wright, 1641.

The last news from IRELAND, 7 March, 1641.
THe 10. of February our men went to Artain, against a castle so called, which
had before done some mischief, to some of our men, the enemy being in it, But
the enemy fled before our second coming, and left the Castle; and a garrison
was left in it by us.

Upon the 11th. we had news, that the enemy was intrenching at a place called
Soughing Town, some 6. Miles south of our City, and some 2000. Foot, and 200.
Horse went out against them; The Lord Lambart commanding in chief; A small
battle they had, but the Enemy stood not, on the Enemies side some 70 or more
was killed, and but one hurt on our side, and so came home that night, and
brought home one of the Rebels Captains and two more of the enemies Captains
slain, many Letters of treason were found about him that was taken.

On the 13. a man was brought to our City being taken by some of our scattering
men scouting about our City, who confessed without constraint, that he had killed
an Englishwoman at a place called Leslipesom, 6. Miles West of our City, and
washed his hands in her blood, being set on by the popish Priests so to do,
he was presently hanged, but dyed with much repentance and a protestant, which
few do.

Upon the 19. and 20. Arrived here from you 2000 Foot and 300 horse but little
or no money, which made us poor of the City fare harder then before; which was
to hard.

Upon the 21. We had knowledge that our Ships sent with vittaile to relieve
Tredath had got safely in, and in spite of the enemy, who had chayned up the
harbor, but our men brake the Chain, and got in, notwithstanding. And public
thanks was with us for that happiness, for in such a great strait was that
City, as to eat Horse flesh, as letters from my friends from the City to me
testified; Also Captain Bartlet who was the Sea Captain, in his coming home
met with some fore small Boats or Barks of the Wexford men, going toward the
enemy in the North to carry Lenten provision, but he spoiled their design in
sinking most or all of them, About the same time we had also Letters out of
Munster, that all that part of the Country was rose in Rebellion being carried
out by the Lord Muscry, and Lord Roch, who had professed much fidellity, and
many deceitful promises had past to the president of that Province, till they
saw their own advantage, And it is reported they are not less then 20000
strong, best appointed of all the Rebels, for indeed this Lord Muscry is the
most monied man, of all the Irish Lords, So that now not one place in Ireland,
but is in Rebellion, for the Lord of Clanrickard, stands as some think Neuter,
does nothing at all, or cannot do any thing, or will not, But we hear that
our President of Munster was forced to betake himself to the strong hold of
Cork, and the Lord of Cork betook himself to Yoyhall, which are reported
both to be besiged by the enemy.

Upon the 23. of this month, news was that at a place near Feleston six
miles from us, a great multitude of the enemies had strongly fortifide
themselves, and it is well fortifide by nature, having also a strong Castle in
it; Some 3000 of our men went against it, horse and foot, Our Lord general
the Earl of Ormond himself went, as did Sir Charles Coot, Sir Symond
Ha^court, and many more, John Moore being one of the Soldiers, and upon the
forelorne hope. had both his left and right hand man killed, he told me that
our general himself, led up the forlorn hope, with many words of Comfort to
them, able to make any man fight to see such a man as he go in such danger:
For the enemy had a great wood to shelter them beside trenches, but our men
after 2 hours Battle, beat them from their Trench, and from the wood, killing
some 80 of them, For all that advantage but 7 of our men was killed, but that
we lost one Captain Rochford, a man of such note, that never more was any man
bewailed; For all the good and valliant parts of a Soldier was in him, in this
bout Sir Symond Harcourts Regiment, behaved themselves valliantly but for the
Castle our men were forced to return home without taking it, having nothing
but field pieces with them, the way being to rotten to bear greater as yet;
many more of the enemies had bin slain but that the wood defended them, so
that the Trees took off all that was sent to them in this Castle is thought to
be much wealth besides all that have bin great men of the Rebels. But our men
will not so leave it, but will again try their forces against it shortly.

As yesterday our men came home, yet it is to be feared that a famine is like to
be in our City, in that still men come to us and provision is short, and none
of yours that come to us bring any vittailes, great taxes are upon us, more
then can be borne, He that had Butter, and Cheese, and Cloth at between 6 and
14 Shillings a yard here sent by any out of London,, might make a good trade of
it; Cheshire cheese is sold here for six pence a pound already; Some of your
Londoners are come hither (acquaintance of mine) that will send for such
things, for great profit may be made by them, and quick return.

A letter sent from Droheda, to Sir Robert King, dated Febr. 27.
Noble Sir,
IN my last Letter, I signified to you the difficulties which were like to
befall us by the releeving of Droheda, but God by his infinite mercy has freed
us (I may say miraculously) from that hazard: for when our men there were
driven to that extremity to eat horseflesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallied out
of the Town with only forty Musketeers, and forty Horse, and beat off four
hundred of the enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore
Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred Sheep; burned four Towns, and brought home
two of their Colors: Besides, I must relate unto you Gods abundant goodness
unto us, in that the night before the relief and succors which we sent by Sea
from Dublin to them, should have entered into the Harbor of Droheda, which was
strongly fenced over with a Chain and several boats, there happened a storm
which broke their chainer, and gave our men so great a passage, as with little
difficulty they came safely to the Town. The Rebels were gathered at
Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men, where they
were settled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carried out part of our
Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into
the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable
loss of our side, only Captain James Rochfort, a most gallant and courageous
Gentleman. This was an act of great bravery, wherein Sir Charles Coote did, (as
he does always) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger as
any man living could; and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and
good affections, and deserves great encouragement from that side. Our
soldiers are in great want of money, which causes a general want of all
other necessaries, yet notwithstanding God has infused such courage into them
(for undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great,
but they may attempt it.

Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lieutenants Regiment of fifteen
hundred foot, and Sir Richard Greevill with near four hundred Horse, which
puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our neighbors, yet we
grieve we cannot be able to releeve our friends in other parts, but I hope when
our full succors shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but add
comfort to our poor distressed friends abroad.

The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond belief, yet their
hearts begin to faint and I believe they repent their furious madness.

If my brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would hae
written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or on his way thither: By
the next he shall hear from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you.

I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things which
concern me, and I am, Sir,

Feb. 27. 1641. Your most affectionate servant, Ed. Loftus,

Martii 7mo.
It Is this day Ordered forthwith, that this Letter be published in print.

H. Elsing. Cler. P. D. Com.

FINIS.

