THE LONDONERS PETITION. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lords and Commons now
assembled in the High Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the City of LONDON and the
Liberties thereof.
Shows,
THat the present sense of our miseries, and apprehension of inevitable ruin
both of the Church and Commonwealth make us to become humble suitors to this
Honorable Assembly (the likest means under God for our relief) to consider
our distressed estates, and to provide a speedy remedy for our present and
future evils, earnestly desiring you to weigh the care and Judgment of our
predecessors, who by a known Law settled and preserved our Protestant Religion,
our Liberties and Properties, with a right understanding between King and
Subjects, which produced peace and plenty in our streets.

And to reflect with serious thoughts upon our present distempers, violating
Religion by Papists and Sectaries, engaging our Nation into a civil, bloody
and destructive war; invading our Laws and Liberties, endangering all our
lives, and utterly disinabling us to relieve our distressed brethren in
Ireland. We beseech you likewise to consider the effects of a continued war, as
the destruction of Christians, the unnatural effusion of blood, Fathers
against Sons, brothers by brothers, friends by friends slain; then, famine
and sickness, the followers of a Civil war, making way for a general
confusion, and invasion by a foreign Nation, while our Treasure is exhausted,
our Trade lost, and the Kingdom dispeopled. These things weighed and enlarged
by your wisdoms, we doubt not will be as strong motives in you to labor, as
in us to desire, a speedy Peace, and a happy Accommodation.

Wherefore we humbly pray, that (not lending an ear to any Fomenters of these
present Wars, under what pretense soever, nor remembering ought that may
increase Iealousies, or continue divisions between his Majesty and his House
of Parliament) you will speedily tender his Majesty (according to his Royal
Intimations) such propositions for Accommodation, as He may with Honor, and
safety to the whole Kingdom, accept. For effecting whereof we shall be ready
to assist you with the best and utmost of our abilities; and whilst you
endeavor peace, we shall send up our prayers to Heaven, for the blessing of
peace upon you, and all that desire it.

London, Printed for Adam Bell.


