ENGLANDS DOXOLOGIE OR RATHER The three Kingdoms Eucharisticall Sacrifice at
the Altar of The Almighty. For the manifold Mercies, and miraculous Deliverances
vouchsafed at sundry times to the several Nations.

To which is annexed A BRIEF RELATION OF The memorable Acts, and prosperous
proceedings of the High, Honorable, and happy Assembly of PARLIAMENT, In this
present year of Grace, 1641.

Composed by J. L. in Art: Mag.

Non nobis, Domine, non nobis,
Sed tuo nomini sit gloria.
C R



Imprinted at London by Barnard Alsop, dwelling in Grubstreet, 1641.

Englands Doxologie.
THere is no Nation under heaven, that has received more temporal and
spiritual favors from Almighty God, then this Kingdom of England. Wat
Blessings can be nominated, which we have not enjoyed? We have fullness in our
Granaries, peace within our Walls, and plenty within our Palaces: There Is no
leading into Captivity, nor complaining in our streets, the voice of the Turtle
has bin heard in our Land: we have swum in pleasures, and had all the
varieties of contentments that our curious fancies can imagine. Our Oxen are
strong to labor, our sheep prosper, all things succeed well, and we have a
Land flowing with milk and honey. And for spiritual Mercies, no people under
the Sun ever went beyond us.

Though our works of darkness might eclipse the Sunshine of Gods goodness,
yet the bright beams of the Gospel have gloriously shined upon us, and the
silver Bells of Aron have melodiously bin rung amongst us. This Evangellicall
and transcendent mercy has bin enlarged to us. Indeed, this is the finest of
the wheat, with which God does feed his people, 56. Psalm. 11. By this he has
delivered us from the Egypt of Rome, from the house of Bondage, and from
Antichristian heresy and superstition. And though there have bin amongst us,
and are still; many dissolute, idle, and illiterate Ministers, who are a stain
and blemish to their sacred function, and profession; yet (for the honor of
the Church of England I speak it) there were never more pious, painful, and
learned Pastors in other Countries, then are now here in this Kingdom.

God has not dealt so with every Nation, no not with any Nation. We have with
the peace of the Gospel, enjoyed the Gospel of peace above these 80. years.
Thus the fountain of Gods goodness is inexhanlt, and indeficient, never
ceasing in his gracious emanation, but ever flowing in the sweet streams of his
mercies. And for wonderful deliverances, how has God in them gone along with
us? From what horrid plots, and hideous Conspiracies has the Lord secured us?
From what monstrous machinations, and never the like heard of Combinations,
both foreign and domesticke, even of those who have treacherously endeavored
the demolition of the whole stare? Did not God most graciously deliver this
Kingdom from the very jaws of death; in miraculously preserving us from that
pair of matchless stratagems, the Spanish Invasion in 88. and the Hellish
Gunpowder Treason in 1605. O that we would remember the days of old, and
consider so many generations! O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men,
It Is the burden of the song of the sweet singer of Israel in the 107. Psalm. no
less then 4. sever all times. Great and stupendous things has the Lord done
for us. And that which adds unto our happiness is this, that a Religious
peace crowns all these. Pax optima rerum; There Is nothing so divine and
acceptable to God and man, as peace; nothing more delightful to be heard,
nothing more profitable to be desired, nothing more happy to be enjoyed then
poace. Pacem te poscimus omnes. we all desire peace. Peace is the darling of
heaven, the delight of the Earth, and joy of the Angels: It Is the Daughter of
charity, the Nurse of Piety, the nerves and sinues of Commor-welths, and
societies. It Is the firm knot and strongest bond of all Corporations, by which
means, Countries and Kingdoms (like Salomons triple cord) are inviolable, and
indissolubly joined together.

We may see the happiness of peace, by the contrary, in the misery of war.
Many calamities are involved in this one vengeance of war. When thousands of
men and horses shall set their feet upon a soil, how soon are they all cut
off by the cruelty of war, both men and horses wallowing in their own blood; so
quickly is a fruitful Land become barren, or the wickedness of the people
that dwell therein. Those were fearful times, when Gods Churches, and men's
houses were flaming over their heads; when the barbarous soldier made it
nothing to toss tender Infants upon their Pikes, when the impotent wife was
bereaved of her dear husband, desiting to dye with him, with whom she could
not live. The Barons wars in this Kingdom for the time of their continuance
were so deplorable, that we have all cause to bless his memory that united the
red Rose and the white. Happy was the union then between the two Houses of York
and Lancaster, and as happy is the Pacification now betwenee the two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland. So unfortunate is war and so happy a thing is peace,
that ever let us pray to the God of peace, with our Church in the Liturgy, Give
peace in our time, O Lord, And from Battle and Murder good Lord deliver us.

It is a general received opinion amongst Physicians, that in the cure of
dangerous and violent Diseases, of all things Rest is most helpful and
comfortable to the patient: In like manner, for the curing of those perilous
wounds, which have long since bin made, and are still mortally infixed in the
bowels and vital parts of Christendom, the sole and sovereign Remedy that can
be prescribed, is Peace. War is the scourge of the Almighty, the event of it
doubtful, and therefore it is never to be rashly undertaken, when it may be
wisely prevented: for as Nature has appointed no Phlebotomy, no letting of
blood, but in cases of extremity; so Grace does admit of no war, and allow no
shedding of Man's blood, but in cases of necessity, and when there is no other
Remedy. War is the Plagiary of Government, the Incendiary and firebrand of a
Nation, but Peace is a Sanctuary and Preserver of a People. Speciosum nomen
pacis, I and preciosuni too. The very name of peace is lovely.

The Jews compirz'd all felicity under the name of Peace, and therefore their
salutation was, Pax vobis, Peace be unto you. Life, Liberty, Dignity,
Tranquillity, safety, and prosperity, Arts, Learning, things Civil, Politic,
Divine, and Humane, all are contained in peace. This heavenly and admirable
blessing do we now enjoy. The thunder of the Canon (the Language of war) is
the best Rhetoric to commend this peace. The noise of that Thunder is
dreadful, and has bin often heard in other Countries to their terror and
amazement, but (God be thanked) it is not audible in our Ears.

Look upon the Empire of Germany, what a havoc and desolation has the
Sangninean hand of war made there? View our Neighbor Nation of France. Behold
that Grand-monarch of Spain; Take a survay of the Netherlands, and those
passages between the States and the House of Austria; consider these premises,
and you will easily conclude the ruin and devastation, that direful war has
bin the cause of in these latter times. Other great Kingdoms have lamentably
suffered, only this little Island is secure; And though many Pioners have bin
at work many a time and often to undermine this Land, yet the Lord God of
Israel has bin a wall of fire round about it. Within these two years, the last
Summer save one, the English Army (consisting of 30000 horse and foot) was
marching toward Scotland, at the same time the Spanish Fleet (that formidable
Armado) was intended for England. In an hostile Invasion they came upon our
Coasts, the incursion of the enemy, then was so unexpected of us, and at so
seasonable a time for them, that had the fire of that war bin once thoroughly
kindled, which was so long smoking, there could not have bin wanting those
that would have added fuel to the flame. But happy was the hour, wherein the
happy Pacification was concluded. For had that design of war gone on, we had
long before this time bin exposed to the pity of our friends, the fury and
derision of our foes; who could not wish for a better opportunity, then to see
this goodly and flourishing land, to imbrue her hands in her own bowels and
blood. Had not our good God bin merciful to us, this Kingdom had bin
desolate, we of comfort destitute, our streets full of blood, and our fields an
Acheldama, or Golgotha, replenish't with dead Carcasses. That fatal war
(without Gods mercy) might have proved the Trojan horse, to bring in an Army of
bloud-loving enemies to invade us; in the mid it whereof we might have bin all
surprised by a foreign Adversary.

This great mystery of iniquity is now discovered, that which so long lay hid
as a work of darkness, is at length brought to light, the prime Agents therein
detected; and I wish that all they in this Land, who bear no good will to
Syon, and care not for the peace of Jerusalem, may (according to their
demerits) receive condign punishment, for their treachery and cruelty, in
desiting, and endeavoring that two Nations should war with each other, that by
weakening both, the Rrmish faction might grow the stronger, and with more
facility take advantage of us. It Is not long since the Axe was laid to the root
of the Tree; A war was intended, and that a civil war, for otherwise I
cannot term it, two Armies were in the field ready to fight (yet they did but
look one another in the face) the sword was drawn, and the battle pitched,
desolation and destruction menaced: we had not then only rumors of wars,
but effusion of blood on both sides, skirmishes were begun, men were lost, both
English and Scottish soldiers slain, and every hour they looked to destroy one
another; the subjects of one King, and people of one faith, members of the same
mystical body whereof Christ is the head, professors of one, and the self-same
Religion; we of England, and our brethren of Scotland were banded one against
another. A sad Tragedy was begun, the Scene was the North, the Actors were the
subjects of both Kingdoms, but (magnified for ever be Gods mercy) it is
inverted to a Comedy, and is come to a joyful Catastrophe, We were as
firebrarnds snatched out of the sire, as birds escaped from the suare, The God
of peace, has blessed us with a settled peace. Ever blessed be our blessed God,
that we and they were not the ruin and confusion of each other.

The black storm in the North is now dissipated, the dismal day is cleared up,
and the fair Sun of consolation has shined upon us; for the two Nations are
united, a blessed Pacification is confirmed, this renowned Parliament has made
us all friends, and those two late terrible Armies of both Kingdoms are quite
disbanded, and quietly departed. Well may we say with the Princely Prophet,
Lord, thou art become gracious unto thy Land. The Lord has spoke peace unto
his people, and to his Saints that they turn not again; for his salvation as
nigh them that fear him, that glory mar dwell in our Land, 85. Psalm. 1.8, 9.
verses. God is our hope and strength, a very present help in trouble. He
makes wars to cease in all the world, he breaks the bow, and knappeth the
spear in sunder. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge.
Psalm. 46.1.9, 11. Who would have thought that such admirable things should have
bin in so short a time effected and brought to pass, which we now behold?
Certainly, it is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Let our right hand forget its cunning, and let our tongues cleave to the roof
of our mouths, if we do not acknowledge that the gracious hand of our glorious
God has in these proceedings gone along with us. Let us ever commemorate and
never forget the mercies of the almighty; but let the voice of rejoicing be
heard in our Churches and Congregations, for the great salvation that God has
wrought for us; in putting to infamy all the enemies of our peace, in-defeating
their plots, abating their pride, asiwaging their malice, and in confounding
their devices. Great cause and much matter have we of rejoicing and
thansgiving. Let us therefore in the name of God, rejoice in the Lord, be
thankful to him, and speak good of his name; Let us turn unto him, and turn
from our wicked ways, by humiliation for them, and reformation from them, and
let us not spend that blood in Fornication and Adultery, which he has spared
in his goodness and mercy. Let every one say with David, quid retribuam? what
shall I render unto the Lord? and with Job, quid faciam? what shall I do unto
thee, O thou Preserver of men, we all partake of the mercy, and therefore let
us all betake our selves to the duty. Let the 3. Kingdoms in general, and
every one of us in particular, offer (according to our obliged duty) this
Eucharisticall Sacrifice at the Altar of the Trinity, saying unfainedly from
the bottom of our hearts, Glory be to the Pather, to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost. And that we may really express our thansgiving, Let us give our Alms
to the poor, and our bodies and souls unto God; the former to his, and the
latter to him, Romans 12.1. Let us demonstrate our thankfulness cogitain,
dictu, and actu; in the thoughts of our hearts, in the words of our mouths,
and in the actions of our lives: For Gratitude is all the interest that God
expects and requires for his principal.

Many are the Arguments and Motives, persuading us to give thanks unto the
Lord for his Mercies and Deliverances afforded to us of this Kingdom. Besides
Gods positive favors which we have received, innumerable privative mercies
have we enjoyed. He has not only conferred good things on us, but also kept
evil things from us. He has delivered us out of the hands of our Enemies, and
those no little ones, but great Mountains, potent, proud, and impudent,
implacable, secret, subtle, insulting, dangerons, and many Enemies, corrupt in
their judgments, impious in their lives, men the more witty, the less wise,
and more wicked, the more politic the more pestilent, and the more great they
have appeared the less good they have proved.

What strange plots and horrid conspiracies (which God in his mercy has
prevented) have of late days bin attempted against us? What undermining there
has bin of the professed Religion, and government of the State, how (under the
pretense of vindicating the Kings honor) some malignant and malevolent
Statesmen, who have bin too near his Majesty, have endeavored to oppress the
just liberty of his freeborn subjects, and to suppress the true Religion in
his Kingdoms, how imminent our dangers were, how constant, close, and
confederated these Traitors have bin in their designs against us, the History
of these times does sufficiently testify.

Look into the Records of the ages past, read Annals, search Chronicles,
examine Antiquities, and you cannot parallel the like.

I am persuaded, succeeding ages will hardly believe (as we who have had the
Science and Experience cannot but admire) that such foul birds should be
hatched in so fair a Land as this is: so capital have bin their crimes, and so
heinous their late offenses, that the generations to come will be astonished at
this generation of Vipers, whose plots, projects, and practices, have aimed,
attempted, and endeavored to involve all of us, and all that can be near and
dear unto us, our Religion, (the life of our souls) our well being with our
very being, our Laws, and our Liberties, in one universal desolation and
general destruction. Praised be the Lord, who has not given us a prey unto
their teeth, Psalm. 1.24.6.

Still have we just cause to offer unto the Lord the calves of our lips, that
acceptable Sacrifice and Divin: Oblation of Praise and Thanksgiving.

What though two Parliaments were dissolved (and we were all then in that
vacation and intermission thereof, full of cares and fears) yet it has
pleased God in much mercy to move the Kings heart to summon a third, which is
the last, (and I dare say the best) and will prove the happiest that ever
England enjoyed.

It Is true God has 3 shafts in the quiver of his Justice, LIMOS, LOIMOS, Ki
POLEMOS, Famine, Plague, and War; these sharp Arrows this great Archer
usually shootes at a Nation in his anger and indignation, being provoked
thereunto by their grievous and crying sins: And though these Arrows, of the
Almighty have bin and are oftentimes abroad in the world amongst us, ( as at
this present he has sent out his arrows and scattered them, Psalm. 18.14) yet
it pleases him in h^s mercy to shoot beyond us, beside us, over us, and short
of us; so that we abide under the shadow of the Almighty; for the Lord is our
refuge, and our fortress, in whom we trust. Surely he shall deliver us from
the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. We shall not be
afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flies by day; nor for
the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the^ destruction that wastes
at noone day, Psalm. 91.3.5, 6. v.

What though the Visitation has within these few years rode circuit through
the whole Kingdom, within these 3. months the. Contagion has increased, and
though of late days grimme Death has gone in triumph through our streets and
kept a dreadful Sessions here within London, and in the Suburbs thereof, yet
we have good cause to be thankful. For God preserves us both in the plague,
and from the plague in taking it from them who are visited, and in keeping it
from us who are not visited. Thus in the midst of judgment the Lord remembers
mercy; And it is of his mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not, 3. Lam. 22.

To enumerate all Gods mercies to our English Nation it is impossible; yet
forasmuch as the Parliament is the abstracted Quintessence and the
Representative body of the whole Kingdom, and (the State of the Kingdom being
united in that one great Council) the welfare of the 3 Nations does consist
in the happiness thereof, Let us for the Honor of the two Houses in
Parliament lately assembled, but especially to the glory of God, commemorate
some famous and never to be forgotten matters and Edicts, which those
illustrious Worthies of the world, and renowned Heroes of their Age (whose
Statues deserve to be set up in Gold) have hoc Anno aureo, this golden year
concluded and enacted.

A BRIEF RELATION OF The Memorable ACTS, and prosperous Proceedings, of the
high Honorable, and happy Assembly of Parliament.
THey have recalled from Captivity, and restituted to their Livings and Liberty
sundry godly Divines, and Religious Christians, as (to instance three for all,
who are sufficiently known to all, Burton, Prinne, and Bastwick.

They have discovered, mulcted, and silenced scandalous Priests, profane
Ministers, and Popish Prelates.

They have questioned the Lord Finch, once Lord Keeper, his Fellow-fugitive Sir
Francis Windebank, late Secretary to the State, and called to account diverse
corrupted Judges.

They have restrained of Liberry Sir George Ratcliffe.

Imprisoned in the Tower the Archbishop, whom if I may call Worm, (as a far
better man then he termed himself no better) I am sure it is an Epidemicall
report both in the City and Country that the little Archbishop was the
greatest Adversary and Cankerworme to this Church and State, that ever these
latter times produced.

They have quelled all the Canter burian faction.

They have dismounted the Canons, and damned that prodigious Oath in that
strange Synod.

They have cut off by the Axe of Justice the late Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

These noble Senators have enacted a Trienniall Parliament, thereby to
perpetuate the present happiness of the King and Kingdom, and to secure th^s
Land from future miseries.

They have damned Ship Money, that general and insupportable grievance to his
Majesty's poor subjects.

They have taxed Monopolists and Pattentces (who have bin humanarum calamitatum
mercatores, as an Author ingeniously styles them) the Horse-leeches und
Caterpillars of these times.

They have voted against Non-reside, and displaced Pluralists, who are so far
from being Pastors, that indeed they are Impostors; rather Wolves to devour
then Shep-heards to feed Christ's flock: for they aim at theirs more then at
them, and at their goods more then their good.

They have decided Controversies, sentenced Romish Ceremonies, Abolished
Antichristian Superstitions, extirpated Innovations; and will shortly at their
recesse (by Gods gracious assistance) set led the Reformed Religion, in its
primitive purity and perfection, banished Papists, Priests and Lesuites
supperessed the two Courts of Star Chamber and the high Commission, damp^
Doctors Commons.

Given an Order for the be^^e^ sanctifying of the Lords Sabboths.

They made an Ordinance for Acapitation, or Poll-money.

They ordained two days this year to be kept holy and set apart for Gods
service and worship, the one fora; public Fast, to humble our selves before
Almighty God the other ( the 7. of September) for a general Thanksgiving
throughout his Majesty's Dominions in England and Scotland.

They voted the 13. Bishops impeached by the Commons of England to be suspended
from the upper House, till the time that they shall come to their Trial.

They have established and set up Lectures where they are wanting, in all the
Parishes of this Realm of England, and the Dominion of Wales, to maintain
Orthodox Ministers.

They have riglited the wronged, eased the oppressed and innocent, punished the
Nocent and Delinquents; Denied the late Requests of the French and Spanish
Ambassadors, caused a Protestation first of both the Houses, next of the whole
Kingdom; And last of all, (to omit many more which might be added) they have
confirmed a blessed Pacification between the two Nations.

To draw all these lines to their Center,

Forasmuch as in Gods special grace and effestuall goodness staends the
safety of this, and the two other Kingdoms, and Gods glory by the Kingdoms
safety; Let the three Nations be tied in the treble bond of Religion to God, of
Loyalty to the King, and of unity to one another.

For all Gods Mercies and Deliverances afforded unto us. Let us with Angels,
and with Archangels, sing in the quire of the Church Militant, this heavenly
Anthem, Gloria Deo in Excelsis, Glory be to God on high. With these 24. Elders
in the 5. Revel. 8. and with the infinite thousands of Angels, Let us fall
down; and with all the Creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and in the Sea, and all that are in them, say, Blessing,
Honor, Glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the
Lamb for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

