THE ORDERS AND Directions, Of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, to be diligently observed and kept by the Citizens of London, during
the time of the present Visitation of the PLAGUE.

As also, Rules and Instructions, to all Brewers, Butchers, Fishmongers,
Victualling-houses, Hackney-Coaches, Brokers, and the rest of the Inhabitants,
both in City and Suburbi.

With diverse excellent Receipts, as well for the Cure of the Plague, as for
preventing the further Increase and Infection thereof, by Gods blessing and
Assistance: Set forth and approved of by the Learned Sir Walter Rawleigh, Mr.
Culpepper, and diverse other famous Physicians and Doctors;

And now published for the use and benefit of all His Majesty's Liege Subjects.

Printed for George Horton, living near the Three Crowns in Barbican.

Health better then Gold: Or, Rules and Directions, as well for the Cure of the
Plague, as for preventing the Infection, etc.
Whereas it has pleased Almighty God to send forth his destroying Angel
amongst Us, to scourge and chastise a stiff-necked and perverse Generation of
People, by spreading the Black-Cloud of Plague and Pestilence, over many famous
Nations and Cities beyond the Seas; but has also out of his Divine Justice,
even now brought it to the very Doors of many who have slighted his gracious
Tenders and Mercies; and indeed who can say, I am free from such provocations,
from provoking a just and righteous God, and from crucifying afresh a precious,
dear and blessed Savior, by their wicked and abominable Oaths, by their sad
and lamentable Imprecations, by their vicious Vices of Whoredom, Drunkenness,
Sabbath-breaking, etc. O let every one therefore seriously lay it to heart, the
great and original cause of these our present Judgments, and by serious
Repentance, and cont^ition of spirit, endeavor to cure the sinful Plague of
the Heart, to amend their Lives, to become new Creatures, to bear a high esteem
of the Blessed Sabbath, and an ardent affection to his gracious Ordinances;
That the Lord may say unto London, as he did unto Israel, Return thou
backsliding People, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am
me ciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. ^ g acious
saying, and worthy of acceptance. But now for the p^b^ick benefit of all
people, in these Times of Calamity, I shall not only recite some Orders of the
Right Honorable the Lord Ma^or, and Court of Aldermen, for preserving of
Health; but also diverse Receipts and Directions as well for the cure of the
Plague, as for preventing the Infection of it etc. And first it is thought
requisite that in every Parish there be one, two, o^ more persons of good sort
and credit, chosen and appointed by the Alderman, his Deputy, and
Common Council of every Ward by the name of Examiners to continue in that
Office the space of two Months at least: and if any person so appointed shall
refu^e to undertake the same, the said parties so refusing, to be committed to
Prison until they shall conform themselves accordingly. That these Examiners be
sworn by the Alderman, to enqui^e what houses be visited, what persons sick,
and of what Diseases, as near as they can and upon d^ubt, to command restraint
of access, until it appear what the Disease shall prove: and if they find any
person sick of the Infection, to give order to the Constable that the house be
shut up; and if the Constable shall be found remiss or negligent, to give
present notice thereof to the Alderman of the Ward. That to every infected
house there be appointed two Watchmen, one for the day, and the other for the
night. That for the Women-searchers in every Parish, to be of honest reputation
and sworn to make due search and true report: and tkat the Physicians appointed
for the cure and prevention of the Infection, do call before them the said
Searchers, who are or shall be appointed for the several Parishes under their
respective cares, to the end they may consider whether they are fitly qualified
for that employment: and that no Searcher, during this time of Visitation, be
permitted to use any public work or employment, or keep any shop or stall, or
be employed as a Landress, or in any other common employment whatsoever. And
for better assistance of the Searchers, it is ordered, that there be chosen
able and discreet Chirurgions, to be resident in most convenient places, and to
be sequestered from all other cures, and kept only to this Disease of the
Infection, and every Surgeon to have twelve pence a Body searched by them,
to be paid out of the goods of the party searched, if he be able, or otherwise
by the Parish. And if any Nurse-keeper shall remove her self out of any
infected house before 28 days after the decease of any person dying of the
Infection, the house to which the said Nurse-keeper does so remove, her self
shall be shut up until the said 28 days be expired. Likewise, that the burial
of the dead by this Visitation be at most convenient hours, always before
either Sunrising or after Sunsetting, with the privity of the Churchwardens
or Constables, and not othe^wise; and that no Neighbors nor Friends be
suffered to accompany the Coarse to Church, or to enter the house visited, upon
pain of having his house shut up, or be imprisoned. And further, all public
Assemblies at other Burials are to be forborne during the continuance of this
Visitation. And to the end no infected Stuff shall be uttered, it is ordered,
That no Clothes, Stuff, Be^ding, or Garments be suffered to be carried or
conveyed out of any infected houses, and that the Cryers and Carryers ab^oad of
Be^ding or old Apparel to be sold or pawned, be utterly prohibited and
restra^ned, and no Brokers of Bedding or Old Apparel be permitted to make any
outward show, or hang forth on their Stalls, shopboards or Windows toward any
Street, Lane, Common-way, or Passage, any old Bedding or Apparel to be sold,
upon pain of imprisonment: and if any Broker or other person shall buy any
Bedding, Apparel, or other stuff out of any infected house, within two mone^ns
after the Infection has been there, his house shall be shut up as infected,
and so shall continue shut up 20 days at least.

It is also ordered, that care be taken of Hackney-Coachmen, that they may not
(as some of them have been observed to do) after carrying of infected persons
to the Pesthouse, and other places, be admitted to common use, till their
Coaches be well aired, and have stood unimpistyed by the space of 5 or 6 days
after such service. Ordered, That every Householder do cause the Street to be
daily pared before his door, and so to keep it clean swept all the Week long.
And that the sweeping and filth of houses be daily carried away by the Rakers,
and that the Raker shall give notice of his coming by the blowing of a Horn, as
heretofore has been done. Likewise, that the Laystals be removed as far as may
be out of the City, and common passages, and that no Nightman or other be
suffered to empty a Vault into any Garden near about the City. That special
care be taken, that no stinking Fish, or unwholesom Flesh, or musty Corn, or
other corrupt Fruits of what sort soever, be suffered to be sold about the
City, or n^y part of the same. That the Brewers and ^ipling-houses be looked
unto, for musty and unwholesome Cask. That no Hogs, Dogs, or Cats, or tame
Pigeons, or Conies, be suffered to be kept within any part of the City, and
that the Dogs be killed by the Dog-killers appointed for that purpose. That all
public Feasting, and particularly by the Companies of this City; and Dinners
at Taverns, Alehouses, and other places of common entertainment be forborne
until further order and allowance; and that the money thereby spared, be
preserved and employed for the benefit and relief of the poor visited with the
Infection. That every house visited be marked with a Red-Cross of a foot long
in the middle of the door, and with the usual printed words, Lord have Mercy
upon Us.

Directions for the Searchers.
1. They are to take notice whether there be any swellings, risings, or botch
under the ear, about the neck, on either side, or under the armpits of either
side, or the groins, and of its hardness, and whether broken or unbroken.

2. Whether there be any blains which may rise in any part of the body in the
form of a blister, much bigger then the Small Pox, of a straw-colour or livid
color, which latter is the worser; either of them has a reddish Circuit,
something swollen round about it, which Circuit remains after the blister is
broken, encompassing the Sore.

3. Whether there be any Carbuncle, which is something like the blain, but more
fiery and corrosive, easily eating deep into the flesh, and sometimes having a
black crust upon it, but always compassed about with a very fiery red (or
livid) flat and hard tumor, about a finger-breadth more or less: this and the
blain may appear in any part of the body.

4. Whether there be any tokens, which are spots arising about the skin,
chiefly about the breast and back, but sometimes also in other parts; their
color is something various, sometimes more reddish, sometimes inclining a
little toward a fai^ t blue, and sometimes brownish mixed with blue; the red
ones have often a purple-circle about them, the brownish, a reddish.

Perfumes against the Plague.
Such as are to go abroad, shall do well to carry rue, anglica, Masterwort,
myrrh, scordiu^, or water-germander, wormwood, valetian, or setwall-root,
Virginian-snake root, or Zedoarie in their hands to smell to; and of those they
may hold or show a little in their mouths as they go in the streets; they may
anoint their nostrils with oil of Amber, or balsam of sulphur; especially if
they be afraid of any place: Fear, as well as presumption, being hurtful.

Take rue one handful, stamp it in a mortar, put thereto Vinegar enough to
moisten it, mix them well, then strain out the juce, wet a piece of sponge, or
a toast of hrown bread therein, tie it in a thin cloth, bear it about to smell
to.

Take the root of angelica beaten grossly, the weight of six pence, of rue and
wormwood, of each the weight of four pence, setwall the w^^g^t of three pence
b^^^se these, then steep them in a l^ttle Wine Vinegar, tie them in a l nnen
cloth, which they may carry

Inward Medicines against the Plague.
Let none go fasting forth, every one according as they can procure, let them
take some such thing as may resist putrefaction.

Some may take Garlic with Butter, a Clove two or three, according as it shall
agree with their bo^ies: And for Women with child, children and such as cannot
take bitter things, use this. Take Conserve of Red-Roses, Conserve of
Wood Sorrel, of each 2 ounces, Conserves of Borage of Sage-flowers, of each 6
drams, Bole-Armoniack, shaving of Hartshorn, Sorrel seeds of each two drams,
yellow or white Sanders half a dram Saffron one scruple, Syrup of Wood Sorrel,
enough to make it a most Electuary; mix them well, take so much as a Chestnut at
a time, once or twice a day, as you shall find cause. It will be good to
forbear all crude and moist Fruits; as Cucumbers, Melons, Plumbs, Cherries,
Peaches, and raw Herbs and Salla^s, as Lettice, Spinach, Radish, and such
like, or to be moderate in the use of them, mixed with Oil and Vinegar.

A Remedy sent to the Lord Mayor of London, by King Henry the Eighth, against
the Plague.
Take a handful of Sage, a handful of Herb-grace, a handful of Elder-leaves, a
handful of Red-bramble leaves, stamp them all, and strain them through a fine
cloth, with a quart of White Wind, and then take a quantity of Ginger, and
mingle them together, and take a spoonful of the same, and you shall be safe
for twenty four days; Nine times taking of it, is sufficient for a whole Year
by the Grace of God. And if it be so, that the Party be stricken with the
Plague, before he has drank this Medicine; then take the Water of Scabios a
spoonful, of Water of Bettony a spoonful, and a quanaity of fine Treacle; and
put them all together, and cause him to drink it, and it will expel all the
Venom. If the botch appear, then take the Leaves of Brambles, Elder Leaves,
Mustard seed, and stamp them together, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it
to the Sore, and that shall draw out the Venom, and the party shall be whole,
by the Grace of God.

A Medicine, that was taught King Henry the Seventh, by his Physician, against
the PESTILENCE.
Take of Rue, Maudragories, Featherfew, Sorrel, Barnet, of each half a handful;
of crops and roots of Dragons a like quantity; wash them clean, and sees them,
with a soft fire, in running Water, from a bottle to a quart; and then strain
them together, through a clean cloth; and if it be bitter, put thereto a
quantity of Sugar Candy, or Sugar: And if this Medicine be used before the
Purples do arise, you shall be whole by Gods Grace.

Sir Walter Rawleigh's Receipt against the Plague.
Yake three pints of Malmsey (or Canary-Sack) and boil in it one handful of
Sage, and as much of Rue, till one pint be wasted away; then stra^n it, and set
it over the fire again, and put thereto one dram of long Pepper, half an ounce
of Ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all well beaten together; then
let it boil a little, and put thereto one dram and a half of Mithridate, one
dram of Venice-Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of Aqua-Vita, or hot
Angelica-water.

Keep this as your life, above all worldly treasure: take it always morning
and evening three spoonfuls at each time, if the party be diseased: if not,
every morning is sufficient.

In all the Plague-time trust to this; for certainly ( God be praised for it)
there was never man, woman nor child whom this drink deceived, if the heart
were not poisoned and downed with the disease before.

An approved Remedy against the Pestilence be it never so vehement.
Take an Ounion and cut him overthwart, then make a little hole in each piece,
the which you shall fill with fine Treacle, then set the pieces together again
as they were before, then wrap them in a white linen cloth. Putting it so to
Roast in the Embers and Ashes, then when it is Roasted enough press out all the
juce of it: and give the patient a spoonful thereof to drink, and so by Gods
help he shall feel ease and most undoubtedly be healed.

For him that is sick of the Plague.
Take white Dittany, Turmentil, white Coral, Genitine, Bole Armonick, Teria
sigilata, and Endive, water of Scabius; and the Accedent coming upon him, this
must be made at least four hours before it be used, take of the said things
stamped each one by it self, and put them severally in glasses, and make of all
of them a drink at your own discretion, making the Vinegar mount in the glass a
little above the other things, and let the patient take it hot, covering
himself (...) in his bed until he sweat, and by Gods help he shall undoubtedly
be Cured.

FINIS.

