THE LAMENTATION OF A Bad Market:

OR, Knaves and Fools foully foiled, and fallen into a pit of their own
digging: Wherein their late Errors are lamentingly laid down by one of the
Brethren of that Function.

Snatched from their Convention Table, AND Published to the end, that against
the next time the People shall be either so Mad or Foolish to believe them, or
trust them, they may learn more wit, and proceed more gradually, and not so
much to Phaetonize.

When Thieves fall out, honest Men come by their Goods again. London, Printed
at the Charge of John Lambert, Charles Fleetwood, Arthur Hesilrig, and --
Hewson the Cobbler, and are to be distributed to the fainting Brethren. 1660.

THE LAMENTATION OF A Bad Market.
Friends and Brethren,
THe cause of this Convention of the Saints, is to condole and lament our great
and manifold Losses and Crosses have beset us, and compassed us round about, to
the utter overthrow of our great and glorious Cause, and our selves and Honors
like wise. This day not to be observed as hitherto have been, for Victories and
Triumphs over our Enemies, but to be kept as a solemn day of Expostulation,
wherein we must with grief, and sighs, and sobs, and bitterness of spirit,
round up our Master for his perfidious leaving of us, and dealings toward us.
Why should he thus reward his Saints with evil for good? We that have sought
the advancement of his Kingdom both night and day, by Plots, Devices,
Stratagems, Fire, Ruins, Blood, all that either we, or he himself to help us,
could invent; and that yet he should forsakes us, cuts our very hearts, so that
scarcely for anguish of spirit shall we be able to look him in the face.

Let us see and examine our selves, what we think may be the reasons of his
late withdrawing from us, and his cancelling of our Commissions in such strange
and unexpected manner; Was it because we proceeded too rashly in the Rule and
Governing of his Kingdoms, and flocked too throngingly to the Throne of
Dignity, thereby to shorten, not prolong his Reign on Earth? or for that we
have been too mindful of private Interest? or what should be the reasons of his
thus, sclipsing our Grandeur, think ye, my Brethren? Oh Lucifer! Lucifer! why
have thou forsaken us, and left thine own people in the day of Adversity? Why
will thou not continue thy wonted goodness to thy chosen ones? but suffer them
thus to be trodden under, and insulted over by the Enemies of both thy, Cause
and ours, by both thy Enemies and our Enemies? Thou can not say thou have
ever found us unfaithful to thee in our Calling and Employments; and wherefore
then have not thou protected us, and taken away that black vail which has
covered our eyes, but suffered us thus to be besotted and beguiled? Well,
seeing it is thus, we are resolved to be angry with thee; and if we were but
certain of making our escapes out of that Gin, Net and Trap thou have caught us
in, we could almost abandon thy Banners, under which we have thus long fought.
Why have thou thus painted and bespotted the immaculate Garments and White
Robes of thine Elect with the dust of the earth?

Oh Brethren! that we had but had the policy of the Monks, then should not we
have been reduced to that low ebb which now we are. Friends, seeing we have
begun, let us search our selves to the bottom, and recount what we were in the
days of old: Were not we the despised of the Nation? Were not we contented
with the meanest Cottages to cover our heads, the like Food to sustain our
selves, and the poorest Weeds to clothe our selves? In those days we took no
thought, neither were our heads busied with National Occurrances, the Secrets
of Kingdoms, Kings and Princes, the acquaintance of Powers, and Exercise of
Powers, Ruling and Dominion, Governments in Church and State? Our chiefest
cover and business then were to get bread to seed our selves, and Clothes to
cover our nakedness, and to become the best Workmen in the several Trades and
Occupations our Fathers gave us education in, as Thimble-makers, Razormakers,
Tailors, Cobblers, Carpenters, Weavers, Brewers Pedlers, and such like
Vocations: Then were we happy, m friends, and lived in peace, sucking
Consolation and Nourishment from the Pottage-pot, Beef and Bag-pudding. O that
we had never known or been instructed in the Rudiments of Ambition, but had
delighted in the Precepts of Content! O that our Master had never charmed us
into an aspiring vain, unless withal he had given us more sober and politic
heads, for the management of our Affairs of such a vast Circumference! O what
fools were we, that when we had mounted two or three steps, and with the
fatning Coniolation of a suitable portion of Kings Lands, Queens, Bishops,
Deans and Chapters, and other Sequestered Lands and Estates, as were allotted
unto us, we could not rest contented there, but must still be fluttering with
our ambitious Wings at the Helm, and nothing will satisfy Cobblers and Brewers,
but Crowns and Scepters. We might have taken our Brother the Neapolitane
Massionello's Chance into our consideration, which (it may be) if our ambitious
eyes had not been dazzled with the glittering hopes of Gold and Honor, but that
we could have had a serious reflection on the same, would have given some check
to our haughtiness, and a Rein to our furious current. But we (like Icarus)
must mount, and stand in competition with the Sun, till that he melts the Wings
of our Ambition like wax, and plunges our brazen faces into the deeps: Nothing
but Phaetons request will give satisfaction unto us, and I think we have
seconded him indifferent well, to our own sorrow and destruction.

O that we had trodden the path that our good Master Oliver lest behind him!
and that the Fleetwoods had not dealt so rashly with his successor in
disinthronizing him, and in time questionless we might have charmed him by the
Spiritual conversations of Goodwyn, Sterrey and Peter's, into a fit composure,
and tempered constitution to have preserved us in our several mounted Stations,
as his father had done before him. O that the Hopes of the Flee woods had not
been so mighty, and the Ambition of the Lamberts so great! then, even in this
day, might we have been wallowing in our far Livings, as the Sow walloweth in
the mine; but now we cannot, with the Dog, return to his vomit. O that we had
had b^^ so much wit as to have avoided the long Treaties, tedious Meetings and
Prolongations in the terrible season which the politic Monck put upon us. Had
we well noted that State-Aphorism (viz.) Delays breed Danger, then had we not
been in this drooping and low estate we are reduced unto. But we were confident
in the arm of our strength, and did not dread or fear the Enemies that were
risen up against us and our Cause: All the care we took was to provide bags to
part the spoil of another Sequestration, but now our bags are rent from us.

How much would we now give, to have had then a spirit of foreseeing and
fore-knowing; then surely we should, if not with victory, have come off with a
complying Plaudite, and not with such a hissing Reproach as is attributed unto
us. Friends, to see how we have been fooled, is doleful and soulcutting to
rehearse; for whilst we stand scussling, fighting, struggling, snarling and
contemning for the Bone, the Owner watches his opportunity, and comes and
snatcheth away the Meat from us. and leaves us to eat each other for hunger,
and in a far worse estate than at the beginning. Truly, friends, we are in a
very sad condition, and have brought our Hogs to a very fair Market, but have
made but a soul price of them I Will assure you. Now the people have found out
what we are, and what way all our actions bent their course, now that our Cause
is quite split, and our Honor laid in the dust, our acts of Injustice laid
open before them, they will stone us if we pass along the streets. We have
received the Mark of the Beast in our foreheads, and the very Children will
smell us out, even as the Cat does the Mouse, and hunt us up and down more than
ever they did Marriot: So that to stay here, we dare not, for fear of the Judge
who is at the door, and will reward every one according to their several deeds,
whether good or evil, for him or against him. And to fly into Foreign Nations,
will be far worse than to abide here; for there the verystones in the street
will rise up against, and accuse such vile Traitors as we, anp we shall be
murdered like so many Dogs. Men and Brethren, what shall we do? -- In my
judgment, our only way is to march under the several Banners of our
Professions, and several Occupations, Trades and Vocations, to meet our
Landlord, and cry Pecavimus with Halters enriching our Necks. O beloved, that
in this our day of Adversity, we were become, as once, honest Thimblemakers,
Cutlers, Cobblers, Beewers, Tailors, Carpenters, Weavers, Tinkers! then should
we take quiet sleeps, then would not fears and dangers in the nights alarm us,
and rowse us from our pillows: Now we shall be subject unto continual fears,
ever expecting and looking for a Messenger to be sent unto us, to call us to an
account, by our Landlords order: We have broken the Covenants in our Leases,
and have suffered his Lands and Tenements to be run over with ruin; we have
forfeited for non-payment of Rent, Service, Homage and Fealty, against Law and
Equity, and a strong Covenant in our Leases to that purpose: We have prohibited
his entrance to view the state of the reparations of his Messuages, Lands and
Tenements: We have persecuted and killed his Servants and Friends, whom for
that purpose he has so often sent unto us: And what can ye name that we have
not done? Finally, Brethren what account shall we give of our Stewardship? and
which of us shall have that impudent boldness as to look him in the face?
Whether shall wesly for resuge, or unto whom for protection? The fight of the
King will cut us like a two-edged Sword; who shall abide his presence? We have
dug a pit, and are fallen into it our selves: how shall we then escape? we
have invented and prepared mischief for others, and it is returned upon our own
pates: Who shall pity us? who shall save us? who shall deliver us?

Now thou our strength has left us all,
For people to deride our fall:
Our wicked actings great and small,
Shall condemn us ith'Judgement-Hall.
Ambitions wings are melted,
Out Honor with dirt is pelted,
And we are left besmelted,
'Cause we must needs be Belted.
Oh! that as first we did begin
With a Cobblers Awl, and a Tailors Pin;
With Carpenters Rule, Brewers Sling,
Weavers Trade, Pedlers Pack,
Tinkers Budget, Millers Sack:
We could but now to work again,
All in our pristine Trades amain:
O then how happy should we be,
If of our Honor we were free,
And could but cry, God Trading send,
And grant us Peace unto (...)
THE END.

