LONDON'S Account: OR, A Calculation of the Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Exactions, Taxations, Impositions, Excises, Contributions, Subsidies, Twentieth
Parts, and other Assessements, within the Lines of Communication, during the
four years of this Unnatural War.

What the total sum amounts unto, What has been disbursed out of it, and
what remains in the Accomptants hands.

Imprinted in the Year, 1647.

To any READER that loves Reason or Understanding.
YOu that read, I would have you know and consider this great oppression that
has been laid upon all men, (except the Members of both Houses) has
occa^ioned me to spend some few hours to make a Calculation of that mass of
wealth which has been within these four years collected in London, and the
Parishes comprehended within the Weekly Bills. I doubt not, but all have paid
who were able, and none escaped but my former exception.) Now if thy support be
not out of those unlawful Taxes, (by which means thou may be prejudicate)
Read and judge; and thou can not but find that I have written, as being
free from favor, falsehood, and partiality: For I have omitted the Taxes laid
on all Halls and Companies, which has been great and large sums; besides
diverse Trades liable to the Excise, it must needs be far greater.

But thou may perceive or guess by the bigness of the Paw, of what a huge
bulk and body the Beast is, as well as the Author can; and know, all the
Counties and Cities in England and Wales, have likewise been charged to the
uttermost. I confess I have purposely omitted the Charge for Arms, and I did
it, in regard they invested themselves of all which His Majesty was owner of at
London, Hull, and all other places they could, which cost them nothing (but the
taking.) We leave to consideration, the direful effects of the issues of those
collections, which only has been the Causes of shedding Innocent Blood, (if
our Laws be Judge) Ruined the Kingdom, most intollerably dishonored our
merciful and Gracious King, Queen, the Prince, withal the Royal Issue, and
useing all the cruelties, and Avaritious demenours upon the Persons, Lives,
Liberties, Estates and Consciences of as many as have dared either to be
Protestants or true Subjects; to the increase of Thieves and Beggars, to the
making of Widows and fatherless Children, to the plucking down of the divine
vengance upon this afflicted Land, to maintain and enrich only factious,
contentious, and insolent persons, the shame of Kingdom and City.

LONDONS ACCOUNT, etc.
IT is (says the wisest of Kings and men) the greatest of afflictions and
oppressions, when subjects and servants rule; and if this Kingdom in general,
and this City in particular, has not found this Truth, then they are both to
learn what Affliction and Oppression is. But (to confirm its verity) I have
here (and I hope it will not be expected exactly, because I protest I have not
seen any Roll of Sellement of any one parish, and therefore have no guide to
this my Calculation, but first, the order for assessing, and next, the order
for a review, lest any through favor or friendship were not fully assessed.
This considered, see what a mass of treasure in this City (and her Weekly
Bills) has been levied toward the Kings, the Kingdoms, and her own ruin.
And leave the Reader to judge by these few particulars, how near the truth
this Calculation comes; yet herein is not comprehended neither Pole Money,
Royal Subsidies, sale of the Irish Lands, (because these passed by Royal
consent) and was at the Parliaments disposu^e; and had they not been diverted
from their prop^r intendments, doubtless would have done more then discharged
them: Nor that voluntary Contribution to the relief of the poor distressed
Protestants in Ireland: Nor that fast and loose trick by inviting such as
formerly had paid sums in for Land in Ireland, to pay half as much more; for
which half (if an Order speak truth) they shall have as much Land, as for
their former sums paid; and I assure you, both of these were not
inconsiderable.

Now, to leven the lump of factious and contentious persons, the first course
must be to fill the peoples ears with oppressions of Conscience, and
infringements of Liberties, (pills covered with gold, that are treason and
poison within.) Then to displace solid Magistrates and grave Citizens, lest if
such good men were in authority, they might sour our lump before it was (by
our usurping Masters) well kneaded, by understanding men's speculative insight
into their proceedings. Those must be removed, and in their steads, covetous
sharks, and griping men, (such as never knew fair dealing) shallow braind
fools, and little better then insolent persons, (men that desire the place,
not deserve it) must be elected in their rooms, whose ignorance proclaims
what they are in their daily consenting to they knew not well what. For
oppression of conscience, who can justly allege (that is a Royal and a loyal
subject) that that is an oppression which the Law has established? But the
same form of Doctrine and Discipline which was established in the Church of
England, by Parliaments, in blessed Queen Elizabeth's Raigue, disputed and
defended by her successor, King James, (of happy memory) and the opponents so
sa isfied, they consented and subscribed thereunto; maintained and (to his
uttermost) defended by our now most gracious and merciful Sovereign with the
hazard of his life, and according to Law performed in his Chapels and
Cathedral Churches. Now if any Church within His Majesty's Dominions, did
wilfully or carel^sly omit what the Law enjoined, it is no oppression to
compel them thereunto, for the Law does it. But do not those who have cried
out of the oppression of their ten^et consciences, strain gnats, and swallow
beetles? Are their consciences so tender against Uniformity of Prayer, (yea and
the Lords Prayer too) and yet consider not how often they have sworn to submit
to it, and their Superiors that imposed it? Obedience is better then
sacrifice. Wherefore all that do adhere to such, do deserve our Saviors woe.
Observe but Gods Judgment on these men, that cannot agree either in doctrine or
discipline, their daily invective pens do witness this for a truth. For our
Liberties, we had them, and enjoyed them, whilst we maintained the Laws; since
we have violated those, we are in worse condition then Turkish slaves: for who
is it that enioyes life or livelihood longer then the beneplacite of his
fellow. Subjects? And if God (for our sins) has decreed us slaves, better it
is to be so to a Royal King, then to those whose cruelties we already so much
have had trial of. Our Pulpits and Declarations thunder into the ears of the
people, the unlawfulness of Ship, Coat, and Conduct money; As I will not
justify them, so (under favor) I cannot conceive them unlawful in a time of
necessity. And could it be otherwise then an urgent need, when His Majesty's
Subjects of Scotland were in Arms against the Kings Honor, Crown and Dign
ty, marching to intest this our peaceable Kingdom, with the calamities of
War? Besides, if such Levies were against former Laws, what need we then of
our late Acts, that from thence forward no Levies should be laid upon the
Subject, til it passed by an Act of Parliament; for was it formerly unlawful,
the Law would have censured it; and now we know it is so. I admire what those
men can allege, that craved, and had this Act passed, to curb the prerogative
of Kings, and yet are the first violators of the same Law themselves, whilst
they are sitting in the same place, as they were when they craved to have the
same Law enacted.

Since, they have acknowledged the Laws cannot question the King for a Breach,
(but it can question all and every Subject.) But the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England, established by law, and the Subjects liberty, has been,
and ever will be maintained and defended against all Sectaries and contentious
men, by more abler pens: And therefore I will return to the Cities
inconsideratenes, and desire them (since the hardness of their hearts
disswades them) to believe, at least they would fancy what the whole Kingdom
groans under. And withal to call to mind, that they were not only the
causers, but they are still the continuers, and maine actors of all its
miseries. That since His Majesty's mercies so often tendered cannot, their own
follies so plainly evidenced (to so great oppression) may reduce their
judgments, to know to whom rightly they do owe their obediecce, for the
Disciples are not above their Master, and obedience is first commanded to
Emperors and Kings, and next, to those whom they set over us.

I desire to show my self a true Patriot, and doubt not but al Loyal and
faithful Subjects will do the like; as for those who have done otherwise,
God and King Charles (upon their true Repentance) take them into favo^r and
forgive them; And I would not have them offended if I say their own factions
has caused their own fractions, and the fly and underhand Courses of many of
them has made them in this world too hastily R ch; And all such do make
little conscience of any thing they undertake, for from the beginning the Laws
of God or man was not, nor to their end shall not be their guide. It is worth
your consideration to remember how peny-wise you were at the beginning of this
long-winded Parliament, refusing the loan of but 100000. l. except His Majesty
would condescend, some conceive, to an everlasting Parliament, for an assurance
of your repayment, (which ir you be all re-paid, it is well) But since you have
embraced an authority is desired to be made lawful, and by that unlawful power
forced so many unjust Taxes, as has (as you shall see anon) amounted to above
seventeen millions and an half of pounds within these four years; I may say
as the Replyer said to you, You have done, but did you ever understand what you
did do? besides the Loanes, plunder, and the many Sequestrations, (which I
have heard are no fewer then 80000 in England and Wales) which your sharking
Committee Men resolve to give no good account of: And so know you have been in
general pound foolish; for look but upon the issue, it is but a cipher to that
which has been collected.

But you may object, There is not so much come to the Parliaments hands.

That cleeres not the Charge, were it just, I see no reason but it should. And
as some of our now Magistrates and griping Citizens know it, Unjust -- The
report goes, near half the said Collections are fleeced away by sharking
Officers -- which is and will be an everlasting shame, and Gods curse will attend
it, on them and theirs, in regard it has maintained a most bloody and native
War against God, his Church, our Sovereign, his Loyal Nobility, Gentry and
Commonalty, and the blood of thousands does cry aloud to the Almighties
Tribunal for vengeance on the causers of these unnatural divisions. Your
inconstant and wavering thoughts first commenced this War; your hands and
purses (by fraud and violence) have maintained it; and if (from the bottom of
your souls) you repent not of it, God in the fullness of his time will be
avenged on you for it. Let the Laws of God and the Land be your rule, then I
doubt not but we may enjoy peace again. And though the Replyer to your
Remonstrance told you, it is in the Parliaments power to ruin you, they and he
knows (if you resolve to be honest) the contrary. In the mean time, God in
mercy look down upon our dread Sovereign, whom you (originally) have
necessitated, and injured most uniustly, with our Queen, Prince, and the rest
of the Royal issue. Preserve (O Lord) and prolong his life, because a more
religious, gracious, and merciful King never reigned in this Kingdom, nor
ever was a good King more abused by Subjects, nor more undeservingly worse
spoken of. Good God confound and scatter all those that delight in, or make a
trade of rebellious war; let them fly and be dispersed like dust before the
wind: This shall be mine, and ought to be the prayer of all loyal Subjects,
and true Patriots.

And now behold (I may say in part) the sums which have been assessed, paid,
and received in London, and her Weekly Bills only.
I conceive in the 129. parishes, there cannot be fewer inhabitants then the
number of 600000. Families, out of that proportion I doubt not for their
Twentieth part, not f^wer have been assessed then 400000 my reasons are, first,
by the Ordinance the Assessors were to estanate all men, and so self them. Now
these being factious men, fessed not according to reason or judgment, but (for
the Cause sake) according to their will, malice, and spleen. I confess the
Ordinance gave way that men might ease themselves (if over-rated) by declaring
upon oath their worth; but this remedy was worse then the disease, for thereby
they must discover their estates, or pay what they were assessed at. To
discover their estates, endangered their credit, which could not but occasion
their ruin, and so necessitated to pay sums far above men's abilities.
Secondly, all Halls of Corporations have been largely estimated, and great
store of men of known ability forced to pay large sums: Now if you consider
every Corporation and man that paid 1000. l at the rate all are valued at one
with another, has paid for 49. more then himself, and so for greater or
lesser sums accordingly, for rating these 400000 families one with another
but at 20. l. a family, it amounts to for the whole, 8:000000 The 50 Subsidi^s
granted, if I have not been misinformed, every Subsidy is 2800. l. which for
the 50. is 0:140000 The weekly Fast days, 400000. families for six months,
rating each family 6. d. a week, though the greatest part paid 1. s. and 2. s.
but rate them one with another at 6. d. a week, it amounts for 6. months to
0:240000 The assessement for bringing in the Scots, though none were to be
assessed but such as would not take their oaths they were not worth 1000. l.
yet it could not amount to less then 0:100000 8: 480000

Now to bring this into an Annual Calculation to the several sums
following, which by Orders has been levied by Excises, take the fourth part of
the sum above, and you shall find it 2: 120000 The weekly assessement to
maintain the Army from 400000 families, at 6. d. a family one with another,
and not without just cause, for I know a poor Porter was compelled to pay 12.
d. or go a soldier, and no able householder but paid far larger, and for any
thing I could learn, all paid that received not alms. This for six months,
amounts to 0: 240000 There is not vented in this City in Grocery ware, less
then 600000. l. a year, which at 1. s. per l. is for the year 0: 030000 There
is not vented in all sorts of Mercery ware in this City, less then 500000. at
1. s. per l. 0: 025000 There is not vented by Silkmen less then 400000. a
year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 020000 There is not vented of all sorts of
Haberdashers ware less then 500000. l. a year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 025000
There is not vented by Salters and Oylemen less yearly then 600000. at 1. s.
per l. 0: 030000 There is not vented by Linen Drapers in general less then
600000. l. a year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 030000 There is not vented by Woollen
Drapers less then 500000. l. a year, at 6 d. per l. 0: 012500 H^^^^rs of all
sorts cannot vent less then 100000 a year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 005000
Upholsters in their several dealings 80000 l. a year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 004000
Stationers and Paper-sellers 80000. a year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 004000
Leather-sellers and Trunk-makers in these times 200000. at 1. s. per l. 0:
010000 Ironmongers in general 300000 a year, at 1. s. per l. 0: 015000
Spanish Tobacco there cannot be less imported then 200000. l. weight, at 2. s.
per l. is 0: 020000 English Plantations 1200000. at 2. d. per l. 0: 010000 Six
shill beer in 400000. families, admitting one family with another spend but
20. barrels a year each family, it is 8: 000000. of barrels, at 6. d. the
barrel, amounts to 0: 200000 Strong Beer and Ale vented in Innes, Cooks
houses, Alehouses, and Chandlers, of all which in the 129 parishes there cannot
be less then 8000. if every of these draw but one barrel a week, it is
416000. which at 2. s. per barrel amounts to 0: 041600 Strong beer and ale in
private houses, if 200000. of them spend but 2. bar. a year apiece, it is
400000. bar. at 1. s. per bar. 0: 020000 Wine of all sorts, there is not less
imported yearly then 20000. Tonnes, at 5. l. a Tonne, 0: 100000 Butchers and
Poultrers for 400000 families, for they must all eat, now one with another
cannot spend less then 8. s. a week, for if some poorer sort spend but 5. s.
and less they cannot spend in a family, others spend 15.20.30. yea 40. s. a
week: But as above at 8. s. a week one with another, it is 8000. l. a week, at
1. s. per l. and for the year 0: 416000 The Annual Revenue of the Crown they
say is eleven hundred thousand pounds a year, but I place here but 1: -- 4:
378100.

Which for the four years is seventeene millions, five hundred and twelve
thousand four hundred pounds. 17. mil. 512400. l.

I doubt not but it will be expected this yearly large Income in this City
only should have as large, or (indeed as the Public Faith stands indebted)
far larger issues, else it cannot be engaged without unsufferable fraud from
the Kingdoms oppression. But since all their Orders, and Speeches to this City,
have expressed no other issues but the Armies pay, consider, that if this City
alone has for these four years maintained ten thousand Foot, pay every
soulder 8. d. a day for the whole year, so he should have no free Quarter nor
Plunder since he is paid, or should be for the whole year, excepting Sundaies,
and that amounts to but 104333. l. 15. s. But I here add the Sundays, and
cast it for 365 days to the year, allotting the 17333. l. 15. s. to pay all
their Officers as duly, yet all together is but 121666. l. Grant they likewise
maintain 2000. Horse, pay these for 313 days 2. s. 6. d. a day, it amounts to
but 78250. l. But for the payment of their Officers, add the 52 days, which
is 13000. l. and both these sums for the whole year is but 91250. l. Grant
twenty of His majesty's Ships, great and small, be employed yearly, allotting
to every Ship 100 men, which is for the whole 2000 men, though few or none are
so well manned, pay these 2000 fifteen shil. a month for the whole year, their
wages amounts to but 18000. l. but to pay Officers in them, add 2000. l. more,
and all makes but 20000: l. Victual these 20 Ships with 2000. allotting every
man 8. d. a day for the whole year, it amounts to little more then 24433. l:
Grant you have 30. merchants Ships great and small in the service, hire them
one with another manned, victualled, and furnished for the War at 200. pounds
a month, (and so you may do) say they are in your service nine months in the
year, it is but 54000. l. 311349: --

These charges I am certain are the maine ones, and with the largest that this
City ever was put to, and were it well examined, I conceive a third part of
every charge here was not employed from hence alone, for all Counties had their
share in pay of the Army, how it is possible for such large incomes to be so
much indebted, since the issues are not answerable, as you shall see by that
should remain for balance is to me a riddle, since the years rest that this
Credit* has, stands indebted to the Debit. 4: 066751 4: 378100

Grave Booker shows the Aspects, and Lilly helps
To lick those Meteors (as Bears their whelps)
Into his fancies shape: But could these two
Can count the Stars (which few but they can do)
Make a just balance to this large Account,
The Danish Tycho Brahe they will surmount.
FINIS.

