MIP

blazon or coat of arms of the City of London An Act of Common Council
concerning the Collecting and gathering of the Fifteenes Granted for the
necessary Defense of the City of London.
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guild Hall Civitatis London, septimo die
Aprilis 1643 post meridiem, Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli, nunc Regis
Angliae, etc. decimo nono, coram Isaac Pennington Majore secundo tempore
Civitatis London, Jacobo Garrad Milite, Thoma Atkin, Johan. Wollaston Milite,
Thoma Adams, Johan. Warner, Johan. Towse, Abraha. Reynardson, Georgio Garret
Milite, Johan. Fowke, Jacobo Bunce, Willi. Gibbs, and Richardo Chambers,
Aldermannis Civitatis praedictae, ac Johan. Langham, and Thoma Andrews,
Aldermannis ac dicte Civitatis Vicecomit' Necnon majore part Communariorum de
Communi Concilio ejusdem Civitatis tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
WHEREAS at a Common Council here holden, the three and twentyeth day of
February last past, eight Fifteenes (after the new rate) were granted for the
necessary defense of this City, and thereby Collectors are to be made, and
directions given, in what manner, and to whom, and to what purpose the said
Moneys Collected shall be paid and issued out, as by the said Act it does more
at large appear. And forasmuch as this Court is informed by some Members
thereof, that the Collecting of the said moneys is much detarded and hindered,
by reason that diverse Collectors conceive that they have not power to distraine
for the same, in case the same be refused to be paid; For clearing of which
doubt, and furthering the Collecting of the same;

It is declared granted, and enacted by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and Commons in this Common
Council assembled, and by authority of the same: That it shall and may be
lawful to and for all and every of the Collectors of the said Fifteenes,
respectively within his and their respective divisions or collections, to
distraine any person or persons refusing to pay the said Fifteenes, by his,
her, and their goods and Chattels, and the same to take, carry away and
retain, until such person or persons so refusing, shall pay his or her part
or portion of the said Fifteenes. And for his assistance shall (if he or they
require the same) take unto him or them any Constable or Constables within the
Parish or Ward, where any person or persons refusing shall dwell. And that all
the Constables within the City of London and Liberties thereof, as well within
Privileged places as without, shall and are hereby required (upon request of
any Collector or Collectors of the said Fifteenes) to aid and assist such
Collector or Collectors to take Distresses for default of payment of the said
Fifteenes. And that it shall be lawful to and for the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor to make a Warrant or Precept unto any Collector (requiring the same)
to distraine the Goods and Chattels of every person or persons refusing to pay
the said Fifteenes. And for the better encouragement of the said Collectors in
the due executing of their duties and speedy collecting of the several sums
of Money in their several and respective Collections; It is granted, agreed
and enacted by authority aforesaid, That if the said Collectors or any of them
shall distraine the Goods and chattels of any person or persons refusing to pay
the said Fifteenes, for the said moneys or any part thereof by a reasonable
distress; And that for the same, he, they, or any person or persons that does
or shall aid or assist him, them, or any of them, in taking such reasonable
distress, shall be sued or put to charges, that then such Collectors and every
one of them, and all Constables and others, persons aiding and assisting them
or any of them therein, shall be defended and saved harmless by this Court.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


