Londons Complaint and Lamentation,
Oxford should keep in subjugation
Sweet Charlemaine, our Sovereigne King,
Which all our discontentments bring.

Why should Proud Oxford thus our KING withold
From his grave PARLIAMENT, and be so bold
To brave fair London? it is sin and pity
That such a Town should front this Famous City.
Shall Oxford in defiance keep our KING,
To make fair London mournfully to sing?
Stand up fair London, thou shall win the day,
Thou have been humbled, thou do fast and pray.
Rowse up thy Spirits, be not discontented,
Christ hears thy prayers, he see's thou have repented:
And he in mercy will to thee incline,
And fight thy Battles, with His Power divine.
Pluck up thy courage, thou shall prosper well
Against malignant Spirits that rebel:
For shame lift up thy head, be valiant, stout,
Courageous, be to punish Romish Rout.
Let not base fear possess thy valiant heart,
Nor daunt thy courage, Christ does take thy part.
HE will not suffer Oxford to bear sway,
Christ mindful is of London night and day:
HE hears the Prayers of such as sigh and mourn,
HE will our sadness into gladness turn.
Go on with speed, to Oxford take your way,
In Christ His NAME, you shall obtain the day.
Christ will defend us, we on him depend;
HE will our Valor, Faith, Hope, Love, commend.
Let not our Spirits be possessed with slumber,
Let not base cowardice our senses cumber.
Speed on apace, we shall victorious be,
Stick to Christ Jesus, foul offenses flee.
Fight for Christ Jesus, King, and Parliament,
So shall you prosper, to your hearts content.
Oxford is base, to keep from us our KING,
Which all these sorrows, discontentments, bring.
Come let us all make haste to Oxford Town,
To fetch our KING with Honor and Renown.
Let us no longer pass our time away,
Let us make speed, Christ Jesus winnes the day.
The Pope of Rome, and those that take his part,
Christ Jesus he will wound them to the heart.
He Will crush their spirits, pluck their Courage down,
Come, let us fetch KING CHARLES to London Town.
Come, let us be courageous, London Boys,
Fetch home King CHARLES His Babes, our Kingdoms joys.
Which that we may, with heart and minds consent,
Christ bless our Kingdoms KING and PARLIAMENT.
Amen.

