A. CATALOGUE OF New Books, By way of Supplement to the former.

BEING Such as have been Printed from that time, till Easter-Term, 1660.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by Luke Fawn at the Parrot in
Paul's Churchyard, and Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1660.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Thought some more fit for this Work, would have pursued it, whereby I hoped
to have performed my promise by a Proxy; but finding the contrary, and
considering the use of it, I have kept my engagement alive by this Supplement.
It might have been more perfect, if done by one nigher the mint of Books; and
therefore the defects of a work so distanced, may I hope amongst the
understanding pass uncensured. Some might have been isntrumental in a more
exact production, who with the Dog in the manger, will neither eat hay, nor
suffer the Horse; yet this I can assure, that none or few Pieces of account are
escaped, and if any, they shall begin with the next years fruits: And so
farewell.

W. L.

DIVINITY BOOKS.
A
DR Ames, The substance of Christian Religion; or an easy draught of the
Christian Catechism in fifty two Lectures. 80. Mr Angel, The right Government
of the thoughts; a discovery of vain, idle, and wicked thoughts; with
directions for getting, keeping, and governing good; with four Sermons, viz.
right ordering the conversation, on Psalm. 50. ult. A Funeral Sermon on Psalm.
39.5. and one on 1 Cor. 11.28. 80. Dr Arrowsmith, A chain of Principles, or
orderly concatenation of Theological Aphorisms, and Exercitations, wherein the
chief heads of Christian Religion are asserted and improved. 40. -- Bad Man, An
exposition of the first 18 Verses of the first of John. 40.
Mr Ash, Faithful Christians gain by death, a Sermon at the Lady Essex her
Funeral. 40. Mr Allen, A Scripture Chronology. 40. Mr Aitesbury, Diatriba de
aeterno Divini beneplaciti circa creaturas intellectuales decreto, ubi patrum
consultae, Scholasticorum scita, and Modernorum placita ad S. Script. amussim,
and orthodexae Ecclesiae Tribunal deferuntur. 40.
B
Mr J. Brinsly, Gospel-Marrow; the great God giving himself for the sons of
men; or the sacred mystery of Redemption, with the two ends thereof,
Justification and Sanctification, opened and applied. 80. -- The hardest lesson
in Christ's School learned and taught by himself; how Christians should submit
to their heavenly Father, in suffering his will in life and death. 80. -- The
false Teacher. 40.
Mr A. Burgess, Self-judging in order to the Sacrament; with a Sermon on the
day of Judgment. 120. -- Doctrine of Original sin, asserted and vindicated
against Socinians, Papists, and Anabaptists, practically improved; also of
Justification by faith alone. folio. -- Scripture Directory for
Church Officers, and people; or a practical Comment on the 3 of the first of
Corinthians; with the Godly man's Choice. folio.
Mr Byfield, Gospel-glory, without prejudice to the Law, shining forth in the
glory of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the salvation of sinners, who
through grace do believe. 80. -- Signs of the times.
Mr Brooks, The silent soul; with sovereign antidotes against the most
miserable exigents, etc. to work souls to be still and silent under all
changes, that have or may pass upon them in this world 80. Mr Boteler, The
Worthy of Ephratah, in a Sermon at the Earl of Masgraves Funeral. 80. Mr Bury,
Every ones duty; or Theses of the duty of Superiors and Inferiors, being the
sum of the fifth Commandment. 120. Mr Beverly, The Presbyterians and
Independants vindicated from the contradictious way of Free Admission, In
Answer to Mr Timson, and Mr Maurise. 80. -- Vnio reformantium, sive examen
Hornbeki de Independentissimo, Apologeticum Elenchticum utrinque, Modestum
Fraternum; ad Ecclesiarum omnium reformatarum, etc. 80.
Mr Bourne, Ministers maintenance by Tithes; Infant Baptism, humane Learning;
and the Sword of Magistracy justified. 80. Mr Ballingford, Habackcuks Prayer,
applied to the Churches present occasion on Hab. 3.2. with Christ's counsel to
the Church of Philadelphia on Rev. 3.11. Preached before the Provincial
Assembly at London. 80. Mr Blackwood, An exposition of the first 10 Chapters of
Matthew. 40. Mr Baxter, The Grotian Religion discovered against Mr Pierce. 80.
-- Crucifying the world by the Cross of Christ; with a Preface to the Nobles,
Gentlemen, etc. directing them to be rich in the best things. 40. --
Confirmation and restoration, the necessary means of reformation and
reconciliation, for healing the divisions of the Church, tendered* to
Magistrates, Ministers, and people. 80. -- Five Disputations about
Church Government, and Worship; about Episcopacy, Ordination, Liturgy,
Ceremonies. 40. -- Key for Catholics, opening the juggling of the Jesuits; the
vanity of Popery; with forty detections of their fraud. 40. -- Holy
Commonwealth; or political Aphorisms, opening the true principles of
Government. 80. -- On saving faith. 40. -- On self-denial, a Treatise. 40. --
Directions to Justices of Peace, in a sheet of paper. -- A Treatise of death,
the last enemy to be destroyed: wherein its enmity consists; and how it is
destroyed. 120. -- True Catholic and Catholic Church described; vanity of
Papists and other Schismatics, that confine it to their sect, shamed; with a
Postscript against Mr Malpas, Mr Pierce, Philo-Tylenus, and others. 120. --
Catholic Unity; or the only way to bring us all to be of one Religion. 120. --
A Sermon of Repentance, preached before the House of Commons at a late Fast.
40. -- Right, Rejoicing, A Thanksgiving Sermon at Paul's before the Lord Mayor,
etc. 40.
Mr Buroughs, The Saints Inheritance 40. -- On Matthew, Christ's invitation: of
meekness and anger; Christ the humble Teacher: the easy way to Heaven. 40. --
Saints Happiness, with steps to it* in diverse Lectures upon the Beatitudes. 40.
-- Gospel-Revelation in three Treatises: 40. 1. Nature of God. 2. Excellency of
Christ. 3. Excellency of man's immortal soul.

Bishop Brownrigg, A Sermon on the fifth of November, the last he preached.
120. Brinsleys false Teacher tried and, cast: a Subject useful at all times
and but too seasonable for the present. 80. Mr Bewicke, Answer to 17 Queries of
the Quakers; maintenance of Ministers by ^ythes; cases of conscience resolved;
Parochial Churches justified; heretical Antichrists described. 40. Mr
Bagshaw, Saintship no ground of Sovereignty; proving that Saints barely
considered as such, ought not to govern. 80. Mr Barton, a Century of select
Hymns, collected out of Scripture, to be sung in five or six Tunes, commonly
known and practiced. 120. Mr Bunnian, The Doctrine of the Law and Grace
unfolded; or a discourse concerning the Law and Grace, the nature of the one,
and the nature of the other; showing what they are as they are the two
Covenants; and likewise who they be; and what their conditions are: that be
under either of these two Covenants. For the better understanding of the Reader
there is several Questions answered touching the Law and Grace, very easy to
be read, and as easy to be understood by those that are the sons of wisdom,
the children of the second Covenant; as also several Titles set over the
several Truths contained in this Book, for thy sooner finding of them, which
are these following the Epistle. -- A few sighs from Hell; or the groans of a
damned soul; or an Exposition of these words, the 19th of Luke, concerning the
rich man and the beggar; wherein is discovered the lamentable estate of the
damned, their cries, their desires, and their distresses, with the
determination of God upon them; a good warning word to sinners both old and
young. 120. -- On the Covenant. 80.
Mr Buchanus his body of Divinity; or Institutions of Christian Religion,
framed our of the Word of God, and the Writings of the best Divines,
methodically handled by way of Question and Answer, fitted for all such as
desire to know and practice the will of God; translated into English by Robert
Hill B. D. for the benefit of the English Nation: to which is added, The
practices of Papists against Protestant Princes. 40 Baptism and conversion of
Isuf Turk. 80. Mr Boyres Enquiries. 120. Mr Bayfield on the Trinity. 80.
C
Mr Crook on hypocrisy in two parts; acutely distinguishing the more
undiscerned differences, between the hypocrite in his best dress of seeming
virtues, and formal duties; and the true Christian in his real graces, and
sincere obedience. folio. Mr Crompton, The practice of prayer; with persuasions
in backsliding times to that most needful duty; the nature, necessity, and
success of fervent prayer. 120. Mr Clarke, Medulla Theology, contained in
sundry Questions and cases of conscience, both speculative and practical, the
greatest part collected out of the Works of our most judicious, experienced,
and orthodox English Divines, and and the rest supplied by the Author folio. --
Golden Apples, or serious and seasonable counsel from the Sanctuary, to the
Rulers of the earth, held forth in the resolution of sundry Questions and cases
of conscience, about divisions, schisms, heresies, and tolleration of them,
collected from the writings of the most orthodox and judicious Divines, both
Presbyterian and Independent. 80.
Mr Clark, Englands Remembrancer, containing a full and true Relation of those
two never to be forgotten Deliverances, the one from the Spanish-Invasion in
88; the other from the hellish Powder Plot, November. 5. 1605. Whereunto is added
the like Narrative of that signal judgment of God upon the Papists, by the
fall of the House in Blackefriers London, upon their fifth of November 1623.
80. Mr Cartwright, A practical and polemicall Comment on the 15th Psalm,
wherein is the Text explained* controversies discussed; cases of conscience
cleared; more especially that of usury. 40. -- Cartwright's Electa Targumnice
Rabbinica, sive Annotationes in Exodum, etc.
Mr S. Cradock, Knowledge and practice; or a plain discourse of the chief
things necessary to be believed, known, and practiced, in order to salvation.
80. Mr Case, Eliahs abatement, a Sermon at Mr Roswels Funeral. 120. -- Morning
Exercises methodized, or certain chief heads of the Christian Religion opened
and improved, in diverse Sermons by several Ministers of London, in the
monthly course of morning exercises at Giles in the fields. 40. -- Challenge
and triumph of faith, in a Sermon at Mr Lucyes Funeral. 120.
Confessio fidei in conventu Theologorum authoritate Parl. Angl. indicto
elaborata eidem Parl. pestmodum approbata; una cum Catechismo dupliplici,
majori, minorique etc. 80. Mr Chetwind, The Watch charged, or a warning to Gods
Watchmen, in a Sermon at the general meeting of the associate Ministers of
Somerset. 80. Mr Collings, The (Preacher pretendedly sent)* sent back to bring
a better account who sent him; in vindication of Vindiciae Ministerii
Evangelici, against a Book called The Preacher sent. 40. Mr Chauncy, Of the
justification of a sinner in the sight of God. 40. Mr Clegat, The abuse of Gods
grace, discovered in the kinds, causes, punishments, symptoms, cures,
differences, cautions, and other practical improvements thereof, proposed as a
seasonable check to the wanton Libertinism of this present age. 40. Mr Caryl,
An Exposition with practical observations continued upon the 30 and 31
Chapters of Job in 37 Lectures. 40. Mr Calamy* A collection of several
Sermons, preached on solemn occasions on these Texts, Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10.
Ezekiel. 36.32. Act. 17.30. Mat. 12.25. 2 Timothy 3.3. Earl of Warwicks Funeral
Sermon. 40. Confession of faith of the Congregationall Churches in England,
agreed upon and consented unto by their Elders and Messengers at the Savoy,
October 12. 1658. 40. St Chrysostomes golden book of education of children
translated from the Greek. 120. Mr Capells Remains, concerning the translation
of the holy Scriptures; with his life. 80. Dr Causabon, Enthusiasme as it is an
effect of nature, but mistaken by many for divine inspiration, or diabolical
possession. 80. Mr Cotton, On the Covenant with additions. 80. Mr Crofton,
Prospering prosaneness provoking holy conference: the state of the wicked:
exercise of the godly; event of both. 120. Captive taken. 80. Churches
censures. 80.
D
Mr Dingley, Vox coeli; or Philosophical, Historical, and Theological
Observations of Thunder; with a more general view of Gods wonderful works,
grounded on Job 26.14. now enlarged. 80. Mr Durham, A Comment on the
Revelations, the Text explained, series of Prophesies therein deduced according
to their order and dependency upon each other, etc. those yet to be fulfilled,
so far as is warrantable enquired into. folio. Duty of man, in a familiar way
for the meanest reader, necessary for all families. 80. Mr Durant, Silence the
duty of Saints under every sad providence. 80. -- Cluster of grapes taken out
of the woman of Canaans basket; or comfort for believers. 80.
Mr Dickson, An Exposition of all Paul's Epistles; also of St James, Peter,
John, and Jude; the sense of every Chapter and Verse analytically unfolded, and
Text enlightened. folio. Devotions of the ancient Church in 7 pious prayers;
with administrations. 80. Mr D. The life and death of Mr Harris, late President
of Trinity-Colledge in Oxon. 80.
E
Mr Eyres, The Church sleeper awakened in 2 Sermons on Act. 20. and Verse.
9.120. Erastus, Nullities of Church Censures, etc. of excommunication not of
divine institution. 80. Mr Ellis, Miscelanea; sive Meditationes, Orationes,
etc. 120. -- Quiet soul, or the tranquillity of Christians estates in two
Sermons. 40.
Ellis, The Pastor and the Clerk; or a debate real concerning Infant Baptism,
wherein first the truth of the Doctrine is afresh cleared. Secondly the
Scriptures alleged for it vindicated. Thirdly the Objections by all briefly
answered. Fourthly and the Seedsman of them truly ciphered; together with some
retractations of the Author, and resentings in reference to the late civil and
Ecclesiastical changes. 80.
F
Mr Fulwood, The visible Church in a large debate, whether the visible Church
may be considered to be truly a Church of Christ, with respect to saving grace,
affirmed, also what does constitute visible Church Membership; what renders it
visible; what nulls it. 40 Mr Fergussor, An Exposition on the Galathians and
Ephesians. 80. Mr J. Fuller, Apprentices allarm, sounded by a dying Watchman to
the Countries about the City of London. 80. Mr T. Ford, Singing of Psalms the
duty of Christians under the New Testament, in a vindication of that
Gospel-Ordinance upon Ephesians. 5.19.120. Mr Firmin, A Treatise on Tithes, a
Discourse concerning Ministers maintenance by Tithes. 40
G
Mr J. Goodwin against Mr Resbury, Mr Pawson, Mr Kendall, in their late
writings against the free grace of God in the redemption of the world, with a
touch at Dr Owen, Mr Lamb, etc. 40. -- On the justification of a sinner,
various causes thereof diligently enquired into, and their several
contributions toward so happy a work clearly distinguished, assigned to their
proper causes. 40.
Dr Gawden, Ecclesia Anglicanae suspiria; the tears, sighs, complaints, and
prayers of the Church of England, setting forth her former constitution,
compared with her present condition; also the visible causes and probable cures
of he distemper. folio. -- A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Bishop
Brownrigge; with an account of his life and death. 4. -- A Thanksgiving Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, at the restoring the secluded Members. 4.
Mr. Guild, The Throne of David, or an Exposition of the 2 of Sam. 4. Mr.
Geering, The arraignment of ignorance; the causes and kinds of it; mischiefs
and danger; with the cure of it; the excellency and benefit of heavenly
knowledge, largely handled from Hosea 4.6.8. Mr. Greenhill, An Exposition
continued upon the 20 to the 29 Chapters of Ezekiel. 4. Mr. Gee, The divine
right and original of the civil Magistrate from God, as it is in Romans 13.1.
illustrated and vindicated. 8. Mr. Geere, Cases of conscience about the
Sacrament. 12. Mr. Gery, Meditations on God, his Attributes, and other points
of Religion fitted for these times, wherein Atheism abounds. 12o. T. Gatakeri,
Adversaria Miscelanea, in quibus sacrae Scripturae primo, deinde aliorum
Scriptorum locis aliquam mult is lux redditur; quae animadversionum hujusmodi
cinnum ab ipso authore praemissum jam subsequuntur, edente Carolo Thomae Gat.
filio. Adjicitur authoris vita propria manu scripta. folio. Mr Gray, The
mystery of faith, the nature, excellency, and usefulness of that noble grace,
and practice thereof powerfully pressed, with three Sermons concerning death,
the great salvation, etc. Gilbert, A sovereign Antidote against sinful errors,
the Epidemicall plague of these latter days, extracted out of divine Records,
the dispensatory of Christianity, for prevention and cure of our spiritual
distempers. 80. -- The learned Maid, or whether a Maid may be a Scholar; a
Logic exercise written in Latin, by that incomparable Virgin Anna Maria A
Schurman; with some Epistles to the famous Gassendus and others. 80.
Gardener, Sixteen Sermons preached in the University at Oxford, and at Court;
together with his Sermon preached in Bow-Church London, on the Anniversary
meeting of Herefordshire Natives, June 24. 1658. 80
H
Dr Hammond, A third defense of the Treatise of Schism, against the Romanists
rejoinder; with a view of their position and oral tradition, in the way of
Master White. 40. -- A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the Psalms, briefly
explaining the difficulties thereof folio. -- Of the daily practice of piety,
with devotions and prayers in time of captivity. 120.
Mr T. Hall, A practical and polemicall comment on the 3 and 4 Chapters of the
2 of Tim. the Text explained; some controversies discussed; cases of conscience
cleared; common places handled. folio. -- An exposition of Psalm. 82. setting
forth the necessity, utility, dignity, and duty of Magistrates; Scripture
cleared; cases of conscience resolved; Anabaptists cavills confuted; and many
seasonable Observations raised. 40 -- Samaria's downfall, or a comment on the
five last, Verses of the 13th of Hosea; the dignity, duty, impenitency, and
downfall of Ephraim; the Text explained; cases of conscience cleared;
practical Observations raised; with characters of the twenty Kings of Israel.
40. -- Apology for the Ministry, and its maintenance; the necessity, dignity,
and efficacy of a Gospel Ministry, against Socinians, Anabaptists,
Swenckfeldians, Enthufiasts, Libertines, Quakers, and the. rest of that rout.
40.
Mr Hardy, The choicest Fruit, A Sermon before the Honorable House of Lords,
at a late Fast. 40. Dr Huit, Repentance and conversion, the fabric of
salvation, being his last Sermons, published by Doctor Wild, and Doctor
Barwick. 80. Mr Hickman, A justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen, in their
denying the positivity of sin, against Mr Pierce. 80. Mr Houghton, On Baptism
against Hagar, and defense of Mr Cook, Mr Baxter, and Mr Hall. 40. Mr Hicks,
An Exposition on the Revelations; with a friendly compliance between Christ's
Monarchy and the Magistrates. folio. Dr Hylin, The parable of the Tares
expounded and applied in ten Sermons before his Majesty King Charles the second
Monarch of great Britain; with other Sermons added. 40. -- Hist.
Quinqu-Articularis; or a declaration of the judgment of the Western Churches,
particularly of the Church of England, in the sive controverted points of
(reproached in these latter times by the name of) Arminianism. 40.
Mr Hodges, The fear of death. 80
I
Dr Ingelo, The perfection, authority, and credibility of the Holy Scriptures,
discovered in a Sermon before the University of Cambridge, at the Commencement,
July 1658. 80. Mr Jourdan, The heavenly child, born and brought up with
difficulty; or Satan defeated by a safeguarding Majesty, in making the creature
nothing that Christ may be all, being the experience of one who desires to be
known to the Lord, not to men, in whom the love of Christ has constrained to
his discovery. 80. Imitation and caution to Christian Women, or the life and
death of Mistress Mary Buly, recommended to the Reader by D. Reynolds. 80. Mr A.
Jackson, Annotations on Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Solomon's
Song. 40. Mr Jeanes, The second part of Scholasticall and practical Divinity.
40. Mr Jemmat, The Abridgement of D. Prestons Works, the second Edition with
large Additions. 80.
K
KEy, Of Reformation. 120. -- Of the Sacrament. 120.

L
LIghtfoot's Horae Hebraicae and Talmudicae impensae. 40. 1. In Chorographiam
aliquam terrae Israeliticae. 2. In Evangelium S. Matthaei.
Mr Llod, Christ's valedictions, or sacred Observations on the last words of our
Savior on the Cross. 120. Mr Lawson, A body of Divinity, containing the Rules
of the special Government of God, according to which he orders the immortal
and inteellectuall creatures, Angels and men, to their final and eternal
estate, being a method of those saving truths which are contained in the Canon
of the Holy Scripture. folio. -- Politca sacra and Civilis, or a model of Civil
and Ecclesiastical Government, wherein besides the positive Doctrine of Church
and State in Genesis are debated the principal controversies of the times,
concerning the constitution of the State and Church of England 40.
H. L' Strange, The affinity of sacred Liturgies. folio.
M
Mr Milton, Of Civil power in Ecclesiastical causes, that it is not a wfull
for any power on earth to compel in matters of Religion. 120. -- Concerning
Church-Fees, Church-Revenues, and Tithes. 120
Mr Martin, Mr Petto, etc. A vindication of the Preacher sent. 80.
N
Mr Nesbit, An Exposition of both Epistles of Peter. 80. Mr Norman, The
Preachers Patent cleared, and the peoples plea considered, a Sermon at an
Ordination, etc. 120. Mr Newton, An Exposition with Notes unfolded and applied
on John 17. folio. -- New-Englands Disputations. 40.
Mr Newcomen, The sinners hope, and his privilege and duty in his worst
condition, to startle and invite the wicked from his sinful and wretched
ways, and directing the humble in the cases of darkness, sin and affliction.
80. Mr Norton, The heart of New England rent at the blasphemies of the Quakers;
concerning their Doctrine, their destructive nature to Religion, Church, etc.
80.
O
Dr Owen, The divine original, authority, self-evidencing light, and power of
the Scriptures; with answer to that Question, How we know the Scriptures to be
the Word of God; with a vindication of the purity and integrity of the Hebrew
and Greek Texts of the Old and New Testament, in some considerations on the
Prolegomena and. Appendix to Biblia Polyglotta. 80. -- A Treatise on
Temptation. 80. -- An answer to two Questions about the power of Magistrates in
Religion, and the worship of God; with one about Tithes proposed and resolved,
a sheet of paper.

P
Mr Pestell's Sermons. 80. Mr Pierson, An Exposition on the Creed. 40. Mr
Pierce's, Answer to Mr Baxter his pretended discovery of the Grotian Religion;
with a Rejoinder to his Key for Catholics, and Disputations about
Church Government. 40. Mr Polen heel, Of self-denial; the necessity and
excellency of it; with Directions for the practice of it. 80. Dr Preston,
Riches of mercy to men in misery, the dignity and duty of Gods children. 40. Mr
Pool, Quo warranto; or a moderate enquiry into the warrantableness of preaching
of gifted and unordained persons, in vindication of Jus divinum Ministerii
Evangelici, against the Preacher sent. 40. Mr Perrot, The Scriptures stability
proved, explained, and applied, that all Scriptures may with singular advantage
be improved. 120. Bishop Prideaux, Sacred cloquence, or the Art of Rhetoric,
as it is laid down in Scripture. 80. Parkerus illustratuus, sive Annotata
quaedam in omnes LXX. M. T. Parkeri Theses, de traductione hominis peccatoris
ad vitam, Epistolae anteloquium, and Epilogus annexus, ad Christianam pacem,
and unitatem Ecclesiasticam obuixe invitant emnia. R. Baxtero, Parkero Thesium
liberal. passim Praeconi, and Tileno-mastigi sa is impotenti, amice and leniter
opposita, ab Authore Philo-Tileno. 40. Mr. Potter, The mystery of the Sabbath;
its Doctrine. 2. Moral and Ceremonial. 3. The Rest of God. 4. The fourth
Commandment expounded, etc, 80. Mr. Patrick, Divine Arithmatick; or the right
art of numbering our days, in a Sermon at Mr. Samuel Jacomb's Funeral. 40. --
Heartsease against troubles; with a consolatory discourse against the loss of
our friends, and those that are dear to us. 80. -- Mensa mystica, or a
discourse of the Sacrament; the ends of its institution so manifested; our
addresses so directed; our behavior so ordered that we may not lose the
benefits of it. 80. -- Aqua regenerationis, a discourse on Baptism, into which
is inserted a brief discourse, to persuade to a confirmation of the Bapismall
vow. 80. -- Palmer, The Gospel new creature, wherein the work of the Spirit is
opened, in awakening the soul to the getting pardon of sin, and an interest in
Jesus Christ, without which it is undone to all eternity, discovering the
refuges and vain hopes for heaven, of ignorant and formal professors in this
Nation, tending to rouse them out of their carnal security before it be too
late, by way of comfort to all dejected souls; the tempestuous soul calmed by
Jesus Christ. 80.

R
Dr. Robinson, Endoxa, or some probable enquiries into truth, both divine and
humane; with a short disquisition of some few difficult places of Scripture. 80
Ralph Robinson, Christ the perfect pattern, being the substance of several
Sermons. Mr. Rutherford, Influences of the life of grace, the way and means of
having and improving of spiritual dispositions, and quickening influences from
Christ the resurrection and the life. 40. The Refuter refuted, or Dr. Hammond's
EKTENESTEPON defended by a third person. 40. Dr. Reynold's Works in one Volume
newly printed. folio. -- Diverse Sermons on sundry occasions, viz. Shields of
the earth; peace of the Church; self-denial; Joy in the Lord; true gain; peace
of Jerusalem; deaths advantage; Zions praise; humane learning; crown of great
actions; the rich man's charge; Gods fidelity. 40. -- The wall and glory of
Religion, in a Thansgiving Sermon for restoring the Parliament, and preserving
the City. 40.
Mr. Robinsons pattern. 80. Mr. N. Rogers, On the parable of the night-friend.
40. -- The parable of the fig tree, or the doom of a barren and unfruitful
profession. 40.
Mr. Reynell against Libertinisme. 120.
S
Sacra Trias, A second ternary of Sermons, the last and best monuments of the
learned and pious Dr. Stuart, Clerk of the Closet to his Majesty. 12. -- Three
Sermons on 1 Cor. 10.30. Mat. 28.6. 1 Cor. 15.29. Ezekiel. 33.11.12.
Mr. Syd. Simpson, Of unbelief, not going to Christ for life and salvation, a
great sin, yet pardonable. 4. Mr. Shaw, The Saints Tombstone, the holy life
and happy death of Mrs. Shaw of Hull, etc. 12. Mr. Swinnock, Heaven and Hell
epitomized; the true Christian characterized; an Exhortation, motives, means
and directions to be speedy and serious about the work of conversion. 8. -- The
door of salvation opened, containing the nature, necessity, marks, and means
of Regeneration. 8. Sanders, A dying fathers living Legacy to his loving son;
or lively rules from the rule of life to be lived by every Mothers child. 12.
-- The spiritual journey of a young man toward the land of peace, to live
therein eternally with God. 4.
M. Sheffeild, The sinfulness of evil thoughts, wherein the chambers of imagery
are unlocked; the cabinet of the heart opened, etc. 8. Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick,
The Anatomy of secret, presumptuous, and sins in dominion, with uprightness,
with the remissibleness of all sin, and irremissibleness of that against the
Holy Ghost. 4. -- The parable of the Prodigal, containing the sinners aversion
from God; the Penitent's conversion, and favorable entertainment from God. 4.
Mr. Sheepherd, The parable of the ten Virgins, in sundry Sermons on Mat. 25.
The difference between the sincere Christian and refined hypocrite; of saving
and common grace, etc. folio. Mr Sharrock, De Officiis secundum naturae jus,
feu de moribus, ad rationis normam conformandis doctrina, unde casus omnes
conscientiae, quatenus notiones a naturae suppetunt, judicari possint. 80. Mr
Spark, The Saints joy, a Treatise discovering the presence of God to be the
Saints fullness of joy and eternal pleasure. 80. Mr J. Smith Fellow of Queens
College in Cambridge, Select discourses; of divine knowledge; superstition;
atheism; immortality of the soul; God; prophecy; Covenant; pharisaicall
righteousness; excellency of Religion; Christian conflict: also his Funeral
Sermon by Mr Patrick; with his life and death. 40. Mr D. S. A vindication of
the civil Magistrates authority about the Church, and subordination of
Ecclesiastical Judicatories; with a refutation of the toleration of all
Religions amongst Christians; with the judgment of the reformed Churches of
France, Switzerland, Geneva, etc. 40. Mr Spencer, Golden means for Christians
to walk by, wherein all seekers in truth, and shakers in the faith, may find
the true Religion, and be established. folio. Mr. Slater's Catechism. 120. Mr.
Stokes, A paraphrasticall explication of the twelve minor Prophets, Hosea,
Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuck, Zephaniah, Haggi,
Zechariah, Malachi. 80. -- Spiritual armor. 40.
Mrs. Anna Shurman her works in English. 80. Mr. Stubb's meditations. 80. Mr.
Stern, Animi medulla, seu de beatitudine and miseria; illius essentia, origin
and ad ipsam methodo: hujus natura, causis and remediis, tractatus in quo
quaecunque ad alterutram spectant, explicantur; facilitas cum
b^atitudinemconsequenditum miseriam declinandi demonstratur, and gravissimae de
libero arbitrio ratione supplicandis Dei concursu causis and origin mali
Divinae peccati non volitione, scientia media paenitentiae lachrimis extasi and
controversiae enodantur. 80.
T
Mr. Tubb, Meditations divine and moral. 8. Mr. Tucker, Gods fearers, Gods
favorites, or an encouragement to fear God in the worst times. 8. S. P.
Temple's best improvement of the worst conditions; contempt of the world;
judgment of God against the wicked; on repentance; Sacrament; affliction; and
martyrdom. 8. Tilenus Junior, Arcana dogmatum Anti-Remonstrantium: The
Calvinists Cabinet unlocked. 8. Mr. Thorndike, An Epilogue to the tragedy of
the Church of England, being a necessary consideration and brief resolution of
the chief controversies in Religion, that divide the Western Churches,
occasioned by the present calamities of the Church of England. folio. Mr
Townsend, The Christians daily practice, or a practical discourse of prayer.
80. D. T. Tailor, A comment on Titus with Doctrine and Observation; with his
life and death fully related. folio. -- On Christ's temptations. folio.
Mr Trapp, A comment on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Solomon's Song, Isaiah,
Jeremy, Lamentations, Ezekiel, and Daniel. folio. Bishop Towers, Four Sermons:
80. 1. Earl of Northamptons Funeral. 2. Baptism of James Earl of Northampton.
3. Defense of the material Church before King James. 4. A Sermon before King
Charles.
D. Jer. Tailor, Sr Ju. Dalstons Funeral Sermon. 40.
V
Vindiciae Magistratuum. 120. Mr Virtue, Christ and the Church, or parallels in
three Books; in the first you have the harmony between Christ and the foregoing
Types, by which he was fore-shadowed in the Old Testament, and other
resemblances, by which it is set forth in the Holy Scriptures. 40. Bishop Vher,
Eighteen Sermons preached at Oxford; of conversion to God; of Redemption and
Justification by Christ; with a narrative of the Authors life by 1 Stanly
Gower, sometime Chaplain to the said Reverend Bishop. 40.
W
Mr Woodroff, A religious Treatise upon Simeons Song, directing how to live
holy, and die happy 80. Mr T. White, Of the power of godliness; wherein it
consists; cautions against mistakes and hindrances most common to Gods people;
helps to it. 80. Mr Wales, Mount Ebal leveled; or redemption from the curse;
our condition under the Law; Christ a curse for us; the grace of reption
weerein; the benefits and engagements to duties which flow from it. 80, Dr
Walton, Against Dr Owen in defense of the Biblia Polyglotta, and translactions
therein exhibited, etc. with the punctation of the Hebrew Text; various
readings, and ancient Hebrew Character is handled. 80. Dr Warmestry, The
conversion of Sig. Rigep. Dandulo, the only Son of a Silk-Merchant in Tzio,
from the delusions of Mahomet; his Baptism by Mr Gunning. 80. Mr Wills, A word
in season for a warning to England; or a prophecy of perilous times opened
and applied. 80. Mr Wilkenson, Conciones octo ad Achademicos Oxon. latin
habita Epistolarum decus. 80. Mr Whitfield, A persuasive to peace amongst the
sons of peace. 120. Mr Warren, The Jewish Sabbath antiquated, and the Lords Day
instituted by divine Authority, maintained by Scripture arguments, and
testimonies of the best antiquity; with a refutation of Objections. 40. Dr
Winterton, The body of Christian Religion, by H. Zankius translated. 40. Mr
White, A manuell for Parents, being particular directions for baptizing,
correcting, instructing, and callings for their children. 80. Mr Whiting,
Jacob's ladder to Heaven. 80.
Y
A Young Divine's Apology for his continuance in the University, with his
serious meditations on the sacred calling of a Minister. 80.
HISTORY BOOKS.
A Pothegmes by King James, King Charles, Lord Worcester, Lord Bacon, etc. 120.
Art of Oratory, Instructions thereunto: 80. Art of Swimming. 80. The whole Art
of Drawing, Limning, Painting, and Etching, collected our of the choicest
Italian and German Authors: to which is added, Exact rules of proportion for
drawing the Heads of Men, Women, and Children, of what bigness soever:
originally invented and written by the famous Italian Painter Od^ardo Fialetti,
Painter of Boloign: published for the benefit of all ingenious Gentlemen and
Artists by Alexander Brown Practitioner. 40. Advice to a Daughter against
advice to a Son, with additions. 80. Mr Bromhall, Of Specters; or an History of
apparitions, oracles, prophesies, and predictions; with dreams, visions, and
revelations; with the cunning delusions of the Devil, a work for the discovery
of impostures, and religious cheats of these times. folio. Mr Burton, A comment
on Antoninus Itinerary; or journyes of the Roman Empire, so far as concerns
Britain, wherein the first foundation of our Cities, Laws, and Governments,
according to the Roman policy are discovered; many antiquary Meddals,
Inscriptions, and Urns are recovered from the ruin of times; with a Map, etc.
folio. Balzacks masterpiece, Aristippus, a discourse of the Court. 120.
Balzacks Remains, or his last Letters written to several grand, and eminent
persons in France; whereunto are annexed the familiar Letters of Monsieur de
Balzack, to his Friend Monsieur Chaplain, never before in English. 80. A. G.
Busbequij quae extant omnia, quibus accessit epitome de moribus Turcarum. 80.
Balzacks Remains. 120. Geometrical Dialling, or Dialling performed by a Line,
cords only, or by the plain Scale, wherein is contained two several methods of
Inscribing the Hour, Lines in all, Plains with the Substile, Style, and
Meridian in their proper crafts and quantityes; being a full explication of
diverse difficulties, in the Works of learned Mr Samuel Foster deceased, by Jo.
Collins of London Accountant. Mr Berbury, The History of the Queen of Sweden,
her Resignation, the reason and manner; with motives of her turning to the
Catholic Religion. 80. S. R. Baker's Chronicle digested into a new method, the
third Edition; with the Reign of Charles the first, with a continuation till
the end of 1658. with a narrative of the affairs of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, more especially relating to King Charles the second. fol. Mr Cogan,
The scarlet Gown; or an History of the present Cardinals of Rome, their life,
birth, interest, offices, dignities, merits, virtues, vices; with the life of
Alexander the seventh. 80. A Character of the Low-Conntries, being three years
Observations of the vices and virtues of the Inhabitants. 120. A Character of
England, presented in a Letter to a Nobleman of France; with reflections upon
Gallus Castratus. 120. A Character of Scotland. 120. A Character of France,
with an Answer to that of England; with a fresh whip for Monsieur. 120. Mr
Charrington, The life and death of Oliver Lord Protector. 80. Mr Clark's
Martyrology reprinted with additions of the persecutions of Piedmount, and
Poland. folio. Mr Chilmead, T. Campanella, An Italian Friar and second
Machiavell, his advice to the King of Spain for attaining the universal
Monarchy of the world; with an admonitory Preface by W. Prin. 40. A Character
of Charles the second by an impartial hand. 40. S. R. Cotton, Count Gondamor's
transactions during his Embassy in England. 40. Mr Clarke, De plenitudine mundi
brevis and Philosophica dissertatio, contra sententias Fr. Baconi, T. Hob^ij,
and S. Wardi. 80. A Character of Italy, or the Italian anatomized by an English
Chyrurgion. 120. Mr Cowley, Observations upon the blessed restoration and
return of his sacred Majesty Charles the second. Mr Dawbeny, History and
Policy, in the transactions of Oliver Lord Protector. 80. Ephesian Marron. 120.
Englands Confusion during its Interregnum; or an exact History of all the
several changes of Government in England, from the horrid murder of King
Charles the first, to the happy restoration of King Charles the second, being
the second part of Florus Anglicus. 80. Englands black Tribunal set forth in
the Trial of King Charles the first; with his Majesty's Speech, etc. with the
several dying speeches of the Nobility and Gentry as were inhumanely put to
death, for their loyalty to their Sovereign Lord the King. 80. Fellow-Traveller
through City and Country, among Students and Scholars, at home and abroad,
furnished with short Stories, and the choicest Speeches of clean and innocent
wit and mirth, for discourse or private entertamment in recreations or
Journeys. 80. Mr Floods Philosphy. folio. Mr Fuller, An appeal of injured
innocence, unto the religious learned, and ingenious Reader, in a controversy
between Mr Heylin and himself. folio. Floreo, The Italian and English
Dictionary augmented with many thousand words, now revised and enriched with
many additions, with proverbs, and instructions to the Italian tongue. folio.
Mr Georges, America painted to the life, the History of the conquest and first
original undertakings of the plantation in those parts. 40. Dr Heylin, A short
view of the Reign and life of King Charles the first Monarch of Great Britain,
from his birth to his burial. 80. -- Bibliotheca Raegia, or royal Library, in
a collection of such Papers of his late Majesty, as have escaped the wrack and
ruin of these times, relating to Church and State, with Observations never
published before. 80.
The History of English and Scottish Presbytery; their designs and practices
for subversion of Government in Church and State. 80. The History of Venice,
written in Italian by Paulo Peruta, translated into English by Henry Earl of
Munmouth. Mr Hoole, Commenius visible world, or a picture of the chief things
in the world. 80. The History of Montross, General for his Majesty Charles the
first, the second Edition, with his character, foreign negotiations, landing,
defeat, and deplorable death. 80. The History of his sacred Majesty Charles the
second, begun from the murder of his Royal Father of happy memory, and
continued to this present year 1660, by a person of quality. 80. Mr Heylin,
Examen Historicum, a discovery and examination of the mistakes, salsities, and
defects in some modern Histories. 80. The Jesuits policy, intrusion into Courts
of Princes. etc. 120. Mr Leigh, England described, or the several Countyes and
Shires thereof briefly handled; something also premised to set forth the glory
of the Nation. 80. Mr Larkin, Speculum patrum, a looking glass of the Fathers,
wherein each are characterized in their colors; also of the chief
Philosophers, Historians, Gramarians, Orators, and Poets. 80. Mr Lee, Orbis
miraculum, or Solomon's Temple pourtrayed by Scripture Light; its famous
buildings, the pompous worship of the Jews; with the Rites and Ceremonies, and
offices in that work; their ample revenues, and spiritual mysteries of the
Gospel veiled under all, which are treated of at large. folio. Mr Langley,
Polidorus Virgil, the History of the inventers and original of all Antiquities,
Arts, Mysteries, Sciences, etc. with Sects and Schisms etc. 80. Mr Loveday,
Exquisite Letters published by his Brother. 80. Lucretius in English. 80. T.
Livy, Newly revised and enlarged, with a supplement in English. fol. Monmouths
History of Venice. folio. Multiplicity of worlds; that the Planets are Regions
inhabited, and the earth a Star. 120. Mysteries of love and eloquence, or art
of complements, as they are managed in Spring-Garden, Hide-Parke, New-Exchange,
etc. with Letters, Riddles, Proverbs, Jests, etc. 80. Mr Morland, The History
of the Evangelicall Churches of the vallyes of Piedmont; the description of the
place; doctrine, life, and persecution of the ancient inhabitants; the late
massacre in 1655; and of the following transactions to 1658. justified by
Manuseripts writ many hundred years before Calvin or Luther. folio. The mystery
of Jesuitisme the second part, representing the humors, designs, and practices
of those who call themselves the society of Jesus. 120. Sr Toby Matthews, A
collection of Letters, with a character of the most excellent Lady Lucy
Countess of Carlisle, with sundry Letters of his own. 80. Mr Moor, The History
of the Turks; their original; rise of the Otaman family, valiant undertakings
of Christians against them; with their various events. 80. The Nativity of the
King of Sweden. 40. Mr Osborne, The author of advice to a Son; his essays,
paradoxes, and problematicall discourses, Letters, characters, with political
deductions from the Earl of Essex, executed under Q Elizabeth. 120. The
Powder Plot. 80. The perfect Politician, or a full view of the life and actions
military and civil of Oliver Cromwell, with his character. 80. Petavius, The
History of the World, continued by others to 1659; with a Geographicall
description of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. Proverbs, English, French,
Dutch, Italian, and Spanish, all Englished. 120. Mr Phillips, The new World of
English words; or a Dictionary of the terms, Etymologyes, definitions, and
perfect interpretations of hard English words, throughout the Arts and Sciences
liberal or mechanic; with poetical fictions, etc. folio. Mr Porter,
Cosmography and Geography, describing the world with plain Rules for the Globe;
also a Chronology of the most eminent persons and things from the Creation.
80. Mr Rusworth, Historical collections of private passages of State, weighty
matters of Law, remarkable proceedings in five Parliaments, beginning the 16th
of King James, to the 5th of King Charles, digested in order. folio. Sr Walter
Rauleigh's Cabinet-Counsell, the chief Arts of Empires and mysteries of State,
discabineted in political and polemicall Aphorisms, grounded on Authority and
experience. 80. Sr Henry Slinsgbye's advice to his Son. 120. Satyricall
declamations at the Opera. 80. The description of the Sector. 40. Vulgar
errors in practice censured, the Art of Oratory for young Students. 80. Mr
Vffllet, Wits sancies, essays, and Observations, divine, Poetical,
Philosophical, Military, and Historical. 80. Mr Wood, The Reign of King
Charles. faithfully performed. 80* Mr Winstanly, Englands Worthies, in. the
select lives of the most eminent persons from Corstantine the great, to the
death of Oliver Protector. 80. Mr Wren, Monarchy asserted, or the State of
Monarchical and popular Government, in vindication of the considerations upon
Mr Harringtons Oceana. folio. E. Warcup Esquire Italyes original, glory, ruin, and
revivall, (...) an exact Survey of the whole Geography and History of that
famous Country, with the Islands adjacent, Sicily, Malta, etc. and what is
remarkable in Rome, and those Towns and Territories mentioned in ancient and
modern Authors.
PHYSICK-BOOKS.
Dr Whitmore, The new disease that now rages in England, its nature, signs,
causes, and cure 80. Dr Winston, Anatomy-Lectures at Gresham-Colledge. 80. Dr
Brown, Urn-burialls, or sepulchrall Urns in Norfolk, with the garden of Cyrus,
or quincunciall Lozenge, or Network plantations of the ancient, etc. with
Observations. 80. Friar Bacon his discovery of the miracles of Art, Nature, and
Magic, translated out of Dr Dees own Copy. 80. Mr Lovells Herball, a
collection of ancient and modern Authors, Galenicall and Chymicall, touching
trees, shrubs, plants, fruits, flowers; their place, time, names, kinds,
virtues, etc. 120. Dr Charleton, A natural History of nutrition, life, and
voluntary motion, containing all new discoveries of Anatomists, and most
probatory opinions of Physicians concerning the Economy of humane nature,
delivered in an exercitatio. Physico Anatomicall. 40. Digby, A Treatise of
sympatheticall powder. 120. Mr Hyden, A new method of Rosiecrusian Physic, the
cause, their experienced Medicines for cure of all diseases. 40. Dr Everard,
The universal Medicine, or wondefull virtues of Tobacco taken in a Pipe its
operation and use in Physic. J. Tanner, The hidden Treasuries of the Art of
Physic. 80. Mr Culpepper, The school of Physic, the whole Art reduced into
Aphorisms, choice and tried receipts, Astrologically and physically
prescribed, etc. 80. La. Kents Man, The second Edition, with the virtues of
Gascoin-powder, and Lapis contra Xarvam, with exquisite ways of preserving,
candying. 120. Mr Williams, Occult Physic, or the three princples in nature
anatomized by a philosophical operation taken from experience. 80.
Accomplished Cook, the whole Art revealed, dressing of-flesh fish, foul; an
exact account of all dishes in season; with the lively illustrations of such
'necessary figures as are referred to practice, by R. May in fifty years
experience, and attendance upon sundry persons of Honor. 80. Schroder's order
of Physic, his Treatise of Animals as they are used in Physic and Chyrurgery,
divided into four parts, the first treats of the more perfect terrestrial
creatures, the second, third, and fourth, of Birds, Fishes, Insects. 80.
Eighteen Books of the secrets of Art and Nature, being the sum and substance
of natural Philosophy, first designed by John Wecker Doctor in Physic, and
now much augmented and enlarged by Doctor R. Read. folio. Catalogus Plantarum
circa Cantabrigiam nascentium, in quo exhibentur quot-quot hactenus inventae
sunt, quae vel sponte proveniunt, vel in agris seruntur. 80. Mr Willis, Liber
de fermentatione sive de motu intestino particularum in quevis corpore. Alter
de febribus, sive de motu earundem in sanguine animalium. His accessit
dissertatio Epistolica de Urinis. 80. Mr Higmore. Exercitationes duae quarum
prior de passione Hysterica altera, de affectione Hypochondriaca. 80. D.
Bicaisse, Manuale medicorum, sen SYNAXIS Aphorismorum Hypocritis, Praenotionum.
Coacarum and praedictionum, secundum propriam morborum omnium nomenclaturam.
240.
LAW BOOKS.
Mr Style, Modern Reports begun in the Upper-Bench, beginning 21 Cha. to
Michaelmas 1665, as well the Criminal as on the Pleas side. folio. Mr Wingate,
Maxims of reason, or the reason of the common Law of England. folio. Reports of
Sr Jo. Bridgman Sergeant at Law. folio. Sr Ja. Leighs reports of diverse
resolutions of Law, arising upon Cases in the Court of Wards, and other Courts
at Westminster, in King Charles and King James Reigns. folio. Mr. Hern, Modern
assurances, exact forms and draughts of presidents for bargains, sales, grants,
feoffments, bonds, bills, conditions, covenants, joyntures, indentures, fines
and recoveries, Charterparties for Kings Leases, with all assurances now in
use. 80 W. Glisson and A. Gulston Esquires, A survey of the Law, directions to
prosecute and defend personal actions usually brought at common Law, with
Judges opinions; the nature of a Writ of error. 80. The general Tutor, or
exact Clark and Scriveners daily exercise, for all Presidents. 80. A young
Clarks guide, the third part, a collection of choice English Presidents, for
Indentures, settlements of Exchange, of bargaining. and sales, the newest form.
80. Lord Cook, Certain select Cases in Law, translated out of a Manuscript
written with his own hand. folio. Declarations and other pleadings contained in
the eleven parts of the Repo. of Sr. Edward Cook, rendered into English by W.
Hughs Esquire folio. An exact Abridgment of that excellent Treatise of the Doctor
and Student. 80. R. Zouch, Questionum juris Civilis Centuria, non minus ad
legum Generalium cognitionem, quam ad studiosum exercitationem accommodata.
120. Sheepherd, Of Corporations, Fraternities, and Guilds; the learning of the
Law in body-Politicks is unfolded; the antiquities, order, and Governments of
the same, with forms and presidents of Charters and Corporations. 80. Dr.
Gowell, The Interpreter of hard words in Law-writtes, and Statutes of England,
fitted for the Students in Law, Statutes, or Antiquities. folio. Sr. George
Crook, latey one of the Justices of the Kings Bench; the potrs of select
cases, the second part. folio. Mr. Harrington, The Art of Lawgiving. 1. The
superstructures of all Governments. 2. The frames of the Commonwealth of Israel
and the Jews. 3. A model fitted to the present state of this Nation; with an
appendix concerning the House of Peers. 80.
Mr. Hackwell, The old way of holding a Parliament in England, from the ancient
Records; with certain municipiall rights and customs of this Commonwealth; with
priveledges of Parliament. 80. Mr. Somner, Of Gavelkinde, both name and thing;
sundry emergent Observations both pleasant and profitable to be known of the
studious, in the Laws of this Kingdom. 40.
MATHEMATICS.
Mr Gadbury, The nativity of King Charles astrologicaly done, with reason in
art of various success and misfortune of his whole life, being occasionally a
brief History of our unhappy Wars. 80. Mr. S. Foster, Miscellanies, or
Mathematical Lucubrations, many translated by J. Twisden, with somewhat of his
own. folio. Friar Bacon, His discovery of the miracles of Art, Nature, and
Magic, translated from Dr. Dees own Copy, by T. M. 120. Mr. Ashmole, The way
to bliss in three Books, a learned discourse of the Philosophers stone. 40. The
French Gardener, showing to cultivate all Fruit Trees, and Herbs, to dry and
conserve them naturally by R. D, now in English by Philocepos, illustrated with
Sculptures. 80. A true Relation of passages betwixt Dr. Dee and some spirits,
tending to a general alteration of most States and Kingdoms in the world,
published by Dr Causabon. folio. Trigonometria Britannica, The Doctrine of
Triangles in two Books; 1. Of natural and artificial signs, tangents,
secants, and a Table of Lorithms. 2. The Canon of artificial signs, tangents,
and Logarithms by H. Gillebrand.
A Table of Logarithms to 100000, with artificial signs and tangents to the
100 part of every degree, and the three first degrees to 1000 parts, by J.
Newton M. A. folio. Mr. Speed, Adam out of Eden, Experiments of Husbandry,
improvement of ground from 200 per an. to 2000 yearly profit, all charges
deducted. 80. Mr. Sharrock, A History of the propagation and improvement of
Vegetables, by the concurrence of Art and nature. Of Plants usually cultivated
in England, as increased by seed, of sets, etc. several Graftings and
Inoculatings; also the best culture of Fields, Orchards, Gardens, Plants; with
the effects of nature upon endeavors of Artists, all from Observations made
from experience and practice. 80. Mr. Newton, Mathematical elements in three
parts. 40. 1. Of pract. Geometry, of Lines, Planets and Solids. 2. Use of the
Globes. 3. Delineation of the Globe upon the plain of any great Circle,
according to the Stereographick or circular projection.
I. Barrow, Euclidis elementorum libri 15. breviter demonstrati. 80. Mr.
Outred, Circles of proportion and Horiozontall Instrument in English. 80.
Paracelsus, Philosophers stone. 80. The Nativity of the King of Sweden. 40. Mr.
Collings Sector. 40. -- Dialling. 40.
Mr. Newtons Logarithmes. 120.
POEMS.
NApps on Parnassus. 80. Cleaveland revived, Orations, Epipistles, etc. 80. --
His Poems with many additions. 80,
Fanshaw. 80. Sucklin's Remains, Poems, Letters. 80. Chamberlain's heroic
Poems. 80. Pecke, Owen, Epigrams translated. 80. Poems, Epigrams, Satyrs, etc.
80. Cockain. 80. Montagues sheepherds Paradise. 80. Rigby. 80. Iter Boreale,
Attempting something upon the succesfull and matchless march of the Lord
General George Monck from Scotland. Mr Francis, A pastoral Elegy upon the
barbarous decollation of King Charles the first, with an Interlude upon the
sudden expiration of our late great controulers. 80. Mr Driden, Astraea Redux,
A Poem on the happy restoration and return of his sacred Majesty Charles the
2. Mr Howell, Sol in ascendente, or the glorious appearance of Charles the
second upon the Horizon of London. Mr Fullar, A Panegyric to his Majesty on
his happy return. Mr Lluelyn, A Poem to the Kings most excellent Majesty. Mr
Waller, Upon his Majesty's happy return, a Poem.
PLAYS.
FAble transformed. 40. Lewis 2.40. Chaste Woman against her will. 40.
Tooth-drawer. 40. Honor in the end. 40. Tell-tale. 40. Don-Quixot. 40. Fair
Spanish Captive. 40. Careless, noble servant. 80. -- Discreet Lover. --
Deserving favorite.
Middleton, No wit to women's. 80. -- More dissemblers besides women. -- Women
beware women.
The famous Pastoral. 80.
SCOOL-BOOKS.
THe Dutch Tutor, brief Grammar Rules, pleasant Dialogues, and Vocabulares of
the most usual words 80. Learnings foundation, in a method for teaching
English in a short time 80. Learners help to the Hebrew, for speedy finding out
any Hebrew root in the Bible by A. R. 80. Mr Sherley, Manuductio, or leading to
the principles of Grammar, the second Edition with Additions. 80. Mr Hoole, A
new Art of teaching Grammar, how children in their playing years may
gramattically attain to the grounds and exercise of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.
80. -- Terminationes and exempla Conjugationum and Declinationum cum multis
additionibus. 80.
Mr Dugard, Lexicon Graci Test. alphab. una cum explanatione Gram. vocum
singularum in usum Tyronum nec non concordantia singulis dictionibus appofita
in usum Theologiae candidatorum. A Greek and English Lexicon. 80. Knowls's
Hebrew Rudiments. 80. A collection of Proverbs used in all languages, and now
made English by N. R. Gentleman.
FINIS.

