Whereas at the open General Quarter Sessions of the Public peace holden for
the City of London, at the Guildhall of the same City on Monday the three and
twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty
and five; before Christopher Pack Mayor of the City of London, Thomas Atkin,
John Kendricke, John Dethicke, and Robert Tichborne Aldermen of the same City;
Justices assigned to keep the public peace in the same City, and also to hear
and determine diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors within the
same City committed: That same Quarter Sessions of the Peace was adjourned by
the foresaid Justices there, until Wednesday the five and twentieth day of the
same month of April, in the year aforesaid, at Seven of the Clock in the
forenoon of the same day, to be holden at Justice-hall in the Old Bayley in the
Parish of Sepulchers in the Ward of Farringdon without London aforesaid, before
the foresaid Justices and others their Fellows, further to do as the same
Justices and Court should consider etc. And thereupon at that same General
Quarter Sessions of the Public Peace holden by the Adjournment aforesaid, at
Justice hall aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, on the said Wednesday
the five and twentieth day of April, in the year aforesaid, before the
aforesaid Christopher Pack Mayor of the said City of London, Thomas Atkin,
Thomas Foot, John Kendrick, Sir Thomas Vyner Knight, John Dethick, Robert
Tichborn, John Ireton, Stephen Eswick, and Walter Big Aldermen of the same
City, Justices assigned to keep the Public Peace in the same City; And also to
hear and determine diverse Felonies, Trespasses, and other Misdemeanors
committed within the same City.

TO the end that Brewers of Ale and Beer to sell within this City and Liberties
thereof, may have reasonable gains for the same and no more: It is ordered by
the said Justices of Peace of this City, assembled at this General Quarter
Sessions of the Public Peace holden for the said City, in pursuance of what
the Laws and Statutes do require: That the Brewers of this City and all others
that now do, or hereafter shall sell any Beer or Ale within the same or the
Liberties thereof, shall not from henceforth sell any Ale or Beer, but at the
Rates and Prices hereafter following that is to say: The strongest and the best
sort of Ale and Beer at the Rate and Price of Ten shillings the Barrel and not
above, The second sort of Ale and Beer at the Price and Rate of Eight shillings
the Barrel and not above, The third sort of Ale and Beer at the Rate and Price
of six shillings the Barrel and not above, And the fourth sort of Ale and Beer
being the smallest sort of Ale and Beer, at the Rate and Price of four
shillings the Barrel and not above; And so after those Rates respectively, for
every greater or lesser vessel, until other order shall be taken herein, upon
such pains and penalties as by the Laws and Statutes are in this behalf
appointed.

Also to the end that Inholders and Hostlers within this City and the Liberties
thereof, may have reasonable gains and no more; The Justices of the Peace of
this City, assembled at this General Quarter Sessions of the public Peace
here holden for the City of London, taking into consideration the great plenty
of Oats and Hay within this Commonwealth, and the reasonable values thereof,
do hereby declare and order, that no Inholder or Hostler within this City, or
the Liberties thereof, shall from henceforth require and take of any person
above seven pence for his or her Lodging, and for Hay, Water, Litter and
Dressing for one Horse for one day and one night, Nor above six pence for Hay,
Water, Litter and Dressing for one Horse for a day and a night; where the Owner
or Vser thereof shall not have convenient Lodging, there that Night; And also
that no such Inholder or Hostler shall from henceforth require or take above
six pence for a Peck of the best Oats Sealed Measure, And so after those Rates
for Lodging, Hay, Litter and Oats, respectively for longer time or lesser, or
greater Measures, until the Justices of the Peace of this City shall give
further order herein concerning the same, upon such pains and penalties as by
the Laws and Statutes are in this behalf appointed.

Also in pursuance of several Acts of Parliament made touching diverse Orders
for Artificers, Laborers, Servants, and Apprentices; And for duly putting the
same in Execution in rating the wages for Artificers, Laborers, Servants,
Apprentices, Workmen and Workwomen: The Justices of Peace here present being
the more part of the Justices of Peace resiant and within the City of London,
having assembled themselves together, and called unto them such discreet and
grave persons of the said City of London as they have thought meet, and
considered together, respecting the plenty of the present time, and the
Cheapnesse of all sorts of provisions (praised be God for the same) And having
taken into consideration all other circumstances necessary to be considered,
Have and do by authority and virtue of the said Statute, limit, rate, and
appoint the Wages of Artificers, Handicraftsmen, Laborers, Servants,
Apprentices, workmen and workwomen (working within this City and Liberties
thereof) hereafter mentioned and expressed to be observed by the Givers and
Receivers thereof, as the same are hereafter set down, rated, limited and
appointed, or according to the same proportion and none others, nor otherwise
in any manner whatsoever; To wit, FIRST, that no Carpenter, Bricklayer,
Artificer, Plaisterers, Masons, Joyners, Carvers, or other Handicrafts man
shall require, receive or take for his own work, for any one day above 00 l. 02
s. 06 d. Nor for the work of any Iourneyman or Apprentice having been brought
up in his Trade full Two years, for any one days work above 00 l. 02 s. 00 d.
Nor for the work of any Apprentice not having been brought up in his Trade full
Two years, for any one days work above 00 l. 01 s. 06 d. And so after the same
Rates for days, weeks, and months. Secondly, that no Laborer to any Carpenter,
Bricklayer, Artificer or other Handicrafts man, or to any other person
whatsoever shall require, receive, or take for his work for any one day above
00 l. 01 s. 04 d. And so after the same Rates for days, weeks, and months.
Thirdly, that no Manservant being not an Artificer shall require, receive, or
take for his service for one whole year not above 05 l. 00 s. 00 d. And so
after that Rate for a shorter or longer time.

And the Justices aforesaid do hereby Order, that every person and persons
shall and do, observe the said Rates in giving and receiving wages, so rated,
limited and appointed as aforesaid, upon the pains and punishments in the Acts
aforesaid mentioned; Which Acts also require that no Artificer, Laborer,
Servant, Apprentice, Workman, Workwoman, or Manservant do hereafter refuse to
be hired to work, labor, and serve for the wages aforesaid, so rated, limited
and appointed to them respectively as aforesaid; And that no person shall
retain or accept into his or her service any Manservant or Maidservant,
before such servant shall produce and show a Testimonial of his her or their
License to depart out of his or her last service, according to the Statute in
that case made and provided.

Whereas complaints are daily made by Merchants and other Citizens, of the
excessive Rates demanded and received by Carmen, above what is reasonable, and
has been limited and appointed for Carriages within this City and the
Liberties thereof: Now upon due consideration had as well of former times as of
the present, and all circumstances necessary to be considered Albeit the prices
of some commodities of necessary use to the Carmen are greater then formerly,
and consequently there ought to be some increase of the Rates heretofore set
for their labor and carriage; Yet is it as requisite that they be not left to
themselves to take what they will, but that Rates beset what they ought to
demand and take for their Carriages: It is therefore Ordered by the Justices
aforesaid, that all Carmen trading or working with Carres in the City of London
and the Liberties thereof, shall and may demand and take for every carriage or
load of the commodities under mentioned, the Rates hereafter following, and
shall not exceed the same upon pain to be strictly punished and proceeded
against for every offense to the contrary; That is to say,

1. FIrst, from any the Wharfs between the Tower and London Bridge, to
Tower-street, Grace-churchstreet, Fanchurchstreet, Bishopsgatestreet within,
Cornhill, and places of like distance up the hill with xviij C. weight, not
exceeding xxiij. C. weight.

In which may be included, Two punchions of Prunes, two bales of Macher, twenty
barrels of Figs, two fats of Fustians, five ordinary sacks of Cotton-woolls of
Smyrna, and three extraordinary; as bags of Cyprus wool, butts of Currants,
great butts of Oils, three chests of Sugars, eight bags of Allums, one last
of Flax, one last of Hemp, and other goods of the like kind and weights, for
every Load xx d. And for Seacols the Load xij d.


2. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old-jury,
Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmongerlane, St. Laurence-lane, Milkstreet,
Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet, Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and places of
like distance, for the like weight of xviij C. not exceeding xxiij C.

For the goods aforesaid, and others of the like kind for every Load xxij d.
And being above xxiij C. weight upon every hundred ij d. And for Seacoals the
Load xiiij d.
3. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To Smithfield bars, Holborn bars,
Temple bar, or any of the bars on the Northside of the City, and places of
like distance up the Hill with xviij C. weight, not exceeding xxxiij C. weight.

For every Load ij s. vj d.

And going beyond the said places, the parties to agree with the Carmen.

4 Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To Towerstreet, Bishopsgate within,
Cornhill, and places of like distance up the Hill with xiij C. weight, not
exceeding xiij C. weight; In which may be included, Twenty pieces of Raisins, a
load of Raisins of the Sun, six bags of Pepper, six ordinary bags of Galls,
three great bags of Galls, six bales and barrels of Indico, six bales of
Grograins, six ordinary bales of Turkey silk, eight bales of India silk, five
hogsheads of Cloves and Tobacco, four bales of Callicoes, three hogsheads of
Wines, two Chests of Sugars, or any other goods of the like weight xviij d.

5. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old jury,
Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmonger lane, St. Laurence lane, Milkstreet,
Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet, Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and places of
the like distance, for any of the said goods of the same quantity and weight,
for every load xx d.

6. Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To Towerstreet, Gracechurchstreet,
Fanchurchstreet, Bishopsgatestreet within, Cornhill, and other places of like
distance up the hill with viij C. weight, not exceeding xiiij C. weight; In
which may be included, All butts and pipes of Wine, packs of Canvas, two
hogsheads, or three terces, a fat of Fustians, and all other goods of the like
bulk and weight, for every load xvj d.

And from any the Wharfs aforesaid, To Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old-jury,
Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmonger lane, St. Laurence lane, Milkstreet,
Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet, Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and other
places of like distance, for any other goods of like load and weight, for every
load xviij d.

7. Also from London Bridge to the bridge foot Westward, Old Swan, Coleharbour,
the three Cranes, Queenhithe, Brokenwharf, Paulswharf, Puddlewharf, the
Wardrobe, and to all other places not exceeding the Poultrey, Cheapside,
Newgate market, for xiij C. weight, not exceeding xviij C. weight xviij d.

And for every load of Seacoals xiiij d. And from all other Wharfs and places
between London Bridge and Temple Bar to the same, and places of like
distance, for every load of Coals xij d. And to all the places Northward of the
Poultry, Cheapside, Newgate market, Holborn bridge and Fleetstreet, for xiiij
C. weight, not exceeding xviij C. weight xx d.


8. Also from Towerstreet, Gracechurchstreet, Fanchurchstreet,
Bishopsgatestreet within, Cornhil, and all other places of like distance, for
every pack of xx Clothes, for vj bales of Clothes and Kersies, six bales of
Pepper, six barrels of Indico, five hogsheads of Cloves, and for other goods of
like weight to the waterside xvj d.

And from Broadstreet, Lothbury, Old-jury, Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Ironmonger
lane, St. Laurence lane, Milksteeet, Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet,
Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and other places of like distance to the waterside,
for the like weight, conditionally, that the Carmen do load their own Carrs
xviij d. And if they refuse to do the same, then but xiiij d.


Also for places nearer or of less distance, the parties hiring and to be
hired, are to make agreement answerably and proportionably to the Rates before
mentioned.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


