The Longing Virgins Choice: OR, The Scotch Lasses Delight.
Virgins all you that Coyness still persuades,
Though against your wills you still continue Maids;
Blush not at this, for though the Lass is kind,
She Is not to blame your all so in your mind:
And fain would have the thing you dare not name,
Sighing for that which she does boldy claim:
Young Men are kind, and would not see you want,
If you but ask, what you desire they will grant:
Then let not Blushes over your pleasures swell,
It Is sure but scurvy leading Apes in Hell.
To a Modish new Scoth Tune, Sung at the Dukes Playhouse.


BOnny Las, gin thou art mine,
and with twenty thousand pound about thee
I Would scorn thy gudes for thee my queen,
To lig the down on any Green,
To show the how thy Daddy got thee.
Bonny Lad gin thou art mine,
and thousand Land about thee:
I Would leave them awe to kiss thy Kneen,
And gang with thee to any Green.
To show the how thy Daddy got thee.
A match, good faith, with thee i will gang,
with the my joy i'se would my lot be;
To Kiss and Clip thee I do long,
Yet bonny Lass i'se do no wrong,
But show thee how thy Daddy got thee.
Thy Ruby Lips with joy i'se Kiss,
and on the Primrose-bank i will put thee:
And there we will take our fills of Bliss,
We Will both play sair and never miss,
Whilst thou know how thy Daddy got thee
Under the greenest Willow shade,
to live and love each e'ne our lot be,
Where pretty Birds in Notes do spread,
And that thou art no more a Maid,
whilst I show how thy Daddy got thee.


Under the Willow shades, quo I,
what mean you in this place without me:
Ods Bares, quo she, I tell no ley,
I hither come with thee to try,
and show me how my Daddy got me.
Come ginn me then, my bonny Lad,
thou'st shall have all that I can let thee:
Come give me then what is to be had,
Tickle my Pulse and make me glad,
and show me how my Daddy got me.
I lig'd me down then by her side,
and muckly there I laid about me:
To get a Bantling I applied,
I spear'd her leave, but she denied,
said I Will show how Daddy got me.
Whelst thus we pass the time away,
and in my arms I mean to put thee:
Renewing pleasures with the day,
I Will respite take' and then i will play,
And show thee how the Daddy got thee.
Don't leave me yet, me thinks it is Spring
the Rose and Lillies bloom about me:
And little Birds do joyous sing,
In streams of pleasure sure I swim,
whilst I learn how my Daddy got me.
Enough my Lass, this time we's part,
gang here to morrow i'se allot the;
Oh! it is too long, thou'st break my heart,
Less you a shorter time impart,
to show again how Daddy got me.
Then by this Kiss and Violets blew,
when the Moon shines I will wait thee:
And so i will bid thee now adieu,
My bonny Lad be sure ye do,
and show me how my Daddy got me.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Pie Corner.


