LONDONS Warning-Leece, BEING, The Common Prayers Complaint.
WHat shall I do; I am cast out of door,
In Church, nor Chapel, I must come no more:
For I am called plain Popery, by those,
That by the Spirit, Prayers do compose;
Such are the men your Roundheads dote upon,
That can make prayers, of an hour long:
That sigh, and sob, with making many faces,
And these are men, preferred in good men's places.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed to see these days,
Where none but such as by th'Spirit prays,
Regarded are; for now adays they cry,
Down all, that will not with the times comply.
So impudent they are, the Church they call
A den of Thieves, yea and the house of Ball:
They Had rather preach in Barnes, in Tubs, and Stables,
For there they can repeat their lies and fables:
But Parliament look to it, or else we will come
Against them and you at dreadful day of doom:
You chosen were as Fathers of the land,
Thinking for King and Kingdom you would stand,
Maintaining our Religion, as it stood
In the best Reformers time, that e're were good.
Stablish'd I was by Orthodox Devines,
But Pim, and the rest to contrary inclines,
They think they are wiser then our Fathers were,
And yet will coozen, lie, and cheat, and swear:
But 'twas not so in that Queens days, whose fame
To the world is spread, Elizabeth by name:
There never was such Schisms, such sects as now,
Preaching in tubs, Green, Spencer, Hunt and How.
No, not so much as one man durst be seen
To contradict the sayings of the Queen:
Much less to take up Arms, for to Rebel,
And Parliament to count this doing well;
No marvel it is that against me they do rise,
When as they do our Gracious King despise:
Yea, base Mecannicks, that do preach in tubs,
Did come to th'Court with swords, and staves, and clubs,
And did annoy CHARLES, our most gracious King,
Day after day they came (but did not bring
Petitions in their hands) for to implore,
But Brazen faced they came to White Hall door;
At which affront our King seemed discontent,
And thought not little that his Parliament
Should slight him so, as not to take a course
With base Mechanics as did swear, nay worse,
Yea, speak high Treason against our royal King,
Which he did hear, yet 'twas counted nothing:
His Majesty seeing himself so slighted,
Abused by base Mechanics, and not righted,
White Hall he left, to Hampton Court he went,
Being filled with sorrow, grief and discontent,
To think that having reigned so long in peace,
This happy Peace should now begin to cease,
And Civil War amongst our selves begin:
O what an age is this we now live in,
That Subjects now against their Prince must war,
Yea, and themselves at first begin to jarre:
For they began an Army for to raise,
Five members 'twas, be it spoken to their praise.
Pim, he began to set it first on foot,
And Stroud, and Hampden both apploy'd them toot,
An Army must be raised, or wee're undon,
The land with Popery will soon be over run,
Come says Kimbolton, let us not make delay,
Let Us raise Ten Thousand men, and send away,
Brave Essex we will make our General,
And to the Soldiers we will be liberal,
Scarfs* Swords, and money then they had great store,
Great heaps of money, and of Plate, nay more
Then for the present they could well dispose,
But what is become of all that now, God knows,
The Army being raised, away they bent,
To meet our Sovereign with full intent,
To kill and slay all those that took his part,
But yet you see it was beyond their art;
For I am sure they have been often banged,
And in the end I think they will be hanged.
What! take up arms against your gracious King!
This is a horrid and a Heathenish thing.
Stay, cry you mercy: CHARLES is no longer King,
King Pim it is, the Roundheads would have him:
Their Zeal is set all on a burning fire,
That none a happy Union does desire:
See how the rage of this great factious crew,
Are bent against kingdoms three, all to undo,
Such plunderings, and such pillaging, nay stay,
Is theeving, though Malignant carry 't away:
One robs another, for to make himself,
And hoards in baggs and trunks this cursed pelf.
Well Londoners, Let no more money go,
Be now a friend to CHARLES, and not a foe,
Foresee how he does prosper in his way,
Scarce once in twice that you have got the day;
Brave Bristolls taken, Gloucester now is shaking,
Ga^sbrough forsaken, Exceter is quaking:
We Will now submit, and join at last for peace,
That this unhappy Civil War may cease:
Then CHARLES too's Crown may be received with joy,
So we will triumph, and sing, Vive la roy.
O Yes, O yes, O yes.
If any man have found Law in a Dcclaration,
That strayed from Westminster after a strange fashion,
Since the Fifteenth of November 'twas not seen in this Nation:
Let him bring news unto Pim, he shall have thanks in a Narration.
O Yes, O yes, O yes.
If any man has found Sir John Hotham, or shall,
Who has lost himself in the keeping of Hull,
And now strayed away, by an Order that is Null,
If the Parliament will not have him, his Majesty will.
God save the King.
O yes. O yes, O yes,
If any man has lost any money or plate,
There was a great deal took up at Gulid-Hall of late;
Let them show the marks on it, now it is melted, abate
Only the keeping, and by Public Faith ye shall ha'te.
God save the King, let us all sing.
LONDONS SACRIFICE,
Will nothing serve? will nothing else suffice
For Englands Peace? No other Sacrifice?
Isaack's demanded: Isaac is deni'de,
Our Righteous Abra'ms they will not confide:
Though prompted by their own Endeavor came,
To rescue Zealous Isaac with a Ram,
If neither Isaac nor the Ram can do,
The Devil take both, Ram* and Isaac too.
Finis.
YORK, Printed by STEPHEN BUCKLEY. 1643.


