A MODEST and CLEAR VINDICATION Of the Serious Representation, and late
Vindication Of the Ministers of London, from the Scandalous Aspersions of JOHN
PRICE, In a Pamphlet of his, Entitled, CLERICO-CLASSICVM OR, The Clergies
Alarm to a third War. WHEREIN His King-killing Doctrine is confuted. The
Authors by him alleged, as defending it, cleared. The Ministers of London
vindicated. The follies, and falsities of John Price discovered. The
Protestation, Vow, and the Covenant explained.


By a friend to a regulated Monarchy, a free Parliament, an obedient Army, and
a Godly Ministry* but an enemy to Tyranny, Malignity, Anarchy and Heresy.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad
for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you, Mat. 5. 11, 12. You fight for the recovery of the Kings Royal
person out of the hands of those misereants, and reinstate Him in His Royal
throne and dignity, that both he and His Posterity may yet flourish in their
Royalty; so that notwithstanding all contradictions you fight for your King.
John Price in his Spiritual Snapsack for the Parliaments Soldiers, p. 8.
London, Printed for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Bible in Popes-head-alley. 1649.

To the Reverend and learned Ministers of the Gospel within the Province of
London, subscribers of the Serious Representation and late Vindication.
REVEREND SIRS,
YOu are those whom I honor and love in truth, for the truths sake that dwells
in you, and is so faithfully promoted by you. Many besides my self rise up and
call you blessed, for that Serious Representation of your judgments, etc. and
seasonable Vindication of your persons and Ministry, which were lately
published in print; It Is true, it is your lot, that you who are Ambassadors of
peace, are now looked upon as men of contention, they who once counted your feet
beautiful, say now the mark of the Beast is on your forehead yea they who
would have pulled out their eyes to have done you good, are now so filled with
prejudice and passion, that they would pull out your eyes to do you hurt; this
is the best requital, the more you love, the less you are loved of them;
though the people are in such a distempered Frenzy, yet I know this provokes
your pity, not your fury. I perceive you are made the But of Satan's malice,
because you make the glory of God, and good of souls the mark you aim at in the
course of your Ministry; the Devil will not let you be at rest, because you
will not suffer the sins of the times to be at quiet. Since the publication of
your Letter and Vindication, there are many scurr^lous Pamphlets spread abroad,
which labor to stain the integrity of your hearts, and the truth of your
testimony; among the rest there is one written by John Price, which is stuffe^
with such falsities, absurdities, tautalogies, calumnies and animosities, with
such railings and revilings, as if he were of the race of Rabs^ekah, or the
lineage of Shime^: the Lord rebuke him, and clear you. He presents you to the
world as guilty of malignity, perjury, hypocrisy, as wanting Ministerial
abilities, and void of the ingenuity that becomes Ministers of the Gospel, as
men of falsehood, deceit, dissension, and what not? but what you are? It may be
your comfort to consider that so persecuted they the Prophets who were before
you; Elijah was called a troubler of Israel in the Old Testament, and Paul a
mover of sedition in the New. When I considered what August. said, M^^i quidem
sufficit conscientia mea, vobis autem necessaria est fama mea Aug. ad frat. in
^^em Sermon. 53.
that a Ministers good conscience is sufficient for himself, yet his good name
is necessary for others: I thought fit to endeavor the Vindication of your
names and Ministry from those unjust aspersions cast upon you by many sons of
slander; your names, which are as precious ointment poured forth (spreading the
sweet savor of the knowledge of Christ in many places) will not want sons of
Beelzebub, as so many flies to corrupt them: yet this may be your confidence,
that although they make their mouths as open sepulchers to bury your names and
reputations in, yet there shall be a resurrection of names as well as bodies at
the last day, at which time all your reproach shall be wiped away, and your
Revilers made ashamed, who have fasly accused your good conversation in Christ.
This is the prayer and confidence of him who is (...)

CHRIST-LOVER (I) HOPE and a Lover of you in him.
Dated this 13 March, 1648. from my house about the middle way between
Whitehall and Whitechappell.
A MODEST and CLEAR VINDICATION Of the Serious Representation, and late
Vindication Of the Ministers of London, from the Scandalous Aspersions of JOHN
PRIC^, In a Pamphlet of his, Entitled, CLERICO-CLASSICVM OR, The Clergies
Alarm to a third War.
John Price,
WOULD one imagine that you who thought your self once so good an Alchymist, as
to extract Alluding to a book^ entitled, Honey out of the Rock, made by ^ohn
Price.
honey out of the rock, should now such poison out of a flower? I cannot
compare you to a Be (unless for your sting) but to a Spider, for sucking
poison from that savory and serious Representation, and late Vindication of the
Ministers of London, against whom you have spit so much of your venom. I shall
not return you railing for railing, slander for slander, but in a spirit of
meekness endeavor, to discover your sin to recover your soul. Before I shall
take a survey of your book in particular, I shall give you this observation in
the general; That either I was not my self when I read your book, or you were
not your self when you made it; The latter I am induced to believe upon this
ground, in your book you declare your judgment for taking away the li^^ of the
King, and blame the Ministers of London for expressing themselves to the
contrary; now had you been your self, undoubtedly you would not have declared
your self for killing the King in this book, yet profess against it in another
made by you when you were of a more sober sp^^it; In your book entitled, See a
Spiritual Snapsack for the Parliament Soldiers, by John Price. p. 8. lin. 32
A Spiritual Snapsack for the Parliament Soldiers; you speak to them in these
words: You fight for the Recovery of the Kings Royal person out of the hands
of these mis^r^ants, and re-instate him in his Royal Throne and Dignity, that
both He and His Posterity (if God will) may yet flourish in their Royalty, so
that notwithstanding all contradictions you sight for your King: (...) forbear
to descant upon your words; he that will compare your two books together, must
think you, if not out of your wit^, yet at least out of your way; Oh that I
might reclaim you! that is all the hurt I wish you. Passing by your slanderous
Title and Epistle, I come to a particular survey of your book it self. You say.

The Letter writers are (as they say) Ministers of the Gospel, Page 2. lin 14.
so the false Prophets of old pretended to be be the Prophets of the Lord, so
the Pope, Christ's grand Ambassador and Vicar upon earth, so the Popish Priests
and Jesuits, the Ministers of Christ, etc.

Answ. 1. The Letter writers are (as they say) Ministers of the Gospel, and do
not you say so too? dare you say the contrary? I am sure you were of this mind
when you (...) Spiritual Snaps^ck for Parliament Soldiers; there you (...)
learned and conscientious Ministers in one place, In Spiritual (...) p. 6. l.
17.
(...) godly Divines in another; if you be otherwise (...) would better become
you to have brought (...) throw their Calling, then (...) and slanders to (...)
names.

2. Because the false Prophets said they were Prophets of the Lord, etc. would
you inserte hence, the Subscribers are not Ministers of the Gospel? Paul said
he was an Apostle^ false Teachers said they were Apostles, when they were not,
was (...) therefore no Apostle? John Price says he deals honestly in (...)
trade, common cheaters will say that they deal honestly also, will it therefore
follow John Price does not deal honestly? this is all the force your reasoning
has with it, which smel^ more of the Exchange then the Universitie, more of
John Price his shop, then John Goodwins study.

Surely who ever among them can vindicate their divine origination, Page 2. l.
24.
these men have administered cause sufficient to question their abilities
hereunto.

Answ. 1. You that make a doubt whether the Ministers can vindicate their
divine origination; it were well you, who presume to be a Teacher in Israel,
would make good your own, tell me in your next whence had you it; whether from
the shop in the Exchange, or the alley in Colemanstreet.

2. Whereas you say, they have administered cause sufficient to question their
Minister^all abilities, this is so palpable a calumny that I need not confute
you therein, because you confute your self: Epist. Dedicat. to the Lord
Fairfax. p. 1. p. 1. l. 30.
In your Epistle you say of the subscribers in the general, that they are
judicious, grave, and learned men: and in page 12. in the body of your book,
you say of some of the subscribers, that they are wise and good men; now if the
subscribers be judicious, grave, learned, wise and good men, what cause
sufficient is administered to question their Ministe^riall abilities? Surely
were the Apostle Paul upon the earth, he would never question the Ministriall
abilities of judicious, grave, learned, wise and good men; nor would he
approve them as fit for the Ministry, who are injudic^ous, raw, illiterate,
indiscree^ and bad men, yet such are the Teachers you cry up, and the others
you cry down; me thinks if you doubt of their office, you should not question
their gifts also.

Some of them have promoted, Page 2. l. 3^.
encouraged, and ^^etted the very self same actions done at another time, by
other persons, (as we shall speak to anon) which here they (...) and branded
(...) an ^^cursed thing.

Answ. You neither name the men, nor mention the actions; when you
particular^i^e the men, and specify the actions, which at one time they
promoted and encouraged, and at another anathemati^ed and branded, it will then
be time enough to give you a particular answer; for the present I shall say but
this to you by way of Retortion, this Brat may be laid at your doors, you
promoted, encouraged, and abetted the forcing of the Parliament by the Army at
one time, yet condemned the violence offered by the King at another; but the
Ministers of London did not thus, they mislik't it in the one as well as in the
other.

Poor London thy Prophets make thee to err, Page 3. l. 5.
etc.

Answ. 1. Poor London indeed, and it is like to be poorer before you have done
with it; I could tell who have made themselves rich, and the City poor.

2. You would have said more truly, if you had said thus, London of late has
made her Prophets poor, rather then the Prophets made London err.

3. You say her Prophets make her err, had you named the men, and
particularized the errors, it would have been more credible and demonstrable;
but general accusations are no proofs; I am sure one Prophet of your own has
vented more gross and pernicious errors in one year, then can be fastened upon
all the subscribers throughout the Course of their Ministry. None of the
subscribers ever held that the English Scriptures, or that book called the
Bible, is not the Word of God; that no writings whatsoever, whether
translations or originalls, are the foundation of Christian Religion; that a
natural man had free will and power to do good supernatural; that those without
the Gospel written or preached have sufficient means for believing; that the
sun, moon, and stars are the Apostles of Christ to preach the Gospel unto them:
But these, with many others, have been invented by Mr. J. Goodwin, as may
appear in his Hagiomastix, and by Divine Authority of the Scriptures, quoted in
the Testimony of the London Ministers, against errors, etc. I would fain know
whether any or all the subscribers have taught any error that carries the least
proportion to any of these; let the world then judge what Prophets they are
that make London to err.

One while thou may take up arms, Page 3. l. 16.
by the instigation of thy Ministers, to maintain the cause of God, decency of
wooship; viz. the Prelaticall faction, or the glorious interest of the Clergy
thereof; another while thou must arm thy self from the same instigations to
sacrifice thy gold and silver, thy moneys and thy plate upon the happy
promotion of the House of God, the government of Christ, etc.

Answ. 1. This is to notorious a falsity, the very mention is a sufficient
Confutation; did ever any of the Letter-writers (as you scoffingly call them)
ever instigate the people to maintain the Prelaticall faction, or the Clergy
thereof? it is well known the Prelates were nevee friends to them, nor they to
the Prelates; wherefore the Lord rebuke thee thou lying tongue, who go about
to belie their persons, when thou can not confute their doctrine.

2. For the latter part of your charge, that they did move the people to
sacrifice their silver and gold, moneys and plate for the promotion of the
House of God, etc. I verily thought that you would mention this as an ornament
to the Ministry, not a reproach to their persons. I am sure you were of this
mind when you made your Snapsack for the Parliament soldiers, Spiritual
Snapsack by John Price. p. 6. ^. 17.
you encouraged the soldiers in the Parliaments war, that all the learned,
godly, orthodox and conscientious Ministers did join issue with them, and
justify defensive arms; did you commend the Ministers then, and dare you blame
them now? by this I see you have a musty budget (out of which at one time you
can bring lies and slanders against the Ministers) as well as a Spiritual
Snapsack, wherein you have Encomiums of their praise.

The ancient love, Page 3. l. 36.
anion, and goodness of thine (i.e. Londons) inhabitants is turned into
hatred, division and bitterness each against other, causing thy foundations to
shake, and thy pillars to tremble, which is all the ben fit thou have received
by the exchange of thy late Diocese for the Province of London.

Answ. 1. I perceive you are a chip of the old block, like master like man,
Young ^^ng elder by John Goodwin. p. 25.
John Goodwin indeed said, that all the success the Ministers of London had in
converting of souls, for three or four years last past, unless from God to
Satan, may be cast up with a Cipher, and measured with a reed that never grew.
One may see by this you are his scholar to fasten on the London Ministers so
notorious a falsity, that all the benefit the City has received by them, is
but to turn its ancient love, union and goodness into hatred, division, and
bitterness each against other.

2. This is so notorious a calumny, that many of your own party blush to read
it, and acknowledge it ever God did the^e souls good, it was by the Ministry
of those men whom you falsely accuse.

3. It were well that you and others (who say the labors of the London
Ministers are insuccessefull) would consider, whether the spirit of the Lord be
not departed from your Congregations, since you have fallen into separation,
whether more has not been perverted then converted by your Ministers. For my
part I cannot discern any signalls or seals to the Ministry of many of your
separated congregations, of bringing sheep to Christ's fold, but of stealing
sheep out of the flock, brought in by the blessing of God upon other men's
labors.

4. Whereas you say, that all the benefit London has received by the
Ministers, is but to turn the ancient love and union of the inhabitants
thereof, into hatred and division; all that I shall say to the slander, is
this, the Lord be Judge between them and you; London was once a City at union
within it self, and did serve the Lord with one consent, and carry on the work
of the Lord with one shoulder, until men of your turbulent faction and humor
fell to schism and separation, gathering Churches out of Churches, and that
not when declining, but when reforming (a practice never heard of before late
years) these and such like practices of yours, have turned Londons ancient
love, union and goodness, into hatred, division, and bitterness one against
another.

5. By these last words, viz. which is all the benefit thou have received by
the exchange of thy late Diocese for the Province of London, by this I
perceive John Price had rather have London a Diocese then a Province; and
thinks London in a better condition under Prelacy, then with Presbytery; of
this I say no more, I wish you had not said so much.

That which Gregory wrote to Mauritius, Page 4. l. 19.
concerning the ambition of the Prelaticall Patriarchs of Constantinople, may
be as truly said of our present Clergy men, exclamare compellor, ac dicere O
tempora! O mores! etc. that is, I am compelled to cry out, Oh times! Oh
manners! behold in all the parts of Europe, Towns are destroyed, Castles
overthrown, Provinces are spoiled, no labourer inhabiteth the land;
notwithstanding the Priests who should lie in a^he^ upon the ground weeping,
they are seeking to themselves names of v^nity, etc. Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 323.

Answ. 1. Who would have thought that John Price had studied Pope Greg^^y? That
he that cries out against all ordained Ministers, as having the mark of the
Beast, should study the language of the beast?

2. The passage you quote out of Gregory, is said to be in the fourth book,
Epist. 323. whereas Gregory has but 56? Epistles in all in his fourth book, if
John Price should quote the third Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, when Paul
wrote but two Epistles to them, I would say he were as ignorant in Paul's
Epistles, as in Gregory's Epistles: As I know Pope Gregory never saw your face,
so this mistake makes me think you never saw his Epistle; let me tell you,
though you mistake Gregory to have more Epistles then he had, yet Gregory [the
Executioner] may not mistake you, to have more necks then you have, if you
persist to justify the Killing the King, forcing the Parliament, imprisoning
the Members, altering the fundamental government of the Kingdom, as you have
done already.

3. Let me know in the next whence this gross mistake did arise, either from
the carelessness of the Printer, or the ignorance of you the Author; that I
may help this poor Ignoramus at a dead list: I shall let you know that it is
true indeed, there is such an Epistle of Gregory's to M^^ritius, and such words
as you mention, but it is in lib. 4. Epist. 32. yet what was then said by him
concerning John Bishop of Constantinople, and other Bishops, cannot as truly be
said of our present Clergy men, as you falsely affirm, for it will evidently
appear to you, if you read the whole 32. Epistle, that the name of vanity that
some did desire, was to be Universal Bishop; (...) then he comes in with the
words you quote, O tempora! O (...) then he goes on, Qui^ est qui contra (...)
Now I leave it to your self to be Judge, (...) be said of our present Clergy men
(as your reproachfully (...) them) at Gregory of th^se Bishops: did ever any
subscribers of the letter, affect the name of Bishop in the Prelaticall sense?
did any of them arrogate the Title of Universal Bishop, or any other name of
vanity of the like nature? if not, then what Gregory said of those Bishops,
cannot as truly be said of our present Clergy men, as you slanderously affirm:
Besides, what names of vanity do the Ministers seek to themselves? are they any
other then Ministers of the Gospel, Preachers of the Word, Ambassadors of
Christ? if these be the names of vanity, do not you count Christ vain in giving
these names unto his Ministers? Which if you do I shall esteem you a man of
vanity and blasphemy too. To conclude my answer, to this Quotation out of
Gregory, I shall only give you this counsel, that it would better become such
a raw novice to study Perkins Principles, then Gregory's Epistles.

Was not the late second War, Page 4. l. 35.
and the flames thereof, kindled and blown up by the Pulpit Incendiaries, the
like Ministers of the Gospel, Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, viz. the ambitous
Presbyters, who are now again by their fiery tongues, and furious pens,
scattering their furious Pamphlets among the people, and hissing them on to a
third war, resolving as it appears to see the Kingdom in ashes, but they will
have their wishes?

Answ. 1. Surely you think your tongue is your own, else you durst never be so
frolic of your slanders; the blame of the first war, nay of the second, yea
of instigating to a third, you lay upon the godly Ministers of the City; I
wonder your heart did not tremble, and you hand shake when you wrote these
lines; had you not a brow of brass, you would blush and be ashamed for raising
against them such improbable and incredible aspersions.

2. I appeal in their behalf to the righteous Judge of all the world to give
sentence between them and you, who kindled the second war; did not they whoat
one time Armies R^mon June, 23. 164^.
cried up the King, closed with the malignants, pleading for the Immunities of
the Royal family, and a moderate Composition for Delinquents; yet at another
time forced the Parliament to the Vote of Non-addresses: this fickleness and
falsnesse in the Army being so palpably discerned by all, did so irritate and
provoke the malignant party, that hereupon many tumults and insurrections did
arise in many parts of the Kingdom; yea the Mariners at sea, did take the
Soldiers on land for their example, and did revolt from, and refuse obedience
to the Parliament; yea the Lord Inchequeene in Ireland also made the Armies
disobedience to the Parliament, to be the cause and President to him, why he
did dispute their Commands, and refuse subjection; as appears by the Relation
made to the House of Commons, published in print; by this you may see, who they
were that did kindle the flames of a second War.

3. May not you now well be ashamed for charging that on others, which only
you, and others of your faction are guilty of? do not you do just as Nero did,
set Rome on fire, yet charged the Christians with it, or as the Papists did,
contrive the Gunpowder-treason, yet lay the blame of it on the Puritans? you
have put the whole land on a flame, yet lay it on the godly Ministers, who
would live quietly and peaceably in the land.

Your letter standt though faintly upon 4 feet. Page 5. l. 33.


Answ. As faintly as it stands on 4 feet in your esteem, yet it is able to
travail up and down the world (when your Pamphlet is hung with cobwebs on the
Stationers stall) and speak in many languages, besides its own, the Piety,
Loyalty, and Charity of the London Ministers.

May we not behold the domineering, Page 6. lin. 22.
Lordly, and Prelaticall pride of these unchrist-like Ministers of Jesus
Christ, that would not vouchsafe such a condescension as to give them (viz. the
General, and his Council of War) a meeting? then a few lines after you say,
these Ministers of the Gospel, these zealous and hot disputers against the
errors, heresies, and blasphemies of the Army, cannot be prevailed withal, by
several applications by writing, by verbal messages to advise, counsel, and
direct them in the matters of the greatest concernment to the whole nation, etc.

Answ. 1. Your aspersions on the Ministers, will not prove them unchrist-like,
they rather prove your self to be unsaintlike.

2. You would by this endeavor to make the world believe, as if the Ministers
were guilty of the greatest act of incivility that is imaginable, to refuse a
meeting with the General and his Ofcers, and that when invited; but if the
whole transaction of the business were clearly understood, their refusal of a
meeting would turn to their honor and your reproach; I shall therefore give
you a brief narrative of the whole business (to rectify your mistake) as I
have received it from those who have very good reason to know all the
particulars of it; which was thus; Col. Titchbourne came to Mr. Ash as from the
Council of the Army, desiring that he and other Ministers would come to a
debate concerning the Coercive power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion;
soon after a letter was written by Mr. Peter's directed to Mr. Calamy, wherein
he, with other Ministers were desired in the name of the Council of the Army,
to meet at White Hall, about somewhat to be held forth by them, about liberty
in worship: To the first invitation by Col. Titchbourne, Mr. Ash did in the
name of the Ministers, declare to him, that if the Council of the Army would
come to a debate, whether they had sinned or no, in entering upon those ways
wherein they were unduly engaged, in seizing on the Members of Parliament, etc.
he professed the Ministers would be willing to meet, where and with whomsoever,
to labor to satisfy them therein; but this offer was declined, they that do
evil hate the light, lest their deeds should be made manifest; I need say no
more, because the letter it self says so much for the Ministers vindication,
in refusing such a conference as was desired, read page 2. of the Serious
Representation, that may stop your mouth. Had a conference been desired with
us, only to have given you resolution, whether the ways wherein at the present
you are walking, are agreeable to the word of God, we should most willingly
have delivered our judgments, etc. And if only for the clearing of this case a
conference had been desired, it was from the first professed, that we should be
ready and willing to meet where, and with whomsoever, to assert and maintain
our judgment therein, but as if the justness of your way were already granted
by us, we were only invited to contribute our assistance in prosecution of what
you had undertaken, which we conceive to be out of your sphere; and for us to
have joined in any consultations of this nature, would have made us accessory
unto them, guilty of the evil that is in them, etc. Thus was the letter. And
because you are but of a vulgar capacity, I shall relate a comparison Mr. Ash
used to Col. Titchbourne, Suppose (said he to the Colonel) your servants
should offer you violence, and lay you under restraint, and should then come to
a Minister, and pray him to advise them, how they shall distribute their
Masters goods, and what or how much each of them should take to themselves; now
should that Minister consult with those servants, he should be an abettor in
their horrid insolences against their Master; the Minister should rather tell
those undutifull servants, that it were more proper for them to ask whether
they had not sinned in thus abusing their Master, and to charge them, to
restore their Master to his liberty, and the enjoyment of his authority, by
them unduly usurped, to obey him for time to come, etc. The drift Mr. Ash aimed
at is easy to conjecture, the Army who are as servants to the Parliament, did
lay violent hands on, and restrain their Lord and Master the Parliament of
England, (whose Army they were, raised by their authority, for preservation of
their privileges, etc.) and when the Army had done that, they sent to
Ministers to advise what was yet further to be done; and how they must manage
their Masters work, (I mean, dispose of the affairs of the Kingdom) but never
desire to be resolved whether they had done well or ill in offering violence to
their Masters the Parliament, but as if it were to be taken for granted that
the Army had done well in forcing the Parliament, the Ministers are only
desired to join in consultations with them, to advise about those things which
are not legally within their cognizance to settle, what ever satisfaction they
should receive from the Ministers.

Your ingenuity and ^andor appears by your submissive and christian respects to
Authority, Page 7. l. 34.
especially the Parliament, and as at all times, so chiefly when they contend
not, (though with the ruin of all) for your greatness and interest, then your
Ministerial ingenuity and candor appears, calling them an Apostatizing
Parliament, a Covenant Breaking Parliament.

Answ. 1. General accusations are no certain proofs: si sufciat accusare,
qui^ erit innocent? if you mention the time when, the place where, and the
Ministers who did call the Parliament an Apostatizing, Covenant Breaking
Parliament (for I know none did so) I shall then blame them, and acquit you
therein.

2. Notwithstanding your slanders, it is well known what submissive and
christian respects to Authority, especially the Parliament, the Ministers of
the Presbyterian judgment have expressed; yea if the Lords and Commons should
sit full and free in Parliament, though in some things God might leave them to
act sinfully, yet would the Ministers live quietly and submissively, if not in
doing what they command, yet in patient suffering what they inflict; and not
express such a spirit of Turbulency, as many have done in the imprisoning of
the chief Magistrates, altering of our Laws, and putting the whole Land into a
conflagration.

3. If the Ministers will not with you cry up a faction, must they therefore
needs be charged by you to cry down a Parliament? suppose they should not
acknowleg. 60 members of the House of Commons (now under the power of the
Sword) to be a free Parliament (when above two hundred Members are forced away)
or the Supreme Authority of the Nation, are they therefore disingenuous, and
unsubmissive to all Authority?

Does not your ingenuity and candor further appear, Page 8. l. 20.
by your abetting, countenancing, and encouraging violence and force upon the
two Houses, by company of loose, profane and wicked fellows at one time, is
some of you did, falling in with the dis^ffected, delinquent, and malignant
party; and at another time, crying out, and exclaiming against the Army, etc?

Answ. 1. It would make more for your honor and their shame, had you named
those Ministers that did abet, and encourage the violence and force upon the
two Houses. Yea it would more have advantaged you, if in stead of a perempory
and naked assertion, you had given in some plain and evident demonstration,
that any of the Ministers had done so.

2. I can truly say, that those Ministers, with whom I have had most occasion
to converse, have expressed their utter abhorrency of that force and violence.
Yea to my knowledge, many of them did declare against it in their Pulpits.

3. For the other part of your accusation, that they fell in with the
disaffected, delingquent and malignant party, that is most notoriously false, as
well as the rest. It Is well known the Ministers have never been friends to
Malignants, nor they to the Ministers.

4. Whereas you say, they did at another time declare against the Army for
S^izing on the Members of the Commons House: I grant they did so, and had they
not cause to do it? considering that the Parliament had long before declared,
Declar. Ian. 17. 1641.
that if any person should offer to arrest or detain any member of Parliament,
that it was against the libe^ties of the Subject, and a breach of the
Privileges of Parliament, and such a person is declared a public enemy of the
Commonwealth. And considering also the Vow and Covenant, when the Lords and
Commons declared a horrid design to surprise the City, and by arms to force
the Parliament, they did then vow and covenant, to resist the same, and all
other of the like nature; so the Ministers have dealt most impartially in
blaming the violence offered the Houses, as well in the one, as in the other.
Indeed it may be said of you, that you are the most partial judge in this
matter that can be in the world; to countenance and encourage the Armies
forcing the Parliament at one time, yet condemn it in the Apprentices at
another, for my own part I must profess I condemn it in both.

The ingenuity and cand^r of London Preachers in fam^us throughout the whole
Kingdom, Page 9. l. ^
does not it further appear, by setting the people at first against the King
and his party -- And now having raised men's spirits to a resolution of
requiring just and scripturall satisfaction that blood may be avenged, in cry
out in your pulpits, of staining the Protestant Religion with the blood of the
King, etc?

Answ. 1. You did once count it a virtue in the Ministers to excite the people
against the King and His party, and do you now esteem it a vice? are you
turned malignant after so many turnings?

2. It Is true the Ministers did excite the people to cleave to the two Houses
of Parliament, who were necessitated to take up defensive arms, against the
forces of the King, but never against the person of the King.

3. But did they ever stir up any to bring the King to a judicial Trial, and
to take away his life? The Ministers understood themselves better then for they
know 'twas lawful in David to take up defensive arms, to fortify Ziglag, and
other places of strength against Saul's fury, yet that it was unlawful for
David to kill Saul, when he had him in his hands, yea though he were a most
bloody and tyrannical King.

The Ministers do well consider that it is one thing to take away the life of
a King, and another thing to withstand the violent execution of the unjust
commands of a King: And this distinction your Mr. Goodwin did well know, I.
Goodwin in his Anti^aval. p. 10. l. 31.
when he wrote his Anticavalierisme, page 10. It Is one thing (says he) to
offer violence to the person of a King, or to attempt the taking away of his
life; another to secure a man's own life, or the life of another whom we know to
be innocent, and much more the public safety, by strengthening a man's self
towithstand the violent execution of any unjust Command from a King: M^.
Goodwin justified the withstanding the violence of the King, yet condemned all
attempts of taking away the life of the King: The Ministers are still of this
mind, though he be revolted from these his first Principles.

4. Whereas you say, the Ministers cry out against staining the Protestant
Religion with the blood of the King; had they not cause to do so? considering
that people of the Protestant Religion did never take away the life of their
King till now: Blessed be God, and blessed be they, that it was in their hearts
to vindicate themselves to the world to be clear in this matter.

If you deny this, I. P. p. 9. l. 16.
I shall show you several of your own Books and Sermons, preaching the one
and the other; and for a taste at present, take one instance of Mr. Chr. Love
Pastor of Anne Aldersgate, etc.

Answ. 1. I deny it absolutely that any of the subscribers did ever stir up
the people to take away the life of the King; for ought I could ever yet
understand: You pretend you can show their books and Sermons for it, but I am
very confident you can show none.

2. I observe you promise in your book more then you make good; you promise as
if you would show several books and Sermons of the subscribers, yet you quote
but one, viz. Mr. Loves Sermon at Vnbridge; now because you single him out from
among his Brethren, I shall therefore speak the more in his vindication. 1. I
perceive you quote Mr. Love no less then ten times in your Clerico-Classicum,
yet never mention him at all in your Pulpit Incendiary, so that it seems you
could not them rake together so much matter against him as to make him a Pulpit
Incendiary. 2. I took notice further that you quote him in the front spice of
your book, as if what you had alleged from him would have made much for your
cause, for bringing the King to Capital punishment; his words you quote are
these: Men of blood are not meet persons to be at peace with, til all the guilt
of blood be expiated and avenged, either by the sword of the Law, or the law of
the Sword, else a peace can neither be safe nor just. Chr. Love in his Englands
distemper. page 37.

Answ. To which I have four things to say. 1. There is no mention at all of the
King, either in that passage, or any other part of his Sermon, that He should
be cut off. 2. Mr. Love does clearly express himself whom he means by those
men of blood, viz. not the King, but as he says, page 32. of Englands
distemper: Many malignant humors are to be purged out of many of the Nobles and
Gentry of this Kingdom before we can be healed. 3. It Is true, Mr. Love then
was, and still is of that mind, that those who were the chief instruments to
engage the King in the late bloody War should be cut off, either by the sword
of the Law in a time of peace, or (if not reach them that way) by the law of
the sword in the time of war; and this he and all others who approved of the
Parliaments taking up of defensive arms, and have taken the Covenant are bound
in their places and Callings to endeavor after; according to the fourth
Article of the Covenant, wherein we are bound that malignants may be brought to
condign punishment, as the degree of their offense shall require or deserve,
or the supreme Iudicatories respectively, or others having power from them for
that effect shall judge convenient. Yet 4. Mr. Love does well consider, that in
that very part of the Covenant, where we promise to endeavor to bring
Delinquents to condign punishment, we promise to preserve the person of the
King; as Artic. 3. and 4. Yea those Mr. Love deems should be brought to
condign punishment, whom the Covenant describes to be malignants and evil
instruments, viz. such as hinder the Reformation of Religion, divide the King
from his people (and have not you done that?) or one of the Kingdoms from
another, or that make any factions or parties among the people, of all which
your self, and the men you plead for, have been most notoriously guilty, as
well as the malignant; therefore deserve to be brought to condign punishment as
well as they.

As for that other passage of Mr. Loves in page 32. of his Sermon which you
quote, I. P. page 9. l 24.
It will search to the quick, to find out whether King James or Prince Henry
his son came to a timely death yea or no. It would, ear^h to the quick whether
Rochell was not betrayed, and by whom; It would go to the quick to find out
whether the Irish Rebellion was not plotted, promoted, and contrived in
England, and by whom. Mr. Love in his Englands Distemper. page 23.

To this I have 3 things briefly to answer for his vindication, viz. Mr. Loves
desire is, that the earth should not cover the blood of the slain, but that the
shedders of blood should be all made manifest; he often wished that the
contrivers of the Rebellion in Ireland, the Betrayers of the Protestants in
Rotchell, the Conspirators of King James or Prince Henrys death (if they did
come to an untimely end) might be found out. 2. I demand of you, is there any
clause in that Sermon, or any tendency that way to charge the King with the
death of King James or Prince Henry, or with the blood of Rochell or Ireland?
3. If he had charged all that blood upon the King (which he did not) yet there
is not the least intimation in all his Sermon, that you should bring the King
to Capital punishment. Now that Mr. Loves judgment was utterly against cutting
off the King, I shall produce anon a book of his long since in print, against
that horrid attempt.

Was it not yet more of your ingenuity and candor to assert several notorious
falsities and untruths, ^. P. p. 11. l. 36. and page 12.
as to instance, page 6. of your Vindication in the margin, where you say the
Agreement of the people, was the same for substance with that of the Armies,
and declared against by the Parliament in December. 1647. there is one untruth --
again you say, that one of the Soldiers was shot to death for promoting it,
this is first a most notorious untruth; and secondly, a most injurious charging
the Army with the blood of that man, the man that was shot to death, was not at
all so much as questioned for promoting that Agreement; but being sent with his
Company by the General to New Castle, did with others make a mutiny, resisted
and beat their Officers, took away the Colors from their Ensign, beat him
with his own Colors, for which this fellow that was sh^t to death was
condemned, etc.

Answ. 1. You who are so pragmaticall as to fasten falsities and untruths upon
the Ministers, will show your self to be (I say not the father of lies, yet) a
son of falsehood.

2. It seems you are put to your shifts, in searching out any accusation
against the subscribers, for from their Representation, you run to their
Vindication, and leap as far as the sixth page at once, and therein it seems
can meet with nothing for your purpose in the body of their book, that you are
forced to pitch upon a small marginal note; which I need not answer, yet I
shall, and I hope clearly evidence that they speak truly, but you falsely, for
you say, it is said in the marginall note, that the Agreement of the People, is
the same for substance with the Agreement of the Army. I affirm it is true
(though you say it is false:) I have compared the one and the other together,
and find them for substance the same; only I must confess, the late Agreement
has more pernicious passages in it then the former Agreement of the People
had, which was voted by the Commons assembled in Parliament, 9. November, 1647.
to be destructive to the being of Parliaments, and to the fundamental
Government of the Kingdom. And afterward in December 17. 1647. there was an
Ordinance of both Houses, wherein it was ordained, that no person who
contrived, abetted, persuaded, or entered into that engagement, called the
Agreement of the People, should be capable of bearing office in the City of
London, for the space of one whole year.

The other falsity you would fasten upon the Marginall note, Page 12. lin. 10.
is, that one of the Soldiers was shot to death for promoting of it. This you
say is a most notorious untruth.

Answ. To convince you that you (not the Minister) have spoken an untruth; I
shall produce against you a threefold Testimony. 1. Of the Honorable House of
Commons, who on November 23. 1647. voted a Letter to be sent to the General to
give him thanks for the execution of that mutinous person, for promoting the
Agreement of the People, and to desire him to prosecute the examination of that
business to the bottom, and to bring such guilty persons as he shall think
^it, to condign and exemplary punishment; now surely the House of Commons then
sitting at Westminster, was more likely to have true intelligence why the man
was shot to death, then John Price could have at his shop in the Exchange.

2. Of the full Relation in print, having Gilbert Mabbots Imprimatur, page 5.
of the proceedings of the Randezvouz (Nov. 15. 1647.) held in C^rkbush heath
near Ware, wherein it is fully declared, that for dispersing sundry scandalous
and factious papers, as the Agreement of the People, etc. for this 3 of them
were tried and condemned to death, and one of them was shot to death at the
head of a Regiment. Yea to give a third testimony, the General and diverse of
his Officers who acknowledged it, yea and did commit to safe custody Col. Air
and Major Scot, for abetting and promoting this Agreement; yea afterward did
not the General write a Letter to the Parliament against Col. Rainsborow, who
was the man that presented this Agreement of the People to the General? Is not
all this proof evident enough that the General and his Officers then did
dislike the Agreement of the People, and did put the man to death for promoting
it? Yea I might quote a fourth testimony also, if it were of any credit, viz.
Lilburne and his Agitators, who with one mouth have exclaimed against the Army,
for voting that man (viz. White) to death. But suppose it were true, as you
relate it in p. 12. that he was shot to death, for mutinying against his
Ensign, and taking away his Colors from him, and beating him with his own
Colors. What will this advantage you? I would ask you which deserves death
most, whether a Soldiers mutinying against an inferior Officer, an Ensign, or
the Armies mutiny against the Supreme Council the Parliament? Whether he that
takes away the Colors from an Ensign, or they that take away the fundamental
laws from a Kingdom? Whether he that beats an Ensign with his own Colors, or
they that offer violence to a Parliament, with their own swords? If you say,
that 'twas not only for his mutinying against his Ensign, but against the
General and his Officers Commands, who ordered him to go to New Castle; If it
were so. I would ask you but this one question more, Whether does deserve death
most, either he that disobeyes a petty Council of War, or they that disobey
the Parliament the great Council of State? Page 14. l. 26.


Had you been ingenuous and candid, as you would seem to be, you would have
said Nicholas Prophet Minister at Fosters, alias at Marlborough in
Sommerset-sheet, and Stanley Gower Minister at Martins Ludgate, alias Pastor of
Dorchester in Dorset-shire, etc.

Answ. What poor cavills are these? I see you had rather wrangle then dispute.
To rectify your mistake about Mr. Prophet, let me tell you first, that he was
never a Minister in Somersetshire, indeed he was about three years since
Minister of Merlborough in Wilt-shire, but has now left the place, and has
received not since that time any profit thence; besides there is a Minister
chosen by them now among them; Moreover, he was fairly chosen Minister at
Fosters, where still he is; now what blemish is it to the Ministers ingenuity,
if Mr. Prophet is said to be Minister at Fosters? would you count it want of
ingenuity in John Goodwin to call himself Pastor of the Church at Swanalley,
because about three years since he was Minister of Stephens Colemanstreet. And
to inform you better about Mr. Gower; I must tell you that he was never settled
at Dorchester, yea when the Letter was made he was not fully resolved to
remove from Martins Ludgate to my knowledge; now was it not more proper for Mr.
Gower to subscribe himself Minister of Martins Ludgate (where he had been so
long) then of Dorchester where he was not then settled at all?

You stain your Reputation with the mention of Thomas Bedford Paster of Martins
Outwich, Page 15. l. 7.
carried from Plymouth for his notorious Delinquency, and worthily sequestered
for the same.

Answ. 1. It seems you want ability to confute the matter subscribed, that one
while you must be forced to exclaim against the persons subscribing, and at
another time against a marginall note.

2. Whether Mr. Bedford is a Delinquent or sequestered I know not, yet this I
know that the Ministers in a general meeting did manifest their dislike that
any should subscribe the Letter or Vindication but such as had owned the
Parliament from the beginning.

3. Whether his name was subscribed I know not, in the printed Copies which I
have seen his name was not annexed, yea the Printer told me that to above 2000
Copies his name was not printed; how it came subscribed he could not give an
account.

You still insist upon the Armies proceedings against the Members, P. 15. l. 31.
which themselves do acknowledge simply considered, irregular, and not
justifiable but by honest intentions, and an extraordinary necessity for the
same end leading them thereunto.

Answ. 1. If the Army (who are but partial Judges in their own case) are
forced to confess their proceedings to be irregular and unjustifiable, may not
indifferent Spectators say they are sinful and abominable?

2. Surely the Army are put to their shifts, when they are constrained to make
honest intentions their main plea to justify irregular actions; this was no
good Divinity in Paul's time for any to say, Let us do evil that good may come,
Romans 3. 8. nor in the time of the Old Testament; Saul had, a good intention in
offering a sacrifice to the Lord (which was the Priests office, not his) yet
his good intention could neither acquit him from sin or punishment, 1 Samuel 13.
v. 9. to 15. nor could it excuse Saul that he had a good intention for the
public, viz. his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, in staying the
Gibeonitel, whose lives by Covenant he ought not to take away, but the Lord
punished that iniquity upon his posterity, though Saul's intentions were honest,
2 Samuel 21. 2. I could instance in Vzzah. 1 Chr. 13. 9, 10. and the men of
Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6. 13, 14. 19, 20. with many others, to satisfy you,
herein, that honest intenteons cannot justify sinful actions. Besides this
plea were somewhat the more tolerable, if the intentions of the Army had been
for public good; but if we may guess at their intentions by their own
expressions in print, they will then appear to be more sinful, treasonable,
and irreligious. Were not their intentions expressed in their Remonstrance,
November. 16. 1648. and other papers of theirs, as against an accommodation with
the King upon any terms at all; p. 57. though never so safe or just, for the
taking away the Kings life, p. 62. that the Prince and Duke of York be made
incapable of government; that if they come not in and render themselves, that
they stand exiled for ever, dye without mercy, if ever found or taken in this
Kingdom, page 62. that a Period be put to this Parliament, that the supreme
power be put into the hands of the people. page 65, 66. that in stead of this
and all future Parliaments there may be a new kind of Representative; that all
professing faith in God, shall have a Toleration whatever his opinion be; that
the Magistrate meddle not with matters of Religion; these and such like are the
declared intentions of the Army, which must justify all their irregular and
unjustifiable procedings; by this it appears, that the ends they aim at are no
more justifiable, then the means they use. Now whether such intentions can
justify their irregular actions, let the world judge, so that I may say of
them, as one did of men of the Popish Religion, if these be Saints, who be
Scythians? if these be Catholics, who be Caniballs?

3. For the extraordinary necessity the Army pleaded for, I have but three
things to say in way of answer. 1. It Is apparent by what was mentioned before,
that the end the Army aimed at, were no more justifiable then the means they
used, now what can be more unreasonable, then to make necessity a plea to
justify not only irregular actions, but corrupt ends also? 2. The godly in
former ages had a more conscientious tenderness, then to make necessity a plea
and patron of impiety; they thought it better to suffer the greatest evil then
to commit the least sin; Aug. in Ps. 73.
Ferenda est magis omnis necessitas, duam perpe^randa est aliqua iniquitas,
said Aug. in Ps. 73. yea it was a Maxim among the primitive Christian,
Tertul. Apol.
Nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus una est necessitas non delinquendi.
3. I am of the same mind with the subscribers, The serious Representat. of the
London Ministers, p. 14.
viz. that the necessity pleaded for, is either merely pretended, or else
contracted by their own misscarriages. And this I am induced to believe,
because at one time they plead a necessity, for treating with the King (as they
confessed in a Letter to the House of Common^, July 18. 1647.) And at another
time plead a necessity for their violence (...) the Parliament, because they
did (...) with the King, must not this be a pretended necessity? In one
Remonstrance, in June 23. 1647, they say, There can be no peace in this
Kingdom (...) and lasting, without a provision for the Rights, Quiet; and
(...) of His Majesty's Royal family. And in mother Remonstrance of November,
16, 1648. they declare, that it can neither be just before God, nor safe for
the Kingdom to have any accommodation with the King upon any terms at all, that
shall imply His Restitution, etc. but that he must be brought to trial and
judgment, for treason and blood he was guilty of. Is not this ground sufficient
to suspect that the necessity pleaded for, is but pretended or contracted, when
they have done the quite contrary this year, to what they did the last, yet
plead a necessity for doing of both, though never so contrariant the one to the
other. So much at present to this plea of necessity; I shall have occasion
afterward to speak more to this point.

I observe by page 16, and 17. that you are not content to vent your passions
against the Ministers of London only; but also against the secluded and
imprisoned Members of Parliament, whom you falsely accuse for countenancing the
tumultuous violence of the Apprentices, imbezling the 200000 l. appointed for
the relief of Ireland, corresponding with the revolted ships, the Scots Army,
and the Insurrections in Kent, etc. For the taking off those scandalls from
those renowned Gentlemen, I refer the Reader to that clear and satisfactory
Vindication of the imprisoned and secluded Members of the House of Commons,
printed January 20. 1648. Hoping that the Lord will bring forth their
righteousness as the light, and their just dealing as the noon day.

You have been as full of changes as the vannes of your steeples, I. P. page
18. l 9.
one while stirring up the people against the King, and for the Parliament,
witness many of your Sermons, preached before the Houses, and elsewhere.

Answ. 1. With what face dare you who have been tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine, accuse so many grave and godly Ministers of ^icklenesse, who
have still kept their first steadfastness, turning neither to the right hand
nor to the left? Indeed you and your teachers have been as changeable as the
Vannes, but the Ministers of London as fixed and immovable in their principles
as the Steeples themselves.

2. If you mean by stirring up the People against the King, and for the
Parliament; that the ministers did, being called thereunto, plead for the
lawfulness of defensive arms against the King with his forces, this I grant;
for they were bound by a Solemn Oath to assist the Forces raised by the
Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their consent. But if
by stirring, up the people against the King, you mean the bringing of the King
to capital punishment, or the taking away of his life, then I flatly deny that
any of the subscribers did stir up the people to that end, or that they have
any books or Sermons in print to that purpose. I am sure many of them in their
Books and Sermons did express their utter abhorrency of any such intendment.
I Will instance but in two of the subscribers (though I could mention many more)
the one is Mr. Case, who though he were a zealous Anti-cavalierist, yet no
Anti-carolist, in a Fast Sermon before the House of Commons 26. October. 1642.
page 11, 12. has these words. It is and has been from ancient times the
cursed policy of desperate malignant Courtiers and Counselors, when they would
arm Princes and Potentates against the poor people of God, to possess their
ears and hearts with this prejudice, that they are enemies to Monarchy. With
such jealousies did the enemies of God and his people in the neighbor Nation
of Scotland labor to possess his Majesty toward those his loyal Subjects
there; they were represented to His Majesty as Traitors and Rebels, that
intended nothing else but to un-Crowne and un-King him, when power shall be in
their own hand. And is not the same design practiced upon his faithful
Parliament and Subjects here in England? Do not these Rehums and Shim^hies fill
his Royal ears with this odium, that the Parliament and the Puritans are
enemies to Monarchy, and intend nothing but to bring all into a parity, and
after they have pulled down Bishops, then down with King too? with a world of
such calumnies invented by the father of lies; truly the Land is not able to
bear their words. If Mr. Case then thought the Land could not bear such
words, blame him not though he be so pathetick and compassionate (as you say he
was) that he cannot bear your deeds, in imbruing your hands with the blood of
your Sovereign, as you affirm he said.

Yea Mr. Love also, whom you slanderously report to be for cutting off the
King, has a book in print near two years since, entitled Works of
darkness brought to light, etc. wherein he does clearly express himself to
the contrary, he having showed that the design of the Army was first to new
mould the House of Commons, next to destroy the House of Lords, their third
design he laid down in these words, viz. To cut off the King if he sides not
to the Independent party; it is true of late they seem to appear for him to
gain Malignants on their side, but it is notoriously known how their
principles are directly against Monarchy; what desperate speeches have some
Independent Members uttered against the King, yea it will never be forgotten
how enraged the Independent Members of the House and Sectaries of London were
against the City Remonstrance, chiefly because there was this passage in it,
for the preservation of the Kings person according to the Covenant. Yea the
Sectaries publish to the world in print, that [the King for his misgovernment
must lose his life -- By this it appears that the Sectaries intend as the 32
Syrian Captains did, 1 King. 22. 31. to fight neither with small nor great; but
with the King of Israel. In laying down this their design I would have none
conceive as if I were a Malignant Royalist (I hate Arbitrary power and tyranny
in Princes, as much as any) I only mention this that malignants might not be
brought to fools Paradise to join with the Army, as conceiving them to be for
the Kings honor and safety, who are the greatest enemies of both. These are
Mr. Loves own words, then he concludes with these verses.

Malignants all believe this thing,
Sectarians would destroy the King,
Yea they do wish there might be none
For to succeed him on the Throne.
All this Mr. Love declared near two years since, however you may account him
a mean Preacher, yet I am sure he was in this a true Prophet.

One while stirring up the People against the King, I. P. Page 18. l. 10.
another while stirring up the People against the Parliament and for the King,
as you did of late in your prayers and preaching expressing greater malignity
against the Parliament, and their party, and greater zeal for the King and his
interest, then those very Ministers whose places you possess, they being
sequestered and cast out for the Tenths of that Anti-parliamentary malignancy
which you have vented.

Answ. 1. It Is true they stirred up the people indeed (according to the Vow and
Covenant) to assist the forces raised and continued by both Houses of
Parliament against the Forces raised by the King, but never stirred any up
against the person of the King.

2. As for the other part of your charge, that another while the Ministers did
stir up the People against the Parliament, and for the King; this is so
manifest a falsity, that the very mention is a sufficient confutation of it.

3. For the last part of your charge, viz. that the Subscribers express
greater Malignity against the Parliament, and greater zeal for the King and
his interest then those very Ministers whose places they possess; this is so
palpable a calumny that I should have more ado to hide and cover your folly,
then to vindicate their innocence in this matter; Will not all that know the
London Ministers acquit them and blame you? could you not be contented to
charge them with falsities, with the want of Ministerial abilities, and of
that candor and ingenuity that becomes Ministers, but must you now tax them
with Malignancy also? yea were you not ashamed to tell the world, that
Malignant Ministers were sequestered for the Tenths of the Anti-parliamentary
Malignancy which the London Ministers vented? when you know that one century of
sequestered Ministers is printed, and the rest recorded, which will remain a
lasting monument of their shame and your falsehood. If you think as you write,
in time you may become the Malignant Ministers Advocate to have them brought
into their places, and the godly Ministers to be thrown out.

And now being come to page 19. of your book, I cannot but give you notice
wherein you discover palpable weakness; for you set your self to answer what
makes most for your ease (though not for your cause) you stand much upon
circumstantials, the Title page, a Marginall note, and such like, but speak not
a word to the most grave, weighty and most material passages of the
Representation or vindication. This I can easily and plainly demonstrate, for
when the Ministers did strongly reason, that if the Kings coming to the House
of Commons to demand but five Members was deemed such a horrid violation of the
Parliaments Privileges, that they thereupon Ordered that any person that did
seize upon any Member of Parliament, was declared a public enemy of the
Commonwealth: Then how might the Armies forcing the Parliament be aggravated
by many more heinous circumstances? yet you have not a word in way of clear
answer to this; ^. P. p. 19. l. 8.
all that you say is this. I ^ay answer you that you never mentioned that Order
of the House in aggravating the Apprentices forcing the House the last year,
and to give you any other answer were but to beat the air, for we are like to
hear no reply to it. Now to this s^eight and shallow answer of yours to that
strong and weighty objection of theirs, I have but four things ^o say.

1. The Ministers did sufficiently declare against and aggravate the evil of
that act of the Apprentices.

2. Suppose the Ministers had not declared against that act of the Apprentices,
yet does that any way extenuate that act of the Army?

3. Whereas you say that to give any other answer were but to beat the air,
I Will say so too; I verily believe you had as good beat the air as go about to
justify the Armies forcing the House of Commons; and yet condemn the violence
offered by the King at one time, and the Apprentices at another. For 1. the
King demanded but 6. the Army imprisoned 42. secluded 100. and forced away 100.
Members more. 2. The King did take away none out of the House; but that they
Army did, they pulled out Mr. Stevens and Colonel Birch by force and violence
out of the House. 3. The King was one of the three States who together with the
two Houses was entrusted with the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom, but the
Army can lay no legal claim to any such authority. 4. The King relinqui^ht
the prosecution of the Members, and promised to have a tenderness of the
Parliaments Privileges for the future, but the Army avowes the act and
per^ists in their force to this very day. Again for the violence offered by the
Apprentices, on July, 26. 1647. (though I go not about to extenuate it, yet
consider, 1. They came unarmed to the Houses, the Army came in a Hostile
manner. 2. They pulled none of the Members out of the House, but the Army
plucked Mr. Stevens, and Col. B^rch out of the House where they were doing
their Country service. 3. They hindered none of the Members from coming to fit
in the House, but the Army excluded and kept by force above a hundred Members
from ^itting in the House. 4. They when they heard of an O^der forbidding them
to co^^ to Westminster, the next day did desist, and did so no more; but the
Army persists in what they have done to this very day. If these things were
compared together, John Price had as good b^at the air, yea his brains too
against the wall, as to go about to justify that unparalleld violence offered
the Parliament by the Army, yet condemn a lesser violence offered by the King
and the Apprentices.

4. Whereas you say, you are like to hear no Reply to it. I would ask you, did
you think your self such a stout champion, and potent Goliath, that none durst
come forth and encounter with you* The reason why you have had no Reply sooner,
wa^, that some wise men esteem your self so unworthy, and your book so weak,
that neither deserves an answer. I am almost persuaded you did not look for a
Reply, if you had, surely you would never have written so rawly, weakly,
falsely, and inconsiderately as you have done, ever and anon exposing your
nakedness to the lash of any adversary that should deal with you.

Supposing that when Argument, I. P. p. 20. l. 34.
Scripture and reason cannot help you, yet the Protestation, Vow and Covenant
will do it, these like the Egyptian reeds run into your ^ides* and do no
service at all for you, but discover your nakedness.

Answ. 1. There is a sufficiency in scripture and reason to justify them, and
condemn you; now if ex abundanti they can plead the Protestation, the Vow, the
League and Covenant also, this makes their cause more strong, and yours more
weak.

2. If these sacred oaths were well considered, it will appear they are as
pillars of Marble, on which the Ministers safely stand, but like Egyptian reeds
run into your sides, and cause the shame of your nakedness to be made
manifest.

You begin with the Protestation; I. P. p. 21. l. 6.
whereby (you say) we are tied to His just Authority, and not abstractively to
His Person, if acting contrary to his just Authority; and that the Protestation
i^ complex^ for the privileges of the Parliament, and liberties of the
Subject, as well as the Person of the King; if the Person of the King be
engaged against the privileges of the Parliament, or Liberties of the
Subjects, the Protestation cannot be obligatory.

Answ. 1. I see you are a pregnant scholar in the Jesuits school, you have
learnt their Art of Equ^vocation, and Mental reservation, in all that you say
or swear; an oath has no more hold upon your conscience, then a loose collar
about an Apes neck, which he can put on and off at pleasure.

2. Why did not you tell the world this your mental reserve, that if the King
did any thing contrary to his just authority, that then the Protestation was
not obligatory, but you might destroy His Person?

3. The Protestation did bind us to preserve the Kings Person according to the
duty of our Allegiance; wherein you swore, ^^ad the Oath of Allegiance.
to defend the KINGS PERSON, and that oath you took according to the express
words, and their plain and commonsense, without any Equivocation, or mental
Evasion, or secret Reservation whats^ever.

4. It seems you your self did once deem the Protestation to be obligatory, in
reference to the Kings person, notwithstanding He should act contrary to His
just authority; for long after the Person of the King was engaged against the
privileges of Parliament, and liberties of the Subject, in demanding the 5
Members, setting up His Standard, and in His own Person engaging in a War
against His Subjects; yet I say after all this, in your Spiritual Snapsack.
page 8. you tell the Parliaments Soldiers, that without all contradictions
they did fight for the King, to rescue him out of the ^ands of Malignants, and
re-instate him in his Royal Throne, etc. With what an impudent face, and
traitorous heart can you at one time plead for the Soldiers to bring the King
to a doleful scaffold, when at another time you tell the Soldiers they fight
to re-instate Him in His Royal throne?

5. Yea the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament (who are the best
interpreters of the Protestation) declared that notwithstanding* His Majesty's
Proclamations against their General and Army as Traitors, Exact Collect.
Append. p. 15. p. 18. 13. 41. 43. 879.
yet they will preserve His Majesty's Person and Cr^wn from all dangers, yea
that they would suffer far more for and from their Sovereign, then they hoped
God would ever permit the malice of His wicked Counselors to put them to: yea
when the Houses were taxt that their intent was to murder and depose the King,
Exact Collect. p. 2^8. 695. 657. 991.
they declared, that the thoughts of it never entered, nor should enter into
their Loyal hearts, and they hoped the Contrivers of these scandalou^ reports,
or any that professed the name of a Christian, could not have so little charity
as to raise such a scandal, especially when they must needs know the
Protestation made by the Members of both Houses; whereby they promise in the
presence of Almighty God, to defend and preserve his Majesty's Person. By all
which it appears, both Houses thought the Protestation obligatory (though you
do not) touching the defense of the Kings Person, notwithstanding His doing
many acts contrary to His just Authority, to the privileges of Parliament, or
Liberties of the People.

6. When the Trained-bands and Seamen of London did wear the Protestation in
their hats, and on their pikes, engaging themselves to King and Parliament, can
it be imagined that they had this mental reservation, that if the King should
go about to infringe the privileges of Parliament, or liberties of the People,
they were no longer bound to preserve His Person, but might cut off His head?
Had you then made this Paraphrase upon the Protestation, you should have lost
your head, and not the King His.

But you go on. I. P. p. 22. l. 12.
We are bound (say you) by this Protest^tion to maintain and defend the King,
Parliament and People, so far a^ lawfully we may, which referres unto the
manner of this defense; while the King was in Person against the Parliament, we
were by this Protestation to defend the Parliament and People, though with the
^azard of the King; if the King and Parliament should ingag^ against the
People, we are by the same reason tied to preserve the People, though with the
^azard of both.

Answ. 1. I told you but even now, both Houses of Parliament did hold
themselves bound by the Protestation to preserve the Kings Person (as appears
by the date of the Declarations forementioned) even after the King had engaged
in person against the Parliament as well as before, so that your limitation of
the Protestation to such a period of time is invalid. 2. It Is true the
Protestation did not bind up the hands of the Parliament, The King confessed it
in His (...) Answer to the 19 Propositions of June, 1642. that there is power
legally in the two Houses of Parliament to restrain Him from Tyranny.
as if they could not legally withstand any Forces to be raised by the King
against Parliament and Kingdom, but only by it they were bound up from doing
intentionally any hurt to the Person of the King; yea to manifest that they had
no evil intention to His Maj^sties Person, when they chose the Lord of Essex
to be General, and raised an Army under his conduct, before any blow was given,
they sent a humble Petition to the King, to be presented by the Lord General,
That His Majesty would not put His Royal Person in danger, but remove Himself
from His Army, and come in person to His Parliament, where he should be sure to
remain in honor and safety. So that if the King would endanger His Person in
being in the head of his Army, 'twas He that put himself upon hazard, the
Parliament still declared, their hands should not be upon Him to offer Him any
violen^e.

3. And whereas you say in the last place, that if the King and Parliament
should engage against the People, we are by the same reason tied to preserve
the People, though with the hazard of b^^h. Certainly your speech bewraies you;
you that once utterd language of Loyal^y in your Snapsack, can speak nothing
but Levelling language now; you are not a friend either to King or Parliament,
unless they will patronize your party, and favor your faction, though it be
to the damage and indangering of the whole Kingdom besides. But I would ask
you, (and pray resolve me in the next) Who are the most competent judges to
determine what is for the good, or what for the hurt of the people? if you say
King and Parliament; why did you not acquiesce in their judgments, in their
late transactions of the Treaty, tending to the settlement of the Kingdom? but
if you say your Sovereign Lords the People, then why do you not give them
their power, and put it to the suffrages of all the People of this Nation,
whether what the Parliament did in Treating with the King were for the hurt of
the People; or whether what the Army did both against King and Parliament, be
not for the hurt and ruin of the whole; if you would leave them to be Judges,
there is a hundred to one that would give sentence to dear the Parliament and
condemn the Army; Alas! what tyrannical Usurpers are you? a few Members in the
House of Common^ (when 200 are forced away) must rule King and Lords; the
people must rule the House of Commons, and the Army must rule the people? have
not you brought the Kingdom to a fine pass, that in stead of having it
governed by the Laws which should administer an equal right to all, the Land
should be overruled by the sword, which will give right to none, neither King,
Parliament, or People?

Have you neit^er for hope or fear, I. P. p. 24 l. 6.
nor other respect relinquisht this Protestation? How is it th^n that you are
so shuff^ing, changing, and uncertain, for the King and against the King, for
the Parliament and against the Parliament, for the Army and against the Army,
for justice and against justice, etc?

Answ. 1. The Reverend Ministers are still the same they were, it is you and your
Teacher (who has made you to err) are the shufflers and changelings; I. P.
His Snapsack, p. 8.
one while for the King, to re-instate to his Throne, another while against the
King, to bring Him to the scaffold; John Goodwin Anticaval. p. 6.
one while that it is the just Prerogative of the Persons of Kings, in what
case soever to be secure from the violence of men, and the^r lives to he as
consecrated corn, meet to be reapt and gathered only by the hand of God. Yet at
another time, that the axe of the Executioner must cut off the King, or cut
down this consecrated corn: let the world judge who are shufflers or
changelings, the Ministers or you?

2. I grant that Ministers were for the King and against the King; but in this
sense, for the Person of the King, never against it; and against the forces of
the King, never for them; I hope this will not make them Changelings.

3. I yield the subscribers are for the Parliament and against the Parliament,
but clearly in this sense: for the Parliament when they sit free and full,
although they should express frailty as men, yet would the subscribers live
submissively as become^ Ministers. And if you mean nothing but this, when you
say, the Ministers are against the Parliament; viz. that they cannot in their
Consciences believe, that the Members sitting at Westminster are a free
Parliament, seeing they are under the power of the sword, nor a full
Parliament; in regard above 200 Members of it are forced away; nor a complete
Parliament, when two States are aboli^ht, viz. King and Lords, if only in this
sense, you say they are against the Parliament, I shall not contend with you.

4. I grant further that the Ministers were for the Army and against the Army;
yet only in this sense, for the Army whilst obedient to the Parliaments
commands, and followed their directions, but against them when they did dispute
the Parliaments Authority and disobey their commands; for the Army whiles they
used the sword to subdue Malignants in arms* but against them when they used
the sword to cut off the King and force the Parliament. And have not the
Ministers cause to be against them in regard they go against those ends, Vid.
the Ord, of P^rl. 15. of Febr. 1644. as the first raising the Army under Sir.
T. Fairfax.
for which they were first raised? For that Ordinance by which this new Mod^ld
Army was raised under the Lord Fairfax was for the def^nce of the King and
Parliament, the true Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, and to be from time to time subject to such orders and directions as
they shall receive from both Houses of Parliament.

5 I yield in the last place that the Ministers are for justice and against
justice; for justice on chief delinquents, that they may be brought to
condign punishment as the degree of their offenses shall require or deserve,
or the Supreme Judicatories of both kingdoms respectively, or others having
power from, for that effect shall judge convenient; yea are they against the
trying, condemning, and ekecuting the King; which is that which you call
justice: this kind of justice the Ministers are against; and had they not
reason? because the Parliament declared to the whole world, that one end of the
war was to bring Delinquents to condign punishment, yet to preserve the
person of the King. And thus I have given you an answer touching the
Protestation; Page 23. lin. 3.
as you conclude about it, so will I. Now let the World judge who it is that
does violate this Protestation so as you d^e. I come in the next place to
examine whether the Vow and Covenant speaks for the Ministers, or against them.

Where as you mention the* Vow and Covenant you might have indeed showed your
ingenuity and candor becoming Ministers of the Gospe^^, I. P. Page 24. l. 14.
to have taken notice of that which was the maine end of that Vow and Covenant
contained in those words, that I will according to my power and vocation assist
the forces raised and continued by both houses of Parliament against the force
raised by the King without their consent; have you performed this vow?

Answ. ^ The Ministers have not been wanting in that ingenuity which becomes
Ministers of the Gospel even in the main end of the Vow and Covenant, for they
have according to their power and vocation, assisted the forces raised and
continued by both Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King,
without their consent. Now because the Subscribers will not assist the said
Forces against the Parliament, as they did once assist them against the Forces
raised by the King, must they be accounted transgress^urs or breakers of their
vow?

2 You might have showed that ingenulty that becomes a Christian to have taken
notice of the grounds or motives why the Vow and Covenant was made, viz.
because there was a horrid and treacherous design to surprise the Cities of
London and West^inster, with the Suburbs, and by arms to force the Parliament,
therefore the Lords and Commons thought fit that all who are true hearted and
lovers of their Country should bind themselves each to other in a sacred Vow
and Covenant, wherein we declared our abhorrency and detestation of the said
wicked and treacherous design, and that according to our power and vocation
would oppose and resist the same and all other of the like nature. So that by
the Vow and Covenant it appears the Ministers were bound according to their
power and vocation to oppose and resist the Armies forcing the Parliament as
well as the former attempt of Malignants by arms to force the Parliament, they
being both of the like nature.

3 Yea you would have showed your ingenuity to have taken notice that the Vow
binds to assist only such Forces as are raised and c^ntinued by both Houses
of Parliament, not such Forces as are raised by both Houses but continue longer
then both Houses would have them; Now the Forces (I mean the Army) raised by
the Parliament are continued longer then both Houses of Parliament thought fit
to continue them. For they would have disbanded them (unless 9000) in May 1647.
and they are continued until March 1649. and God knows how much longer yet
they may continue to be an oppression to the people. To conclude this, I would
ask you whether in case the Earl of Essex his Army, the Lord of Manchester's,
Sir William Waller's, and Major General Massie's Soldiers, who were all
raised by the Parliament, had refused to disband when the Parliament did
command them, and had continued in arms together longer then the Parliament
thought fit to continue them, I pray resolve me in your next whether the Vow
and Covenant did oblige those that had taken it to assist and defend those
Forces; if not, then how can you accuse Ministers that they have broken their
Vow in not assisting the Army, who though they were raised by both Houses, yet
have continued longer in arms then both Houses were willing to continue them.

4 We were all bound by the Vow and Covenant to assist the Forces raised and
continued by both Houses of Parliament against the Forces raised by the King,
but not against the person of the King, the privileges of the Parliament, etc.
Now to assist any Forces whatsoever in opposition unto those just ends for
which they were first raised, would have involved us in the guilt of the
greatest perjury imaginable. And that the Army raised by the Parliament went
directly contrary to those just ends for which they were first raised, is
easily demonstrable. For ^. the Army was raised for the defense of the Kings
person, and they have destroyed his person. 2. For the preservation and defense
of Religion, and they have endangered Religion, by pleading for a licentious
toleration. 3. For the privileges of Parliament, and they have offered such an
unparalleld violation of their Privileges as the like has not been heard. And
now tell me whether the Protestation and Vow be not as Egyptian reeds to run
into your sides when you lean on them. I come in the third place to examine
whether the Solemn League and Covenant will stand you in any better stead then
the Protestant Vow and Covenant has done. You say,

When Scripture, I. P. p. 26. l. 3.
reason, civility, justice, and honesty leave you, you make the Solemn League
and Covenant to go along with you, using it as you do the holy Scriptures
themselves, dispossessing them of their true, natural and genuine meaning, and
(as Satan once assumed Satan's body to d^ceive) you spirit them with your own
opinion.

Answ. 1. Is it not enough for you to walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, and
stand in the way of sinners, but will you sit in the seat of the scornful
also? what contemptuous and contumelious calumnies are these which you cast on
the grave, godly, and learned Ministers of London? could it not suffice your
scornful and revengefull heart, to say that scripture, justice, and reason had
left them, but impudently to affirm that civility and common honesty had left
them also? The Lord rebuke thee, thou false and deceitful tongue.

2 Whereas you say they do dispossess the Scriptures of their true, natural
and genuine meaning, all that I shall say is this, if you had named the men
who, the place where, the time when, and what particular part of the Scripture
that is which they have dispossessed of its true natural and genuine meaning,
I should then have been ready to have given you a fuller answer, but it is your
manner to raise a general slander when you have no particular proof.

3 You say further that they use the Covenant as they do the holy Scriptures,
vi^. pervert the true, natural and genuine meaning of it, but how, or wherein,
or against whom can you evidence this? they do not as you do, lay the Covenant
on the rack of a tortured misinterpretation, See Testimony to the tr^^h^ of
Christ by the Ministers of London p. 28.
forcing it to speak what it never mean. The Ministers did formerly declare
that neither the Covenant, nor any other O^th is otherwise to be interpreted
then according to the common, plain, and true grammatical sense of it.

By your example are all contrary parties taught to plead the Co^enant, I. P.
p. 27. l. 1^.
those you call Sectaries, Schismatics, etc. plead the Covenant, eng^ging each
to go before others in matters of Reformation, the Presbyt^rian pleads Covenant
engaging conformity with the Church of Scotland; the Parliamenteer pleads
Covenant engaging to pre^erve the rights and privileges of Parliament; the
Royalist pleads Covenant engaging to defend the Kings Majesty's person and
authority; the Armists plead Covenant engaging to preserve the Liberties of the
Kingdom, etc. So that you have made the Covenant a mere contradi^^ious thing,
etc.

Answ. 1. I wish all contrary parties would plead Covenant and keep Covenant
according to the good example of the Ministers.

2. Because all contrary parties do plead the Covenant to different ends, must
it needs be charged on the Subscribers that they make the Covenant a
contradictious thing? because Prebyterian plead Scripture to warrant
Presbyteriall Government, and Papi^^s, Prelates, Erastians, Seekers, and
Independents plead Scripture too, to warrant quite contrary ways, must the
Presbyterians bear all the blame that they make the Scripture a contradictious
thing?

3. It Is you and your party (not the Ministers) who make the Covenant a
contradictious thing: the Covenant ties to preserve the Kings person, yet you
plead Covenant to destroy his person: the Covenant binds to preserve the
privileges of Parliament, yet you plead Covenant to destroy their privileges:
the Covenant engages to extirpate Heresy and Schism, and you plead Covenant
to tolerate them: the Covenant binds to preserve the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government of the Church of Scotland, and you plead Covenant to
cry up your own kind of Discipline and Government, and c^ie down theirs: the
Covenant ties us to endeavor after an Uniformity in Religion, and form of
Church Government, and you plead Covenant to allow men to be what Religion they
list, and set up what form of Church Government they please. Now let the world
judge who makes the Covenant a contradictious thing, or (to use your own
phrase) like unto one of the Diabolical Oracles of the Heathens to speak
nothing certain, but ambigui^ies.

4. I wish you would consider that the Malignants and you are equally partial
in the Covenant, they cry out against S^hisme and Heresy, but not so zealous
against Profaneness and Prelacy; they cry up the preservation of the Kings
person, but not a word for the privileges of Parliament* and are not you
altogether as partial? you cry out against malignity* but not a word against
Schism and Heresy, (though the Covenant is expressly against both,) you cry up
the Liberties of the people, but not a word for the preservation of the Kings
person, and the privileges of the Parliament, though engaged by the Covenant
to the one as well as to the other. But the Godly Ministers were impartial in
the Covenant of their God, they held themselves bound. in their places and
callings to oppose Malignity as well as Heresy, to defend the Kings person and
the Parliaments privileges as well as the Peoples Liberties; in fine they hold
themselves engaged to one thing in the Covenant as to another.

But you go on. I. P. page 28. l. 8.
The obligation (say you) is for the preservation of His person and Authority.
Not for his person simply, but his person and Authority; if both come in
competition, then the greater is to be preferred before the less, that is, his
authority before his person.

Answ. I have answered this cavil when I cleared the Protestation from your
gross mistakes* I shall say therefore the less here. I have but three things
to say, by way of answer; viz.

1. It Is to be observed when the Covenant was made, not before the King had done
acts contrary to his just authority, but long after the King had set up His
standard, declared both Houses Traitors, and engaged in person in the head of
His Army, yet I say after all this the Parliament thought fit to make this
Covenant, to preserve his person, that all the world might bear witness with
their Consciences, of their Loyalty, and that they had no thoughts or
intentions to diminish His Maj^sties just power and greatness.

2. I would as^, why would you take the Covenant to preserve the Kings person,
even then when His person and authority stood more in competition then
afterward they did? for then He was in the Head of an Army, but since cast
himself on His people; then unwilling to yield to any reasonable terms, but
since offered more for the Parliaments safety and peoples good (though I wished
he had yielded to more) then ever any Prince that sat upon the English Throne.

3 Is it not most inequitable that you should^ take away the life of the King
because His person and authority stood in competition, and yet you and your
faction the only men that hindered the Kings person and authority from a
conjunction with His two Houses of Parliament? The truth is, the Kings person,
and the Armies designs stood both in competition; and therefore they must
destroy the one to carry on the other. If the King in person would have had
engaged in a combination or conjunction with the Armies Counsels* all the blood
that had been spilt, or the evils that He had done would have been forgotten,
you would not once have muttered that his person and authority had then stood
in any ^ Competition.

But you plead, I. P. p. 28. l. 37.
that the Covenant binds us to preserve His Person in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion; true Religion does not say, if the Subject do
kill and murder, etc. he shall be ^o and ^o punished, but if the King do these
things^ he must not be meddled withal by any but God alone; true Religion
says, he that shed man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, the murderer
shall surely be put to death; if then the King be a murderer, true Religion
commands that h^e be put to death.

Answ. 1. Was the Kings person, and Religions preservation so inconsistent,
that there was no way to preserve the one, but by destroying the other? I am
su^e the death of the King was a stain to Religion, I am not so sure that his
life would have been such a wound to it; whether purposes were in his heart to
alter it, I know not, yet if power were not in his hands, how could Religion be
endangered?

2. If true Religion does not say, if the King kill or steal, etc he must not
be meddled withal by any but by God alone; then surely John Goodwin must be of
a false Religion, for he said, ^^hn Goodwin Anticav. p. 11.
It Is the just Preregative of the Persons of the Kings, in WHAT CASE SOEVER, to
he secure from the violence of men, and their lives to be as consecrated Corn,
meet to be reapt and gat^ered ONLY by the band of God himself.

3. The King had spilt much blood (by His Forces, for I know of none killed by
His own hands) at Edgehill, and many other places, I. P. His Snapsack, p. 8.
long before you made your Spiritual Snapsa^k, yet you told the Soldiers that
without Contradiction they did fight for the King, to rescue his Royal Person
out of the hands of Malignants, and re-instate Him in His Royal Throne and
dignity; if true Religion commands that the King should be put to death, what
Religion then were you of when you said the contrary?

4. Whereas you af^irm, that if the King be a murderer, true Religion commands
that He be put to death. To this I have 3 things to say. 1. It Is unknown to
me, that ever the King murdered any in His own Person, what blood was spilt,
was in a Military way, wherein he did contest for His seeming right. 2. The
word of God which is the rule and standard of true Religion, does not afford
one instance, that ever any King was judicially tried or put to death for the
spilling of blood. 3. If you stand so precisely upon this, that the murderer
shall surely, be put to death, th^n are you bound to put every man to death,
that bore Arms for the King; they were guilty of blood as well as He, yea was
not the Lord Goring, and Sir John Owen guilty of death? if so (according to
your Principles) did not true Religion command you to put them to death as well
as the King?

If Kings may be dealt withal in a judiciary way, I. P. p. 30. ^. 17.
why are they so angry that the late King was brought to condign punishment?
if they say no Court by the Laws of the Land had any auth^rity to judge Him,
then it would he worth our enquiring, whether every man, even to the last man
left, was not bound to lay his hands upon him, for the murderer must not be
suffered to live, but must surely be put to death, the land must not be defiled
and polluted with blood.

Answ. 1. If Kings may be dealt withal in a judiciary way, etc. here you beg
the question, taking that for granted, which was denied by the subscribers; had
you produced any one instance in the Word, that any Kings were judicially tried
and put to death by their Subjects; or that there is any known Law of this
l^nd, that the Kings of England should be arraigned and executed, it would the
more advantage your cause.

2. Because you ask, why were the Ministers so angry, that the late King what
brought to condignpunishm^nt? I must answer you, they expressed no anger, but a
holy indignation against so horrid a fact, and had they not reason?
Considering, 1. That o^e end of the War was to preserve the Kings person. 2.
Many s^bsequent O^th^, Protestations and Declarations of the Parl^ament for the
preservation of His person also. 3. He was the f^st Protes^ant King in the
world, so put to death by His own S^^ject^. 4. That you could not put to death
the King of England, but must kill the King of Scotland and Ireland also, who
had as tru^ right in Him as their King, as this Kingdom had. 5. That He had
granted more for the good of the Kingdom, then any King that sa^e upon ^he
English thron* 6 The house of Commons if free and full (which now they are not)
have no power to take away the life of any man, much lesle the li^e of the
King; if they cannot administer an Oath, how can they take away the life of any
man? seeing no man (...) but by the oath of two or^ three witnesses. These and
such like considerations might stir up a holy indignation in the Ministers
against bringing the King to capital punishment.

3. If the Ministers say there is no Court by the laws of the land that has
any authority to judge the King, (then say you) it would he worth our inquiring
after, whether every man even to the last man left, was not bound to lay his
hand^, upon him. All I shall say to this inquiry of yours, is to propose to you
3 other enquiries, viz. 1. Whether was every man in Israel, even to the last
man, bound to kill Saul a bloody King? if you answer affirmatively, I am su^e
you answer falsely, for David said, who can stretch forth his hand against him
and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26. 9.
2. If the Adulterer by the law of God was to be put to death as well as the
murderer, and there is no Court by the laws of the Land that has authority to
put him to death, whether is every man in the land even to the last bound to
lay hands upon the Adulterer? if you say yea, I am sure some of your greatest
Grandees would not be long lived; if you say no, tell me a reason why you hold
your self bound to do so to the one and not unto the other. 3. If it be true
that it is not the condemnation but the execution of blood-guilty persons that
makes satisfaction for the blood they spilt, and keeps the land from being
defiled, then I demand whether every man in the nation (according to your
principles) is not bound to lay their bands upon the Lord Goring, and Sir John
Owen, to put them to death, seeing those that are in power will not do it? I
might add a fourth enquiry, viz. to know whence you had this notion, that if
Courts of Judicature will not put a Murderer to death, that then every man even
to the last man is bound to do it^ I am sure the Scripture affords you no such
notion; Paul puts the sword only into the hand of the Magistrate, and says,
that he is the Minister of God, Romans 13. 4.
a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. If this loose Principle
of yours should take place, that any man may kill a Murderer, if the Magistrate
does not; I fear there would be a hundred murders committed by private men,
before one will be legally punished by the public Magistrate. Pareus has a
good note on those words; Pareus on Genesis 9. 6.
He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Vt homicidae
plectantur capitaliter per hominem, non sane quemvis, sed gladio divinitus
armatum, hoc est per magistratum; alioqui homicidiorum licentia daretur in
immensum si intersiciendi homicid as potest as cuivit esset; that is, that the
murderer be put to death by man, it is not meant truly by every man, but by him
that is armed by God with the sword, that is, by the Magistrate; else a License
of murder would be given beyond all measure, if the power were in the hands of
any one to kill the Murderer. But to end this; by what you have here said, I do
plainly pe^ceive, that if no body would have put King Charles to death, you
would have been the Executioner.

You go on, I. P. pa. 31. l. 27.
That the people (say you) ought to punish^ their King according to their
demerits, has been the declared judgment of many Protestant Divines.

Answ. Before I come to clear those Authors alleged by you in particular; I
shall give you these advertisements (about your quotations) in the general.

1. Many of the authors you quote do you belie in affirming that they plead for
the killing of Kings by their Subjects, which they never did: thus you wrong
^ez^, Zuinglius, Pareus, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Pryn and Mr. Love; as I shall
evidently make appear anon.

2. In your list of Protestant Divines, I find one Popish Priest, whom you call
Junius Brutus, alias Parsons the Jesuit, as I shall prove when I come to answer
your allegation of him.

3. I have good reason to believe that you borrowed most of your quotations not
from the Authors themselves, See a Book ^ntituled the image of both Churches
Ierusal^m and Baby lon by P. D. M.
but from a Popish writer (supposed to be Toby Matthews) his lies and slanders
against Protestant Divines you take up for undoubted truths. He railes on Bez^
p. 82. and says that the book entitled Vindiciae contra tyrannos by Junius
Brutus was his, p. 105. and against Zuinglius, p. 81. and p. 115. against Knox,
p. 134. and Goodman his associate, p. 134. brands Pareus in p. 225. rails on
the Wieliffs and Waldenses, p. 250. These are most of the Authors quoted by
you, whom he represents unto the world, as Rebels against, and murderers of
Kings and Princes; yea does impudently affirm, that the Protestants have
deposed more Kings in 60. years; then was by the means of Catholics in 600.
Ibid. p. 226. Now is it for your credit to gather such broken scraps, and
tortured collections from so infamous an Author? That which induces me to
believe that you had these quotations not from the Authors themselves, but from
that Popish writer, is this. 1. In reading those Authors I find some of them to
be of a quite contrary mind to that which you alledg them for. 2. Those very
men, and that matter almost in terminis is quoted by that Popish writer; and
may not this give some ground to believe what I assert?

4 You must needs be put to a penury of proofs, when you pretend to alledg
Protestant Divines, yet among them mention Mr. Prynne a Lawyer but no Divine,
and Junius Brutus a Jesuit but no Protestant; surely either your memory must
be short, or your reading but small.

5. In some of your quotations you only name the men, but do not mention the
page where such a passage is to be found. Thus you deal with Zuinglius, Pareus,
Dudly, Fenner, and Rutherford; which makes me think you never read their books,
or else that you intended to pervert their words, and put your Reader to more
pains before he shall find out your abuse of the Authors.

6. Though some of the Authors alleged speak high of punishing Tyrannical and
idolatrous Kings, yet none of them (unless the Jesuit, under the name of
Junius Brutus) ever gave the least intimation of spilling the blood of a
Protestant King.

7. One solid Argument had stood you in more stead then a hundred quotations;
not men's sayings, but their reasons are to be regarded.

8. There is no opinion so gross, but there may be some particular men who
will labor to maintain it; it is true, some particular men may plead for the
putting of Kings to death, but is this the received opinion or declared
judgment of any of the Reformed Churches? could you show that (which I know you
cannot) it would be of more weight with me.

9. Although some of the Authors speak high in this point, yet none of them
come up to the present case. There were so many considerable and concurrent
circumstances in the case of the king that varyed it much from the case of
Kings in former times; the business is so circumstantiated that were all the
Authors alleged by you alive, none of them (I verily believe) nor any Casuists
in the world would give their consent to the taking away the life of our King
as the case stood with us. For, 1. He was a Protestant King. 2. The end of the
Parliaments War against the Forces raised by him, was to preserve His person,
as appears by their many Declarations in that behalf. 3. Many Oaths and
Covenants made to the most high God for the preservation of His Royal person.
4. The King of England could not be put to death, but they must kill the King
of Scotland and Ireland also, who had as true a right in Him as this Kingdom
had. 5. That he granted more for the good of the Kingdom then ever any King
that sat upon the English Throne. 6. That He never personally shed blood. 7.
That the Army must first force the Parliament before they could kill the King;
which will be to after ages a lasting monument of the Parliaments Renown, and
the Armies Reproach. 8. That the House of Commons (if they sat free and full,
which now they do not) have no power by law to erect a new Court to take away
the life of any man, much less the life of the King. 9. That the General and
his Officers declared in their Remonstrance, June 23. 1647. that they did
clearly profess they did not see how there could be any peace to this Kingdom
firm and lasting, without a due consideration of and provision for the Rights,
Quiet and Immunities of His Majesty's Royal family, etc. these and such like
circumstances considered, can it be imagined that any could have their hands in
the Kings blood, unless they were led more by passion then reason, by design
then conscience? Thus having given you these advertisements (touching the
Authors by you alleged in the general) I come now a to particular survey of
the several authors brought by you to maintain your King-killing Doctrine.

You begin with Mr. Love and so will I, I. P. p. 31. l. 31.
of whom you say, that in his Sermon preached at Uxbridg, and printed, having
spoken before of the blood-guiltinesse of the King, yea intimated u^^aturall
and horrible blood-guiltinesse in Him, as if He had been guilty of King James
his death, and Prince Henry's death, the blood of the Prot^stant^ in Rochell,
and the Rebellion of ^reland, and all the Protestant bloodshed there. p. ^3.
of the said Sermon styled Englands distemper.

Answ. 1. That Mr. Love has his Sermon printed which was preached at Vxbri^ge
is true, but that he spoke therein of the blood-guiltinesse of the King is
utterly false; I have read over his Sermon from the beginning to the end; and
can find no mention of the King throughout his Sermon, but in two places, and
there too, without the least reflection or accusation on the King, See Mr. Loves
Sermon entitled Englands distemper. etc. page 16.
the first place is in p. 16. where he says, that the rising (though now
falling) Clergymen would serve up Prerogative to the highest peg (by which
means they have cracked it, at least the credit of it) affirming that Kings
might do what they list, that the life's, ^ives, liberties, and estates of
Subjects, are to be disposed by the King, according to his own will, yea have
they not taught the people, that if the King require the life of any or all his
subjects, they must lay their necks to the block, they must not defend
themselves by force of Arms in any case? Here Mr. Love does accuse
Court-preachers, and Parasities of flattery bu^ is there the least word here of
accusing the King of blood-guiltinesse? Ibid. p. 19.
The second place where he makes mention of the King is in p. 19. and there he
says nothing but this; Is not our King the head divided from his Parliament,
the Representative body of this Kingdom? and is not one member divided from
another? and does Mr. Love in this accuse the King of blood-guiltinesse? These
are the two places where Mr. Love speaks about the King, I am sure there is
not one word else touching the King in all his Sermon.

As for your false charge against Mr Love, I. P. p. 31. l. 35.
that he intimated unnatural and horrible bloud-guiltiness in the King, as if
he had been guilty of K. James his death, and Prince Henrys death, the blood of
the Protestants in Rochell, and the Rebellion of Ireland, and all the Protestant
blood there; See Mr. Loves Sermon entitled Englands distemper. p. 23.
this you say in p. 23. of his Sermon. To this I have two things to answer in
his behalf. 1. I need not become his Advocate; the Sermon may plead for him
that made it, all that Mr. Love says is this, It would search to the quick to
find out whether King James, and Prince Henry his son came to a timely death,
yea or no? It would search to the quick to know whether Rochell and all the
Protestants in it were not betrayed into the hands of their enemies; and by
whom? it would go to the quick to find out whether the Irish Rebellion was not
plotted, promoted and contrived in England, and by whom? Is here the least
charge against the King? cannot a man speak of King James or Prince Henry's
death, but must it be interpreted that he said King CHARLES had a hand in it?
cannot a man wish that the betrayers of the Protestants in Rochel, the
contrivers of the Rebellion in Ireland, may be discovered, but must all the
guilt of that blood be needs laid upon the Kings head? 2. But suppose he had
intimated that the King was guilty of blood-guiltynesse (which he did not) yet
is there not the least intimation of that for which you alledg him, viz. to
prove that it was his decl^red judgment that the King was to be put to death:
you labor to stain his reputation, but you do no way strengthen your* own
assertion. I am sure Mr. Love declared his judgment against putting the King to
death long before the Armies attempt to bring him to trial, as appears by that
book mentioned before, entitled Works of darkness brought to light, printed
about two years since.

You say that Mr. Love made the King the Troubler of England as Achan was of
Israel, I. P. page 32. l. 3.
and has these words, p. 32. It was the Lord that tr^ubled Achan, because he
troubled Israel; Oh that in this our State Physicians would resemble God to
cut off those from the land who have distemperd it: M^lius est ut pereat unus,
quam unit as.

-- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trabatur.
Answ. 1. Did not your heart give your hand the lie when you wrote these words?
does not your Conscience tell you that there is not the least syllable in Mr.
Loves Sermon tending to this, that the King was the Troubler of England, as
Achan was of Israel?

2. Does not Mr. Love clearly express himself whom he meant by those Achans
who were to be cut off; and that but three or four lines before those words you
quote of Achan, where he says that there are many malignant humers to be
purged out of many of the Nobles and Gentry of this Kingdom before we can be
healed? but there is not in that place, nor in 13 pages before* any one word
about the King; and what is said of him in p. 16 and 19. is not in the least
disparagement to his Royal person and authority, as I made appear before.

3. The phrase by any grammatical construction cannot be referred to the King;
for he wished that the State Physicians would resemble God to cut off those
from the land that had distempered it* now had it been meant of the King he
would have wished that they would have cut him off (not those off) that
distempered it. As for those Latin sayings, Melius est ut pereat unus quam
unitas: and, -- Imm^dicabile vulnus Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera
trabatur:
these expressions cannot be referred to the King unless something spoken
either before or after (of which there is not a word) does enforce such an
inference. Besides, Mr. Love does well know that although the cutting off one
Malignant member may preserve the body, yet the cutting off the head (though
there may be Malignant humors in it) is not the way to save the body, but to
destroy it.

You go on, I. P p. 32. l. 11.
But yet more plain, page 37. men who lie under the guilt of much innocent
blood (says Mr. Love) are not meet persons to be at peace with till all the
guilt of blood be expiated and avenged either by the sword of the Law, or law
of the sword.

Answ. 1. But yet more plain say you, truly you had need of something more
plain say I, before you will be able to make it appear that ever Mr. Love did
plead for killing the King.

2. It seems this is the plainest passage in the Sermon, but does this ^peak
what you assert, that the King must be punished according to his demerits? Is
there any clause to this purpose in the words you quote?

3 Mr Love does well consider that in the same Article or part of the Covenant
wherein we promise to bring Delinquents to punishment, we engage our selves to
preserve the person of the King.

4 I do verily believe Mr. Love is still of this mind (and I have some cause
to know it) that the guilt of that innocent blood which has been spilt, must
be expiated and avenged on some of the chiefest Incendiaries either by the
sword of the Law in a time of Peace, or (if that cannot reach them) by the Law
of the sword in a time of War; and what is this more then we are all engaged
to by Covenant? to bring Delinquents to condign punishment as the degree of
their offenses shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Judi^atories of both
Kingdoms, or others having power from them for that effect shall judge
convenient. But for you to wrest and torture his words, as if he meant that the
guilt of the blood shed could not be expiated unless KING CHARLES were
executed; I am persuaded there was never such an expression from his mouth, nor
motion in his heart.

The second Author you allege is Mr. John Knox, I. P. p. 32. l. 25.
who in his book^ called the Appellation etc. affirms (say you) that the people
may depose their Princes and punish him etc.

Answ. It Is true Mr. Knox spoke more freely in this point then any Scottish
Divine that I know of before or since, yet let me tell you, that what he says
will not reach to such a case as ours. For 1. I read in his b^ok called the
Appell^tion of John Knox, page 78. that he pleads only for the punis^ing of
such Kings as are Idolaters and Tyrants against God and his known truth; now
our late King was not such a one. Secondly, he speaks of such Kings as were
rashly and unadvisedly chosen by the People; now our King was not merely
elective, but had a title to the Crown by succession, and a just Hereditation.
Thirdly, I do not read in his Book called the Appellation, etc. that he
contends for bringing Kings to a judicial Trial and taking away their lives,
but only in general of punishing and deposing them. Now what is said here by
way of answer to what you alleged out of Mr. Knox, may serve also for an
answer to Goodman whom you call the great associate of John Knox.

The third Author you quote, I. P. p. 32. l. 38.
is Doctor John Ponnet in his Books called A Short Treati se of Politic
Power, Cap. 6. page 45.

Answ. It Is true, Dr. Ponnet is of large principles in this point, yet 1. it is
to be observed that when he made his book it was in the reign of Queen Mary,
Ann. 1556. and so spoke of Popish, not Protestant Princes; yea it was during
the time of his banishment out of England, at which time his discontent might
make him to be led more by passion then reason. 2. Though he holds it lawful
for a People to depose and kill a Tyrant, yet he gives not this power abslutely
to a particular party, but to the body of the People; See a short Treati se of
Polit. Power. by Dr. I^^n Pennet, ^. 6. page 49.
The body (says he) ^f every State may (if it will) yea and ought to r^dresse
and correct the vi^^^ of their Heads and Governors. I am sure you cannot say
the body of this State was for the execution of the King; there were an hundred
against it to one for it. Yea 3, Though he goes further, that private men may
kill a Magistrate, yet he holds it with some special limitations, See Dr.
P^nnets Treatise of Polit. Power. cap. 6.
In some cases private men (says he) may kill their Magistrates, as when a
Governor shall with his sword run upon an innocent, or go about to shoot him
with a gun, or if he should be found in bed with a man's wife, or ravish a man's
daughter, or go about to make away his Country to Forraig^ers. Now can you
prove the King to be guilty of such things as these? If not, your quotation of
Ponnet does not reach our case. To close this, I would ask you, Are you of Dr.
Ponnets mind that any private man may kill a Tyrant? do you think that Moses
his practice in killing the Egyptian, and Ehud slaying Eglon, is to be
imitated by every private man? It seems you do so, why else do you urge these
instances out of Doctor Ponnet to justify your King-killing Doctrine? If you
do, I fear you will often times follow the Devils instigation to murder the
innocent, when you think it is the impression of Gods spirit on your heart to
do justice on the guilty. Oh take heed that you be not given over to believe
lies, and then to work wickedness with greediness. Before I leave this
unsafe assertion in Dr. Ponnets Book (of which you approve) viz. that private
men may kill a Tyrant: I desire that this might lie sadly on your heart,
suppose you should think such a Magistrate to be a Tyrant and a murderer, and
because none will put to death that Tyrant, therefore you hold your self bound
to do it: suppose again, another thinks him to be a just Magistrate whom you
slew, and kills you that killed him, and a third kills him that killed you, and
so ad infinitum: Is not this the way to make us Cains, not Christians, one unto
another, and in the end not to leave so many men in the world as Cain did when
he slew his brother?

A fourth Author you quote is Junius Brutus supposed by good Authors to be
Beza's works, I. P. Page 33. l. 30.
in his book called Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, etc.

Answ. 1. Indeed if you count the Popish writer supposed to be Toby Matthewes
to be a good Author, who made that book entitled the Image of both Churches,
Jerusalem and Babylon (by P. D. M.) He says it was Beza's works page 105. and
yet herein he was no more ingenuous then you were; for says he, if it was not
Beza's it might be Hottomans, page 107. and page 111. Do you deal heartily
with so Orthodox a Divine as Beza was, to receive the slanderous reports of
Papists against so zealous a Protestant? The same Author who said that Beza
made that book called Vindiciae contra tyrannos, See image of Ier. and Bab. by
P D. M. p. 82.
affirmed also that Beza usurpt another man's parish, that he was the husband
of another man's wife, etc. the one is as true as the other. 2. It may be made
demonstrable that Beza was not the Author of that book, which goes under the
name of Junius Brutus, for can it be imagined that so sober and learned a man
as Beza was, should be so inconsistent to his own principles, to write one
thing in one book, and the quite contrary in another? throughout all the veins
of his writings, he calls for subjection to Magistrates, but not a word of
deposing or murdering of Kings, which is the whole drift of that book called
Vindiciae contra tyrannos. Beza lib. confess. Christianae fidei cap. 5. Ecclesia
circa finem.
I could produce multitudes of places out of Bezaes works utterly repugnant to
what is in Junius Brutu^; take for presnt one or two: Nullum aliud (says he)
rememedium proponitur privatis hominibus tyranno subjectis, preter vitae
emendationem proeces and lachrymas; that is, there is no other remedy left to
private men being subject unto a tyrant, besides amendment of life, prayers and
tears. Yea Beza was of this judgment, that though private men might disobey
the sinful commands of a Prince, yet he was utterly against taking up of Arms:
Beza in confess* fidei Christianae c. 5. Sect. 45.
It Is ane thing (said he) not to obey Magistrates, and another to resist or take
up Arms, which God does not permit thee. If Beza was against private men's
taking up of defensive arms, can it be imagined that he would plead for
offensive Arms against the life and person of a King? Indeed Beza has a
learned Tract extant de Haereticis a Magistrati^ puniendis; but not a word de
Magistratibus ab Haereticis puniendis; Beza did hold that Magistrates should
punish Heretics, but never held that Heretics should punish Magistrates.

3. This Iunius Brutus whom (you say) good Authors affirm to be Bezaes works,
is indeed and intruth no other then the work of a Jesuit; I have it from good
hands that Parsons the Jesuit was the Author of that book; there are now some
alive that can witness it, that one Rench a Printer was condemned to be hanged
for printing it, and another book of the same man's, under the name of Doleman.
And here I cannot but give the world notice that one of the good members now
sitting at Westminster (whom I could name but that naming men now in the House
would be accounted breach of privilege, when pulling Members out has been
esteemed none) did employ Walker the Mercury man (who writes the Perfect
Occurrences) to get this book being translated into English to be printed; it
seems themselves were ashamed of it, suspecting that it might be known to be
Parsons the Jesuit, if it had continued still under the name of Junius Bru^us,
and therefore they did make a new Title to this book; which is this.

Four great Questions concerning the Trial of the King, as it was delivered to
the Colonells and General Officers of the Army, and presented to the High
Court of Justice appointed by an Act of the Commons of England for Trial of
the King.

I only mention this that it might appear unto the world, that the Books,
Principles, and Counsels of the Jesuits had a great concurrence with, if not
influence upon the late Transactions of the Army; and High Court in putting the
King to death.

You go on, and discerning a scarcity of Protestant Divines, you are beholding
to Popish Presidents to help you out; you say Christierne lost the Crown of
Denmapke, I. P. p. 34. l. 29.
etc.

Answ. True, he did so, but yet he did not lose his life; but you have made
King Charles lose his Crown and life together. Christierne was only restrained
as a Prisoner, but not adjudged to dye. Besides the Kings of Denmark come in
merely by election, but the Kings of England by a rightful succession. So that
your instance of Christierne will not advantage you a whit.

Edward the second (say you) lost the crown of England for the same
mis-government as our late King lost His Crown and head. I. P. pa. 34. l. 31.


Answ. 1. This was in the time of Popery; are Popish practices good patterns
for Protestants to walk by?

2. Edward the second did not lose His Crown by a judicial Deprivation, but by
a constrained Resignation.

3. He was never legally arraigned and brought to trial in Parliament for his
life.

4. It Is to be observed that Mortimer (who had the chief hand in deposing King
Edward the second) was in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. condemned and executed as a
Traitor, and guilty of High treason, for murdering Edward the second at Berkely
castle, although he was deposed. It may be after Parliaments may call some of
you to account for the Kings death.

That superior Magistrates may be put to death by the inferior, I. P. p. 35.
l. 3.
because Domestic Tyrants are chiefly to be represt, was the opinion of Pareus
in his Commentary on Judges. In casu necesstatis licita est defensio per
magistratum infe^^oorem (...) superiorem. D. Paraeus in c. 13. ad Romans p. 262.


Answ. Indeed in his Comment on the Romans he says, that in case of necessity
the inferior Magistrate may lawfully defend himself against the superior; but
has not a word in his Comment on the Judges (that I can find) that superior
Magistrates may be put to death by the inferior. Surely Pareus would not say
one thing in his Comment on Judges; Christianes (...) minus quam alios
quos^unque potesta^^. subject^^ esse debere non tantum fide ^lus sed etiam
infidelibus sed, etc D. Paraeus in Romans 13. v. 1.
and the quite contrary in his Comment on the Romans. He says expressly, that
Christians no less then others ought to be subject to the Powers, not only
when believers but when Infidel^s, as all the powers then were, not only to the
me^k and just, but to the froward and unjust, etc. It Is true, Pareus pleads for
defensive arms in case of necessity, (and so do I) but yet he never went in
so high a strain to plead for the killing of Kings and Princes; yea when Pareus
speaks of defensive arms he does it with abundance of wisdom and caution:
Vide Paraeum in explic. dubiorum. in c. 13. ad Romans Prop. 2. p. 262.
Subditi (says he) non privati sed in magistratu inferiori constituti,
adversus superiorem magistratum se and Rempublicam and ecclesiam seu veram
Religionem etiam armis defendere possunt. His positis Conditionibus, cum
superior ma^istratus degenerat in Tyrannum. 2. Aut ad manifestam idolotatriam
atque blasphemias ipsas vel subditos alios suae fidei commissos vult cogere,
etc. The sum of what he says is this, that it is lawful (not for private men
but) for the inferior magistrates to defend the Church and Commonwealth,
against the superior Magistrate, yet he lays down 6 conditious or limitations;
provided that the Superior Magistrate degenerates into a Tyrant, that He
compells His Subjects to manifest idolatry and blasphemy; and that they keep
themselves in the bounds of selfe-defences according to the Laws, etc. Now can
it be imagined that Pareus should lay down so many cautions to justify a
defensive war in his Comment on the Romans, and yet affirm that the superior
Magistrate may be put to death by the inferior? It makes me think that you
never read Pareus his works; or if you did, that you intended to be lie him, as
you have done many others. Besides, Pareus never made a Comment upon Judges all
his life; after he was dead there was found some short notes written in his
own Bible, only for his own private use, which his son Philip Pareus did lately
put among his other works.

That famous Dudley Fennor affirms, I. P. pa. 35. l. 8.
that an evil Prince may be taken away in a time of peace, or by war, which
they may do who are either Ephori or ordinum omnium conventus, says he.

Answ. 1. You use still your wonted stratagem, to alledg Authors, mention their
names, but give no notice in what page that passage is, which you quote of
theirs, which must argue either your ignorance of such men's works, or else a
purpose in you to deceive the Reader, and abuse the Authors you quote.

2. Though I am not bound to answer you in every Author you quote at large, yet
for disputes sake I shall yield to your weakness; it is true Dudly Fennor has
some such words in his Sacra Theolog. cap. 13. Sacra Theolog. per Dudleium
Fennor. c. 13. de Politeiae-civili. p. 80.
de Politeia civili. p. 80. though you pervert them woefully; you had showed
your ingenuity had you quoted all that Dudly Fennor spoke touching the point in
hand. He does distinguish of a Tyrant, there is Tyrannus sine titulo, and
tyrannus exercitio. Tyrannus sine titulo est qui imperium ad se absque legitima
ratione rapit, huic quisque privatus resistat, and si possit e medio tollat.
that is, A Tyrant without a title, is such a one who by force and fraud has
got the Government of a Kingdom into his hands, when he has no legal claim
thereto; now such a one (says he) any private man may resist and take him out
of the world. Put case O. Cromwell or any other man who has no legal claim
to the Crown, should by force and fraud usurp to himself the Kingdom, such an
one is Tyrannus fine titulo, and if you will follow Dudly Fennor he gives
liberty that any private man may resist such a one, yea if he can take him out
of the world. I hardly believe that Dudly Fennors doctrine (whom you call
famous) would please at White Hall. Again, when he comes to speak of a Tyrant
(not in title, but) in the exercise of his government, he does not plead for
popular tumults, but says (which you have unworthily left out) that such a
tyrant may be punished, but yet only by them (qui ea potete donati sunt) who are
endued with such an authority; now that is most true, that if the laws and
constitutions of a Kingdom or Commonwealth be such, that there are select men
empowered by Law to restrain and punish the vices of a tyrant; in such a case
it is unquestionably lawful. And if you can show that the House of Commons have
power by the known laws of this Land, to condemn and execute any man, much
less the King, I shall then be silent.

When a tyrant is taken away either by the suffrage or consent of the people,
I. P. p. 35. l. 15.
fit Deo auspice says, Zuinglius.

Answ. 1. Here you name the man, and mention the words, but quote not the place
where such a passage is to be found; in Zuinglius his works (who has four
large volumes extant.) I perceive your drift is to put him that should answer
you to the more pains, to manifest your abuse of both of Author and Reader.

2. It Is true, there is some such passage in Zuinglius as is quoted by you, yet
I must tell you, as the Devil did with that scripture he quoted to Christ; so
do you with Zuinglius words, viz. leave out the most considerable clause, and
grossly pervert the meaning of his words, which I shall evidently demonstrate:
His words are these: Quum Consensu and suffragi^s totius an^ certe (...) is
multitudinis, Tyr^annus tol^itu^r, deo fit auspice. Zuingl. in explanatione
Articuli 42. p. 85. Tom. 1.
When a Tyrant is taken away by the consent or suffrages of the whole or better
part of the people, it is done God disposing it. Now you have left out these
words [of the whole or better part of the people] It may be your conscience
told you you, that the whole or better part of the people would never have
given their consent to cut off the King, and therefore you have done it without
them, never desiring their consent, so that what Zuinglius says will not
justify your practice, which was done by the lesser (and not the better
neither) of the people. Besides, you grossly abuse and pervert the meaning of
his words; as if Zuinglius justified in that place the taking away the life of
a Tyrant, which he was utterly against, as appears in that very Article where
this passage is sound. It Is true, he was for the deposing of Tyrants, so it were
done by the whole or better part of the people, but yet against the killing of
them, as he says expressly. Quopaecto tyrannus movendus sit ab officio facile
est conjectare, Zuingl^^^ exp. Arn^ 42 p. 84. Tom 1.
non est ut ^umtrucides, nec ut bellum and tumultum quis excitet, quia in pace
vocavit nos Deus, sed aliis viis res tentanda est, etc. that is, after what
sort a Tyrant should be put out of office it is easy to conjecture, it is not
that thou may kill him, or raise war or tumult against him, because God has
called us in pea^e, but the thing is to be assayed by other ways, etc. Yea it is
further to be observed how he defines a Tyrant, viz. to be such an one (qui vi
regnum accepit, and per ambitionem irrumpit) who has gotten a Kingdom by
force, and breaks it by ambition. There is no doubt but such may be deposed,
yea destroyed too, if the people have strength to do it.

See more to this purpose in a book not long since put out, 1. P. p. 35 l. 17.
as it is upon very good grounds supposed by Mr. Rutherford of Scotland, called
Lex Rex, and especially in Mr. Pryns works, etc.

Answ. 1. You still use your old device, name the man but not quote the place.
I shall not contest with you whether Mr. Rutherford made that book called Lex
Rex, yet this I will maintain, that in all that book there is not one passage
that I can find for bringing the King to capital punishment; I am sure in many
places he is against it, in answering that objection which Royalists made, that
because David would not stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed,
therefore the King being the Lords anointed cannot be resisted. To which he
gives this answer: Lex, Rex. quest. 31. p. 330.
David speaks of stretching out his hand against the person of King Saul; no
man in the three Kingdoms did so much as attempt to do violence to the KINGS
PERSON; Il. p. 104, 105.
and in another place, Quest. 14.
he says, one or two tyrannous Acts deprive not a King of his Royal Right;
and a little after he says, any man is obliged to honor him as King whom the
people makes King, though he were a bloodyer, and more tyrannous man then
Saul; Ib. p. 233. qu. 26
and in p. 233. he says, That the King is an eminent servant of the State in
the punishing of others; if therefore he be unpunishable, it is not so much
because His Royal power is above all Law-coaction, as because one and the same
man, cannot be both the punisher and the punished, etc. Many such like passages
as these are to be found in Lex, Rex. Is it like that Mr. Rutherford (if he be
the Author of it) should plead for putting the King to death, in one place, yet
declare himself against it in so many places throughout his book?

2. Whereas you would make Mr. Pryn a patron of your opinion, I need say
nothing in his vindication, he is alive, and now among us, more able then I to
vindicate himself; it is true, in his Appendix to his fourth part of the
Sovereign power of Parliament and Kingdoms, he has made many instances of
States and Kingdoms that have deposed and punished their Princes. Yet he gives
no instance of a Protestant State that ever did so; yea in his speech in the
House of Commons on D^cemb. 4. 1648. M. Prynnes speech in the House of Common,
December. 4. 1648. p. 77.
he says expressly, that though there be some Presidents of Popish States and
Parliaments, deposing their Popish Kings and Empeperors at home and in foraign
parts, in an extraordinary way, by power of an Armed party yet there is no
President of any one Protestant Kingdom or State that did ever yet judicially
depose, or bring to execution any of their Kings and Princes though never so
bad, whether Protestants or Pap^sts, etc. (...) I hope our Protestant
Parliament will not make the first President in this kind, nor stain their
honor and Religion with the blood of a Protestant King, etc.

And thus I have labored to clear the Authors you quoted, most of them make
against you, none speak for you, I leave the Reader to judge. As you quoted
some few Authors who seemingly might speak for you, but really against you, I
might produce a cloud of witnesses against you in this point, not only of
Protestant Divines since the Reformation, against killing Kings in the
general, but also multitudes of Protestant Divines declaring against the
cutting off the head of our King in particular; as the Ministers beyond the
Seas, the Ministers of Scotland, the Ministers of Essex and Lancashire, and of
many other places of the Kingdom besides the London Ministers, who have
unanimously declared their abhorrency of that horrid fact of taking away the
life of the King; But I forbear quotations, only to manifest the levity and
inconstancy of you and men of your faction, I shall mention some few who have
in print declared against the cutting off the King, yet have been of late great
sticklers for the spilling of His blood. I shall begin with your self, not that
I think you deserve the honor of Priority, but that your ownmistake may be the
more obvious unto observation. John Price his Snapsack. p. 8.
In your Spiritual Snapsack for the Parliament Soldiers, p. 8. you tell the
Soldiers thus, You fight for the recovery of the Kings Royal person out of
the hands of those Miscreants, and re-instate Him in His Royal throne and
dignity, that both He and His Posterity may (if the Lord will) yet flourish in
their Royalty; so that without all contradictions you sight for your King. By
this it appears that since you have separated from the Ministers Churches, you
are like the vannes of their steeples full of changes, one while to bring the
King to His Royal throne, another while to bring Him to a doleful scaffold;
one while that His Posterity may flourish in their Royalty, another while for
the extirpation of the Royal family root and branch. The next I shall quote
shall be your goodly Pastor John G^o^win, that the world may see you are like
people, John Goodwin Anticaval. p. 10, 11.
like priest. In his Anticavalierisme, p. 10, and 11. he says: As for offering
violence to the person of a King, or attempting to take away his life, we leave
the proof of the lawfulness of this to those profound disputers the Jesuits,
who stand engaged by the tenor of their professed Doctrine and Practice, either
to make good the lawfulness thereof, or else to leave themselves and their
Religion an abhorring and hissing unto the world: As for us who never travailed
with any desires or thoughts that way, but abhor both mother and daughter,
doctrine and practice together, we conceive it to be a just Prerogative of the
Persons of Kings in what case soever to be secure from the violence of men, and
their lives to be as consecrated Corn, meet to be reaped and gathered only by
the hand of God himself: David's Conscience smote him, when he came so near the
life of a King, as the cuttiag off the lap of his garment. notwithstanding
these high expressions of his against taking away the life of Kings in any case
whatsoever, yet had this wretched Apostate a great hand in bringing the King to
death. It would be endless to mention all that could be found in their books in
print to this purpose; See the Armies Remonstrance of June, 23. 1647. p. 12.
I shall only quote the Armies judgment touching the preservation of His
Person; their words are these, we clearly profess we do not see how there
can be any peace to this Kingdom firm or lasting, without a due consideration
of and provision for the Rights, Quiet, and Immunities of His Majesty's Royal
family, and His late Partakers; and more fully in their Proposalls of Aug. 1.
1647. See the Armies Proposalls. Aug. 1. 1647.
they propose, that His Majestic^ person, Queen, and Royal Issue, may be
restored to a condition of safety, honor and freedom in this Nation, without
Diminution of their Personal Rights, or further limitation to the exer^ise of
their Regal power then according to the particulars aforegoing. Yet there very
men in their late Remonstrance, desired that the Capital and grand Author of
our troubles, the Person of the King, may be brought to justice for the
treason, blood, etc he was guilty of. What lasting settlement can be expected
from th^^^ men who at one time desire one thing, and at another time the quite
contrary?

If so be the saving of the Kings person being a murderer, I. P. p. 37. l. 25.
etc. be the destruction of the Command of true Religion, that the murderer
shall surely be put to death, we must by the obligation that lies upon us from
the Solemn League and Covenant, cut off the Kings head for the Preservation of
true Religion.

Answ. 1. Here you come in with your Ifs and Ands, begging the question, taking
that for granted which was still denied; say not if the saving of the Kings
person being a murderer, be the destruction of the Command of true Religion,
but prove that he was a murderer, and that the saving of His person would be a
destruction to true Religion; a convincing Argument would stand you in more
stead then a confident assertion of the one, or a naked supposition of the
other.

2. I would demand of you, whether the saving of David's person, who killed
Vriah the Hittite; and of Saul's, who slew 85 of the Priests of the Lord; and of
Manassehs, who made the streets of Jerusalem run down with blood, were a
destruction of the Commands of true Religion? if you say it was, are not you a
very charitable man to stigmatize the children of Israel, that they destroyed
the Command of Religion, that the land was defiled with blood, and that to many
generations, for not executing all their Kings who had spilt blood; if you say
no, give me one cogent reason why many of the wicked and bloody Kings of Israel
(as well as the good) should live, and yet our late King dye.

3. You are the first (and I hope will be the last) that ever I could hear of,
that pleaded an obligation by the Covenant to cut off the Kings head for the
preservation of true Religion: unless to preserve his person, can be
interpreted to cut off his head, I am sure the Covenant lays upon you no such
obligation; was the Kings person, and Religions preservation so inconsistent,
that you must needs destroy the one to preserve the other? were there no veins
to be opened to let out malignant blood from any part of the body, but must you
cut off the head? could no person be found but the King alone to expiate the
guilt of blood? I remember indeed you say in p. 23. that the cutting off the
Kings head was the most acceptable and fattest sacrifice unto justice, that
ever was offered in this Kingdom. I do verily believe it was so fat a
sacrifice that it will overturn your stomachs, it may be something else too.

4. I grant it is the Command of God that a murderer should be put to death; yet
is there a great difference to be put between one that kills another
maliciously, and between a multitude who shed blood only in a Military way in a
time of Civil war; as for instance, Judge. 20.
in the bloody war betwixt Judah and Benjamin; though the men of Judah (who had
the best cause) lost 40000 men in two battails, yet upon a third attempt when
God gave them the day over the Tribe of Benjamin; though they do slay them in
the pursuit and heat of the battle (which was lawful) and smote 25000 of the
children of Benjamin; yet when the war was ended, and a full and final victory
gotten by the men of Judah; they did not bring the residue of the children of
Benjamin to a judicial Trial, nor executed them, though they slew of the men
of Judah 40000; but the sword having determined the controversy in the field on
their side, by a very full and final conquest, the remaining part of the
children of Benjamin were invited by their conquerors to an amicable
reconcilement and Treaty; as appears Judge. 21. 13. The whole Congregation sent
some to speak to the children of Benjamin, that were in the rock Rimmon, and to
call peaceably unto them, or as it is in the margin, to proclaim peace to them;
yea it is said that the people (even those that slew them) repented them for
Benjamin, because the Lord had made a breach in the Tribes of Israel. c. 21. v.
15. now had that Law taken place in all Military expeditions, they had been
bound not to have suffered one of the children of Benjamin to live who was
engaged in the war against them, especially considering that they had spilt so
much blood, no less then 40000 men slain by the Benjamites. I could produce
many instances in scripture of the like nature; but this may suffice, I shall
only mention that the Army was not in time past so high flown, as to put no
difference between shedding blood maliciously, and in a Military way, else how
could they say, that tender, equitable and moderate dealing both toward His
Majesty and Royal family, See a Letter from Sir Tho. Fairfax to both Houses of
Parliament Dated from Redding, July, 6. 1647. which he declared to be the
general sense of all or most part of the Officer in the Army.
and late party, so far as may stand with the safety of the Kingdom, and
security to our Common rights and liberties, is the most hopeful course to
take away the seeds of War, or future seeds among us for Posterity, and to
procure a lasting peace, and a government in this distracted nation. The Army
you see became Petitioners for the King and His party, yet believed them to be
guilty of blood; if they had believed that the Law of God had reached them they
should have petitioned that all might dye, not that any might live: I am sure
you will say the King and His party were murderers, if so, why would you cut
off the King, yet spare His Party? when they in your esteem are guilty of blood
as well as He? does your Religion teach you to punish the King and spare the
Subjects? Now in regard I shall meet with but little or no further occasion in
the following part of your book, to con^ute that bloody practice you pleaded
for; viz. the putting the King to death, I shall therefore before I leave this
subject give you these 6 scripturall advertisements, if it may be, to reclaim
you from your King-killing doctrine.

1. That there is no President in all the scripture, that the Sanhedrin of the
Jews, or Rulers of Israel did ever judicially arraign and put to death any of
the Kings of Judah or Israel, though many of them were most gross Idolaters,
and tyrannous Princes, who shed much innocent blood, and oppressed the people
sundry ways. It Is true indeed, some of the idolatrous Kings of Israel were
slain by private conspiracies, and popular tumults in an illegal way, but none
were ever arraigned, condemned or executed by their Sanhedrins, or general
Assemblies. So that in putting the K to death, you have done that for which you
have no Scripture president. 2.
2. The servants of God in scripture did hold it lawful to take up defensive
arms to withstand the rage and tyranny of their Kings, yet did not count it
lawful to destroy the persons of their Kings; thus David did by force of Arms
defend himself against the raging and tyrannical invasion of Saul, by
possessing many strong holds and fortified places, 1 Samuel 24. 6, 7. 13.
yet thought it not lawful to kill him; God forbid (said David) that I should
do this thing to my master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against
him, 1 Samuel 26. 8, 9.
etc. -- and said he to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his
hand against him, and be guiltless. If many circumstances had been considered,
David had much to plead why he should take away the life of Saul, (more I am
sure then you had to take away the life of our late King) for 1. Saul was in
actual pursuance of David for his life, 1 Samuel 23. 26. 2. God had before this
declared that he repented that he had made Saul King, 1 Samuel 15. 11. 3. God had
rejected Saul from being King over Israel, 1 Samuel 15. 26. 4. Saul had lost his
governing abilities, the spirit of government was departed from Him, 1 Samuel 16.
14. 5. He was guilty of much innocent blood; He slew 85 Priests of the Lord;
and put to the sword, both men, women, children and sucklings in the City of
Nob, 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19. 6. He was earnestly urged to kill Saul by the men that
were about him, 1 Samuel 24. 4. and 1 Samuel 26. 9, 10. 7. Saul was the only man
that stood between him and his actual possession of a Kingdom, yet all these
considerations did not take with David; he was still of this mind that none
could stretch forth their hands against him, 1 Samuel 26. 10, 11.
and be guiltless; His day (said David) shall come to dye, or he shall descend
into hattail, and perish, the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand
against him, etc. Another scripturall instance that I may give you (to name no
more) you may find in 1 Samuel 14. 45. When Saul would have put Jonathan to
death, the people rose up and rescued Jonathan out of the hands of Saul, that
he dyed not, yet none of them attempted to lay violent hands on Saul himself.
I shall conclude this advertisement with a good observation Mr. Prynne has,
Mr. Prynnes third part of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, p.
95.
That we may forcibly resist and repulse with safe Conscience, th^se whom we
may not wilfully slay, etc. -- The King may not with safe Conscience be
wittingly slain by His Subjects; but that therefore He and His Cavaliers may
not be forcibly resisted for their own defense, is a gross inconsequent, etc.

3. To spill the blood of any (especially Royal blood) merely out of a
Political design, is in the account of God murder (not justice) although the
men may deserve to be put to death. The scripture affords a pregnant proof of
this, the Lord commanded Iehu to smite the house of Ahab, 2 King. 9. 7.
to avenge the blood of his servants the Prophets; 2 Kings 10. 6.
according to the command of the Lord, Iehu caused 70 of the sons of Ahab to be
slain by the Rulers of Iezreel; God commends him for doing this, the Lord said
unto Jehu, because thou have done well in executing that which is right in mine
eyes, and have done unto the House of Ahab, according to all that was in my
heart, thy children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.
Yet for all this, because Iehu had a Political design in smiting the House of
Ahab, viz. the emolument and establishment of his Kingdom, not a conscientious
respect to the command of God, Hosea 1. 4.
therefore the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Hosea says, that He will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the House of Jehu. That is, the blood of Ahabs
70 sons which was shed by the Rulers of Iezreel at Iehu's command: I wish those
who had a chief hand in putting the King to death, would consider whether a
Political design, rather then a conscientious respect to justice, was not a
chief motive engaging them to that horrid attempt.

4. Most of those men in scripture who spilt the blood of their Kings (although
wicked) did not dye a natural death, but came to an untimely end. It Is said in
2 King. 21. 23. that the servants of Ammon conspired against Him, 2 Kings 21.
23, 24.
and slew the King in His own House; then it is said in the very next verse, the
people of the Land slew all them that had conspired against King Ammon. Again
Elah King of Israel was slain by Zimri a Captain of his chariots, 1 Kings 16.
8, 9.
as he was in Tirzah drinking himself drunk, it is said Zimri went in and smote
him, and killed him; But what became of Zimri? Jezabel could ask, had Zimri
peace that slew his master? 2 King. 9. 31. No, he had not, for when 'twas told
in the camp of Israel, that Zimri had conspired and also slain the King; 1
Kings 16. 16.
upon this the Army of Israel fell into a mutiny, made Omri King, and came
against Zimri, 1 Kings 16. 18.
who for fear was driven to run into the palace of the Kings house, put the
house on fire about his ears, and was there burnt to ashes, that was the end
that Zimri came to: Another King that was killed by his own Subjects was
Iehoash King of Judah; 2 Kings 12. 19, 20, 21.
it is said, his servants arose and made a conspiracy, and slew Jehoash in the
House of Millo. But what became of these men that slew Iehoash? 2 Kings 14. 5.
it is said expressly 2 King. 14. 5. that as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in
the hand of Amaziah the son of Jehoash, that he slew his servants which had
slain the King his father. 2 Kings 15. 10. 14.
So likewise Shallum killed Zecharaiah King of Israel, but he himself was soon
afterward killed by Menahim the son of Gadi, as it is storied, 2 King. 15. 10,
14. Again Pekah the son of Remaliab killed Pekaiah King of Israel, and soon
after he himself was killed by Hoshea, as it is recorded 2 King. 15. 25. 30.
Many other instances might be alleged, if I should exactly look over the
Histories of the Kings of Israel; but these may suffice.

5. It Is to be observed, that Omri who did succeed Zimri (who came to so
untimely an end) was made King by the Soldiers or Army of Israel; and was he
better then the rest? no, he was rather worse, 1 King. 16. 25.
it is said expressly, that Omri wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, Micah.
6. 16.
and did worse then all that were before him. It is my wi^h that those Rulers
or Representatives, or call them what you will, who have the rule of the Kingdom
now in their hands, and have gotten it by the power of an Army, do not worse
then all the Kings that ever went before, that we feel not their little fingers
heavyer upon us then the Kings loins.

6. The children of Israel from Saul their first King, to Zedekiah the last
(which was about 480 years) were never under such intolerable oppression and
misery, 2 King. 16. 21.
as in the times of those Kings before mentioned, Mr. Arth. I ackson in his
pious and learned Annotations has a good observation; It seems (says he) the
people misliking the King the Soldiers chose this Ti^ni to be their K. between
whom there was continual war for three years and upwards, etc.
who were so put to death; such violent removalls of their Kings made such
strange alterations, and popular commotions in the Kingdom of Israel, that the
people had not peace or settlement, but lay under the miseries either of
oppression or Civil wars; thus it was after Zimri King of Israel was burnt in
the place of the Kings house; then Tibni and Omri had a contest about a
succession, or claim to the Kingdom; upon this it is said, the people of
Israel were divided into two parts, half to make Tibni King, another half
followed Omri to have him King, upon which a bloody war followed, for three
years and upward. It Is my prayer that a war might not follow in England as did
in Israel. This instance may suffice in stead of many, I. P. p. 38. l. 34.
I shall mention no more.

It seems these Ministers of Jesus Christ in London, I mean these subscribers
could aquiesce in such concessions from the King, etc. then a little after, the
Ministers of Jesus Christ in London, plead Covenant for the Parliaments
acquiescing in the concessions of the King at Newport, which (by the testimony
of the whole Ministry of Scotland) acquiesced in, would destroy both Religion
and Covenant.

Answ. 1. It Is no wonder that you who make so little conscience to maintain
errors, should make no more of speaking falsehood; and that not only against the
Ministers, but against the Parliament also; you say the Parliament did
acquiesce in the Kings concessions, which they did not; yea they did wholly
wave that question, Whether the Kings Answers to the Propositions of both
Houses were satisfactory? and like men of wisdom, honor and conscience they
voted only this; That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of both
Houses, are a ground for the House to proceed upon for the settlement of the
peace of the Kingdom.

2. The Ministers did not plead Covenant for the Parliaments acquiescing in the
Kings concessions, (I am sure their Representation and Vindication has no such
intimation in them) the Ministers did hope and believe the Parliament would
have demanded more, and the King yielded to more for the good of the Kingdom.

3. The Ministers of the Church of Scotland, did not say, that the Parliament
did, or would acquiesce in the Kings concessions as satisfactory, but only they
gave a timely caution, that if they should be acquiesced in, it would be
dangerous and destructive to Religion and Covenant.

Look back into your former course of life, I. P. pa. 40. l. 16.
and call to mind how many oaths and subscriptions you have made from time to
time, over and over, etc. And how have you directly for sworn your selves
against the light and sense of your own judgment and conscience? have we not
cause to judge better of many of the Prelaticall party? who being men of
learning and conscience, and never so violent against their opposers in Church
and State as your selves, etc.

Answ. 1. Is it not more then enough for you to accuse the Reverend and godly
Ministers of falsity, vainglory, malignity, but must you now lay Perjury to
their charge also?

2. Suppose any of them (I am sure all did not) did swear or subscribe to the
Church Government by Bishops, and to the book of Common Prayer, (for it is of
that you speak) and should now renounce them, yet 1. I thought that you would
account it a badg of their glory, and not asperse them with the stain of
Perjury for thus doing. 2. Was it agreeable to the Law of love, or rules of
Christianity, to say that so many godly and conscientious Ministers did
forswear themselves against the light and sense of their own judgments and
consciences in so doing? 3. Although the Ministers did subscribe to Bishops and
the book of Common prayer, yet cannot they justly be accused of Perjury, though
they did afterward swear to extirpate them, because Bishops (and
Common Prayer) were settled not by a Divine but merely a Political institution
in this Kingdom; the same power that established them, might either for a while
suspend, or totally abolish them without the least show of Perjury: I suppose
when you were made free you took an oath to maintain the Privileges and
Charter of the City; if that Power that made that Charter think fit to abolish
or alter it, you will not think your self under the guilt of Perjury, for
subscribing to another Charter somewhat different from the former. 4. If the
subscribers have forsworn themselves, then I am sure John Goodwin and the rest
of your Independent Teachers (if Ministers) are as deeply guilty of Perjury as
they are; the one subscribed to no more then what the others did.

3. Whereas you declare, that you have cause to judge better of the Prelaticall
party, who are men of learning and conscience, and never so violent against
their opposers in Church and State as the Ministers. To this I have 2 things to
say, 1. This malicious and malignant language of yours, shows you to be a
follower of Pragmaticus or Aulicus, rather then a disciple of Anticavalierism^.
2. It seems, the Prelatical party are in your esteem men of learning and
conscience, John Price his Snapsack. p. 8.
but the Presbyterian party are men of neither; you say in p. 2. All the godly,
learned and conscientious Ministers are for defensive arms, and few there are
of the contrary judgment, but Papists, Atheists, Prelates, Delinquents, and
profane wretches.
they want Ministerial abilities, and here in page 40. that they forswore
themselves against conscience, etc. and if so, you account them to be men
neither of learning or conscience. I am sure you were once of another mind,
when you reckoned the Prelaticall party among Papists, Atheists, Delinquents
and profane wretches, and the Ministers to be learned, godly, and
conscientious, etc. O quantum mutatus ab illo! Surely you are not the man that
you were. Would one think that you should be the man to cry up the Prelaticall
Clergy, and cry down the godly Ministry; to publish those unto the world to be
men of peace, but these to be violent disturbers both of Church and State? do
not you justify the wicked, and condemn the innocent, both which are an
abomination to God: Alas! what wrong have the Ministers done? what violence to
any have they ever offered? it may be you who will not be ruled by the golden
red of Presbytery, may have your neck under the iron y^ke of Episcopacy, and
then you will feel who will be most violent against their opposers, whether the
Prelaticall party, or the godly Ministry.

The truth is, I. P. p. 41. ^ 24.
(i. e. the Army) have spread the sweet savor of Religion abroad throughout
this Kingdom, more then thousands of those who style themselves Ministers of
the Gospel, etc.

Answ. The truth is, the stink of the camp, both for their practices and
opinions, is come up into the nostrills of the Lord of hosts as an abhorring to
him as for their practices, disobeying the Parliaments commands, disputing
their authority, imprisoning many of their persons; using the sword for the
destruction of the person of the King, and privileges of Parliament, which was
put into their hands for the preservation of both; such practices as these,
with many others, have no sweet savor of religion in them. And for their
opinions, are there not among them multitudes who deny the mystery of the
Trinity, the Divinity of Christ, the Authority of the Scriptures, the
Immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, and such like; and is
this to spread the sweet savor of Religion throughout the Kingdom? If the Jews
were banished out of England for poisoning our fountains and springs of water,
what do such men as these deserve, who labor to poison the pure fountains of
the Scriptures? Many are of opinion, they have done more hurt by their errors,
then good by their swords. Yet are not you ashamed to say, they have spread the
savor of Religion abroad, more then thousands of the Ministers of the Gospel.
To conclude, I shall ^ay but this, that many who when they came first into the
Army had sweet and savory affections, whose gifts are now withered, and are but
as stinking snuffs; As it was a Proverb in Queen Elizabeth's time, If you would
spoil a Preacher make a Bishop of him; so it will become a Proverb in our time,
If you will spoil a Professor of Religion, make a Soldier or an Armyman of
him, he will then soon turn heady, Heretical, and what not?

Many of your own party being more moderate, meek and considerate then your
selves, I. P. pa. 42. l. 5.
have declined you and are ashamed of you, etc.

Answ. I know no moderate, meek and considerate men who have declined them:
indeed some rash, passionate, inconsiderate men have done to them, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
as D^mas did to Paul, forsaken them to embrace this present evil world, they
could not get followers and advantage enough in being the Disciples of the
Truth, and therefore would be Masters of an error to draw disciples after them,
that so many might follow their pernicious ways and it is no wonder if such as
have declined and are ashamed of the Truth, are ashamed also of the Ministers
that preach it.

Why may not they (i.e. the Army) conclude from successes as well as you, I. P.
p. 44. l. ^2. p. 45, 46.
etc. -- 2. Though successes are not always infallible testimonies of the
goodness of the cause on which side they fall, yet successes with their
circumstances, do sometimes most evidently vindicate the mind of God. As 1.
when both parties appeal solemnly to God, etc. 2. When th^se succ^sses are
carried on in an uniform manner, the Lord giving several years success upon
their appeals unto him. 3. When the glorious Majesty, power and presence of God
does appeal after such appeals, when he shall with a small Army of 16000 men
destroy near an 100000 men in Arms, as if the Scots Army, the Welsh Army, the
Kentish Army, the Essex Army, were considered, it would appear. This is the sum
of what you say about the point of success in three pages.

Answ. 1. The Ministers did never conclude successes to be the infallible
testimonies of the goodness of the Cause, on which side they fall; they know
that oftentimes they that work wickedness are set up, Mal. 3. 15.
and they that tempt God are delivered; yea that a just man may perish in his
righteousness, Eccl. 7. 15.
and that a wicked man may prolong his life in his wickedness.

2. In this the Papists and you are not much unlike, they make Prosperity a
note of the true Church, and you make Success an evidence of a good cause; if
it were so, the Heathen Emperors might plead their Cause to be good, and the
primitive Christians to be bad; yea the Turk and the Pope might borrow an
Argument from you that their ways are good, because they have prospered, and
the Church of God have been persecuted and kept under by them.

3. You think that you have a shift that will help you out, by saying, that
successes with their circumstances, as praying, and solemn appealing unto God
vindicates the mind of God. To this evasion of yours, I shall say but this,
Success may not always fall to that side (though just) which does pray and
appeal to God, but on that side which is unjust, and does neither. As is clear
in the case of the men of Judah, Judge. 20. 18. 23.
they sought unto God, and asked Counsel of God before they would fight with
the children of Benjamin, yet for all that they lost in two battails 40000 men;
yet their cause was good, their prayers and appeals to heaven were solemn and
serious.

4. Consider God may give the Army successes not out of any love or approbation
of their ways; but out of love to his own name and people, whose work for some
time they were employed about. Cyrus was successful against the Chaldaeans;
these successes were given him not for his own sake, but for the sakes of the
children of Israel; God may use the Army as a battle axe, to break the enemies
of his Church in pieces, and yet neither love their persons, nor own many of
their actions, but break them in the end. Dionysius did ill to say, because he
had a prosperous voyage at sea, that therefore the Gods did favor Sacrilege;
God neither favors nor loves Rebellion, though they may prosper that are
guilty of it. If you do build so much on successes, yet make not present but
final success the ground of your confidence; if the Army persist to justify
their sinful actings, mark what will become of them in the latter end. He
conclude this with the wish of the Poets.

-- Careat successihus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
That impulse of spirit, I. P. pa. 49. l. 8.
and those impressions of heart, that stirred up Jehoiadah the Priest to raise
up several parties, to put Queen Athaliah to death, for her cruelty and
murders, did stir up the Army, Parliament, and Court of Justice, to put the
late bloody Tyrant to death, and we may expect rest and peace as the issue
thereof.

Answ. 1. Had the Army as good grounds to put to death King Charles, as
Jehoiadah had to kill Queen Athaliah, I should not open my mouth. Consider 1.
Athalia^ was an usurper of the Crown of Israel, Read 2 Kings 11. 2. 12, etc.
but so was not King Charles of the Crown of England. 2. What Jehoiada did do
was by Authority derived from the young King Joash, who was proclaimed and
crowned King by the consent of the whole realm. 3. Iehoiada was not only a
Prince of his Tribe, and the young Kings uncle, but also he was as it were
Lord Protector of the young King, during his minority; and therefore might
without question legally put that usurper to death. Prove the King to be such
an usurper as Athaliah was; or the High-Court and Army to have such an
authority as Iehoiada had, and I Will be silent.

1. If she had had a true and legal Title to the Crown, as the King had. 2. If
he had solemnly swore to God to preserve her person, as you did to preserve the
Kings. 3. If she had been no Idolater, as the King was not. 4. If he had not
authority from the young King for doing what he did, would he have done it? no
doubtless.

2. I shall pass that by, that you put the Army before the Parliament, and only
speak to that impulse of spirit, that stirred up the Army and Court of Justice
to put the King to death; I shall yield that they did by an impulse of spirit,
but yet I have reason to believe 'twas by the impulse of that spirit that now
works mightily in the children of disobedience, because 'twas done without and
against the rule of the Word (as I showed before) by which as the spirit, so
all the impulses of the spirit are to be tried, and if they agree not thereto
they are Satanicall suggestions, not the Spirits inspirations.

3. And whereas you expect that the issue of putting the King to death will be
rest and peace; I must tell you the blood of Kings has been oftentimes the
seeds of dissentions, commotions, and desolations, not of rest, peace and
establishment unto Kingdoms; as I told you before, so I say again, that the
children of Israel from Saul their first King, to Zedekiah their last, were
never under such intolerable oppressions and miseries as in those times wherein
their Kings (though wicked and bloody) were put to death by their Subjects.

That the murderer shall surely be put to death, I. P. p. 50. l. 1.
is a known Precept of God, if this must be dispensed withal, show us the
absolute, present, and clear necessity of it; if you cannot, will you speak
wickedly for God, etc. As for the Armies prrceedings, if there was a necessity
that the Land should be cleansed from blood-guiltynesse, that the great ends of
the Covenant, and all our wars should be secured, etc. then was there a
necessity on the Army to take that course they did.

Answ. 1. I may answer you by way of Retortion, that the murderer should be put
to death, is a known Precept; that Goring and Owen had murdered many, was a
known practice; for their pardon there is a known Vote; now if they were
innocent, why were they condemned? if guilty of blood, why were they spared?
can you despence with blood and none else?

2. Though murdering of one personally and maliciously cannot be dispensed
withal; yet God never required that all who in a military way shed blood
should be put to death; as is clear in the case of Absolons Rebellion, and the
Benjamites unjust war (with many others) neither David, nor the men of Judah,
(when the sword had determined the controversy in the field on their sides, and
had cut off many of the evil doers) held themselves bound to cut off the
remainders that was left of the Armies either in the one or the other. If you
think that this Precept (viz. that the murderer be put to death) reaches to all
blood spilt in a military way, then are you bound that every man that was in
the Kings Armies should be put to death, else (according to you) the land
would be defiled with blood.

3. To what you say in the last place, that there was a necessity on the Army
to take that course they did, if there was a necessity that the Land should he
cleansed from blood, etc. I shall return this brief answer. 1. The Army
pleaded a necessity in the year, 1647. for things of a quite contrary nature,
to what they pleaded a necessity for in Nov. 1648. 2. Who are the most
competent judges, the Parliament or the Army, to judge of this necessity? if
you say the Parliament, they saw no such necessity, why did not the army then
acquiesce in their judgments as they once promised to do? If you say the Army
may be judges (which is most inequitable for them to be judges in their own
Cause) then why may not any other 20000 men in the Kingdom plead necessity to
oppose the Army, as they did to oppose the Parliament? should any party, (whose
principles are not consistent with, but contrariant to the Armies proceedings)
plead a necessity for their appearing for the interest of Religion, laws of the
land, Privileges of the Parliament, and Liberties of the People, etc. how can
you justify the Army, yet blame them? 3. If the necessity pleaded for, was so
clear, present, and absolute as you pretend; how it comes to pass that it can
be discerned by none but by the Army themselves and their own party? This makes
me of the same mind with the subscribers, that the necessity pleaded for is but
pretended, or else contracted by their own miscarriages; the Army that
prevailed against the sharpest weapons of their enemies, were overcome by this
own poor dart of pretended necessity; true is that Proverb, durum telum
necessitas; could the Army have overcome their groundless fears and
jealousies, they would never have done what they did; yea could they have
trusted God, they wonld have been of Austins mind, (Ferenda est magis omnis
iniquitas quam perpeiranda est aliqua iniquitas) viz. to endure the greatest
evil, rather then commit the least sin.

If your Temple work goes on slowly, I. P. p. 55 l. 8.
then the City is set on work, the Country is excited, the Apprentices
encouraged to offer violence upon the two Houses, forcing them to Vote and
Vnvote at pleasure, and encouraged by some of your Tribe and subscribers, as
shall be made good if occasion be.

Answ. 1. It will turn to your reproach that you are builders of Babel, but to
their renown, that they are employed about Temple work, which though it go on
slowly, yet safely, you have no cause to despise the day of small things; he
that has laid the foundation stone, will rear up the top of the building, that
all the people may cry Grace grace unto it.

2. And whereas you say, that they had excited men to offer violence to the two
Houses, forcing them to Vote and Vnvote, etc. I answer, you measure other men's
corn by your own Bushel, and other men's hearts by your own practices, you and
your faction have offered violence to the two Houses, forcing them to Vote and
Unvote at your pleasure, and yet you do the evil and other men must bear the
blame.

3. As to that you say, that it shall be made good if occasion be, that some
of the subscribers did encourage the Apprentices to offer violence to the
Houses, I shall give you but this answer, viz. to give you a challenge and
offer you an occasion to make it good if you can; that you have not done it all
this while, I impute not to your lenity but their innocence.

And thus I have returned you an answer to the most material passages in your
book; I shall not meddle with those fond Queries you propose in the latter end
thereof; I know one fool can ask more questions in a day, then twenty wise men
can answer in a year.

You conclude your book with a profane descant on a serious and savoury Sermon
of Mr. Calamies; you who were once, when you wrote your Snapsack, so humble as
to say you were neither a Prophet nor the son of a Prophet, are now so proud as
to become a Lord and judge of the Prophets? yet those that know you will count
your tongue to be no slander; Mr. Calamies person is so well esteemed, and his
Ministry so approved, that all your revilings will turn to his glory, and your
shame: Mr. Calamy only affirmed that Anarchy, Perjury, Toleration, etc. are
such deeps able to sink a Kingdom, if you say the contrary, you will show your
self a simple and shallow fellow. To conclude all, the counsel I shall give
you is this, that you would be more in the shop, less in the pulpit, more in
your dwelling house, less in the Printing House, then will the Church be less
disturbed and your family better provided for.

FINIS.

