LONDONS OUTCRY TO HER Sister-Cities of England.
REmarke (dear Sisters of this noble Isle)
My dismal Tragaedie: perhaps awhile
You safe may be, so long as my supply
Can be extorted by the Soldiery;
Whilst that their wolvish hands, like Lycanthrops,
Our houses plundered have, and robbed our shopps,
Despoyl'd our Churches, and defiled our Wives,
Murdered our Servants, and enthralled our lives;
But when they ruined have us and undone,
Expect your dreadful Visitation.
What Safety can we look for from such, where
The Lion, Tygre, Panther, Wolf, and Bear,
(With such like beasts of prey) sit in Committee,
Whose Salvage Natures have no sense of pity?
When fierce Lycaon is Dictator; when
Blood-sucking Nero, Commodus, or then
When damned Apostatizing Julian reign,
When Hell's broke loose, and all the Devils streyn
For the Supremacy, and who should be
The Whitest Devil by Hypocrisy.
When all our Lawful Princes banished are,
When a blind Cobbler (for a bulk) the Chayr
Of State usurp's; when Grooms and Porters take
The Regal Sword, and Plead for Conscience sake;
When nothing but Rebellion can be said,
Or beggary the Tutors of their trade.
When Church and State in sad Confusion lie,
When nothing perk's up but cropp't Anarchie.
There is no Safety by the Hills or Field,
Our fruitful Meads nothing but danger yield,
Our Pastures, Gardins, Walks, Streets, Lanes, Highways
With Theives and Robbers Plagued are, like those days,
When Jeremie his Lamentations wrote,
And Sions Music tuned a mournful Note.
Our Senators no more than Stators are,
Rendered most vile and base: the Speakers Chayr,
Which for five Centuries has had renown,
Is made the Scorn of every Red-coat Clown.
The Glory of our head is fallen, and
Our headless members like dumb Statues stand.
The Basilick (of all the veins the chief)
Being Contus'd, obstructed, stopps in brief
The Faculty and Energy of the parts,
Contracts a Lethargy or worse on hearts,
So that the Bodies stupefied, do lie
Senseless, halfe-dead, or at the point to die.
As it is in Naturalls so is our case,
The lawful Magistrate, 'should stand in place,
As the sole Vital of the State, by force
Is now suppressed, and thereby all the course
And Rules of Policy and Law subverted,
Justice exiled, and Rapes of right asserted,
Murder and Theft, and what is most condemned,
By the Law of God, (which more and more's Blasphemed)
Is by our Vult'rous Crew, and Vip'rous Brood
Maintained to be the principle of good:
As if the seeds of Empire best are sown
In blood, and that when no man knows his own,
And all things in the most distraction are,
Then should the only Cure be for despair,
And order nearest to return again:
As when Chyrurgeons launcing of a vein,
Repel the virulence of Fevers, and
When Contraries bring best Effects to hand.
But may such sonns of blood like Cyrus, be
Drenched ore in blood, and never live to see
The Blessing of a second part of days,
And may their memory no greater praise
Have, than what Cataline's Conspiracy
Obtein'd has in the Roman History.
May such Subvertors of all right and reason
Receive the due rewards of Hell-bred treason.
May (like their Crimes) their names detested be,
And wither like good Jonah's short-lived tree:
May such as will runn through stich, as they say,
In Mischief have at last in full their pay.
He that would have my Famous Seat consumed
In flames, and his Bituminous scent perfumed,
With the Oblation of my Childrens Bones,
And all my Glory made an heap of Stones,
May he tormented be with greater skill
Alive, and then in Hell receive his fill,
By all Artifices the Devils can
Invent to torture such a Julian.
Let Horror and Despair (like Nero,) seize
Such, and their own Swords give um a release,
By their own hands, that Gods revenge may be
More Glorified in their iniquity;
And may his Gracious providence defend
Me and my Children, from Old Rome's sad End.
FINIS.

