A Clear and Necessary VINDICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES and PRACTICES OF ME
CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Since my Trial before, and Condemnation by, the High Court
of Justice, WHEREBY It is manifested, That a close Prison, a long Sword, a High
Court, and a bloody Scaffold, have not in the least altered my judgment.

WHEREAS ALSO The Cruelty of the Sentence, the Insufficiency of the Proofs, and
My own Innocence, are demonstrated. AS ALSO My Grounds and Reasons of giving in
a Narrative, and the Lawfulness of the Matter and Titles of My Petitions
(though to Usurpers) manifested and maintained.

TOGETHER WITH A Declaration of My judgment concerning Cromwells unlawful
Invasion of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Written by Me CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Master of Arts, Minister of Lawrence Jury,
London; Penned by Me the eighth of August, fourteen days before My death.

Jeremiah 26. 14, 15. As for Me, behold I am in your hands, do with Me as
seems good and meet unto you, but know ye for certain, that if ye put Me to
death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this
City, and upon the Inhabitants thereof, etc.

LONDON Printed in the (...)

To the Reverend Fathers and Brethren, the Ministers in and about the City of
London, Subscribers of the Petitions for my Reprieve and ^ardon.
Reverend Sirs,
IT is no little comfort to me, that when Men cast me out of the world, that
God does not cast me out of your hearts, (which would have been more bitter
than death unto me) How much am I bound to bless God, and thank you, that you
should intercede should not dye, when so many Sons of Violence think me not
worthy to live? Though your mediation for my life should not succeed, yet
herein I should rejoice, if your meeting together lay a foundation of love and
union among your selves, though not of advantage unto me. It has been no
little grief of heart to me to consider, that whiles the Prelates contend^d for
Uniformity, thinking to have the Coat of Christ without rent, and the
Separatists for Purity, thinking to have it without spot, by their contentions
they have left the Church this Coat of Christ full of both. I know it is your
work and wisdom to labor for the things that make for Peace in the Churches
of the Saints. As for a State-peace, or State-union, that is more proper for
Statesmen; I should not desire to live to that day, to see the Ministers of
London unite upon a State interest to maintain the present Power; this were to
say a confederacy with them that say a confederacy; this were rather a
Combination, than a Union. All that I shall say touching the men in present
Power, They have gotten Power into their hands by policy, exercise it by
cruelty, and they will lose it with ignominy. As it was said of Boniface, he
entered the Popedom like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, but dyed like a Dog:
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, as you have not bin ashamed of my chain, so, I
beseech you, wax more confident by my bonds, and be much more bold to Preach
the Word without fear. God has not promised to preserve this or that kind of
Government in the States and Kingdoms of this World, but he has promised to
preserve a Ministry in his Church, and lo he will be with you to the end of
the World. I have no more to say, but to take my last farewell of you all, for
I am ready to be offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand; I see men
thirst after my blood, though you long after my life, oh! that my blood could
soder the differences, and my dead body fill up the breaches that are among the
Godly, that they might walk together in Truth and Love, in the Fellowship of
the Gospel; This is the prayer of

Your dying, yet comforted Servant,
From the Tower of London, Aug. 11. 1651.
I May say as Austin did, though a good Conscience be sufficient for my self,
yet a good name is necessary for others; a good name is as precious ointment,
yet there will not be wanting many flying reports to corrupt it; many are the
obloquies and reproaches which by the Sons of slander are cast upon me, they
would feign have my name to be buried and rot above ground, before my friends
can bury my body under it, yet herein is my comfort, there will be a
resurrection of names as well as of bodies at the last day; I am assured that
God will not only wipe off all tears from mine eyes, but all reproaches from my
name also; I am, as says the Apostle, counted a Deceiver, yet True; as an
Apostate, yet firm to my first principles.

There are two things at which offense is taken, first my Petitioning for my
life to the Parliament (so called;) secondly, my giving in a Narrative of the
whole matter; to both which I shall give full satisfaction. About my
Petitioning, a double offense is taken, first at the titles of my Petitions;
secondly at the matter of them. I shall speak briefly to both, to take away any
stumbling block out of the way of any. Touching the Titles of my four Petitions
they run in this form.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

Although I am far from going about to justify their right to this Title to
whom I give it, yet I shall justify the lawfulness of my practice in giving
them this Title which they assume to themselves, especially in a case of life
as mine is: for in trivial matters I had rather lose my own right which
belongs to me, than give them this Title which belongs not to them.

The reasons which sway with me why I gave them this Title (though I am not
satisfied they have a right to it) are these.

1. They would not receive my Petitions without giving them their assumed
Titles; yea to my knowledge they have rejected Petitions which have not had
these Titles.

2. I am upon sure and clear grounds persuaded, that giving to men Titles they
assume to themselves, is not a real owning that they have a right to those
Titles. Titular and real are usually distinguished; by giving them the Title
of Supreme Authority, and Parliament, I do acknowledge them a Titular
Authority, and a Titular Parliament, but by engaging to them (which I have
never done, and I hope shall never do) I do acknowledge them a real Authority,
and a real Parliament: that I may further evince the truth of this second
reason, viz. that giving of Titles to men they assume to themselves, is not a
real owning that they have a real right to those Titles, I shall give sundry
instances in Scripture to make it good; 2 Samuel 16. and 16*
Hushai did call Absalom, that notorious Usurper, King, saying, God save the
King, God save the King, (an expression the People gave him) yet Hushai knew
that David only was (even then) the Lawful King of Israel set over him by God,
and Absalom only an intruder, and made King by the tumults of the People, yea
David himself did bid Hushai call Absalom (that Usurper) King. 2 Samuel 15. 34.
Say to Absalom, I will be thy servant O King. Yea further David himself did
call Absalom King, 2 Samuel 15. 19. David said to Hushai, return to thy place,
and abide with the King (that is with Absalom) yet he knew himself to be the
lawful King, and did not acknowledge that his Son Absalom had any right to
the Kingdom, though he did give him the Title of a King. So Athaliahs Usurping
is called by the Spirit of God reigning, yet the spirit of God ownes not her
right to reign, but approved of the killing of her, and the setting up Ieh^ash
the true and lawful heir in her room. 2. Kings (...) per to^u^.
Yea Christ himself called the Devil the Prince of this World, John 12. 13.
and 16. and 11. yet is it imaginable that Christ thought this Title of right
belonged to the Devil? certainly no, Musculus on John 12. 31. well observes,
non est i^le (viz. Satan) Princeps mundi legitimus, sed per rapinam. Paul
called the Devils Principalities and power, Ephesians. 6. 12. yet none will be so
shameless as to say, that Paul thought this their Rule, Dominion, and power,
of right belonged to them, but is merely usurped and intruded into. See Annot.
on the Bible on Ephesians. 6. 12.

3. Titles are not always approbative, but distinctive; my meaning is, that
giving of Titles to persons or things argues not ones approving of a just right
to those Titles, but seems merely to distinguish those persons or things from
others that are called by other names or Titles; as I call them at Whitehall a
Council of State, to distinguish them from a Council of War, I call those
at Westminster the Parliament of the Commonwealth, to distinguish them from
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.

4. Titles are giving to things or persons sometimes merely by allusion, not
approbation, as in Scripture phrase sin is said to reign, and the Devils are
said to rule, not that either the one or the other has an approved right to
rule over man, as a lawful Prince has to rule over his Subjects, but they are
said to reign or rule by way of allusion to the reign of Princes in their
Dominions.

5. Titles may be given without sin to persons or things, though of right they
belong not to them, where they are generally received or mentioned by such
titles by the people where I live. About names and titles much indulgence is to
be given to the common usages and customs of the people; I may call things or
persons by such names or titles as I know belongs not of right unto them,
because they are ordinarily known, and generally received by such names and
titles. I could give manifold instances out of Scripture to prove this; David
called Abs^lom King, not that he thought him so of right, but because he was
commonly known and generally received by that title among the people. So Herod
was called by the Evangelist King of the Jews, so did the Jews generally call
him by that title, yet none but that sect or sort of people called the
Herodians did own it as Herod's right to be the King of the Jews, who were so
called because they pleaded for Herod to be the lawful King of the Jews, which
the Pharisees and others withstood, because he was not one of the Jewish Nation,
as he ought to be. Deuteronomy 17. 15. Yet all the Jews called Herod King, though they
did not acknowledge him to be their lawful King; it is manifest giving of titles
are but titular acknowledgments and no more.

6. If names may without sin be given to places and things (which belong not to
them) I see no reason why they may not be given to persons. There are names and
titles given to many places both upon superstitious and idolatrous grounds, yet
may without sin be used (I speak not of the first imposers) when those places
are so called and commonly known by such names. Luke that writ the Acts of the
Apostles, calls a place in Athens, Mars-hill (as it was commonly called) and
this he might do without sin, though this name was originally imposed on that
place in honor of Mars, yet he calls the place as it was commonly called,
though called so upon an Idolatrous ground. Acts 17. 22. So for T^ings also we
may without sin call them by those names which others give them, though they
may deal superstitiously or sinfully in the first imposition of such names.
Thus Paul mentions a ship of Alexandria whose sign was Cast^r and Pollux,
names originally imposed by the Gentiles, upon an idolatrous ground, yet being
generally received, Paul calls the ship after this name.

7. It was a matter of absolute necessity (as to my life) for me to Petition
them, I being condemned to dye; it is true for a trivial, or ordinary occasion I
should never Petition them, but in an extraordinary case I might lawfully do
it; David in a case of extreme necessity did eat the Shewbread, which in an
ordinary case he might not do. It Is true indeed, Cato would not Petition Caesar
for his life, he had rather dye than Petition, but that I conceive was rather
out of some animosity or height of Spirit, or petty discontent, than out of a
rectified judgment; for my part I am fully satisfied that I have not sinned in
giving them their assumed Titles; Names and Titles do not determine rights,
convenient rebus nemina saepe suis, it is true sometimes, but not always:

8. Titles men assume to themselves, or are generally given by others, may be
given them by me without sin, or without owning a right to those titles; this I
may make appear by sundry late instances; Henry the eighth had this title given
him, Defender of the faith, yet he had no right to this title; for he defended
only the Popish Religion; he opposed the Faith rather than defended the Faith,
and the true reason why the Pope gave him this title Defender of the Faith, was
because he opposed the Doctrine of Luther, and wrote against him; yet none
scrupled to call him and the succeeding Kings of England the Defenders of the
Faith. So the King of Spain is called the Catholic King, yet he has no true
right to this title, for he is not a Catholic or universal Monarch, yet our
new State have lately sent to the King of Spain under this title, The
Catholic King; so the King of France is called the most Christian King; so the
Duke of Bavaria having by arms ejected the Palsgrave writes himself Prince
Elector Palatine of the Rhine, so the King of Poland takes this title to
himself King of Sweden, yet has no right to that Kingdom; yet none that ever
I heard of scrupled to give these titles to them, considering that titles do
not determine rights, and considering also, that no addresses to them will be
received by them, unless the titles they assume to themselves be given them by
those who make applications to them.

Having thus spoken to justify the lawfulness of the titles of my Petitions,
I come now to justify the matter of my Petitions. Before I speak to the matter
of my Petitions positively, I shall in a word declare negatively what was not
the matter of my Petitions, as,

1. I did not promise to act any thing for the promoting and maintaining this
present Government, that had been equivalent to taking the engagement.

2. I did not promise to join with the present power to oppose the Scottish
Army though I was often solicited to it.

3. I did not declare that for which I was condemned was a sin against God, I
am of the sam^ mind I was when at the High Court after I had my sentence, I
said, Though they Condemned me, yet God and my own Conscience did not Condemn
me, they Condemned me for Treason, yet my Conscience did not tell me that it
was a sin against God which they counted Treason.

I confessed it was a transgression of their Laws, but no transgression of any
command of God. In my first Petition I have these words, That I lay my mouth in
the dust, that there may be hope that the Lord will pardon his manifold
iniquities, and that your Honors will pass by his offenses contrary to your
Laws. In my second Petition I have these words, through unadvisednesse and
weakness he is fallen under your sad and heavy displeasure, and has offended
against the Laws of this Commonwealth. In my third there is no mention of
sin at all. In my fourth Petition there is this passage, The consideration
whereof melts the heart of your Petitioner, and makes him (after a more
narrow search of his heart and ways) more deeply sensible than ever of his
sin against God, and more sorrowful for his crimes and offenses against the
Parliament in his late and great miscarriages. In all which passages I have not
renounced the righteousness of the cause for which I suffer, nor acknowledged
the thing it self to be sinful, which I still maintain as justifiable, and
can say with the Apostle, Happy is he that condemns not himself in the thing
which he allows.

4. I did not in my Petition justify the acts upon which I was condemned to be
righteous; nor the Court to be legal: I do publicly protest against the
former to be most unrighteous, unmercifull, and severe Laws, as Draco's
written in blood; and have before the High Court protested against the latter,
that they were not a leagall Court of judicature to judge me for my life,
therefore I did earnestly plead it was my birthright to have a jury, my duty to
demand it, though their pleasure to deny it.

5. I did not absolutely justify the sentence of the High Court, I had rather
patiently undergo the sentence than absolutely to justify it; I must confess
through advice of Lawyers, and earnest solicitatious of friends, I did in my
last Petition, after a sort, and in some sense say the Sentence was just (in
what sense I shall by and by show) My words are these, He humbly acknowledges
he has so highly violated the Laws of the Commonwealth, as that thereby he
has rendered himself guilty of the sentence of death, justly past upon him by
the high Court of Justice. In which words, first, I do not justify their
Laws, nor, secondly, the Legality of the Court, thirdly, nor the sufficiency
of the testimony of the Witnesses; There did not any two Witnesses evidence any
one fact against me that was treason by their new Acts, and that some Members
of the High Court have confessed unto me.

Having spoken Negatively what was not the matter of my Petitions, I now come
to speak positively what was the matter of my Petitions, wherein I have said
or done nothing contrary to Conscience, or my former principles.

The matter of my Petitions contains three parts, first, the Narratory part,
secondly, the Promissory part, thirdly the Petitionary part; At the last none
can be offended, (unless such as thirsted after my blood) in that I did but
beg a grant of my life, that I might be rescued from going down into the
Grave. None can justly blame me for begging my life from any who have my life
in the power of their hands; I need not speak to that.

But the two former parts of my Petitions ( viz. the narratory and promissory
parts) require more to be spoken concerning them.

As touching the Narratory part, I shall begin with the first Petition, the
narratory part runs thus. Most humbly shows, Your Petitioner having received
the sentence of Death by the High Court of Justice, is preparing himself in all
humility, and serious submission to drink that bitter cup, the terror whereof,
though much abated through the pardoning mercies of God, in the blood of
sprinkling, yet your Petitioner, being brought down to the dust of Death,
desires to see the righteous Lord in this Sentence; acknowledging it to be just
with the the most High to cut him off, both in the midst of his days, and the
midst of his Ministry; but desires to be deeply humbled under the mighty hand
of God, lying low before the Lord and you, putting his mouth in the dust, that
there may be hope that the Lord will pardon his manifold Iniquities, and that
your Honors would pass by his offenses, done contrary to your Laws, which as
he formerly did, so still does confess renders him faulty, for which he is
unfeignedly sorry; your Petitioner goes not about to plead excuse, but with an
humble submission prostrates himself at your feet, acknowledging he has
offended against the acts of this Commonwealth, and thereby is fallen under
your sore displeasure, of which he is very deeply sensible and sorrowful also.

This is all the narratory part, which I hope offends no sober mind, nor
Christian ear, it offends some I have said no more, it offends none (I hope)
that I have said so much. I desire to give you a few things to observe out of
these words in my first Petition. 1. I said, I desire to see the righteous Lord
in this Sentence. I do acknowledge God to be righteous (what ever men are) in
all that is brought upon me, he is righteous should a worse Sentence than Death
pass upon me.

2. I do acknowledge it to be just with the most High to cut me off, both in
the midst of my days, and in the midst of my Ministry. I do not say it is
just with men, they shall answer for what they have done; but it is just with
God, he is just in men's injustice, and righteous in men's unrighteousness.

3. I say in my Petition, That I desire to be deeply humbled under the mighty
hand of God, lying low before the Lord and you, putting his mouth in the dust,
if there may be hope that God will pardon his manifold Iniquities, and your
Honors pass by his offense done contrary to your Laws, which as formerly did,
so I do still confess renders me faulty, for which I am unfeignedly sorry. In
which words I desire the Reader to observe I do only in the general beg
pardon for my manifold Iniquities, without restraining it to this particular
fact for which I am condemned. I am assured that what they count Sin is Duty,
and what they judge Treason is Loyalty. Secondly, when I beg their Honors to
pass by my offenses done contrary to their Laws, I do not intend it as if my
offending against their Laws made me a transgressor against Gods Laws; no they
are transgressors against Gods Law for making such Laws, not I for breaking
them. Thirdly, I used this passage [against your Lawes] on purpose to
distinguish their new Laws from the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this
Nation. Fourthly, when I say I am by their Laws rendered faulty, I do not, nor
never did intend it as to God, but if I respect their laws singly I am faulty
by them, for I confess I have broken them; yet as to God they are faulty in
making them, not I in breaking them. Fifthly, when I say I am unfeignedly sorry
that I have done it contrary to their Laws, My meaning is, because of the
penalty their Laws inflict, viz. Imprisonment and Death, for this I am sorry;
As for Gods Law I desire to grieve more for the offense than the Punishment,
but as for their Laws I am not bound to do so.

Fourthly, when I say I prostrate my self at your feet, acknowledging I have
offended against the Acts of this Commonwealth, and thereby am fallen under
your sore displeasure, of which I am very deeply sensible and sorrowful also,
I desire the Reader to observe, 1. I call their Laws the Acts of this
Commonwealth, to distinguish them from Acts of Parliament. 2. By these words
you may understand my intent in the foregoing Clause, where I said I was sorry
for my offenses done contrary to their Laws, these words explain those, that my
sorrow is that I have fallen under their sore displeasure (which I feel by
Imprisonment and sentence of death) rather than transgressing their Acts; I
have more cause of grief that their Laws are not abolished, than that they are
broken.

This is all I have to say about the narratory part of the first Petition, the
narratory of my second Petition is as follows:

Most humbly shows, That your Petitioner does with all thankfulness
acknowledge it a singular Providence of God, and special favor of the
Parliament, that a door of hope is yet open, and opportunity once more offered
to prostrate himself at your feet for a grant of his life, which if you
vouchsafe, he shall accept as an Act of great grace and mercy. It is no little
grief of heart to your Petitioner, that through unadvisednesse and weakness he
is fallen under your sad and heavy displeasure, and has offended against the
Laws of this Commonwealth, for which he is unfeignedly sorrowful; And now by
the sentence of the High Court (to which he submits with all Christian
meekness and humble acknowledgement of Gods ^and therein) is in inevitable and
suddon danger to lose his life, without your merciful interposition. And
whereas there is surmise of a plot continued against the peace and welfare of
this Commonwealth, he does protest in the presence of GOD, the searcher of all
hearts, that he knows of no plot or design against the present Government,
nor it privy in the least to any preparations or intendments toward any
intestine Insurrections, or foreign Invasions, or to any Correspondency now
held with any in, or of the Scottish Nation, or any other whatsoever. He is not
ignorant how much Malignants will triumph at his death, nor is he without
natural affections to his dear Wife and Children, nor without real^ desires of
life to do GOD and his Country service, which are powerful perswasives to
him to do what ever he can, without wounding his Conscience. In which words I
desire the Reader to take notice, 1. That by using the word Parliament, I do
not own them as a real, but as a titular Parliament. 2. When I mention
unadvisednesse and weakness, I understand it in the manner of management of
such a business, that is, was without that caution and care that became a
business of such a nature. It was my unadvisednesse and weakness, I confess,
that I ever met with such persons who were some of them so false, others so
fearful, most of them so undiscreeet, yea it was my unadvisednesse to meet
with so many of them. 3. When I say I am unfeignedly sorrowful, it is not
singly for offending against their Laws, but conjunctly, because I am fallen
under their sad and heavy displeasure, and offended against their Laws. This
explains a like clause in my first Petition, it implies I am sorrowful for the
penalty their Laws inflict ( viz. Imprisonment and Death) for therein I find
the sad effect of their heavy displeasure, so that my sorrow is rather that I
am a sufferer by their cruel Laws, than that I am a breaker of them; indeed as
to the Laws of God, and the unquestionable Laws of this Nation, a man ought to
be more sensible that he is a transgressor, than that he is a sufferer: But a
man is not bound to be so for transgressing their treasonable Laws. 4. Take
notice, I call their new Laws the Laws of this Commonwealth, to distinguish
them from the old Laws of this Kingdom, which I will keep, not only for Fear,
but for Conscience sake, but as for their Laws a man may forbear to break them,
out of Fear, or in Prudence, but not for Conscience sake. 5. When I speak to
the sentence of the Court, take notice I only say, That I submit to the
Sentence of the high Court with all Christian meekness, and humble
acknowledgment of Gods hand therein. Take notice I do here submit to the
sentence, not justify it; and I do acknowledge therein God to be righteous;
for he is righteous in the unrighteousness of men. I do acknowledge Gods hand
in this Sentence to be just, though man's hand to be cruel. As for other
passages in the narratory part there is nothing questionable, therefore I shall
speak no more to it.

The narratory part of my third Petition is as follows. Most humbly shows,
That whereas there are but a few hours between your Petitioner and Death, he is
humbly bold, before he breath out his Soul to God, to breath out his request to
the Parliament, by making his last address to you, humbly acknowledging he
has incurred your high displeasure, of which he is deeply sensible, and
violated the Laws of this Commonwealth, for which he is unfeignedly
sorrowful, and now also submits to the sentence of the High-Court. I desire
the Reader to observe, that this third Petition for the narratory part of it,
is but a repetition of what was in the two former Petitions, therefore what I
have said to the former, will suffice for this also.

The naratory part of my fourth Petition is as follows. Shows, That your
Petitioner does humbly adore the wonderful goodness of God, and most
thankfully acknowledge the great mercy of the Parliament, for so seasonable and
acceptable an Act of Grace, to such an offending Suppliant, that when there was
but a step between him and death, the number of his days being accomplished,
and he almost cut off from the Land of the living, then you mercifully
interposed, and gave him his life for a month longer, which was to him as a
Resurrection from the dead; the Consideration whereof, melts the heart of
your Petitioner, and makes him, after a more narrow search into his heart and
ways, more deeply sensible than ever of his sin against God, and more
sorrowful for his high crimes and offenses against the Parliament, in his late
and great miscarriages. He humbly acknowledges he has so highly violated the
Laws of this Commonwealth, as that thereby he has rendered himself guilty of
the sentence of death, justly past upon him by the High Court of Justice. He
does also herewith humbly offer to your Honors a free and full Narrative under
his hand of the whole design to the best of his remembrance, which he leaves
to your grave wisdoms and favorable interpretations. This would require a
more large vindication than the former. Wherefore I shall desire the Reader to
take notice of these following particulars.

1. I do in the same sense call them a Parliament in this Petition as I did in
the former; I know that the giving them the name Parliament (without engaging
to them) is but a titular, not a real acknowledgement, yea in the titles of my
Petitions I call them the Parliament of the Commonwealth, I do not call them
(nor do I believe them to be) the Kingdoms Parliament. I have observed the
name Parliament has bin three different ways applied: The Juncto of Oxford
was called a Parliament, but that was only the Kings Parliament: The Members
now sitting at Westminster are called a Parliament also, but they are the
Parliament of that Faction, who stand for the Government of a Commonwealth, in
opposition to the Kingdoms Government: The Lords and Commons assembled at
Westminster were called a Parliament, and they only were and are the Kingdoms
Parliament, to preserve whose Privileges the people of this Nation are under so
many Oaths and Covenants. I call them the Parliament of the Commonwealth, to
distinguish them from the Kingdoms Parliament.

2. In saying I am an offending Suppliant, my meaning is only that I have
offended them whose new Laws I confess I have broken.

3. In saying, the Consideration whereof (that is, that my life is given me for
a month longer, which is as a Resurrection from the dead) melts my heart I
do confess, sense of their kindness does more gain upon me than the fear
of death; what I writ to Mr. Scot, I still affirm, Their displeasure might have
broken my bo^es, but their mercy has broken my heart. I confess it has done
so: This favor has much won my heart toward them in love and thankfulness,
as they are Gentlemen (who had my life in their hands) but not so as to comply
with them in a State-interest, to promote and maintain their present Government.

4. In saying I am more deeply sensible, than ever, of my sin against God, I
bless God I am so, my Imprisonment, and the sentence of Death past upon me,
has made me to search more narrowly into my heart and ways, and caused me to
see my sinfulness, unserviceablenesse, and unprofitablenesse in the Lords
vineyard, for which he may justly cut me off as a withered branch, and lay me
aside as a useless vessel, wherein he will take no pleasure. It would be a
sottish stupidity in me, should not all these sharp and bitter afflictions make
me more sensible of my sin against God; nor dare I excuse my self to be withont
sin in my late actings, that is, in the manner of management thereof, being too
open and indiscreet, and too credulous of men; these, and other infirmities did
cleave to these actings, as there does failings cleave to the works of my
calling, and to all my duties, yet I have never thought the facts I have done
in their own nature to be sinful, but lawful. I cannot conceive it to be a
sin against God, to desire in my prayers to God as a private man, that there
might be an Agreement between the King and the Scots, upon the interest of
Religion, and terms of the Covenant, or to be present when Letters were read,
which were either sent from or to the honest Covenanting party in Scotland; nor
can I believe it to be a sin to move for money for the relief of Major General
Massey, (who had been so useful for, and isntrumental in the good of this
Nation) and that not for a military use (that was disclaimed by me) but namely
for a supply of his personal necessities. I know no sin in this, yet this is
all that was proved against me, for which I am condemned to dye.

5. When I say I am sorrowful for my high crimes and offenses against the
Parliament in my late and great miscarriages. I desire three things may be
taken notice of, 1. The reason why I call my late actings high Crimes and
offenses against the Parliament, because they were the very words of my Charge.
I was charged with High Treason, and other high Crimes and offenses. To the
first I still pleaded Not Guilty, the second I confessed before the High-Court,
that I was guilty of those things which their Laws counted high Crimes and
offenses, in concealing what my accusers had done. Secondly, I do in these
words mention the object of these high Crimes and offenses, not against God,
but against the Parliament (so called for distinctions sake) Thirdly, I call my
late actings great miscarriages (not sins) because I did miscarry as to the
manner of managemement, and as to the desired issue and event, that there might
be a healing of breaches, and composing of differences among the godly in both
the Nations.

6. In saying I have highly violated the Laws of this Commonwealth, I call
them thus to distinguish them from the old and fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom^, which I have not broken in any thing that I have done.

7. In saying I have by the high violation of their Laws rendered my self
guilty of the sentence of Death justly past upon me by the high Court of
Justice, I would be rightly understood in these words, that they might not be
wrested beyond, or contrary, to my intendment; that you may fully apprehend
what I aim at in this expression, I desire you would take notice of a few
particulars. 1. I do not say I am proved to be guilty of the sentence of death,
but I have rendered my self guilty, etc. that is, though they have not proved,
yet I confess it, I have done those things (contrary to their late Acts) which
are punishable with death by their cruel Laws; so that if the Reader mark my
words, I do not place my guiltiness of the sentence of death upon the things
proved against me, but upon the things done by me. And when I say The sentence
of death is justly past upon me by the High Court of Justice, I do not place
the justice of the sentence on the clearness or sufficiency of the proof, (for
there was no treasonable fact (as they call it) proved against me by two
Witnesses) but upon my violation of their Laws; that is, I had done those
things which are punishable (by their bloody Laws) with death; I did violate
their Laws, and upon my violation of their Laws, not upon the clearness of
the evidence, do I acknowledge the sentence of death to be justly past upon, by
their bloody and tyrannical Law;: for although eight Witnesses came in
against me, yet they were very deficient in their evidence, sometimes they
contradicted one another, they did not agree among themselves; sometimes a
Witness contradicted himself; none of the Witnesses proved, that ever I
received Letter, that ever I writ Letter, that ever I collected, gave or lent
one penny of money, yet I am condemned to dye; I confess I did write two
Letters, and did give a small sum of money, (not upon any Military account)
both which facts are adjudged Treason by their new Acts, in which regard I do
acknowledge the sentence of death is justly past upon me, that this was the
sense that I intended, many friends who were with me in the Tower can bear
Witness.

Thirdly, In a sense (though a rigid and forced sense) I must confess, the
sentence may be said to be just, for although there was no single personal
fact proved against me which made me guilty of Treason; yet my facts being
(they say) of a continued time, and complicated nature, I cannot deny, but upon
the whole matter, they have by rigid collections, and strained consequences,
hookt me within the general clause of the Act of August the second 1650. To
abett, countenance, or encourage the Scottish Nation, or the Forces adhering to
them, which is declared to be Treason. There was no Act but this could reach
me, and no particular clause in this Act but these general words of abetting,
countenancing, or encouraging the Scottish Nation, or the Forces adhering to
them, for which I was condemned. I do not deny but I might in a sort be brought
under some of these general words, if the Members of the High Court would put
a harsh and rigid interpretation (as they have done) upon what was proved
against me; they might have put a more candid and fair interpretation upon
what was proved against me; if they had not been led more by Interest than by
Conscience, they might have saved their Oaths and my life too; I believe some
of them said in their Consciences at least, we find no cause of death in this
man, but others mighty say, as the Jews to Pilate, you are no friends to
Caesar, you are no friends to the State, if you condemn not this man to dye.
Others of them happily may through blindness and partiality be so bound up in
their Consciences, as Herod was, that he must cut off John Baptist's head for
his Oath sake; so, forsooth, because they had sworn to execute justice upon
all that came before them, according to those Acts, they by forced inferences,
and tortured collections, bringing me under one clause of the Act of August 2.
1650. thought they were bound by their Oaths to condemn me, so to avoid the
appearance of perjury they commit murder, as Herod did in cutting off John
Baptist's head, pretending that he should break his Oath if John Baptist did
not lose his head.

Fourthly, Though I should grant the sentence to be just according to their
rigid inferences, and strained and forced collections, yet I do not by such (no
nor yet by any) acknowledgment of mine, absolutely justify the sentence. To
clear this in a few words, take notice, a sentence may be said to be just in a
twofold sense, or consideration. First, In an absolute sense. Secondly, In a
respective or relative sense and Consideration. F^rst, A sentence is then said
to be just in an absolute sense in the general, when for the substance of it,
it is such that no injustice can be charged upon, that is, when it has all
those requisites, and ingredients, that are required to, and are necessary for,
the making up such a sentence, and they are chiefly these three. First, That
the Law or Laws which are proceeded by, be for the matter and substance of
them consonant and agreeable, at least unto general rules of Scripture.
Secondly, That the Ministers of those Laws be such who are Lawfully designed
and deputed to the management and exercise of them. And thirdly, That in their
sentence they walk by, and proceed according to the substantial rules and
directions given them in those laws; and where these three things concur to
a sentence, it may be said to be just in an absolute consideration, and when it
misseth it in any of these, it cannot truly and rightly bear the domination of
such a sentence; now that the sentence past upon me, was a just sentence in
this absolute consideration, I have not, and I hope never shall, acknowledge.

But then secondly, A Sentence may be said to be just in a respective or
relative consideration; that is, as it has reference to, and respects those
Laws which are the rise and foundation of it: Now, though a Sentence should
miss it in the two first respects of a Sentence absolutely just, that is,
though the Laws proceeded by should be vicious for the matter of them, and the
Ministers of them Usurpers, that have no right nor title to the exercise,
either of those, or any other Laws, yet if their proceedings be such, as that
the Sentence being laid to the line, and weighed in the balance of those
Laws, shall be found in any sense (yea, though a strained and forced sense) to
be a sentence according to, and that holds proportion with those Laws, or any
other Clause or Clauses of them, in this sense, and so far, the Sentence may be
said to be just, just not simply and absolutely, but only in reference and
relation to those Laws.

And when I acknowledge the Sentence to be just, I understand it in this sense,
viz. according to their rigid and forced inferences from their unjust and
cruel Laws.

Object. If it be demanded, what was the reason that I refused formerly to
mention a word about the justice of the Sentence in any sense, yet afterward
do it?

Sol. I shall give you a brief and (I hope) satisfactory account to both parts
of this Question; I shall first give you the reasons why I formerly refused to
speak a word about the justice of the sentence, then give you reasons why I
did speak something to it in my last Petition.

The reasons why I formerly refused to mention a word (in my three first
Petitions) about the justice of the Sentence, are these.

1. Lest I should harden the hearts of my unjust Judges; they themselves
confessed mine was as intricate and dubitable, a Case as ever came before them,
to find by what Act, and by what Clause in that Act I was found guilty,
therefore they spent more time about my trial, than about any Man's since their
High-Court was established. I refused therefore to say that was Justice, which
God will say is Murder in the great day of their account, and which themselves
could hardly say was just, until by the subtle insinuations, and rigid
inferences and Collections of the Lawyers (of that Court) they hook't me within
the compass of those general words, To abett, countenance, or encourage.

2. Lest I should injure my Godly Brethren who should be afterward tried. The
most they proved against me by two Witnesses, was prefence at the hearing of
Letters read: Now I thought with my self, should I confess the Sentence just,
I should pre-judge my Brethren, and in effect, say the Sentence would be just
against them, as well as against me; upon this ground I refused to say the
Sentence was just; but this reason is of no force now, for all my Brethren in
the Tower, who were engaged in the same business, they have either confessed, or
intend to confess against themselves.

3. I could not be informed (upon discourse with diverse of the Members of the
High-Court) what personal fact of mine (proved against me) made me guilty of
Treason by any public Act of theirs, nor could I understand by any of them,
if they did proceed Secundum allegata, and probata, how they found me guilty of
Treason; all the refuge they had to run to, was this, That I was an abetter,
countenancer or encourager of the Scottish Nation, and forces adhering to them;
and upon that Clause they sentenced me. Now, when I saw some of my Judges could
give me no more satisfactory reasons of their Sentence, it made me the more to
doubt of the justice of the Sentence, even according to their own Laws; upon
these grounds I forbore to speak of the justice of the Sentence: in mentioning
the justice of the Sentence, I did not use lightness, or show fickleness, but
what I did it was upon solemn and serious advice and consideration.

The reasons why I did say the Sentence of Death was justly past upon me, are
these.

1. Because I knew I had done those things which their cruel Laws punish with
Death, as I did write a Letter to Massey, and gave a small sum of money to him,
both which are punished with death; yet they proved neither of these; so that I
place the justice of the Sentence, not upon the sufficiency of the proof, but
upon my violation of their bloody Laws.

2. I had not so much hopes, that saying in any sense the Sentence was just
would formerly so much advantage me as now I have, therefore would not give so
likely an offense for so unlikely and uncertain an advantage.

3. I considered with my self, that the Sentence of the Court (whether just or
unjust as to my acknowledgment) was but a nice controversy in Law, not a clear
Case of Conscience in Divinity. I did not refuse to say the Sentence was in any
sense just, as if I thought it were a sin in its own Nature to say that by
their Laws the Sentence was just, I never loaded my Conscience with that, but I
forbore it out of Christian prudence; I would not harden my Judges, nor ensnare
my Brethren.

4. The last reason why I did say the Sentence was just, is this, because my
Judges did upon the evidence bring me under these general and comprehensive
words, To abett, countenance, and encourage the Scottish Nation. These words are
of such a latitude, that they might bring me under them by forced inferences,
strained consequences, and rigid interpretations; so that in this sense ( this
rigid sense) the Sentence may be said to be just. Yet for all this that has
been said, my Judges have great cause to be troubled, as

1. For sitting in so arbitrary, illegal, and tyrannical a Court. 2. That
they judged me upon such incompetent, insufficient, and uncertain evidence. 3.
That they judged me to dye by such an Act, they indeed are to be judged as
Traitors who made the Act, not I who broke it. 4. For being such vassalls to
those who Commissionate them, most of them having offices, or places of profit
from the State, are in fee with the State, and for that very reason are not
competent persons to be judges of matters of Fact against any man's life; indeed
the Judges of the Land are only Judges of matters of Law, and may be in fee
with the State, may receive a yearly revenue, but the Jury who judge of matters
of Fact, ought not to be in fee with the State; therefore by Law the Prisoner
at the Bar, may lawfully except against 35 if he see just cause, either in
that, or any other regard. 5. They have great cause to be troubled, that when
they could not prove one Treasonable fact against me by their new Laws, either
that I ever writ Letter, or received or sent Letter, or gave one penny of
money, when, I say, they could prove neither of these against me, that they
judge me to dye upon such a quirk in the Act, and by such harsh interpretations
force my actings to come under those general words, abetting, countenancing
and encouraging, I am bold to say, that Treason was never made by such general
words, as abetting, countenancing and encouraging, in any State or Kingdom in
the world, but in ours by our Commonwealth-men; and some of my Judges have
confessed, there was never such general words found in any Law to make a man
guilty of Treason: Ignorant men talk of the Norman slavery, but there is no
such slavery in the world as this is, for a man to dye upon such words as
these; for ought I know speaking well of a Scotch man may be judged abetting,
and looking lovingly on a Scotch man may be judged conntenancing, and speaking
comfortably to a Scotch man may be judged encouraging; so that if a man speak
well of, or look lovingly on, or speak comfortably to any of the Scottish
Nation, he may, for ought I know, be brought under this unmercifull and cruel
Act as well as I. Though I am not the first sentenced to death by the flew
Acts, yet I am the first Man in England sentenced to dye by those general
words of abetting, countenancing and encouraging, which are not found in any
ancient Laws or Statutes, and which no Jury in England would have Condemned me
upon, as Lawyers have informed me. What will after-ages say of these
proceedings, but that this kind of justice is extremity of rigor, and that
there is a talent of unrighteousness to one dram of justice found in this
sentence? I am very confident, that after my head is off my shoulders, some of
my Judges will have terrif^ed and troubled Consciences, as Herod had after he
had cut off John Baptist's head, he thought he had seen John's Ghost, which was
nothing else but merely the reflections of his natural Conscience for his
cruel murder of that innocent man: And I hope and believe I shall have more
peace of Conscience in undergoing the sentence on a Block, than they will have
for inflicting the sentence when they come to lie upon their deathbeds. I pray
God lay not my blood to their charge.

This is all I have to say touching the Narratory part of my 4 Petitions. I
proceed now to justify the second part of my Petitions, which is the
Promissory part; as I have declared nothing that is sinful in the former, so I
have not promised any thing that is sinful in the latter. Before I shall
undretake to justify what I have promised, I shall premise a few particulars.
1. Had I been free, I should have promised them nothing, because I owe them
nothing. 2. I promise them only Negatives, which I may lawfully make to a
company of Highway robbers, if they will spare me life, when some of their
society would spill my blood. Now, that I might satisfy the world in what
promises I have made, I shall lay them down in order, as they are in my
Petitions.

In my first Petition I did only promise, That for the remainder of my days I
would lead a peac^able and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, and that
in my place and calling I would endeavor the peace and welfare of this
Commonwealth. The first part of this promise is my duty, as I am a Christian,
it was the Apostles prayer in 1 Timothy ^. 2. therefore ought to be my practice.
The second part of this promise is my duty as I am an Englishman, to endeavor
the peace and welfare of this Commonwealth. where by Commonwealth I understand
not this form of Government in opposition to a Kingdom, but by Commonwealth,
I understand the whole Body or Community of the people of this Nation, I shall
endeavor their peace and welfare as I am a native of this Nation.

In my second Petition I promised only this, To endeavor in my place and
Calling the composing of differences among the godly, and preserving spiritual
peace and love throughout the Churches of the Saints, as well as the civil
peace and welfare of this Commonwealth. And I further promised, neither to
plot, contrive, or design any thing to the hurt of the present Government,
and, if it be required, to put in further security for performance thereof. In
which words I promise four things.

1. In my place and calling to compose differences among the Godly. It would be
my sin to widen differences, it is my duty to compose them. I would have
Christ's Coat without rent, as well as without spot. I can truly say for the
breaches among the Godly I have had sad thoughts of heart, the grief of my
heart has been for the Division, and the desire of my soul, for an Union, and
closure of the differences that are amongst us. Oh that my body could make up
that breach, I would cast it in, or my blood soder the differences, I would let
it out with gladness, for the attainment of so desired an end.

2. To preserve spiritual peace and love throughout the Churches of the
Saints. It is my duty not only to endeavor to restore peace and love where it
is not, but to preserve it where it is.

3. To preserve the civil peace and welfare of this Commonwealth, which is
the same with that promise in the first Petition; by Commonwealth I
understand, not a form of Government, but the whole body, or Community of the
people of this Nation. I promise to seek their civil peace and Union. I am
bound to the two first as I am a Christian, and to the latter as I am an
Englishman.

4. Neither to plot, contrive, or design any thing to the hurt of the present
Government, and if it be required, to put in further security for the
performance of the same. In which promise I do not absolutely bind my self to
do nothing against this present Government, so as not to pray, or not to
preach against their Usurpations and Oppressions, but I do confine my promise
to Not plotting, contriving or designing the hurt of the present Government,
that is, that I shall not engage in any plot, contrivement or design against
them who are in present power, and this promise I had resolved to keep, had
they given me my life, though I might have opportunity and secrecy to carry on
such plot, contrivement, or design against them. Such a Negative promise as
this, in such a case of extremity as I am now in, I might lawfully make to a
company of Thieves, when they have their knife at my throat, or their swords at
my heart, I may lawfully promise to them, that I will neither plot, contrive,
nor design to hurt them, to way-lay them, and take them; I promise no more to
the present power, and this I should make good, and if I might not be believed,
I did offer security for the performance hereof; Yet were I at liberty, at my
free choice, I should not promise so much unto them, nor would I advise others
to engage themselves in the least unto them, yet it would not offend me, if any
man in the condition I am in did promise so much, if he would promise no more.

In my third Petition I promised and offered further security, neither to plot,
contrive or design the subversion of this present Government, accounting it as
a brand of the highest ingratitude to employ my life against you, if I shall by
an act of grace and favor receive a new life from you. In which words, I
beseech the Reader to observe, my promise is only Negative, I make no positive
promise to them of a concurrence with, or acting for this present Government;
this is the same promise in terminis with that in the second Petition, only
there is an additionall clause here, viz. That I account it as a brand of the
highest ingratitude, to employ my life against them, if I should by an Act of
grace and favor receive a new life from them. I do not say I shall employ my
life for them if I should receive my life from them, that I dare not do, yet I
will say I will not employ my life against them, and this promise I would have
kept, had they given me my life, as long as I had lived under their present
Government.

In my fourth petition I promised that I would neither plot, contrive or
design, any thing prejudicial to the present Government, but in my place and
calling oppose any Malignant designs whatsoever, (whether in this or the
neighbor Nations*) that may tend to the ruin of this Commonwealth. And a
while after I promised, never to employ that life against you, I shall receive
from you, but bold it my duty to lay out my life for the glory of God, the good
of his people, the peace and safety of this Commonwealth. I have promised four
things in this Petition, the lawfullnesse whereof (as the case stands) I shall
sufficiently evince.

First, I promised neither to plot, contrive, or design any thing prejudjciall
to the present Government. This is the same, in terminis, with what is promised
in my second and third Petitions. To vindicate which, I refer my Reader to what
I said there.

Secondly, I promised In my place and calling to oppose any Malignant designs
whatsoever (whether in this or the neighbor Nations) that may tend to the
ruin of this Commonwealth. In which words I desire the Reader to take notice.
First, That I hold my self still bound to oppose malignant designs as much as
ever I did, I still retain as great a dislike of a Malignant interest as ever.
Secondly, When I mention Malignant designs, I do not understand the honest
Scots undertakings, in preserving their King, Country, Religion and all against
the invaders, to be a Malignant design; far be it from me I should once
imagine it; but by Malignant designs, I mean such which the Covenant
expresses, the Covenant brandeth them for Malignants, Incendiaries, and evil
instruments, who divide the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from
another; they are the Malignants which I did oppose, and should oppose, who did
labor by Arms to force the two Houses of Parliament, this the Cavaleers would
have done but could not, but this the Army has done. Thirdly, I do not say I
shall oppose all designs that may tend to the ruin of the Government of the
Commonwealth, but that may tend to the ruin of the Commonwealth, that is, to
the ruin of the body of the people of this Nation.

Thirdly, I promised Never to implo^ that life against you I should receive
from you. This is the same, in termin^s, with that in my third Petition; could
they give me a thousand lives, I would not employ one for them, yet if they had
given me my life, I would not employ that life against them.

Fourthly, I promised To lay out my self for the glory of God, the good of his
people, the peace and safety of this Commonwealth. That is not the Government
of this Commonwealth, but of the Community or whole Body of the people; I
think there is none that will question the lawfullnesse of this promise.

Thus you have seen to a tittle both the Narratory and Promissory part of all
my Petitions, wherein I have declared, and promised, nothing that will
strengthen this Government, that does contradict my Principles, wound my
Conscience, or justly offend my Godly Brethren. I promise nothing in a way of
active concurrence or compliance with their State Government, neither to preach
or pray for them, fight or act for them in the least. Thus I have justified the
lawfullnesse of the titles of my Petitions, etc. Also of the matter of them,
both of the Narratory, Promissory, and Petitionary part of them. I now begin to
justify my practice, in giving in a Narrative of the whole transaction. This I
did not out of constraint, but voluntarily. In my Narrative offense is taken at
two things. First, That I accuse my self. Secondly, That I accuse others, yet
at first I did refuse to do either. To this I shall give a clear and
satisfactory answer, to justify what I have done. It is true, before I was
condemned to dye I deemed it against the Law of Nature to accuse my self, and
against the law of love to accuse my Brother, therefore then would do neither.
And I am still of this judgment, before a man sees his accusers face to face,
and is convicted, I would not have a man confess a word in a case of that
nature as mine is; but as the case stands with me, being a condemned man, I
conceive it is not against the Law of Nature to confess against my self, nor
against the Law of Love to confess against my Brethren, who are partakers with
me in this business; I shall begin with the first, viz. To prove the
lawfulness of my practice in giving in a Narrative of what I had done; This is
not forced from me, I offered this from the beginning (I mean since I was
condemned, I would not do it before) to let them know what I had done in this
whole business, but it would not be accepted unless I would name other men,
which I was then loath to do, but, upon further consideration, I afterward
inclined to it.

The Reasons which induced me to give in a Narrative of what I my self had done
(I being now a condemned man) are these.

First, As self justification can do me no good, so self accusation can do me
no hurt; before I was convicted I would not confess a word, that were to make
me guilty of mine own blood, if out of my own mouth they should condemn^ me;
then confession might have been a prejudice to me, but now it can be none.

Secondly, My acknowledgment may soften, and sweeten, the spirits of those
toward me, in whose hands my life is, remove many prejudices out of their
minds, that I am not obstinate or perverse, when they shall see me deal with
them with an ingenuous freedom, and opennesse of heart to them.

Thirdly, I do it to take off jealousies. out of the minds of them who are in
power, who surmise plots and designs carrying on against them, who suspect
there is not a full discovery of this business; upon this ground therefore I
shall discover what I well remember, and distinctly know in this business.

Fourthly, I am willing the world should know the worst I have done, therefore
I shall acknowledge, not only what is proved against me, but those things none
in the World could accuse me of, they are such things as I need not, I ought
not be ashamed of, viz. That I desired, as a private man, there might be an
agreement between the King and the Scots, upon the interest of Religion, and
terms of the Covenant; or that I relieved Massey with money, not upon any
Military account* but merely as a supply for his personal necessities, etc.
these are things I am not, I need not, be ashamed of.

Fifthly, If I should now conceal what I had do^^, the World would think
w^rse of it than it is, and worse of me than I am.

Sixthly, I intend upon the Scaffold to make an acknowledgment of what I have
done, and why may I not do it before? I need not, ought not, be ashamed to
justify what I have done, upon the Scaffold, I have done nothing either by the
Laws of God or of this Nation for which I ought to dve, although by their
bloody Laws, they have condemned me to dye. These are the reasons why I have
confessed against my self. I am now to give reasons why I have in my Narrative
confessed against other men, when before I did refuse to do it.

To this also I shall give a brief yet satisfactory account; it is true, before
I was condemned I would not accuse any man, because then my testimony happily
would be looked upon as valid in Law against them* so that in that case, I had
rather lay down my own life than be isntrumental in taking away the life of
another man. I might have had my own life given me for a prey, would I have
but informed against other men, and so devoted their lives for a sacrifice to
the bloody rage of men, but ^ still withstood it. I then was, and still am of
this principle, to judge it better to be a sufferer with the Brethren* than an
accuser of the Brethren, especially when my accusation may turn in the least
to their prejudice.

The reasons which swayed with me to name other men in my Narrative, are these.

1. Because my Testimony (being a condemned man) is not valid in Law, and so
can do them no harm, as to Estate or Life.

2. I do name those persons only, who are already discovered, and certainly
known to those in power; should I go about to vindicate them, I should do them
no good, and now I do nominate them. I can do them no hurt.

3. Most of the persons I have named, have given me their Consent that I should
name them; so that themselves being Judges, they thought I could do them no
injury.

4. Most of the persons I have named in my narrative, have of their own accords
confessed as much (if not more) than I have spoken concerning them; yea before
I have sent in my narrative (for I am one of the last, though my danger is the
greatest) they have sent in theirs, and confessed against themselves more than
I have mentioned in my narrative.

Thus I have spoken as briefly as the matter would permit, to justify the
Title and Matter of my Petitions, and the giving in of my Narrative; This I
do, because I would give no offense either to Jew, or Gentile, or the Church
of God.

There are other scandalous aspersions and slanderous reports cast upon me,
which I must endeavor to satisfy the world about. I have publicly made 3.
solemn and true Protestations, both on the first and last day of my appearing
before the High Court of Justice, the truth whereof I still stand to maintain;
it is bruited abroad, that both by the Testimony of the Witnesses, and by my
own Confession I have contradicted my own Protestations, which is most
notoriously false, I did therefore in the end of my Trial declare, that it was
my rejoicing, that though 8. Witnesses came in against me, yet none of them did
contradict or falsify my 3. Protestations; I had rather dye, than any should
make my glorying void, yea, I had much rather be made a Sufferer than a Liar.
In going about to vindicate my self in these particulars, I shall give you the
reason why I made these Protestations, because the Charge was so black and
foul against me, of corresponding with the King, Queen, Iermin, and Piercy, of
raising great sums of Money for the Scots to maintain a War against this
Nation, etc. To remove prejudices from the minds of my Judges, and of the
hearers then present, I did make these three Protestations, the truth whereof I
stand now to justify and seal with my blood.

1. The first Protestation I made before the High-Court was this; viz. That I
never writ any Letters either to the King of Scots, or the Queen his Mother, or
to the Church or State of Scotland, or to any particular person of the Scottish
Nation, since the beginning of the Wars between ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, to this
day.

This first Petition has not been falsified, either by the Testimony of my
accusers, or my own Confession. None of the 8. Witnesses did prove that I ever
writ a Letter, yet, I confess, I did write one to Massey in Scotland, and
another to Bamfield in Holland, yet my Protestation is not falsified, for they
are both of the English, not of the Scottish Nation; though I did write to
Massey who was in the Scottish Nation, yet is he not of the Scottish Nation; so
my Protestation holds true.

2. My second Protestation was this, That I never received any Letters writ to
me, either from the King of Scotland, on the Queen his Mother, or the Church or
State of Scotland, in the general, or from any other particular person of the
Scottish Nation, from the beginning of the Wars between the two Nations to
this day.

This Protestation is true also, and has not been contradicted by my own
Confession, or any of the Witnesses, only Capt. Potter did swear, That he
received a Letter from Colonel Bamfield with a great L. on it, and that there
were enclosed Letters from 4 Scottish Lords and from Mr. Bailey a Scottish
Minister. He said in his Examinations: before the Committee of the Council of
State, That he conceived the Letter from Bamfield was writ to me; but before
the High-Court, being on his Oath, he could not say so; nay, he said he thought
it was not writ to me; nor can I imagine why Colonel Bamfield should write to
me, for I had never heard from him, or writ to him before; nor did I ever see
his face. But if Bomfields Letter with a great L. written on it, had been writ
to me, yet my Protestation is not contradicted, for Bamfield is an English man,
not a Scotch man: Now my Proteftation was, That I received no Letters writ to
me from any of the Scottish Nation, since the Wars began. Moreover, the Letters
from the 4 Scotch Lords, and Mr. Bailey the Scotch Minister (which were enclosed
in Bamfields Letter) had not a great L. written on them, as Bamfields Letter
had, and were not writ to me; and had those Letters from the Scotch Lords, and
the Scotch Minister been written to me (which they were not) yet my
Protestation is not falsified, for Captain Potter received them, opened them,
read them, before he showed them to me, he kept them and carried them away, as
was confessed in open Court, but I did neither, nor did I write an Answer to
those Letters from the Scotch Lords, or the Scotch Minister; indeed I did write
to Bamfield in Holland, but he is of the English, not of the Scottish Nation: so
my Protestation not contradicted.

My third Protestation was this, That I never collected, gave, or lent ^ne
penny of money to send into Scotland, or any foreign parts, either to the King,
Queen, Church* or State of Scotland, or to any particular persons of the
Scottish Nation, since the beginning of the Wars unto this day. As to these
three particulars I have said it, and do say it again, I am as innocent as my
harmless Child that is not 3 years old. This third Protestation is true also,
though I did send 5 l. to one Bamfi^ld in Holland, and 10 l. to Massey in
Scotland, for they are of the English, not of the Scottish Nation; Yea, though I
did give money to relieve poor Scotch men, prisoners, and others here in
London, yet this contradicts not my Protestation, for therein I said, I did not
give money to send into Scotland, or any other fo^eign parts, to any persons of
the Scottish Nation; but I did not say I did not give here in London to any
person of the Scottish Nation, I did relieve many of the poor Scotch prisoners
who were taken at Dunbar fight, and brought to Black-wall: Yet this does not
falsify my Protestation; though I did give money to poor Scotch men in London,
yet I sent none into Scotland to any Scotch person since the Wars began, to
this day.

When I first put pen to paper, I did not intend to look fo far back as the
Trial, but because the Trial is so misrepresented, and mis-reported in some
Books in Print, especially in that lying Book, called, The Plea for the
Commonwealth, and because many black and hideous things are laid to my Charge,
of which I am not guilty. Wherefore I shall do two things, 1. Lay down what
none of the 8. Witnesses did prove against me. 2. Give a brief Extract of what
they did prove against me, that so the World may be satisfied upon what I was
Condemned to dye.

None of the 8. Witnesses did prove in Court.

1. That I writ Letter to the King of Scots, or Queen, or Jermin, or Piercy, or
to any other persons in foreign parts, either in or of the Scottish Nation,
since the Wars began, to this day.

2. Or, that ever Letter was writ in my House, or in any place else where I was
present.

3. Or, that ever I directed, ordered or persuaded any others to write.

4. Or, that I did know of any person that did write Letters into Scotland, or
any foreign parts.

5. Or, that ever I sent, or gave my consent to the sending away of any Letters
into Scotland, or any foreign parts.

6. Or, that ever I received any Letter from Scotland, or any foreign parts.

7. Or, that I ordered any other person to receive Letters for me.

8. Or, that ever I did so much as read any Letter in my House, or any where
else, that did come from Scotland, or from foreign parts.

9. Or, that ever I collected, gave, or lent any money, either for the King of
Sc^ts, the Queen his Mother, the Church and State of Scotland in the general,
or for any particular persons, either in, or of the Scottish Nation, since the
beginning of the Wars to this day.

10. Or, that ever I invited any foreign Forces to invade either England or
Ireland.

11. Or, that I was, in the least, privy to, or accquainted with any
preparations or endeavors tending to the raising of intestine insurrections at
home, or joining with any foreign Invasions from abroad. None of these
particulars were proved against me, yet I was condemned to dye; which does
manifest to the world, that I I am put to death rather upon an interest of
State, than Principles of Conscience; rather to put a terror upon others, than
for the merits of the Facts I have don my self, yet my Oppressors slay me, and
hold themselves not guilty.

The most that was proved against me, was this, That I was present at meetings
in several Fasts, to beg a blessing on the Treaty between the King and the
Scots, that there might be an Agreement between them, upon the interest of
Religion, and terms of the Covenant; That I was several times present at my
House when Letters were read, that either were sent to, or received from
Scotland; That I moved for money for Massey and Titus (yet one of the Witnesses
swore that it was not upon a Military account) to maintain the War in Scotland,
but merely to relieve the personal necessities of Massey and Titus; That two
of the Witnesses brought Fifteen pound for Massey and Titus to my House, viz.
Potter brought Ten pound, and Far brought Five pound, but neither charged me
that I received it. Here I desire the Reader to take notice, that though 8.
Witnesses came in against me, yet no two of them did concur in their
Testimony to prove any one thing against me, unless that I was present at the
bearing of Letters read, which other men brought to my House. As for all other
things, though two Witnesses might sometimes speak ad idem, yet not to the
same thing, eodem tempore. It Is true, two swore that I moved for money, yet one
swore I did it in a meeting, the other swore I did it to him alone at another
time, But lest it should be thought I am too favorable in my own Cause, I have
here made an Extract, out of the Depositions of the Witnesses, that so you may
see the worst that is proved against me.

A brief Extract or Collection out of the Depositions of the Witnesses against
Master LOVE.
The first Witness was Captain Potter.

POtter swear, Potter the first Witness that came in against me.
he brought ten pounds to my house, which he intended for Masey and Titus, he
laid it down in my Parlour, 5. or 6. being present, but proved not that I saw
him, or bid him lay the money down, or that I received it, I can truly say I
did neither.

Potter swear he did receive Letters, one from Bamfield, another from four
Lords in Scotland, viz. Argile, Loudon, Lothian, and Bellcarris, and another
from Mr. Bailey, on the superscription was a great L. but said it was not to me,
but he said he showed them me, and some others at my house, and when he came in
he said, Mr. Love, I have nues to show you; in one of the Letters there was a
motion for ten thousand pound, but, said he, we all disliked that motion,
dissented from it, and resolved to send a Nagative Answer, yea he might have
said, that I was the man that dissuaded them from doing any thing in that
business.

Potter said, An Answer to those Letters was brought and left at his shop he
said he thought it came from me and Dr. Drake, but, God is my Witness, I
neither sent, carried, nor left, Letter at his shop in all my life.

Alford said, Alford the second Witness.
William Drake held a Correspondence with Scotland, but he knew no Ministers
that knew this.

He said, That after he came from Callis he brought to William Drake a
Narrative from Captain Titus of all his proceedings at Iersey, and how the
Cavaleers abused him, and also brought a Copy of a Letter from the King, he
said, this was read at my house.

He said, There was a Commission and instructions read at my house, a little
before the Treaty at Bredah, to Authorize the Lord Willoughby, Bunce, Massey,
Titus, Graves, to use their interest in the King, and in the Scots,
Commissioners to agree in their Treaty upon the terms of the Covenant.

I desire you to take notice, that this was the only meeting I was at about an
agree meant between the King and the Scots, and at this meeting I did declare
against the sending this Commission and instructions, as being an act of high
presumption, for private men to Commissionate, and an act of notorious falsehood
to say this was in the names of the Presbyterian party, when none knew of it
but those present, but it seems it was sent away by Alford without my knowledge
or consent; indeed Alford swear, that I was present, but could not say that 4
directed in it, yea he contradicted himself, in saying at one time the
Commission and Instructions were agreed upon, and at another time, that they
were read at my house but not agreed upon.

Alford said, After Dunbar fight, that there was a Letter which was said to
come from Massey, relating how many were lost, writ for Arms by the way of
Holland, he spoke also of his own and Titus necessities, being strangers in
Scotland, he said all waved the business for Arms, but a proposition was made
for supplying those Gentlemen's necessities, without reference to arms, or any
such thing, the sum was either 200, or 300. l. He said, that I did move for
the contribution of money, but mentioned no sum, nor could he say the money
was raised, I do verily believe the sum promised to Massey and Titus was
never gathered, nor sent unto them from England.

Huntington said, Huntington the 3d. Witness.
That in the heginning of March, 1649. he was at my House, where he heard a
Commission read by William Drake, written in Characters, to be sent to the Lord
Willoughby, Bunce, Massey, etc. and said that I should say, upon the hearing of
it read, Come, come, let it go, which in the presence of God I declare, is
notoriously false; yea another of the Witnesses said, that all the Company was
against sending it.

Bains could not testify a word concerning me.

Adams said, Baines the 4th. Witness. Major Adams the 5th. Witness.
he could not say Mr. Love had a hand in Letters sent to Scotland, or in
Letters of sending moderate Propositions to the King.

He said, that when Alford returned from Callis, he brought with him a
Narrative from Titus, and a Copy of a Letter from the King, but he could not
swear the Letter was read at Mr. Love's house. The Narrative from Titus, was to
give account how he was ill used by the Cavalier party.

He said there was a motion about a Commission and Instructions to be drawn up,
and sent, but by whom he could not say, he could not say it was agreed to be
sent, it was read in Mr. Love's study, and Mr. Love was there some part of the
time.

He said, the substance of the Instructions, was to use all Arguments they
could to move the King to give the Scots satisfaction, to take the Covenant,
but he could not say, that he heard Mr. Love say, Come, come, let it go.

Adams being asked, whether was there not a Letter, sent from Piercy for money
to be sent to the King, read at Mr. Love's house? he said, no certainly; he
said he saw such a Letter in Masons hand.

He being asked, whether about August 1650. a Letter was not sent from Massey
to some here, that he had back friends in Scotland; complaining, he could not
be promoted there, and whether was not this communicated at Mr Love's house? he
answered, no certainly.

And being demanded, whether Mr. Love was not named to draw up a Letter to be
sent to Scotland? he said, I was not named, but himself was, and some others.

He said, one Sterkes, whom be took to be a Scots Agent, met sometimes at Mr.
Love's house. I desire you to take notice, that this Sterkes was no Scots
Agent, he was not in Scotland for 12 years before, and he told me himself, that
he was no Agent.

He said, there were eight or ten meetings in Master Love's house, within two
years.

He said, when Massey's Letter was read Mr. Love was there, it did declare the
poverty of his Condition.

Being asked, whether Mr. Love did not write down the sums that each would
give to Massey, he said, that I had a Pen in my hand, did write something, but
he knew not what I did write, but particular men did write their sums, but he
could not say, that I writ either names or sums.

He said, at a meeting at my house, I being sometimes present, there was a
Letter read penned by Mr. Love and Dr. Drake, but being asked why he thought Mr.
Love penned it, he said, merely because of the language of it. This Letter was
declared to be sent to the Assembly of the Church of Scotland, and this was
after Dunbar fight. This Letter was read in my house, it is true, but never
written by me.

He mentions a Letter in the nature of a Declaration to be sent to Scotland,
penned either by Mr. Love or Dr. Drake, but I know nothing of this, I remember
no such thing, but afterward he said he had no ground to say Master Love
penned it.

He said, he conceived me to be a correspondent, but could not say that I was
so.

Iaquell said, Mr. Jaquell the 6th. Witness.
that the Narrative Alford brought from Titus at Callis was read in my House,
but could not say that the Copy of the Kings Letter was read there. He says,
that I was not in the room when he came in, and that I went out oftentimes.

He said, Potter received Letters from Bamfield, and the Marquess of Argyle,
and brought them to my house, and that Potter read the Letters, in one of the
Letters there was a motion for five thousand pounds, but it was refused by all,
none liking of that business.

He said, it was thought convenient the Messenger should have money, but could
not say that I agreed to give him any.

Colonel Barton swear nothing against me, Mr. B^rton the 7th, Witness Captain
Fa^ the 8th. Witness.
but only that I was at a Fast at his house, but could not tell whether I
exercised there or no.

Captain Far swear, that at the ending of the Treaty at Iersey, a Letter was
sent from Titus, to desire sombody to be sent to Callis, to take an account of
his Negotiations; said, this Letter was read in my Study, and that I was
present; and said, it was agreed Alford should go, being his Son was gone
from him. I desire the Reader to observe how Captain Far forswears himself,
and contradicts another man's testimony, for Alford swear, he was never at my
house till after he came from Callis, yet Far says, he was there before; that
he was desired at my house to go to Callis, yet Alford swears he was never at
my house till he returned from Callis.

Captain Far said, when Alford gave an account, at his return from Callis, i^
was at my house, but he could not say that I was present, but, he said, I was
absent sometimes.

He said, at a meeting at my house, William Drake read papers under the name of
Commission and Instructions, they were read in the company, but they were not
agreed upon, because private persons could not do such a thing as give
Commission, etc.

He conceived the Commission was in the name of the Presbyterian party, but
could not say so; he said William Drake undertook to draw up the Instructions,
but he could not say they were drawn up, or sent. He said, that those that were
named Commissioners, they were to advise but not to treat in the behalf of the
Presbyterian party.

After the fight at Dunbar, a Letter from Massey, to assist both with money and
arms, was read, but he said he came in late and did not hear it read; he could
not say positively such a Letter was read, but that I told him so, and that I
told him we could not do it.

He said, that I told him we had agreed to raise a sum of money for Massey
and Titus, either 250 li. or 300 li. He said that I asked him what he would do,
so he brought five pound and laid it upon my Table when several persons were
in the room; and being asked whether I was in the room, he said, yes, my Lord,
but he could not say any else was, so he contradicted himself; before he said
several persons were present, now, he said, he could not tell that any else but
my self was in the room; yea, he could not say that I received it, or see him
lay it down, or bid him lay it down; and further he says, he does but
conceive that the money was for Massey or Titus.

He could not say that I was privy to the Negotiation with Titus, nor that I
was present at the reading of the Copy of the Kings Letter, which Alford
brought from Callis, nor that I was present whilst that the Narrative was read.

He being asked, whether I did send Alford to Callis, or agree to the sending of
him? he answered that he thinks I did not.

He being asked, whether I gave my consent to the sending away of the
Commission? he answered, that he could not say that I was there when it was
sent away.

And being asked, whether I did not protest against it? he answered, that it was
agreed by all that the Commission should not be sent.

He being asked, whether he thought that I received the five pound he laid on my
table? he answered no, but he thought another did receive it, and named who.

Thus you have an extract of all the eight Witnesses have deposed without
extension or omission of any material passage in any man's Testimony. I wish
from my heart that all the Depositions, together with my Defense made in Court,
were truly published by an impartial hand, then I should be confident the
Reader would justify me, though the High Court have condemned me. Being now
upon the Testimony of the Witnesses I crave leave to insist a little larger
upon it than I at first intended, that I may manifest the more clearly, the
insufficiency, falsnesse, and contradictorinesse thereof; what the Evangelist
observes touching the accusers of Christ, I may without vanity say of mine,
that they did not agree among themselves, one Witness swear one thing, and
another swear the quite contrary, yea they did not only contradict ^ne another,
but sometimes contradict themselves, as I have made appear more fully in my
defense before the high Court. I did never see Witnesses more confounded than
they were* so that though their Testimony did condemn my person, yet I (nay
themselves) have condemned their own Testimony; So that may I say, without
vanity, that promise is made good, Isa. 54. 17. Every tongue that shall rise up
in judgment against thee thou shall condemn, this is the heritage of the
servants of the Lord. To evidence this to the world, I shall give you a brief,
and true relation, of sundry remarkable passages concerning the Witnesses,
either before, or in, or after, the Trial, which will, If not nullify, yet
invalidate and disparage their, Testimony, in the thoughts of judicious and
impartial men. I shall begin with the first Witness, which was Captain
Potter. I beseech you take notice, concerning him, of these particulars. First,
If ever his testimony be published, Captain Potter the first Witness*
he does rather justify than accuse me, he fastens nothing capital upon me;
yea, secondly he swears, he met at my house sometimes on a friendly, sometimes
on a Christian account, or to hear news, that was the worst he did swear about
the meeting at my house. Thirdly, He swore in Court, that till Master Prideaux
remembered him of some things out of the examinations of other men he could not
remember them, or speak to them, yet things done so long ago, and forgotten by
a man are counted to be sufficient proof against me. Fourthly, he was threatened
with death if he would not, and promised his life by Mr. Prideaux and Mr. Scot
if he would confess what he knew, and Witness against me. And because he did
not swear to every addition and agravation against me, put into his examination
(by Capt. Bishop Clerk of the Committee) which he discovered in Court, and
said, all was not his, therefore he is condemned to dye, and in great danger to
lose his life.

The second Witness was Major Alford, Major Alford the 2d. Witness.
he was in much trouble before he came in against me, he told his Sister, and
other Friends, they would put him to death, if he did not testify against me;
but now he sees me condemned, he is filled with shame, that he cannot walk the
streets, and with sorrow, that he can neither sleep, nor eat his bread with
comfort. Yea, Mr. Cranford coming once to visit him, did find him lying on his
bed in a dark room, in much disquiet of mind; he told Mr. Cranford, that
nothing did trouble him so much in all his life, as his witnessing against me,
and were it to do again, he would never do it, if he had ten lives to lose.
Mr. Cranford told me this, that he heard it from Alfords own mouth. I hear that
he is not well, but I believe I may say agrotat animo magis quam corpore, and
that he has great cause to be.

The third Witness was Major Huntington, Major Huntington he 3d. Witness,
a man whose face I never saw but once at my house, nor since, but at my
Trial: He is not only a dissembling fellow, but a most perjured wretch; he did
hardly swear one true word, as relating to things done at my house, yea, as to
me, he swear most falsely that I said of the Commission, Come, come, let it go,
which is a most notorious lie; yea, Captain Far, another of the Witnesses who
was then present, swear the quite contrary, that all the Company was against
the sending the Commission, and did allege the reason that I gave against it,
That private men had not power to Commissionate, etc.

The fourth Witness was Lieutenant Colonel Baines, Leiutenant Colonel Baines
the 4th. Witness.
that Arch-Apostate from his first Principles, he told the Court a long story,
but did not, could not say one word concerning me, so he went as wise as he
came.

The fifth Witness was Major Adams, who is a Monster among men, Major Adams
the 5th. VVitness,
and will be, I am persuaded, a monument of Misery to all that know him; I have
many things to say concerning him. First, He was a hired Witness against me;
one Major Cobbet (a pragmaticall fellow) was employed by Mr. Scot to subborne
this Major Adams, and did so, and to that end did give him 10 l. to that
purpose, I seeing him stand by me in the Court, did charge this Cobbet with it;
all the eva^ion he had was this, that he lent the 10. l. to Major Adams his
Wife, because he thought he was poor, yet I could have produced Witnesses in
Court (but the HighCourt would not permit it) to prove, that Adams had received
a vast sum of money from Mr. Scot, and from others by Mr. Scots appointment,
to betray me, and the rest of the Ministers and Citizens now in the Tower; so
that we may say of this Adams, as Nehemiah did of Shemaiah, that suborned
Prophet, Neh. 6. 12, 13. And so I perceived God had not sent him, for Tobiah
and Sanballat had hired him. And therefore was he hired, that they might have
matter for an evil report, that they might repr^ach me Peradventure, God may
fill him with such horror of Conscience, and consternation of mind before he
dies, that he may bring back the money, the price of my blood, to those Tabiahs
and Sanballets who hired him, as Judas did in trouble of Conscience bring back
the 30 pieces of Silver to the Priests and Pharisees, who did hire him to betray
Jesus Christ. Secondly, This Adams, would ordinarily come once or twice a week
to my house un-invited, on purpose, I now perceive, to ensnare me; he would be
very inquisitive after News from Scotland, and would be very free to offer me
money, and asking, whether I knew of no public use that required money? but,
as the Lord ordered it, I never received a penny from him. Thirdly, This
wretched Adams has been in pay with Mr. Scot above these 12 months, yet he
was not to discover himself, but to carry himself as formerly, that so he might
ensnare honest men with the less suspicion. This, this is the only man who
has accused 13. Godly Ministers, many worthy Citizens; all who are now in
trouble, were brought to Prison upon his single Information. I speak this upon
knowledge; for by a special providence I have gotten a copy of his
Informations he has given in to Mr. Scot: Yea, he has informed of every
private Fast that he himself was at, signified what persons were present, who
preached and prayed, and what they prayed about the State; he has accused many
of the secluded Members also. There has been such a continuance in, and
contexture of studied wickedness, and all under a high pretense of Profession,
that I think there is not such a Parallel in the whole world. Oh! I do wonder
how this wretch can sleep by night, or eat his bread by day, with any comfort,
who has bin the cause of 1^ Godly Ministers Imprisonment, and of the
withdrawing of others from their Families and Pulpits. Oh! I durst not lie
under this man's guilt for 10000 Worlds. Fourthl^, to cover all this
wickedness, they must accuse him of High Treason, clap him close Prisoner, yet
underhand they did maintain him there; yea, he did shed tears, and pretend
trouble, that he was forced to come in against me. He told Mistress Jackson in
the Poultrey, that he did not know whether he had not better choose to be
hanged, than to swear against me; yea, he took a cup of Wine or Beer (in the
presence of Mr. Spencer a Minister, and his Son, who lives in the Poultrey)
wishing it might be his poison, if either he had accused me, or would accuse
me. This Mr. Cranford told me he had from Mr. Spencer himself. All this was to
cover his wickedness, that he might not be suspected to be a hired or suborned
witness. And herein you may see the falsenesse and wretchedness of this man,
he that pretended trouble and sorrow before he did come in a Witness against
me, now discovers impudency, impenitency, and hardness of heart, after he has
maliciously sworn against me, to take away my life; the Lord open his eyes, and
touch his heart, that he may at length see, and bewail his great wickedness.

The sixth Witness was Mr. Jaquell. I dare not say he accused me out of
studied knavery, Mr. Jaquell the 6th. Witne^e.
as Adams did, but only out of base fear and Cowardice, to save his own life
he would cast away mine. Concerning Mr. Iaquell I shall mention but a few
particulars First. He did fully resolve, before he was taken into Custody,
neither to accuse himself, or any other; yet, through fear, did both. Secondly,
when he was brought in open Court to be a Witness against me, he did, for at
least half an hour, refuse to swear, or to be a Witness against me, yea, when
he came first in the Court, be said he was a close prisoner, accused of the
same crim^ that I was accused of, that he was not a competent Witness against
me, yea, he said oftentimes that he could not in Conscience be a Witness
against me; the Counsel for the Commonwealth, and the Court did still press
him to take his Oath against me, yet he did still refuse; he was fined 500 l.
and sent out of the Court; and immediately he was called into the Court again,
and urged to take his Oath, and threatened if he would not; they told him they
had fined him 500 l. for refusing to swear against me; upon this he was more
yielding to take his Oath, yet he did not take his Oath as any of the rest did,
but did only put up his hand by his buttons, and when I asked him, whether he
was under an Oath? he answered, that he was as good as under an Oath; at length
he did mutter out that he was under an Oath, but yet since I was condemned his
own wife came to me, told me how much her husband was troubled for what he had
done, and did assure me, that her husband told her, that he did not look upon
himself as under an Oath. Thirdly, when this poor man heard that I was
condemned to dye, then in the anguish of his Soul he did write me a Letter,
wherein, among other things, he did confess he had done me wrong, and desired
me to forgive him the wrong he had done me, and had this passage among the rest
in his Letter, which I have transcribed to a word. Surely (said he) in that day
that I shall hear of your life being violextly taken away, mine will be but a
little comfort to me, being an instrument in takin^ away of yours.

The seventh Witness was Colonel Barton. He had nothing to say against me,
Co^. ^arton the 7^^. Witness^ Captain F^^ the 9th. Wi^ness^.
but that I was once at his house at a Fast, of which I am not ashamed.

The eighth Witness was Captain Far. He was so astonished and confounded, that
he could not speak an entire sentence of himself; but only what he was prompt
by Mr. Prideaux. He was so struck with fear, that sometimes he spoke Nonsense,
otherwhile falshoo^^, and otherwhiles spoke manifest Contradictions to
himself: The poor man was so amazed, that he knew not what he said, or what he
d^d, but Mr. Attorney had his Examinations, which were taken in private, and
patcht together by Mr. Scot, and Captain ^ishop, and by the help of those
papers, Mr. Prideaux made a ^hift to rub up his slippery memory, and to help
his slow tongue; And Mr. Prideaux perceiving that Captain Far was likely to
mar his own evidence, had he been let alone to himself, therefore Mr.
Prideaux helps him at a dead lift, and puts to Captain Far no less than
fourscore and eighteen Questions, or leading Interrogatories a thing which I
think was never heard of before practiced, in any Court since William the
Conquerours days, until then* yet by the poor misled Members of the Court
this was well accepted of, though I did protest against it as a most illegal
practice. Now I am Condemned, I am informed, that this Captain Far is much
troubled to think of my death. Touching these 8 Accusers I will say but this,
they did prosecute my life, to preserve their own; I have done with them, I
pray God begin with them, to humble their hearts, and show them their sinne^,
that they may see, and fear, and do no more so wickedly; for my part I would
not change Conditions with them they are in a sinning, but I only in a
suffering Condition. I had rather be a Sufferer with the Brethren, than an
Accuser of the Brethren. I have more peace and quietness who am to dye, than
they will have who have bought their lives at so dear a rate, as with the price
of my blood.

Having spoken largely about my Witnesses, I shall mention but a word about the
partiality of my Judges. I think there was never such violent, indirect
procee^ings to take away the life of a Minister, since the Reign of Queen Mary,
to this day. They suffered the Examinations of the Witnesses, composed by Mr.
Scot and Captain Bishop, to be read in Court, which is contrary to Law and
Justice, and the Customs of all Courts. They commanded the Scaffolds to be put
up the first day, when my black and bloody Charge was read, and the Witnesses
produced in Court, but pulled down the Scaffolds when I made my Defence^, not
caring how many heard my Charge, nor how few heard me to clear my self. And
they gave me but from Saturday till Wednesday to make my Defense, although the
Depositions were to write out, which were 28 sheets of paper, which I was to
peruse and answer. Though they pulled down the Scaffolds when I made my
defense, yet they put them up again, when the Counsel for the Commonwealth
were to make their Reply to my Defense; All this was that I might lie under
more disadvantage in the judgment of the Spectators. Yea, such was the
partiality of the Court, that they refused to hear my Witnesses, when produced
them in Court. And after they had assigned me Counsel, they rejected two of
them, one of them could not be there, and the fourth, viz. Mr. Hales, was not
acquainted with my case, I never spoke with him until half an hour before the
Court sat, he never saw nor read the Depositions, yet they would not allow my
Counsel a days time to study my case, but he must plead then, ^x tem^ore, or
not at all. Oh extremity of Rigor! yea further, though I had a Notary to write
for me, yet have they taken away all the Books from him* so that nothing shall
come to the public view, but with what additions or alterations they please,
to my greater disadvantage; but my hope is, that some faithful Pen or other
h^th writ my Defense, and the Witnesses Depositions, and according to them let
my Innocence be judged by indifferent and unprejudicated men. But enough of
this.

I have but one thing more to do in this vindication of my person and
ministry, and that is to answer a grand objection which is brought against me,
viz. That all the blood of ^co^lana is charged upon me, and the rest of my
Brethren whom they call my Confederates. viz. 1. Give you something to observe
in the general. 2. Manifest that I have no hand in the War with our dear
Brethren of Scotland. 3. Lay down Arguments drawn from instances of Scripture,
clearness of reason, and interest of State to prove the unlawfulnes of the
E^glish Arm^'s invading of Scotland; then conclude with some Demonstrative
suggestions, what may be the intolerable mischiefs, sad corsequence, and
unexpressible calamities that may befall the Godly party in both Nations, if
the English Army prevail over our brethen of Scotland, to subdue and conquer
them.

1. Touching this Objection, I shall give you something to observe in general,
that is this, That these men do as N^ro did, set Rome on fire, and then charge
the Christians with it; so do these new Commonwealths men put two Kingdoms on
fire, blow the sparks of dissension into a flame, so causing a mighty
Combustion and Conflagration, yet charge it upon us, who pour out tears to
quench the burning which their lusts and ambition (who affect only earthly
domination and rule over their brethren) has kindled in the Neighbor Nation.
As the Gunpowder Traitors charged that plot of blowing up the Parliament (which
themselves only contrived) upon the Puritans, who were ever Friends, never
Enemies to Parliaments, till this Apostate Generation of men stood up; so do
these Traiterous Heretics lay lasting Seeds of Division between the two
Nations, invade Scotland, imbrue their hands in their Brethrens blood, slay
them with a rage reaching up to Heaven, spill their blood like water on the
ground, yet we must be charged with all this blood, who have had no hand in,
but a detestation of the Invasion of the Neighbor Nation; the Lord judge
bttween them and us.

What act have I done (my Enemies themselves being Judges) to make me guil^y of
the blood spilt in Scotland? Did I ever encourage Cromwell to invade Scotland?
or ever invite the Scottish Nation to invade England? let Cromwell and his
Confederates look to it, the blood of Scotland will cry in the ears of him who
is the avenger of blood, who has said, The Earth shall not cover the blood of
her slain; I may say as Elijah said to Ahab, It is thou, and thy Fathers house,
that has trouble Israel; so it is not I, but Cromwell, Vane, Bradshaw, and the
rest of that Crew, who have troubled Scotland. When God comes to make
Inquisition for blood, they will be charged with all the blood of Scotland.

If they will say, The King had not agreed with the Scots, had it not been for
me and my Confederates, and so by consequence I am guilty of all the blood shed
in Scotland. To this I say,

1. If I, by any strained consequence, should be found guilty of the blood of
Scotland, then Cromwell and his Army, who did actually and cruelly shed their
blood, are directly guilty of all the blood shed in Scotland.

2. By no kind of consequence can the guilt of Scotland's blood be charged on
me: I would fain know what act I have done, that has a remote tendency to the
sheding of blood in Scotland; Can I be said by Consequence to be guilty of the
blood of Scotland, only for praying the King may agree with the Scots upon the
interest of Religion, and terms of the Covenant? there is no more consequence
in this, than to say Tenterden Steeple is the cause of Goodwin Sands; nor no
more consequence, than in the Jesuits Argument, that because CHRIST did feed
the multitude with five Loaves and two Fishes; therefore there must be seven
Sacraments.

Thirdly, For my part I am a man of such an obscure station, that it was not
within my sphere to be able to do any thing to promote the Agreement between
the King and the Scots, otherwise than by my poor prayers. I was at no meeting
(as I remember) to promote that end (Fast only excepted) but one at my house,
at which time William Drake propounded this question, What we should do to
promote the Agreement between the King and the Scots at the Treaty at Bred^h?
he drew out some papers written in Characters, which he called, A Commission
and Instructions to several persons in Holland to use their I^terest to
fu^ther the Agreement between the King and the Scots. When I heard it, I
declared my self against it, as being an act of high presumption for private
persons to send Commi^^ion and Instructions, and an act of notorious falsehood
to say it was in the name of the Presbyterian party, when none knew thereof but
those present, that I know of; yea one of the Witnesses, viz. Captain Far,
swore that all the Company were against sending them. I know no more that I
have done to promote the Agreement, yet the blood of Scotland is charged upon
me. But suppose I had done a hundred times more than I did, to promote the
Agreement between the King and the Scots, upon the interest of Religion, and
terms of the Covenant, yet how can I be justly charged with all the blood of
Scotland, for desiring the King should agree with that Kingdom who had
proclaimed him King? What law of God, or of the Land, have I broken, if I had
done so? the Covenant counts them Malig^ants, Incendiaries, and evil
Instruments, that desire or endeavor the contrary, videlicet, Divide the King
from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another.

3. I say no more concerning this, I shall be more large in the 3d. viz. Lay
down some Arguments to prove the unlawfulness of the English Army's invading
Scotland. Yet I intend not to handle the case of Invasion, to show in what
cases only an Invasion of another Nation in a Hostile manner is lawful: I am
from all my books, that I cannot consult with Casuists in that point; all that
I shall do at present, is to give some Scripture instances, that may hint unto
us the unwarrantablenesse of the War with that Nation of the same Religion, and
in Covenant with us; and then give reasons and considerations, drawn from
interest of State, against the unlawful Invasion of Scotland. Had God given me
life, I intended a large Treatise concerning the Usurpation of the Government
of England, and the unlawfulness of the Invasion of Scotland; but my
collections being lost and taken away, they must dye with me; I hope more able
hands will write against the Invasion, though they cannot fight against the
Invaders.

I will offer but a few Scripture instances that may suggest something against
this bloody War with our Brethren in Covenant with us. Read Amos 1. 9. 10. 11.
12. I will not turn away the puni^^ment of Tyrus because they have delivered
the whole cap^ivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly Covenant. So that
Scotland may say as in Obadiah, ver. 7. The men of my confederacy that were at
peace with me have deceived me, and prevailed against me.

Yea the English did to Scotland, as Edom did to Israel, Amos 1. 11. Edom did
pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger
did tear continually; did not Cromwell do so to Scotland, worse than Edom to
Israe^? let Dunbar fight testify, and the worse than butcherly usage
afterward of the prisoners there taken; I may say to Cromwell as God said to
Edom, for thy violence against thy Brother Jacob [thy Brother Scotland] shame
shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever, Obad. v. 10. then in
Obad. v. 13, 14, 15, it is said, Thou should not have entered into the ga^e
of my people, in the day of their calamity, yea thou should not have laid
hands on their substance in the day of their calamity, neither should thou
have stood in the cross way to cut off those of his that did escape, neither
should thou deliver those of his that did remain in the day of distress.
Then it follows, As thou have done, it shall be done to thee, thy reward shall
return upon thine own head. I shall mention one Scripture History that is
pertinently applied and published in Print, 2 Chronicles. 28. 9. 10
entitled, The History of Pek^h, it is worth your perusal; Pekah King of
Israel did sinfully invade Jud^h, had the worser Cause, and the lesser number,
yet prevailed over Judah, then said Oded the Prophet, because the Lord was
wrath with Judah he has delivered them into your hand, and ye have flaine
them in a rage reaching up to Heaven, and now ye purpose to keep under the
Children for Bondmen, and Bond-women unto you, but are there not with you,
even with you, sins against the Lord your God, etc? And does not C^o^^ell do
this to Scotland, as Pekah did to Judah? Nay he is not so merciful, for Pekah
returned the Captives, restored the spoil, arrayed them, and shooed them, gave
them to eat and to drink, and carried all the feeble of them upon Asses, etc.
2 Chronicles. 28. 15. Cromwell is so accustomed to works of cruelty, that he is far
from showing such acts of mercy to his Brethren of Scotland, as Pekah did to
his Brethren of Judah. There is one Chapter in Ezekiel, that I have often
thought of, which cannot be more aptly applied to any in the World than to
Cromwell, and the rest of the invaders of the Scot^ish Nation it is the 35 of
Ez^kiel v. 5. to the end, Because thou have had a perpetual h^tred, and have
shed the blood of the Children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time
of their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end, therefore as I
live says the Lord, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue
thee, and v. 10. Because thou have said, These two Nations, and these two
Countries shall be mine, and we will possess it, whereas the Lord was there,
therefore as I live says the Lord, I will do according to thine anger and
according to thine envy which thou have used out of thy hatred against them,
and I will make my self known amongst them when I have judged thee, etc. It is
in Scripture record accounted a more deplorable judgment to have Nations of the
same Religion, and under the same Government to wage War one with another, than
to have a War with any other Nations whatsoever, read 2 Chronicles. 15. 5, 6. Nation
shall rise against Nation, that is the Kingdom of Israel against the Kingdom
of Judah, who were of the same Religion, and also under the same Government,
during the Reigns of Saul, David, Solomon, and part of Rehoboams, so in 2.
Chron. 28. 9, 10. per totum, many instances out of Scripture might have been
produced to suggest to you how unwarrantable a thing it is for Cromwell with
his English Army to invade, spoil, and lay wast, their poor Brethren of
Scotland. We are commanded Zech. 7. 9. 10. ^o show mercy and compassion every
man to his neighbor, oppr^sse not the Widow nor the Fatherl^ss, nor the
stranger, nor the poor, and I t^none imagine ev^ll against his Brother in your
heart; and the reason may be drawn from Mal^chy 2. 10. Have we not all one
Father? has not one God created us? Why do we deal treacherously every m^n
against his brother, by prophaxing the Covenant of our Fathers? I have no more
to say in this matter, but will say of Cromwell, though he may prosper for a
while against the people of God, yet I may say of him as God did of J^hojakim,
Tkine eyes and thi^e heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed
innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it; therefore, thus
says the Lord, Jer. 22. 17, 18, 19.
They shall not lament for him, saying, ah my brother, or, ah my sister, they
shall not lament for him, saying, ah Lord, or ah his glory, he shall be buried
with the burial of an ^sse, etc. Ier. 22. 17, 18* 19.

I am in the next place to give some reasons to prove the unlawfullnesse of the
invasion of our Brethren of SCOTLAND, I shall lay down a few considerations
whereby you may see the evil nature, and dangerous consequence of this War.

First; This War with Scotland is worse than the former war intended against
Scotland in the year 1640. First reason may be by comparing t^is with the first
War.
it is worse in many regards: 1. The First war was called Bellum Episcopale,
this may be called Bellum Haereticale, (if I may so say) the first War would
have brought in Popish ceremonies, this War brings in damnable Heresies, and
hellish blasphemies; by the first they would have scrued up Monarchy into
Tyranny, by this they will pull down Monarchy, and turn all to Anarchy. 2.
This War in the year 1650. is worse than that intended about the year 1640.,
because then we were not under so many Covenants, and Engagements one toward
another as now we are, Cromwell invaded them after a Covenant and Articles of
Agreement for assistance made with them, after help and Brotherly assistance
received from them, yet he has forgotten the Brotherly Covenant, with them,
and all the kindnesses we have had from them in the day of out deep distress.
Thirdly, This war has not such an Authority as the former had, the first was
raised by the King and his Council, this by Cromwell and a Faction. Fourthly,
the Soldiers, many of them, do behave themselves worser than the Soldiers
the King and Bishops did raise against the Scots at first; the Kings Soldiers
were but ignorant and profane, these many of them Heretics and Blasphemers;
those did pull down Crosses and Pictures, these pull down Ordinances; those
drunk with Wine or Strong Drink, but these drunk with Error, having a spirit of
gyddinesse and contradiction against the Truth, which is the worst sort of
drunkenness. Fifthly, far worse in the event also; in the Kings and Bishops
war not above 14 slain one both sides, but in this war Cromwell with a more
cruel and bloody mind has most barbarously slain at least 10000 of the
Scottish Nation, since he entered Scotland, oh the bloody cruelty of this man!

2. A second reason may be taken from the time when Cromwell invaded them; it
was not when Scotland was overrun with malignity, during the time of
Hambletons prevalency, but it was when the power of that Kingdom was in the
hands of the most Religious and Covenanting Party in Scotland, after Hamblitons
Army was destroyed, and Montrosse defeated; and the godly party who managed the
cause of God for these 14 years faithfully, had all the power of that Kingdom
in their hands, then Cromwell invaded them, which to me is an evident
Demonstration, that the invasion of Scotland was by the instigation of
Jesuits, and the Papists Party to root out the Protestant Party in ^cotland,
and to bring their persons in vassalage and thraldom as to their civil
Liberties.

3. A third Reason may be drawn from the slight grounds Cromwell had to invade
Scotland, because they would not be a Commonwealth, therefore they shall not
be a People; because they will not break their Covenants, therefore Cromwell
will break them; because the^ will not lay their Consciences waste, he will lay
their land waste and make it desolate; because the Scots are for a Scripturall
Presbytery, and a well-regulated Monarchy, for found doctrine and the power of
godliness, therefore it is that Cromwell is so much their Enemy. Whatever else
may be pretended, ^et these were the true grounds why Cromwell and the rest of
the Iesuited Spanish Faction did invade the neighbor Nation.

4. A fourth reason may be taken from the wicked ends Cromwell aims at in his
invading Scotland, viz. merely to satisfy his ambitious and covetous desires
to be absolute Lord of the Estates, Liberties and Lives of all the people in
these 3. Nation; it does not content him to have one Kingdom, viz. Ireland for
Ireton his Son, nor another Kingdom, viz. England for himself, but he must
have Scotland also. His end is as was that of the Children of Ammon invading
Israel, in Amos 1. 13. That they might enlarge their borders; his end, and the
end his Soldiers aim is like that of the Chaldaeans, Amos 1. 13.
that bitter and hasly Nation to march thr^ugh the bredih ^f the Land, to
possess the dwelling places that are not theirs; his end is like that of M^unt
Seir, Hab. 1. 6.
who said, ^hese two Nations, and these two Countries shall be mine, and we
will passesse them. So says Cromwell, these two Nations, and these two
Countrves, viz. England and Scotland shall be mine, and I will possess them;
nor will all this content him, he seeks to be an universal Monarch, like that
Ch^ldaean Monarch in Hab. 2. 56. He is a proud man, neither keeps at home,
who exlargeth his desire as hell, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto
him all Nations, and heapeth unto him all people, but shall not all these take
up a taunting proverb against him, Woe to him that increases that which is
not his, etc. We punish him with death who breaks open a house and robs but
one Family, but what a thousand deaths does he deserve, who breaks into a
Kingdom, and robbes many thousand Families, even a whole Nation. The Prophet
Hab akkuk pronounces A woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and
establishes a City by iniquity. Hab. 2. 12. What a woe then shall befall
Cromwell, that does not build Towns with blood, but destroys many Towns by
blood, but builds up none? that does not stablish a City, but destroys many
Cities in ENGLAND and SCOTLAND by Iniquity?

5. A fifth reason may be drawn from the Covenant and Treaties between the two
Nations. I begin with the Covenant so far as it concerns Scotland. In the first
Article we promise to endeavor the preservation of the reformed Religion in
the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government: But
Cromwells invading Scotland tends directly to the destruction of the reformed
Religion in Scotland, both in Doctrine, by the many Heresies the Army spreads
amongst them, and in Worship, by those who are above Ordinances, and in
Discipline and Government by those that are inveterate enemies to the
Presbyteriall Government, and are most of them for Independency, or
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, or Scepticisme, etc. In the third Article we promise to
preserve the liberties of the Kingdoms: But Cromwells invading Scotland, brings
England under guilt, and Scotland under beggary and slavery. In the fourth
Article we promise, That we shall endeavor the discovery of all such as have
been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or ev^ll Instruments, by hindering
the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the
Kingdoms from another. If these things be the brands that the Covenant puts
upon Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, then is not Cromwell and
his Faction the great Incendiaries, Malignauts, and evil Instruments, who have
hindered the Reformation of Religion, nay blemished the very name, and destroyed
the very face of Religion? and have they not divided the King from his people,
not only by interrupting his agreement with the Parliament, and dividing him
from them, but by dividing his head from his body? and have not they divided
one of the Kingdoms from another, and by this unjust invasion laid such seeds
to dissentions, and irreconcilable differences, as are likely never to be
healed, yea so divided as never likely to be united together any more? In the
fifth Article it is said, Where as the happiness of a blessed peace between
these Kingdoms, denied in former times to our pr^genitors, is by the good
providence of God granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by
both Parliaments, we shall each one of us endeavor that they may remain
conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity. Let the world judge
whether Cromwell and his invaders have endeavored that the Kingdoms may remain
in a firm peace and union to all posterity; he was so far from endeavoring to
have this Union kept to all posterity, that he dissolved this Union within
seven years after he promised to preserve this Union, for he took the Covenant
in the year 1643. and entered Scotland, in a bloody Hostile manner, in the
year 1650. Thus you see Cromwells invasion of Scotland is repugnant to the
whole scope and tenor of the Covenant; it is contrary to the Articles of the
Treaty between both Kingdoms; for this is one among the rest, That one Nation
shall not wage war with each other, but give three months warning before hand;
but Cremwell did not not give three days warning to Scotland before he invaded
their Land.

6. I may draw the sixth reason from the judgment of the Parliament, when free
and full, they were still averse to any breach with, and war against, their
Brethren of Scotland, as knowing it would endanger the Protestant Religion, and
godly party in both the Nations. I well remember the King called a Parliament
here in England in April 1640. on purpose to raise money to carry on the War
against the Scots, but the Parliament utterly refused to grant any money to so
ill a purpose, and did all they could to dissuade the King from the War with
Scotland, publicly protesting against the War as dishonorable, and dangerous
to Religion, and both Kingdoms; whereupon, through the designs of the
Prelates and Popish party that Parliament was dissolved, within 10 days after
it was called. Although the dissolving that Parliament was a great grief of
heart to all the godly in this Nation, yet it was a rejoicing, that the
Parliament refused to engage in the War of Scotland. After this, there were
public Thanksgivings throughout all England, enjoined by King and Parliament,
for the Pacification between England and Scotland.

If the wisdom of the Parliament in the year 1640. judged it unlawful to wage
War against Scotland upon the solicitations of the King and Bishops, because
they would obtrude Popish Ceremonies upon that Nation, may not we judge it much
more unlawful to wage War with Scotland, to bring Blasphemies, Heresies, and
Slavery upon them, and that after we have had a Brotherly assistance from them,
and have entered into Covenant with them? There are l^^^e pretenses to justify
the War with Scotland in the year 1650, by Cromwell, than in the year 1640.
when the King intended to wage war with them.

7. A seventh Reason may be drawn from the intolerable mischiefs, sad
consequences, and unexpressible calamities likely to befall the Protestant and
Covenanting party in the 3. Kingdoms, the mischiefs and sad consequences of
Cromwells invading Scotland, I shall reduce to 8. heads.

1. The War with the Irish Rebels is by this means neglected, and lengthened
out; had Cromwell staid in Ireland, and had but one half of the Soldiers he
has now in Scotland, in all likelihood the Irish Wars had been ended long
before now, the Rebels destroyed, and the English had had a quiet and peaceable
possession of that Land. But Cromwell (through the counsel of the Pope, King
of Spain, and the Jesuits) had rather fight with the Protestant covenanting
party in Scotland, than with the Rebels of Ireland.

2. By this means most grievous and burdensome Taxes are continued and
increased. I shall mention one thing, which to the vulgar may seem incredible,
viz. That the Iuncto at Westminster have (by the Excise, Customs,
Sequestrations and Taxes) received more money in one year, than all the Kings
of England, put them all together, since the Conquest, did raise upon their
Subjects for such a space of time, yet the Kings called Oppressors, and these
called Saints, etc.

3. A total eradication of the Presbyteriall Government in both the Kingdoms.
Presbytery is the But, at which the Prelates of old, and the Sectaries of late,
have shot their invenomed Arrows.

4. A great indangering of all the Protestant Churches and States in Europe.
The Kingdoms of England and Scotland make up the greatest Body of the
Protestant Religion in Christendom, being best able to defend themselves, and
succor other Reformed Churches, when endangered and designed to ruin by
Popish Enemies, therefore the discountenancing of the Covenanting party in
England, and the ruining of them in Scotland, is the readiest way to endanger,
conquer, ruin all other Reformed Churches in the World; and how will this
imbolden and encourage Popish Adveraries to invade and ruin the Protestants
whiles they see England and Scotland (who make up the greatest Body of the
Protestant Religion in Christendom) engaged in an un-Brotherly and
un-Christian War between themselves, and weakening, impoverishing, and
destroying each other?

5. Cromwells invasion of Scotland, is an extraordinary ground of joy to the
Pope, and all his Confederates. Had the Conclave of Rome plotted together, they
could not wish a more happy and hopeful design to advance the interest of
Rome, and Catholic Religion; that does more glad and gratify the Popish
party, than to see the Protestant party in England and Scotland ruining one
another. I have read a very remarkable story of a great Politician in France,
that is, Cardinal Richelieu, That a little before his death be left
Instructions and advice with the late French King, that he would use his utmost
endeavor to foment the late differences between the King of England and the
Parliament, and, if it were possible, by the solicitations of his Instruments,
to draw the House of Commons in England to change their Government, from a
Kingdom into a Commonwealth; by which means England and Scotland would be
imbroyled in wars one against another, which is the only and best policy of
all to weaken and destroy the Protestant Religion, and advance the interest of
France, and Catholic Religion. The truth of this story is asserted by an
Italian of good note and credit, and published by him, and Printed in Italy,
anno 1645.

I shall say no more touching this particular, but only this; that I do verily
believe Cromwels invading Scotland in the year 1650. makes it a year of Iubilee
in Rome; but a year of slavery to England and Scotland, and a year of sorrow to
all the Protestant Churches round about us; which puts me upon the next sad
consequence of this war, viz.

6. It will be, and is a great grief and sadning to all Protestant States and
Churches round about us; when they consider how we who have lived under one
King, united in one Covenant, engaged in one and the same Quarrel, that we
should ruin and destroy one another, and that with such bloody rage, and
cruel hatred as we do; what a grief is it to them to consider, that we who
might have been their he^pers, are our own destroyers, neither able to assist
them abroad, nor defend our selves at home?

7. It will lay lasting foundations of irreconcilable discord between the two
Nations, That we who were the dearest Friends, will be to each other the
greatest Enemies.

8. There will be a toleration of all Heresies and Blasphemies in the Church,
and an increasing of all oppression and violence in the State. These two
usually go together. Judges 5. 8. They chose new Gods, then was there War in
their Gates. These, with manifold more inconceivable mischiefs are likely to
arise, by reason of Cromwels groundless and unwarrantable invasion of our
neighbor Nation.

The last work I have now to do about this vindication of my self, is to take
off some aspersions and slanders unjustly laid upon me.

1. Some report that I am under great fears of death, that much terror and
trembling lays hold upon me.

To which I say, That through the sense of the pardoning mercies of God,
through the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 2. 14.
the bitterness, fear, and sting of death is much abated; that I am delivered
from the fear of death, to which all the former part part of my life I was
subject unto bondage; I speak it without vanity to the praise of Gods glorious
grace, I formerly have had more fear at the pulling out of a Tooth, than now I
have at the thoughts of the cutting off my head. I mention it to the praise of
God, who supported me, the hearing of the Sentence of Death pronounced against
me in the Court, did no whit dismay me, I had as much calmnesse and quietness
in my mind, at that very ho^^e, as ever I had in all my life yea since I have
been condemned, I bless God, I have not had one troubled thought, nor broke
one hours rest, nor forborne one meals meat, yea the very night before I was to
suffer, I supt as heartily, and slept as sweetly, as ever I did in all my life;
the hopes I have of an eternal life, does swallow up the fears of a temporal
death.

2. Objection, But yon confess you have sinned, therefore you are put to death
for your sin.

Sol. I have indeed, and I ought to confess my sins against God, so condemn
my self, and justify God, acknowledging that I have sinned, and he is
righteous in all that is come upon me, so that it is just with the most high to
cut me off in the midst of my days, and in the midst of my Ministry; but yet I
never said that I had sinned against God in the particular facts for which that
cruel sentence was past upon me; I say still as I did at the Bar, when I
received the sentence of death, that God did not condemn me, when I was
judged, that neither God nor my own Conscience did condemn me of sin; I have
transgressed their bloody Laws, it is true, yet not broken any command of God
in so doing, they have sinned in making such Laws, not I in breaking them. I
am far from thinking that I have sinned in what I have done, to desire the King
might agree with the Scots upon the interest of Religion, and the terms of the
Covenant, to relieve that gallant Gentleman Major General Massey, to pray for
and endeavor after the good of the Godly in the neighbor nation of Scotland,
who are Brethren in Covenant with us; I count all this my duty, not my sin;
yet I deny not, but as infirmities do cleave to my duties, so in the way of
mannagement of this business, inadvertency, indiscretion, and too much
opennesse might cleave to these actings of mine, but that the thing it self was
evil that I never have, never shall confess.

3. Object. Some are not ashamed to say, that I am a debaucht person, that I
have been guilty of uncleanness.

Sol. This I declare in the sight of God is most abominably false; as Luther
said of himself, That he was not tempted to covetousness: so through the grace
of God, I can say it without vanity or falsehood, I have not been tempted to
uncleanness. I know no ground of this report but this, that on Easter Day
night last was six year, one of my name, Master Edward Love, a Chaplain in the
Army, was questioned before Justice Rich, dwelling about Chancery Lane, for
being found in bed whith a Whore, now because he was one of my name, some
Malignants did charge it upon me, but that gross lie was soon quelled, but is
now revived, and suggested to some in present power, on purpose to exasperate
them against me: But why should I be troubled at these slanders? my betters
have been falsely accused as well as I; two Harlots accused Athanasius that he
was unclean with them, when he was the Chastest man of that age; Beza was
accused of drunkenness and uncleanness also, who was free from both; the
Jesuits accused Calvin that he had the foul disease, that he was eaten up of
V^^min; yea the Lord Jesus was accused to have a Devil, though the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt in him:

4. Object. It is reported that I was unnatural to my Parents, that I would
not relieve them in their necessities.

Sol. I am loath to commend my self, yet when another man's mouth does accuse
me, it is lawful for my own to praise me. My duty and Natural affections to
my parents has abounded, as I had great cause, for their tenderness and care
in my education, they have been dead above seven years since; it is true, they
had a competent livelihood in the World, but fell to decay, and when they were
necessitated, I speak it truly, when I was not worth 20 li. in all the world,
my parents had ten of it.

5 Object. It is reported that I neglected Mr. Erbury, who was the means of my
conversion and education, that when he was plundered in WALES, and came to
ENGLAND in a necessitous condition, that I would not relieve him.

Sol. As for Master Erbury, though he is fallen into dangerous opinions, yet,
he being my spiritual Father, I do naturally care for him, as Timothy did for
Paul, my heart cleaves to him in love, more than to any one man in the World; I
speak to the praise of God, he was the instrument to my conversion, near
twenty years ago, and the means of my education also in the University, for
which kindness, the half I have in the World, I could readily part with for
his relief. It is true, about eight or nine years since, he was plundered in
Wales, and did come to see me at Windsor Castle, but a Son could not make
more of a Father, than I made of him, according to my ability; when I had not
twelve pounds in all the World, I let Master Erbury have six of it, indeed he
afterward gave me a horse, for which I received not much above forty shillings;
yea I procured him a place in the Army, to be Chaplain to Major General
Skippons Regiment, where he had eight shillings a day.

6 Object. Others say that what I denied in Court, was afterward proved against
me, and then I did confess it.

Sol. This is a manifest untruth; those Protestations I made the first day of
my Trial, I made them also the last day, rejoicing that they were not
falsified nor contradicted by any of the 8 Witnesses; but I have spoken to this
more largely before.

If other slanders shall be cast upon me, I hope you will have so much charity,
not to believe reports raised upon me, when I shall be silent in the Grave, not
able to speak in my own vindication. This I say without vanity of falsehood, I
have been kept for these twenty years, from the time I first knew God, from
falling into any scandalous evil, but only into those infirmities of
unavoydable and daily incursion, unto which all the Godly are subject in the
course of their pilgrimage. I love not to speak in my own praise, yet I judge
it lawful when other men's mouths falsely accuse me, my own mouth may modestly
commend me.

As an Appendix to what I have already written, I have but a few things to
desire the Reader to take notice of.

1. I am informed that there is something blotted out of my last Petition,
after it went from me, without my knowledge or consent. To assure all the World
that I was no Malignant, I did put this clause in my fourth Petition, That in
my place and calling, I should oppose all Malignant designs, whether in this or
the Neighbor Nation, that may tend to the ruin^ of this Commonwealth.
Somebody blotted out the word [Malignant] and would thereby hold the world in
hand, as if I should engage to oppose the King and Scots which are now entered
England, which was far from my Heart; I judge it no Malignant design for the
Scots to defend their Nation, and the Title of their King, upon the interest of
Religion, and terms of the Covenant, this is an honest and justifiable design.
Indeed Mr. Owen and Mr. Bond were with me in the Tower, and desired me to put
it out, but I told them I could not do it, because I said, though I would be
looked upon as one that would oppose Malignant designs, yet I would not be
looked upon as one that would oppose the honest Scots, or as if I thought their
actings were Malignant designs. I sent the Petition to Sheriff Titchburn, if
he observed it, he will justify me that the word Malignant was in the
Petition. Whether they have blotted out any thing more, or put any thing in,
God knows; I am not ashamed to own the Petitions. I have given you the
Substance of them in my vindication. I desire you to take notice also, that by
[Common-wealth] I do not understand the present Government, (I wish that were
ruined) but by Commonwealth I understand the Body or Community of the People
of this Nation, I shall in my place and calling oppose any Malignant designs
that may tend to their ruin.

2. I desire you to take notice, that it is very likely they will not publish
the Depositions of the Witnesses in Court, but the private Examinations taken
from them in private, and patcht together by Mr. Scet, and Captain Bishop; they
were not ashamed to produce them and read them in open Court, and some of the
Witnesses had so much honesty left, as to dissavow them in open Court. Believe
nothing (beloved) but what was sworn in open Court, nor all that neither, for
some of the Witnesses swore falsely, as I made appear in my Defense.

3 I desire the Reader to take notice, that there is a lying Pamphlet put
forth, entitled, A short Plea for the Commonwealth. In which there are many
gross lies, especially in things which relate to me. It is not fit for me to
enter the Lists with him; It becomes not a dying man to write of Controversies,
which will beget dispute; therefore I shall not answer the Book, though I could
easily do it, but only sum up the many Lies he relates concerning me; As

In Page 3 second Edition. First lie,
He insinuates, he is loath to say it out for shame, or to name me, yet he
would deceive the Reader, by saying, The meetings of these Traitors here,
produced the first Treaty at the Hague. And elsewhere he says, That I am chief
of these Traitors; so that in the lump, he is willing to have the Reader
believe as if I were at those meetings, when I was at none, neither about the
Treaty at the Hague, nor the Treaty at Iersey neither, till both were
dissolved. Indeed Alford, Adams, Far, etc. who were my accusers, were at those
meetings from first to last, as they themselves confessed; yet such was the
wisdom of Mr. Scots Council of State, they must be acquitted, and I
executed, that know nothing of all those meetings.

In Page 7. second Edition. He says, For what Mr. Love is concerned to say
nothing of what preceded Titus his going to Iersey. Here he would insinuate
also, as if he could say something of me before Titus his going to Iersey,
which he cannot do, if he could, he would not have spared me.

In Page 7. Second lie
second Edition. That one was sent to Titus from my house, and that he
returned, and gave an account at my study. The latter part is true, he that was
sent to Titus did give an account of his journey at my House, but the first
part is a Lie; if it were a Truth, why would he not name the man, as he does
others? bu^ for fear that every one who heard the Trial at the High Court
would have bin able to cry shame upon him. Major Alford was the man was sent to
Titus to Callis, but not in my house; for Potter swore Alford was sent when
they met at a Tavern, yea Alford himself swore, that it was William Drake that
desired him to meet Titus at ^allis; and swore also, that he was never within
my house, nor ever spoke with me, till after he returned from Callis; yet this
impudent fellow, the Author of the ^^ea, does charge me with it.

In Page 7. second Edition. Third lie.
He says, That upon the debate of sending a Commission, that I should say,
Come, come, let it go, which is a gross lie; indeed Huntington did swear thus
in Court, but was forsworn; I was against sending the Commission, and gave
reasons against sending it, yea Capt. Far said upon Oath, and that 3 times
together that the Company were against sending it, because private persons had
not power to Commissionate, etc.

In Page 8. Fourth lie.
second Edition. He says, That a Letter wrote with B. on it, brought to Capt.
Potter from Bamfield, and said by the Party that left it at Potters, that it
came from Mr. Love. Captain Potter did not affirm this in Court, indeed he said
he thought it came from me, or Doctor Drake, but for my part I never brought,
nor sent Letter to his shop in all my life.

In Page 9. Fifth lie.
second Edition. He says, That I made 3 dreadful Protestations, that I never
wrote Letter to the King, Queen, Iermin, Piercy, Titus, Massey, etc. That I
never received Letter from any of them, That I never contributed any money ^or
gathered any for the King, etc. or Massey and Titus, etc. This is a loud Lie,
it is well there are many Witnesses to contradict him; and surely, if the
Author of this Book had not east off all fear of God, and regard to the good
name of his Brother, he could not be so impudent, as to affirm that these were
my Protestations. I never named Massey or Titus in my Protestations, for then I
had protested a falsehood, (which I durst not do) I did write a Letter to
Massey, and did contribute money to Massey and Titus, yet my Protestations are
not contradicted; for I Protested, I writ no Letter to the King, Queen, Church,
or State of Scotland, in the general, or to any particular person of the
Scottish Nation. The truth of this I shall stand to. For though I did write and
give money to Massey, yet my Protestation is not falsified, for he is of the
English not of the Scottish Nation.

In page 9. Sixth lie.
second Edition. He says, That at my Examination I made such a deep and
general profession of my Innocence, though the proof, and his Confession at
the Court contradicted it, etc. The first part of this Speech is true, the
latter notoriously false. As to the Questions propounded to me, about
Correspondence with the King, Queen, etc. writing a Letter to the Church of
Scotland, or sending Titus to Iersey; as to these things I said I was innocent,
and so I say still. But as for the latter part of his words, That the proof,
and my Confession at the Court contradicted my Answer at my Examination, that is
abominably false; though he was not ashamed to say so in the general, yet he
durst not instance in any particular, nor will any other in my life time,
whilst I can answer for my self. I do affirm this to all the World, That at my
Examinations I did deny nothing that was true, nor would I confess any thing
that was Criminal. And because I am belyed, about my examination before the
Committee, and may be more abused after I am dead, therefore I am necessitated
to discover that juggling and baseness of Mr. Scot, and Captain Bishop, about
my Examination, which I thought never to have made public. Whiles I was
examined before the Committee, that pragmaticall fellow Captain Bishop (who, I
suppose wrote this lying Book) did put in 6 or 8 lines into my Examinations,
which I never said; he supposing I would be so mease-mouthed as not to read it,
or to put my hand to his for^eries with out any more ado: But I did, to his
shame make him blot out at least 6 lines in my Examination, which was but very
short; Some of the Committee did ingenuously say sometimes, that I did not
speak such words as Captain Bishop did put in. By his abuse of me, who would
not be abused by him, I cannot but think how he injured other men. I did refuse
to put my hand to it, seeing I was abused by Captain Bishop, but told them, if
they would give me a Copy of it, I would subscribe my hand; but they denied me
a Copy, which made me susspect they did not intend to deal fairly with me; as
I found true soon after. About 3 weeks after I was examined, Mr. Prideaux, and
Mr. Scot came to examine me in the Tower; I still refused to accuse my self;
Mr. Scot showed me a Paper, told me it was the Examination taken from my mouth;
he read it to me, when I saw and heard it, I renounced it, told him plainly it
was a forged paper, that it was not mine. He replied, it was that very
individual paper that was written and taken from my mouth; and that he himself
did endorse it with his own hand. To this I reply, whether he endorsed it, or
no, I could not say, but I can say, and do affirm, the paper was not mine, and
I gave him two evident and undeniable Demonstrations that it was not the paper
written at my Examinations. For, 1. In that paper there were many lines blotted
out, but in this there were none. 2. In the paper showed me at the Tower was
written to this effect, That I should say, I was not present at the reading or
hearing of any Letters read from Scotland, which I never said; and I did put
him in mind, that I refused to Answer that Question, Whether I was present
when Letters were read? Because (said I) then your next Question will be, Who
else was present? So I must accuse others, which I shall not do: And then,
further, if I should say I was not present, and you could prove that I was
present at the hearing of any Letters of News from Foreign parts, you would
tax me of a falsehood, which none shall be able to fasten upon. This did
somewhat silence, and satisfy Mr. Scot, that it was not the paper that was
taken at my Examination; wherefore, I beseech the Reader not to believe any
thing that shall come forth, either pretended to be my Examination, or the
Examinations of other men against me, they are but the Forgeries and
Contrivements of Mr. Scot and Capt. Bishop.

Mr. Seventh lie. In page ^o second Edition.
Love would have denied the jurisdiction of the Court, had he not remembered
what it cost his Master Charles. He behaved himself exceeding haughtily,
prevar^cating uncivilly, etc. Elsewhere the man speaks more than I did, but here
he speaks less than I did, in the former part of his speech; here he says, I
would have denied the jurisdiction of the Court; if I had not remembered, etc. I
confess I did deny the jurisdiction of the Court, and did declare before the
Court, that they were not a legal Court of Judicature, to judge me for my
life; that it was my birthright to be tried according to the Laws of this
Land, which was to be by a Jury of my neighborhood, and when they told me they
were as a Jury, then I replied, I have liberty by the Laws of this Land, to
except against 35 of them. Though they did deny me a legal Trial, yet a
necessity was put upon me to plead to clear my own innocence. But the latter
part of his speech is notoriously false, I leave my self to be judged by the
spectators, whether I did behave my self exceeding haughtily, prevaricating,
untivilly, as this man does accuse me.

In Page 11. The eighth lie.
second Edition. He says, That I did not acknowledge the Laws or Authority,
by which I was judged, to be the Laws of the Land, but that I said in my
Petition, by [your Lawes] I am justly condemned, which said he, my Brother^
Master Calamy instructed me in, to put me out of all hopes of mercy, that his
good tricks, and the rest of his close Brethren, might not come to light. This
common liar stumbles upon a truth now and then; the first part of the words are
true, viz. That I did not acknowledge the Authority, or Laws, by which I was
judged, to be the Laws of the Land; and that I called them [your Laws,] this
is most true, and for this very reason I called them [your Lawes] to
distinguish them from the Laws of this Nation: But the following words are
notoriously false; As first, That I should say in my Petition, (the first he
must mean, for the clause [your Lawes] is not in the other) by Your Laws I am
justly condemned, I never said so in that Petition. He that will be so
shameless to falsify my Petitions, which are made so visible, will not be
ashamed to belie my words. Secondly, To say that Master Calamy instructed me to
call them Your Laws, that is false also. Thirdly, to say it was that Master
Calamies good tricks might not come to light; he has done nothing that he may
be ashamed to own before the Sun.

In Page 18 second Edition. The ninth lie.
He says, That when Master Peter's, and Col^nel Okey spoke to me, I railed on
them, and called them a company of Heretics, and Schismatics, that the curse
of God is on you and will destroy you, I will not have to do with you: This is
false also. If this man has belied others in his book whom he names, as he
has done me, there is not one true page in all his book; yet this lying book
must be Printed by Du-Gard, Printer to the Council of State, forsooth. I see
all is not to be taken for truth that comes from that Council.

In Page 20 second Edition. The tenth lie.
He says, That Mr. Love and my confederates (as has been proved by the Court)
have assumed to themselves a supreme power in Authorizing by Commission, etc. I
wonder the man is not ashamed to fasten this on me, who did declare it was an
Act of high presumption, for private men to take upon them to Commissionate;
yea one of the Witnesses did positively swear, that those that met when that
Commission was read, were against sending the Commission, because private men
could not give Commission; yea none of the Witnesses did swear, that I
assented to this Commission, but only Huntington, who swear falsely in it self,
and contradictorily to the Testimony of another Witness.

In Page 20 second Edition. The eleventh lie.
He has these words, They have kept Massey and Titus their agents in Scotland,
received and gave advice concerning raising parties in England, likewise
concerning many Arms, and bringing over foraigne Soldiers, Generals,
Shipping, etc. all which Mr. Love has held forth to be according to his
judgment, Conscience, and Covenant. If this man were not an Atheist, or an
Antiscripturist, the example of Ananias and Saphira might make him tremble,
lest he should be stricken down dead, with a lie in his mouth; did any
Witness, say of me, that ever I gave advice to raise parties in England? or to
bring over foraigne Soldiers, Generals, Shipping? yet this false and
deceitful man, will make the world believe, as if this were proved against me;
indeed I declared before the High Court, that it was according to my Judgment,
Conscience, Covenant, to desire as as private man, that the King might agree
with the Scots upon the interest of Religion, and terms of the Covenant,
rather than join in with Papists and Irish Rebels. And this I still stand to
as my judgment.

These and many other Falsehoods might be found in this book, if I should make a
thorough search into it. He calls it A short Plea, but I may call it a long
lie; and it is not for the honor of the present Government, to have a common
liar to be a pleader for their Commonwealth.

Having thus finished the third particular, which I desired the Reader to take
notice of, I now come to a fourth.

I desire the Reader to take notice of the justice of the men in present power,
those men who did send Letters to the King, Queen, Iermin, Piercy, who did send
Titus an Agent to Iersey, these men must be acquitted, but I, who did not thus,
must be condemned and executed. I may aptly apply that latin Proverb, Dat
veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas; or else that English Proverb, Some men
may better steal a horse, than another look over the Hedge.

5. I desire the Reader to take notice of the bloody policy of the men in
present power, as also of the simplicity and folly of the Members of the High
Court, the Politicians that sat at stern, did make some of the silly Members
of the High Court believe, that to preserve the honor of the State I must be
condemned, for two of the High Court told me, they must condemn me for the
honor of the Parlinment; and if they did condemn me, yet the Parliament would
pardon me, if I would but Petition them for mercy; by this means they inveagled
the High Court to pass the bloody sentence of death upon me with the less
regret of Conscience.

6. I desire all men to take notice, that there has not been such an eager,
furious and unjust prosecution of a Ministers blood, since the days of Queen
Mary, as there has been of mine. For, first, Although no two Witness did
prove any particular fact that was treasonable by their new acts, yet I must
dye. Yea, Secondly, Though the Reverend Ministers of London, the Ministers of
Kent, and of Worcestershire, did Petition in my behalf, yet they will have my
blood. Thirdly, Though diverse Citizens of London, and many of them of their
own party, did Petition for me, and so did my own Congregation, and diverse
other ways and means used for the preservation of my life, yet so thirsty are
they after my blood, that nothing will satisfy them but my death. Fourthly,
Yea, although diverse of those who are Members of the High Court of Justice did
use their utmost interest to preserve my life, yet all these applications,
together with mine and my Wifes, are ineffectuall, they rather hearken to the
bloody solicitations of a Malignant, Heretical, and Jesuitical party, who
thirst after my blood, than to the desires of many Godly and peaceable minded
men.

7. I desire the Reader to take notice, that although the Independent Ministers
did Petition for my reprieve (for which I thank them) yet they refused to join
with the Presbyterian Ministers to Petition for my life, unless they would do
those things which they could not do to save their own lives; I say they
refused to join with them to Petition for a Pardon, unless they would own the
present Power, declare against the Scots, and such like hard terms would the
Independent Brethren, tie the Presbyterian Ministers too, else they would not
join with them to beg for my life, so that it seems their aim was more at the
bringing over the Ministers to join with the State faction, than out of any
aim to save my life.

8. I desire the Reader to observe, that since the days of Queen Mary, there
has been no Protestant Minister so unchristianly dealt withal, as I have
been, and received such hard measure, and that from those, who profess
Religion, as I have done, which I shall plainly evince by undeniable
demonstrations. First, They hired one Witness with vast sums of money,
promises of preferment, to betray and ensnare me, and bring in evidence against
me. Secondly, They threatened other of the Witnesses with death, if they would
not testify against me. Thirdly, They sent several persons to me to the
Tower, to discouese and dispute with me, on purpose to entrap and ensnare me
Fourthly, They put up large Scaffolds on the first day of my Trial, when the
bloody charge was read against me, that the greater number might hear it, and
be prejudiced against me, but pulled them down again, when I was to make my
defense in my own justification, that so my defense might be smothered; then
put the Scaffolds up again, when the Council for the Commonwealth pleaded
against me. Yea, Thirdly, They took away the writings and books which my Notary
took in Court, that so nothing might come to light, but what pleases
themselves; so that they will put in and put out passages about my trial as
shall make most for their advantage, and my prejudice. Sixthly, they rejected
two of the Counselors which themselves had assigned me, that they should not
plead for me, because they had not taken the Engagement. Seventhly, They would
not allow Mr. Hales, who was one of my Council to have an hours time to prepare
himself to plead in my case, but he must plead presently or not at all;
although, as I told the Court, I never saw Master Hales till that morning, so
could not acquaint him with my case, nor did Mr. Hales ever see the Depositions
of the Witnesses, yet for all this they would not allow him one days time to
study my case; yet it pleased God to assist Mr. Hales, that he did plead ex
tempore, to overthrow the Charge, proved it illegal, etc. They were so
silenced at, and ashamed of, their illegal proceedings, that after my Notary
had written a while, they forbade him to write any more, which they never did
before; they were afraid lest Mr. Hales pleading in my behalf should come to
light. Eighthly, They have raised lying and slanderous reports of me, on
purpose to kill my name, as well as murder my Body. Ninthly, Whereas I sent
Colonel Fortescue with a Petition to Cromwell, to desire him to mediate to the
House for my life, upon his return to London with several Letters in my
behalf, they have clapped him close prisoner, would not suffer him to come near
me so that I know not what he did in my behalf* yea, they secured his Letters,
would not suffer them to be delivered to those to whom they were directed, th^^
so there might be no solicitations for the preservation of my life; so that
all the cost I am at in sending is in effectual by this means, although it
has already cost me, for two Messengers, above one hundred and five pounds,
yet the great kindness and labor of love the two Gentlemen expressed, is never
the less acceptable to me, although it be not successful for me. Tenthly,
Although I do not envy the safety, or desire the ruin of others, yet I cannot
but take notice of the rage of some men toward me, that I must dye, yet others
live, who have been correspondents from the beginning, who have sent Letters to
the King, Queen, Iermin, Riercy, who sent Titus over as an agent to Jersy,
(which I never did.) All this Alford, Adams, and Far, who are my accusers, have
done, yet they must be acquitted, and I executed; I mention not this out of
envy to them, I have none in my heart toward them; I wish their Lives, not
their deaths; but the reason why I mention this is, to let the world see why
their rage is thus against me, it is not for the merit of my facts, for then
they should punish others, who are far more guilty, but it is merely their rage
against my person, and calling, as I am a Minister, and because I will not
prostitute my Conscience to their ambition and usurpation. Eleventhly, The High
Court would not allow the common privilege, to have Witnesses for me heard,
though I earnestly desired; I had many Witnesses ready in Court* who could have
testified many things to invalidate and take off the Testimony of some of the
Witnesses, but I could not have that ordinary favor granted me. Twelfthly,
Yea, they have done that to me which was never done to any, viz. They have kept
me close prisoner from the 10th. of August, till the very day of my execution,
that none but my Wife had leave to come to me, others who got to me came but by
stealth and connivance, there is no robber nor murderer at Newgate, but after
they are condemned, any friends have liberty to come to them, but I must not
have the favor which every murderer and robber has; will not the righteous
Lord judge for this? I doubt not but he will; ^hey who have showed judgment
without mercy, may find no mercy another day, yet from my heart* beg mercy for
them, who would show no mercy to me; I pray God forgive them, who would not
forgive me. God is my record I do not dye with a revengefull heart, yet I do
believe God will, before this generation pass, avenge my blood, and that by
some signal providence. I will mind you but of one passage in Scripture, and
shall conclude, in 2. Chron. 24. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. King I^ash remembered not
the kindness which Iehoidah the Priest had done him, but did slay his Son,
viz. Zechariah; and when Zechariah died, he said, The Lord look upon it and
require it; then what follows, it is said, It came to pass, as the end of the
year, that the Hosts of Syria came up against Ioash, and they came to Judah and
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the people, and sent the spoil of
them unto the King of Damascu^; but I pray observe what a signal providence of
God was in this, for in verse 24. it is said, The Army of the Syrians came but
with a small company of men, and the Lord delivered a very great Host into
their hand, so that they executed judgment against Ioash. For my part, I am no
Prophet, nor do I pretend to a prophetic spirit, yet this persuasion I have
strongly settled upon my heart, now I am a dying, that Cromwell and his
Confederates shall be destroyed, that they shall not dye the common deaths of
men; and my persuasions are, that there are not many years between them and
ruin, yea though there were no Scots in Scotland, nor no King and his Army in
England, yea I am confident their downfall is at hand; how it shall be I
imagine not, but that it shall be I doubt not.

The last part of this Appendix was written the 20 of August, the last day but
one before my death. This Vindication, together with the Appendix was made by
me, and written with my own hand, so I testify

CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
From the Tower of London, August 20. 1651.
FINIS.

