A SECOND SPEECH MADE BY THE LORD LOWDEN, In the Parliament of Scotland the 24.
of September. 1641.

Being in Answer to some Objections made against the honorable Design of the
Palatinate.

LONDON Printed by A. N. for I. M. at the George in FLEETSTREET, Anno 1641.

A second Speech made by the Lord Lowden, in the Parliament of Scotland the 24.
of Sept. 1641.
Being in Answer to some Objections made against the honorable design of the
Palatinate.
MY LORDS,
HIs Majesty's gracious manifest, and proposition touching the Electorall
Family, having been so generally approved, and concluded to be, both a pious,
honorable, and equitable enterprise, should not, as I humbly conceive, be
either procrastinated, or frustrated by that worse then weak Objection, that
the Country is so ruined and depopulated, that being won, it will not (in all
probability) countervaile the charge, loss, and hazard, that must first be
undergone.

This Objection I deny not to be, both fit and necessary of a State to be
considered, when as their undertakings are for particular wrongs and injuries
sustained: But when as an Enemy (as in this case) has forceaby thrust a
lawful Prince out of the whole Inheritance of his Royal Ancestors, and
refuses to restore him upon honorable Conditions, I humbly conceive quitting
of cost ought not to overballance the Right and honor of a Prince so injured.

The Prince Elector is not only forceably kept forth of his lawful
Inheritance to his great Loss and damage, but his Honor is thereby deeply
wounded, and through him his Majesty our Native Sovereign his Royal Uncle,
and indeed all the Princes of the Reformed religion bear a share in his
dishonor.

Let not then the unvaluable honor of God, and so many pious Princes who are
(I say) interessed in this cause, lie any longer in the dust: But let us schew
our forwardness, and as much as in us lies speed this most pious and
honorable enterprise: And for our Brethren of England, they questionless will
show the like readiness; And to say my opinion, I hold the design not only
pious in it self, and honorable in the undertaking, but also expedient (as
the case now stands) for both Nations: For we and they having lately had
Armies in the field (which now through the goodness of the God of peace are
united and dis-banded) in which were many stout and valiant Commanders and
Officers of both Nations, who out of the wars are Extra sphaeram activitatis,
and left their preferments beyond the Seas to serve their King and Country,
unto which to return now cannot be expected (by reason of their
discontinuance) others having possessed their places: Many others no doubt there
are of both Nations, that by reason of the late, and too long Commotions
amongst us are (being dis-banded) altogether to seek for settled ways of
subsistence; These things (for many respects) ought to be considered, and such
provision made, that not any desperately expose themselves into Foreign
parts, or in their own Countries for want and penury despair of themselves,
or oppress others; either of which must consequently be dishonorable and
prejudicial to their Native Nations.

Now this design (my Lords) E Contra, probably will render his Majesty
formidable, his Kingdoms honorable, make provision for all such of his
Subjects as cannot conveniently, or contentedly subsist in these kingdoms, and
must certainly give great contentment to the Sons of Mars, those valiant and
Heroicke spirits, who as I have said out of wars move not in their proper
Orb: And who knows but the almighty providence, who lately suffered our
Armies to meet in the Field one against the other; and when that their swords
were unsheathed, would not suffer them to offend each other, but miraculously
united them; who knows ^ I say) that he did it not even for this very end
(his appointed time being come) to restore the Princely Family of the
Electorall house, to their ancient and rightful Inheritance and Renown, And
by that means advance his own glory and true religion.

Up then, let us be doing, and surely the Lord of Hosts will go before the
Army (that shall fight for such a cause) and make plain all Mountains that
shall occur in the way, and give a blessed and succesfull issue to such an
honorable Enterprise.

FINIS.

