LOVES LETTERS, His and Hers, To each other, a little before his Death.



Printed in the Year, 1651.

Mrs Love's Letter to her Husband.
Sweet heart,
BEfore I write further, I beseech you think not that it is your wife but a
friend that now writes to thee: I hope thou have freely given up thy Wife and
Children to that God that said Ier. 49.11. Leave thy Children, I will preserve
them, and let thy widows trust in me: thy Maker shall be thy Husband: On that
the Lord would keep thee from having one troubled thought about thy relations;
I desire to give thee freely up into thy Fathers hands, and not only look upon
it as a Crown of Glory for thee to die for Christ, but as an honor for me that
I should have a Husband to leave for Christ: I dare not speak to thee, nor have
a thought within my self of my unspeakable loss, but wholly keep my eye fixed
upon the unspeakable and unconceivable gain. Thou leavest but a sinful mortal
Wife, to be everlastingly married to the Lord of Glory, thou leavest but
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, to go to the Lord Jesus thy elder brother;
thou leavest friends to go to the enjoyment of holy Angels, and of the spirits
of Just men made perfect; thou do but leave Earth for Heaven; and if natural
affections begin to rise, I hope that spirit of grace that is within thee will
quell them: And knowing that all things here below are but dung and dross in
comparison of those things above; I know thou keep thy eye fixed upon the
hope of Glory which makes thee so trample upon the loss of Earth. My Dear, I
know God has not only prepared Glory for thee, and thee for it, but I am
persuaded he will sweeten the way for thee to come to the enjoyment of it; and
when thou art putting on thy clothes that morning, think, I am putting on my
wedding clothes to go to be married to my Redeemer; when the messenger of Death
comes to thee, let him not be dreadful, but look upon him as a messenger that
brings thee tidings of eternal life; when thou go up the Scaffold, think
what thou toldest me, that it was but thy Chariot to draw thee to thy Fathers
house. And when thou layest down thy dear Head to receive thy Fathers stroke,
Remember what thou said to me, that though thy Head were severed from thy
Body, yet thy Soul should soon be united to Jesus Christ thy Head in Heaven.
And though it may seem bitter that by the hands of men we are parted a little
sooner then otherwise we should have been, yet let us consider it is the decree
and will of the Father, and besides, we could not have lived much longer
together, and it will not be long ere we shall enjoy one another again in
Heaven. Oh let us comfort one another with these sayings: Oh be comforted, it
is but a little stroke ere thou shall be where the weary are at rest, and where
the wicked shall cease from troubling thee; Oh remember though thou eat thy
dinner with bitter herbs, yet thou shall have a joy full supper with Jesus
Christ that night: And my Dear, by what I write to thee, I do not under take to
be a Teacher of thee, for this comfort I have received from the Lord by thee. I
hear a Warrant is come to the Lieutenant, I am ready to think it may be
concerning thee to send thee to thy journeys end to morrow, and that because
they may possibly be hindered if they stay till the day appointed, but I am
persuaded that thou art so far from being afraid of it, that thou do long for
the day, which (next under God) to hear of thy willingness to die, will be the
greatest comfort to me in the world. I can write no more, but commit thee to
the hands of that God, with whom thou and I ere long shall be:

Farewell, Farewell, M. Love.
One Comfort I would have thee to carry to thy grave, If ever God did good to
my Soul, thou wast the chief Instrument of it, for I never looked after God
till I saw thy face. July 11.



Another.
My Heavenly Dear,
I Call thee so, because God has put Heaven into thee before he has taken
thee to Heaven; thou now beholdest God, and Christ, and Glory as in a Glass,
but to morrow Heaven-gates shall be opened, and thou shall be in the full
enjoyment of all that glory which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor the
heart of man can conceive. God has now swallowed up thy thoughts of Heaven,
but ere long thou shall be wholly swallowed in the enjoyment of Heaven. Oh no
marvail there should be such a quietness and calmness in thy spirit, whilst
thou are falling into this tempestuous storm; because thou perceivest by the
eye of faith a haven of rest, where you shall be richly laden with the glory of
Heaven. Oh lift up thy head with Joy when thou layest it upon the block in the
thoughts of this, that now thou art leaving thy head, to rest in thy Saviors
bosom; which when thou shall awake, shall be Crowned not with any earthen
Crown which fades away, but with an Heavenly Crown of glory. Oh be not
discouraged when thou shall see a Guard of Soldiers triumphing with their
Trumpets about thee; but lift up thy head, and thou shall behold God with a
Guard of his holy Angels triumphing for to receive thee into glory. Oh be not
dismayed at the scoffs and repreaches thou may meet with in thy short way to
heaven; for be assured, that God will not glorify thy body and soul in Heaven,
but he will make the memory of thee glorious upon the earth. Oh let not one
troubled thought for thy Wife and Babes rise within thee; thy God will be our
God, and our portion; he will be a Husband to the Widow, and a Father to thy
Children; the grace of thy God will be sufficient for us. Now, my Dear, I
desire willingly and cheerfully to resign up my right in thee to my Father, and
thy Father, who has the greatest part and interest in thee. Though men have
separated us for a time; yet our merciful God will ere long bring us together
again, where we shall eternally enjoy one another, never to separate more. And
let me hear how God bears up thy heart, and let me taste of the Comforts that
support thee, that they may be as Pillars of Marble to bear up my heart. I can
write no more: Farewell, farewell, my Dear, till we shall meet where we shall
bid farewell no more, till which time I leave thee in the hands of a
tenderhearted Father; and do rest, till I shall rest with thee in Heaven.

Mr Loves Letter to his Wife, the day of his Death.
My most gracious Beloved,
I Am now going from a prison to a Palace, I have finished my work, I am now to
receive my wages; I am going to Heaven where are two of my Children, and
leaving you on earth where are three of my Babes; those two above need not my
care, but the three below need you^^. It comforts me to think two of my
Children are in the bosom^ of Abraham, and three of them will be in the arms
and care of so tender and godly a mother; I know you are a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, yet be comforted, though your sorrows be great for your
Husbands going out of the world, yet your pains shall be the less in bringing
your Child into the world; you shall be a joyful Mother, though you be a sad
Widow; God has many mercies in store for you, the prayers of a dying Husband
for you will not be lost; to my shame I speak it, I never prayed so for you at
Liberty, as I have done in Prison; I cannot write much, but I have a few
practical Counsels to leave with you, viz.

1. Keep under a sound Orthodox and soul-searching Ministry: Oh there are many
deceivers gone out into the world, but Christ's sheep know his voice, and a
stranger they will not follow; attend any Ministry which teaches the way of
God in truth, and follow Solomon's advice, Pro. 19.27. Cease to hear instruction
that causes to err from the words of knowledge.

2. Bring up your Children in the knowledge and admonition of the Lord; the
Mother ought to be a Teacher in the Fathers absence, Pro. 31.1. the words of
his Mother taught him, and Timothy was instructed by his Grandmother Lois, and
his Mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5.

3. Pray in your Family daily, that yours may be in the number of the families
who do call upon God.

4. Labor for a meek and quiet spirit which is in the sight of God of great
price, 1 Pet. 3.4.

5. Pore not on the comforts you want, but upon the mercies you have.

6. Look rather at Gods end in afflicting, then at the measure or degree of
your affliction.

7. Labor to clear up your evidence for Heaven, when God takes from you the
comforts of Earth, that so as your sufferings do abound, your consolations in
Christ may abound much more, 2 Cor. 1.4.

8. Though it is good to maintain a holy Jealousy of the deceitfullnesse of
the heart, yet it is evil for you to cherish fears and doubts touching the
truth of your graces; If ever I had confidence touching the grace of another, I
have confidence of grace in you; that I can say of you as Peter did of
Silvanus, I am persuaded that this is the grace of God wherein you stand, 1
Pet. 5.12. Oh my Dear Soul, wherefore do thou doubt, whose heart has been
upright, whose walking has been holy, etc. I could venture my Soul this day in
your Souls stead, such a confidence have I of you.

9. When you find your heart secure, presumptuous and proud, then pore upon
corruption more then grace, but when you find your heart doubting and
unbeleeving, then look upon your grace not on your infirmities.

10, Study the Covenant of Grace and Merits of Christ, and then be troubled if
you can, you are interested in such a Covenant that accepts purposes for
performances, desires for deeds, sincerity for perfection, the righteousness
of another, viz. that of Jesus Christ, as if it were your own: Oh my Love, rest
thou in the love of God in the bosom of Christ.

11, Swallow up your will in the will of God: It is a bitter cup we are to
drink, but it is the c^p our Father has put into our hand; when Paul was to go
to su^ at Jerusalem, the Christians could say, The will of the Lord be done, Oh
say you so when I go to Tower Hill, The will of the Lord be done.

12. Rejoice in my Joy; to mourn for me inordinately, argues that either you
envy or suspect my happiness; The Joy of the Lord is my strength, Oh let it be
yours also: Dear Wife farewell, I will call thee Wife no more, I shall see thy
face no more, yet I am not much troubled; for now I am going to meet the
Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus, to whom I shall be eternally married.

13. Refuse not to marry when God offers you a fair opportunity, but be sure
you marry in the Lord, and one of a good disposition that may not grieve you,
and one of a comfortable livelihood in the world,

Farewell Dear Love, Farewell, and again I say Farewell, the Lord Jesus be with
your Spirit, the Maker of Heaven and Earth be a Husband unto you: -- and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ be a Father to your Children: So prays,

From the Tower of London, the 22. of August, 1651. the day of my
Glorification. Your dying, yet most affectionate Friend, till death,
Christopher Love.


