LONDONS TEARS, UPON THE NEVER TOO MUCH TO BE LAMENTED DEATH Of our late
Worthy Member of the House of COMMONS, SR. RICHARD WISEMAN KNIGHT and BARONET.
Whose Hearse was upon Wednesday the 19th day of January, 1642. Solemnly
conducted from King Street in Westminster, through the City of London, to the
Parish of St. Stephens Coleman-street, by above two hundred Apprentises, with
swords and black Ribbands, in Funeral equipage; and with above four hundred
Citizens, all in mourning, with each man his sword in their Procession.
ALL you which hitherto have wavered in your censures of these matchless
Matchiavels of our age, these perfect enemies of our Kingdom: you whose tender
Consciences will believe nothing in its Causes, till you see the effects: The
first of which, your too much incredulity might have prevented: but the latter,
never with all your lamentations. Come and weep over him, whom with all your
tears you cannot recover again, whose each drop of blood out-weighs an Ocean
of that corrupted Fountain, which lies hid in the veins of those who were his,
and our Commonwealths incestive enemies: had not his loyal and courageous
heart bin animated with the true love of his King, Religion and Country, he
easily might have put offrashnesse, which by more grave, and more cautelous
Statesmen of our republic, is accounted wisdom, and exempted himself from
danger, and not exposed his last blood to such eminent misfortune: but as he
was borne more for us all, then for himself, he has ventured what he has
lost, Supremum Spiritum: Although all be for his better purchase which is
Heaven, in so good a cause.

I need not relate to you the circumstance of his fatal blow, which he
received amongst the promiscuous consent of Rascals in Westminster Hall: where
he stoutly fought, Pro aris and focis, but God who knew him more ripe for
heaven then for earth, determined it the second cause of his death, and so took
him from us, who are unworthy of him, or such as he is, and received him to
himself, a fit companion for the Quire of heaven: his body only being left for
its due rites of Sepulcre, was suddenly received, being (wonderful to
consider) by the Apprentises of London, being above 200. in their orders.
Together with 400. of grave Citizens sadly pacing along with their tears in
their eyes, in commemoration that not long before they joyfully conducted him
alive, with the rest of those most worthy Members, from whence they now as
sadly bring him back. Heaven be more propitious to us all in the safe
protection of the rest that remains, if a few more such pillars fall, the whole
Fabric will shake? so this flourishing, peaceful, and fertile land, will
become a Chaos, or mere desolation; the true picture at the length, of her
wretched and most disconsolate sister Germany.

An Accrosticall ELEGY upon the death of the Noble Gentleman Sir WILLIAM
WISEMAN.
REnd not my heart too much ( Grief) leave one string
Entire to hold it by, while I but sing
CAres last farewell; his last peale I must ring.
HE whose brave spirit, aided by the power
ANd great Decrees of Heaven, when that power
RApt him from Earth, amidst his foes I gave
Despair to virtue for another grave.
WHose ashes should like his so blaze her name
IN this her time of banishment, and came
SOrdid and bloody treachery, that she
ENter no more the Scene of cruelty
MAking the world admire brave Wisemans blood
AS a true Tipe of those who yet have stood.
NOw and all times for their Countries good.
LONDON. Printed for John Greensmith. P 642:


