Clavis Medicinae: OR, The Practice of PHYSIC REFORMED: Wherein is described
The Nature and Cause Of most DISEASES AND The Select Way of Cure For the same.
A Method contrary to all Authors in being.

By Jeremiah Love, Doctor of Pysick.

Ex Herbis fit Mel. LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul
Churchyard, at the West End, 1674.

TO THE READERS.
My Friends,
NO Man was born for himself only, but to do good to others, or else to receive
good from others; yet it happens that most men are Self-Seekers in these days:
I have practiced Physic many years, and in the Galenical way; but finding my
self often frustrated in my expectation, after my Medicines given to my
Patients, that at last I found nothing certain in all those Woods or
Wildernesses of Medicines, which I looked upon then as not well prepared. Then
I followed some years the Chemical way of Practice, and in it I thought I had
excelled many; and likewise to see all things, I studied Astrology, that I
might give Judgment upon the sick Party as if I had been with him, and both
these I found to be base and erroneous, for my Scheme showed me sometimes
little danger, and then my Chemical Preparation worked violently, and my
Elixirs and Quintessences, although I gave but some drops, yet I found them to
be too hot, and inflaming the Bodies of my Patients, and so they caused very
bad Symptoms, so I found no reality in either, and so I left them off. Then I
bent my mind to study to find out a way to help Nature, with means that were
safe and easy, which at last I attained to, by the blessing of God to me. And
then though I found at the Decumbiture of the sick party, that the Lord of the
Eighth was in conjunction with the Lord of the Ascendant, and likewise if I
found the Lord of the Ascendant combust in the Eighth, which we conclude in
Astrology, death approaching. Yet by these means used, I found a strange
alteration for a man to be even at Death's door by all men's apprehension, and
in an hour or two to be quick and lively, and without pain. Shall I hide these
Mysteries? A Talent lent me for a time, and I bury it in oblivion? God forbid.
My Life is short, therefore will I publish things of great moment, and show you
the way, or a new Method in practicing Physic, that others which are more
sharp sighted, and of quicker Wits, may not be idle, but to dive into Nature's
Secrets, and to find out some new things, which was not before. Shall we be
always led by the Nose of the Heathens, when we have both Sense, and Reason,
and Scripture to guide us in the Light? And here in this Treatise I have showed
you Experience, grounded upon Reason and Sense; nay a way so safe, that a man
may follow his occasions, and not keep the House, or drink gallons of
Posset Drink, or have Nurses to attend him, or suchlike; I hope I have put an
adjuvant hand to make rough things smooth; and rectify those manifold Errors
which are used in those which practice Physic. What causes, I pray you, that
so many Quacks and Empiricks are suffered, nay applauded? And likewise silly
Women now a days venture to cure the Body by internal Medicines. What Religion
is there that we should tempt the Lord our God in destroying our selves, who
are the Work of his hands? I tell you it is as great a Sin to put our lives
into these Triobolary Empiricks hands, as for a man to murder himself.

Read this little Book of mine, read it through, and mind what you read: you
have in it the very Key of Natures Secrets; a few Medicines, but so grounded
upon Reason, and Sense, and Experience, that it comprehends the whole Body of
Physic, as it was ordained in the beginning: Why then should we be lazy, and
know no more than what is beaten into us, or tread only in our Forefathers
steps, though they went into the mire of Ignorance, and be contented with Ipse
Dixit? Truly their Writings have much Learning and Ingenuity, so they have much
Obscurity and Suppositions of those things which have little real truth in
them. Now my Brethren, my hearty desire is, that this Treatise may be useful
unto all those that shall willingly read it: What I have done in it is
Methodical, and I leave it to others to judge. But if you mislike any thing
herein, write your mind, and deliver it to the Printer, and I will be very
willing by Writing again to satisfy thee, or else I will thankfully accept of
thy Advice, and confess my fault: for, Humanum est errare, The best may err;
some have before me, and others will after me: However let the Will be accepted
for the Deed; which if I find, (God assisting me with Life and Strength) I
shall endeavor to publish some other Tracts useful and necessary for young
Practitioners.

Hic labor, hoc opus est --
-- Noveris si rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non,
His utere mecum.
Clavis Medicinae: OR, The Practice of PHYSIC REFORMED.
CHAP. I.
I Purpose here in this small Treatise to give the most Judicious Reader, and
all Lovers of the Art of Physic, Satisfaction; and likewise lay open to the
meanest capacity, the Causes, Symptoms, and Sings of most Diseases of the Body
of Man, and likewise the choicest and select Remedies for the perfect and
speedy cure of them: A method I think as yet no man ever used, as I could hear
or read of.

First, I here declare unto thee an Apozem which I have made choice of this
many years, for the best and safest working, and the good success of it: A
Medicine so prepared and corrected, that it does (without any danger, pain, or
molestation of the Body whatsoever) evacuate and carry off all corruption and
filthy humors out of the Body. The virtue of this Apozem being so wonderful,
and so well pleasing to the Stomachs of all those that ever took thereof, that
I shall do my Country much wrong, if I should any longer keep from them so
great a treasure.

I have delivered my Bill for the making of it, only to Mr. Fisher, who lives
in St. Olaves Parish in Southwark London, Surgeon, a man whom I have a great
love and respect for, and likewise for many years I have made trial of his just
and honest dealing, and his good Judgment in composing of Medicines, and in
choosing the best Ingredients. And when any man has a mind to make use of it, I
have styled it by the name of Panax Angliae, by which name you may have it.

The Use of this Apozem I shall declare in every Chapter, where I treat of the
Disease particularly, and the way of cure.

CHAP. II.
IF any man should think it strange, or as it were impossible, that one
Medicine should be good for so many Diseases; Know this, that our old excellent
Writers, being Fathers of Physic, have left their Monuments of Learning to us,
which show us diverse Confections, some purge Choler, some Phlegm, and some
Melancholy; so that we must all conclude that they are good in all choleric,
phlegmatic, and melancholic Diseases; so after their manner have I invented
this incomparable Apozem.

And although all our Fathers of Physic being excellent men, have left their
Receipts behind, for composing all sorts of Physic, for all Constitutions and
Complexions, yet I trust we, who as it were stand upon their shoulders, may see
farther than they, if we do strive, and be industrious in those Studies.

Now if we give this Apozem to strong Bodies, we give a greater quantity, and
oftener; in weak Bodies, less is required.

If we are to cure the Head or Stomach, we order to take our Apozem an hour
before they rise, that it may continue the longer in the place where the
corruption is, and so it will work effectually; whereas if one walks
presently after the taking of it, it slippeth away, being liquid, and leaves
the work undone.

Wherefore this Apozem being of a thin substance, gathers it self easily with
the corruption which it finds in the Stomach, and dissolves the same; whereas
Pills, and other Compositions, require first to be dissolved themselves, which
is a great trouble to Nature, and so many times works upon Nature two or three
days after, leaving bad Symptoms behind them, which you shall never find by
taking this my Apozem.

Although this Apozem is a very great cleanser of the Body from filthy corrupt
Humors, yet I confess it is no Universal Medicine for all Diseases (as your
Triobolary Empiricks declare) for this requires help, as you shall see in the
Chapter following, to as much brevity as can be required by few yet select
Medicines, and what no Artist I imagine) dares contradict, as you may see by
the speedy cure. I hate multiplicity on the other side, made by Chemists and
Galenists now a days, and some that are neither of the two, most of which
Medicines are as Clouds without Rain. A fair Tongue and a Plush Coat must needs
do well; but for Virtue, away with it; Ibis Homere for as, Homer himself must
sing Ballads.

The publishing of this my Book is only to show what Artists can and may do: I
would have them take more pains to find the right way of practicing Physic,
and not to fill the Bodies of poor Souls with a Mass of hotch-potch, one mess
contrary to another, and never see the operation of any thing; and not
Quack-like, carry a Box of Pills in their Pockets to cure all Diseases, and so
for a little filthy lucre called money, as too many use now a days, thinking
with themselves there is no Day of Judgment. What shall I say then? Shall we so
continue in this Sin? God forbid.

CHAP. III. Directions.
1. COncerning the taking of this my precious Apozem, You need not be so strict
in keeping your Chamber as you do in taking other Physic; you may walk abroad,
if your distemper will permit you, but keep your self warm, and forbear
drinking. 2. You may take it at any time when you find it requisite, either hot
or cold, as your Stomach can bear it. 3. Children must take little, for a small
Vessel is sooner emptied than a great, and likewise the humors are more
fluxible. 4. Those that are full of ill humors may take it a week or more,
both Spring and Fall. 5. Always take somewhat that is warm, in two hours after,
for it will help the operation of the Medicine. 6. If it work not the first
time, you may take more the next day safely. And if thy Body be always loose,
take the lesser quantity. 7. A spoonful of this Apozem will in most Bodies give
one stool, now you may take three or four or five or more spoonfuls at a time,
as you think fit. 8. When you take this Apozem, abstain from all sorts of Wine,
hot Spices, salt Meats, and raw Fruits, and green Herbs, and all cold things.
9. Take it not at the change and full of the Moon, for then Nature is weak.
CHAP. IV. Concerning the Diseases of the Head and Face.
1. THe Headache proceeds from many Causes, as sometimes from Heat, and
sometimes from Cold, both which being kown, is easily prevented; so that they
happen seldom, and do not stay long.

2. The Headache proceeds from fullness, etc. when men live idly, and fill their
Bodies excessively, as like a Bladder blown up.

3. The Headache proceeds from filthy corrupt humors, which abounds in great
quantity in the Body, which two last are thus perfectly cured, as easy as a
man can wash his hands with a Basin of Water:

Take four or five spoonfuls of this my Apozem every morning for six or seven
days together, for so by that means thou shall cleanse thy self of all filthy
corrupt Humors that remain in thy Body; but observe the Directions prescribed
in the third Chapter.

After the same manner is cured the Giddiness of the Head, and red sore watery
Eyes.

4. The Headache proceeds sometimes from the fume of corrupt Humors, and not
from the humors themselves; for the corruption lying long in the Stomach,
casts up to the brain evil vapors, which offend it, it being of all parts
most sensible.

For the Cure of which,

Take four spoonfuls of this Apozem an hour before you rise, and sleep not, so
do it for three days.

5. The Headache comes by reason of the Excrements tarrying too long in the
Body; for when thou have taken thy Dinner, or the like, first Nature takes to
its self for its nourishment the thin and purest part, and leaves the rest as
gross and corrupt; and then these Excrements tarrying longer than usual,
sends noisome vapors to the Brain, and offends it; so that he that is much
costive, can never be long in Health.

For Cure of which,

Take such a quantity of this Apozem as will give thee one stool a day more
then ordinary; and likewise take a spoonful an hour before Supper: for in so
doing thou shall toll Nature to do her work without help.

So now by what has been said concerning the Headache and sore Eyes, you may if
you will endeavor to know a little more than is told you, you may with a
little Addition to this Apozem, cure Apoplexies, Palsies, Epilepsies, Incubus,
Frenzy, Lethargy, and what not, if it belongs to the Head.

CHAP. V. For Red Faces, Pimples, and other Corruption arising in them, and
likewise the Morphew.
IT is a strange thing, that the Face which is the grace and beauty of a man,
should be so greatly disgraced by corrupt blood, and all the rest of the parts
of the Body clean and fair: The common saying is, The Liver is inflamed, which
in many I think is the only cause, some have it from their Parents, and some by
drinking and sotting, and others that are mighty bashful, and their blood being
corrupt withal, so the Blood has often recourse to their Faces, as a witness to
testify, and so returning away suddenly, leaves some gross corruption behind,
which Nature there casts out.

For the Cure of which, take these Directions, which never failed.

First for three or four days take five spoonfuls of this Apozem, which will
draw the course of humors from thy Face; and then I prescribe thee an Ointment
which is admirable good for the same, you shall have it made by Mr. Fisher
aforesaid. And pray use it after this manner: Anoint your Face where the
Pimples and corrupt Blood lodges, every night gently with this Ointment, cold
with your Finger, the next morning moisten your Face with a little new Milk,
and wipe it gently; use this way a fortnight, and you shall find an alteration.
After the same manner you may cure the Morphew, for it cleanses and purifieth
the Skin wonderfully.

CHAP. VI. For the Itch and Scabs, Byles, etc. Leprosy, Small Pox, Measles.
SOme are troubled with this, having it by Nature from their Parents, some by
long and bad Diet, others by infection, as by keeping company with those that
have their Bodies inclined to Byles, Scabs and Itches.

Now the way of curing by our Artists (so called) now a days, is to purge
first, and then bleed, and after to use some Mercurial Ointment; and in many
Bodies all this will not do; if it does, the next Spring they are most commonly
worser than they were before. Now I will show thee Art it self, as it was at
first instituted, and thou shall as easily cure this distemper by small means,
as when thou art a dry to drink a Cup of Beer to quench thy thirst.

First, Take this Apozem about four spoonfuls every morning for three days, and
take something that is hot two hours after. The fourth day take of white
Briony-Root half an ounce, a sprig or two of Mace, boil this gently in a pint
of Ale, strain it out, and sweeten it with Sugar, drink a good draught of this
well warmed in thy Bed, and sweat three or four hours upon it, and in thy sweat
drink off the rest of the Pint hot; if a Child less, as age does require: Use
this way three days together, and longer, if the Disease have been of long
continuance; and let the Patient in sweating rub his Body with warm Cloths, to
take such corruption as comes out by sweating: after this manner the Scabs
will fall off miraculously.

You may cure the Leprosy, all scald Heads, Scurffs, and likewise prevent any
one from having the Small Pox or Measles, that they shall not have them at all.

I would have all men take notice that this way is the only Galenical way in
practicing the true Physic; and not to fill their Bodies with Drugs, or with
Mercurial or Antimonial Preparations. And you shall see in every Chapter a
contrary method to all Authors extant.

CHAP. VII. For a Cough, or shortness of Breath. For Surfeits by taking Heat
and Cold. For People that are very phlegmatic, and stuffed up with Phlegm, and
for those that are entering into a Consumption.
GAlen would have a cold distemper of the Instrument of Breathing to be the
only cause of the Cough; sometimes a Humor distilling from the Head to the
Trachea Arteria, and sharpness only of the Cuticle of Trachea Arteria going
about within, does provoke the Cough; sometimes it is caused through cold and
phlegm descending upon the Lungs; sometimes it happens through heat dissolving
the superfluous matter of the Brain, and so through a Catarrhal Distillation
the Cough is excited.

Now my Brethren, we all know that Cold is most commonly the original of most
Diseases; for if the Body be full of gross corrupt Humors, having taken a
great cold, presently there arises a putrid Fever, sometimes malignant, and
sometimes pestilential. Now judge you, if a Medicine will disburthen and carry
out of the body this phlegmatic corruption, without weakening of Nature; and in
the highest Fevers, I trust you will grant to me it is the onliest means to be
used.

Then take two spoonfuls of this my Apozem every day in the morning, or if
occasion permit, once in two days: this will I will assure you unlade the body
sweetly of this corruption.

And now will I give thee a Pectoral Drink, which thou may drink as often as
thou will, which will quench thy thirst, bring thy body to its natural heat,
and cure thee of thy cold.

Take of Coltsfoot an handful, Hysop half an handful, Angelica roots bruised a
dram, Liquorish scraped and bruised two ounces, Anniseed half an ounce: boil
this in two quarts of Spring Water gently half an hour, strain it out, and put
two ounces of fine Sugar, drink freely of it warm when occasion serves: by
taking this Pectoral Drink hot mornings and evenings, the phlegm will come up
easily, and is a wonderful Preserver for the Lungs, keeping them from
putrefaction.

Now, good people, there are many in this City of London, that are troubled
with the shortness of breath, and have their Lungs very dry, so that it is a
continual pain and labor for them to breathe, or as the saying is, to fetch
their wind: First, I advise them to take for three or four days, three or four
spoonfuls of this my Apozem, which will cleanse the inward parts of most of the
corruption; then take this Pectoral Drink named before in this manner following.

Take a quarter of a pint of the Pectoral Drink, and put therein the yolk of a
newlaid Egg, and drink it fasting, and fast an hour after it: if thou have been
troubled with this grief many years, by using the Medicines so, will open and
moisten thy Lungs, and help thee: you cannot use it too long, for it is both
Meat and Medicine. After the same manner are cured all those that are entering
into a Consumption: But with this Proviso, they must abstain from all Spices,
Salt Meats, and all Wines, for they fret and inflame their Bodies, and withal
let them take care they over-heat not their Bodies with any violent exercise,
that they strain not their Lungs by violent Coughing; wherefore avoid all
Chestnuts, and all raw fruits, as inimical to them; for this Disease is
difficult, and therefore great care is to be used in their Diet, etc.

Now if any man by violent exercise heat his body excessively, and when he is
so hot, suddenly cool himself by drinking, by rest, or any other ways, so that
this man falls sick even unto death, and it he escape, he remains weak and
sickly during his life. Now, my Friends, Nature misliketh nothing more than a
sudden change from one contrary to another, to wit, from heat to cold.
Wherefore I conclude by reason and experience, that the best way to cure a man
in this extremity, is to bring his body orderly again to the same heat wherein
it was when he took cold, which thou shall do after this manner.

Take half a Pint of the aforenamed Pectoral Drink, and dissolve in it two
drams of Venice-Treacle, let the Patient drink half of it hot fasting, and
sweat four or five hours upon it, and in his sweat let him drink the rest, and
be sure abate his sweat very gently, and beware he take no cold: For three
mornings afterward let him drink a quarter of a pint, with a dram of
Venice-Treacle, hot two hours before he rise, and keep his body warm without
sweating. But if the party have been long sick, and so weak that he is not able
to sweat as before, then assure your self there is little hopes of life.

Note, that if the party be costive, give him three or for spoonfuls of my
Apozem, for that will ease and disburthen Nature, and let him drink some warm
Broth or Water-Grewel an hour or two after.

Courteous Reader, I would willingly root out the Tares of bad Physic, lest
they over-grow the brave Corn of real Medicine.

CHAP. VIII. For the Heart-burning.
I Shall content my self (as most people call it) with the ordinary name of
this Disease, which belongs not to the Heart, but only to the Stomach; and
those who are troubled with this Disease, are commonly at ease after they have
eaten, but after digestion, they feel a continual heat or bitterness in the
mouth of their stomachs: they often are troubled with belching, and sometimes
an inclination to vomit. It continues long in some people, and in others it
comes every foot, especially by eating Fat, Salt, and Choleric Meats.

For cure,

First Forbear those Meats and Drinks after which thou art most troubled, for I
will assure thee they will not make good Blood, and then yon see Nature will
not like it: for if good Diet will help thy Distemper, never take Physic for
the same: but if thy long evil Diet has laden thy stomach with Hot, Salt, and
Choleric Humors, which do cause this Heart-burning, (as it is named).

Then take five or six spoonfuls of this my Apozem every morning for three
days, and so thou shall cleanse thy stomach perfectly, which I avouch to thee
will be a perfect and speedy Cure, and not to eat Chalk, or to take some
cooling Juleps or any such Slops, which will hurt more than heal.

CHAP. IX. For the Cholick and Wind, gnawing of the Stomach and Guts, and all
Corruption that causes Wind.
ALL thee Distempers proceed from corrupt and filthy slimy Humors, which
sticks to the inner part of the Stomach, and the Intestines. Now the common
course of people when they are afflicted, they boil in some Wine, Pepper,
Ginger, and other hot Spices, and all hot Seeds, which is mere madness, for
these hot things are proper to warm a cold Stomach, and make it apt to digest,
being moderately used, than to cleanse it being full of corruption, and these
hot things are only proper for old people that have their natural heat decayed,
so that Nature fails; wherefore we are forced to seek help by Art. Now our
Physicians follow this road, first, an Emollient and Carminative Clister is to
be administered, then a Cordial for to cause rest, and likewise Diaphoretical
means, and then for some day a mass of Pills; and if this do not the work,
make a Fontinel in the Leg, and then in little time as bad as before. If an
Empirick light on such a Patient, presently he has an universal Pill, which
they must take every day, and at night three or four drops of this Elixar,
which is a Panpharmacon, and indeed all good for nothing, and then it is a
Palliative Cure, as they call it.

Now I pray hear a little Reason, and follow Experience, her Lady and
Governess: Take five or six spoonfuls of this my Apozem, if the party be any
thing strong, or else less, and so do five or six days, and thou shall see that
it will cleanse thy Stomach and Intestines of all its filth, and thou shall be
perfectly cured without Clisters, or Issues, or Pills, or any universal
Elixars. And for the future, I would advise thee to avoid all windy and slimy
meats, that thou may prevent those Diseases.

CHAP. X. For Surfeiting by over-eating.
SOme men, by long fasting, coming to Dainty Fare, such as he is not used to
eat, being very hungry, eats over much, and cloyeth Nature, so that Nature
refuses any digestion, as a man having a burden too heavy for him to bear,
does not so much as offer to lift it: this Distemper proceeds from quantity: so
likewise the evil quality of Meats do cause a man to surfeit, as Meat not
roasted: so likewise Fresh Herrings, Fat Pyes, heavy Cake-bread, and the like,
causes great sickness.

For the Cure of these,

If the matter of the Disease lodges still in the Stomach, give him a draught
of warm water, with two spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, which will cause him to vomit:
if it work not quickly, help it with your finger by thrusting it to his throat,
and after vomiting, give him some hot Broth, and let him for three or four
days eat not much in quantity, and likewise what is hot, and of good digestion.

But it this matter has passed the Stomach without vomiting, and there be
little or no digestion, so that now a vomit will do no good:

Then take half a pint of Canary-Wine, and burn it with a sprig of Rosemary and
some Mace, and put in it two drams of London-Treacle, and some Sugar, and drink
it off in a morning hot, and sweat three or four hours in your Bed, according
to the strength of the patient, and in his sweat let him drink posset drink
hot; for I promise you this way will make a persed digestion through the whole
body, of whatsoever he did surfeit of. This way is easy and good, and I
imagine Reason will conduct you so far, that it must needs do the work without
a belly full of Drugs.

CHAP. XI. For continual Vomiting after Meat.
THere are too many now a days that destroy their own Natures; some mind the
filthy lucre of this world, that they will not allow themselves time to eat,
although they have meat, and likewise an appetite, and then in time they would
eat, but then there is no appetite. Some do fill their Carcases so much with
Drink, and smoking that stinking weed called Tobacco, that they cannot eat,
but before they come to many years, Victuals then will not go down, no not so
much as Broth, this is sad!

Now there are two special causes of this Disease: The one is, When the first
Veins which receive the Nutriment from the Stomach, are stopped: The other is,
When the Body is long bound, and the excrement very hard, so that the Patient
seldom goes to the stool: In some people it is so bad, that they never go to
stool, but that which remains after digestion, comes up by vomit.

For cure, take notice of these Observations:

First, Take four spoonfuls of this my Apozem fasting: if that work not that
day, the next take five, and so forth, always increasing the quantity until it
work: And when it has operated, take an handful of Parsley, bruise and boil it
in a pint of White Wind a quarter of an hour and better, then strain it out,
and put some Sugar in it, and the next morning drink a good draught of this
hot, and keep your bed, and sweat three or four hours, and in your sweating,
drink off the rest. After that, let him take fasting two spoonfuls of my
Apozem, and let him continue it so till his body be soluble, and that his
excrement be not dry, or stay too long in his body.

Now, my Friends, the White Wind thus ordered and taken, and sweating withal,
opens the first Veins, and makes a passage into the body. The Apozem of mine
draws down gently the excrement, and brings Nature to her usual course to
all admiration, and cleanses the stomach of that corruption which is the very
cause of this disease.

CHAP. XII. For want of Appetite.
FIrst, when the first veins do not suck, which is their natural action, by the
which they receive food for the nourishment of the whole body: secondly, fat
and gross bodies, which are always stuffed, and so full, that Nature seems to
be contented with what she has, and has little desire of more. For cure of
this, remember these Observations, small but pithy* Take for some days three
spoonfuls every morning of this harmless Apozem, and in little time thou will
find thy self exceeding hungry; it may be Beef will go down, when Chicken would
not before: but if thou have not an appetite presently after taking of this
Medicine, then take the Whitewine as is mentioned in the foregoing Chapter,
after the same Directions.

CHAP. XIII. For Catarrhs and Rheums.
MAny people are troubled with this disease, but especially Scholars, and other
Students, idle persons, and those Tradesmen that stir little. Now the fashion
is to have an issue or two; nay, these issues are to have many pease in them,
which things were forbidden in the Levitical Law, as much as if he had the
Plague: but now there is great alteration, I shall prescribe you a way (if you
will hear reason) to cure your self without these nasty Eyletholes in your
skin, and I imagine a great deal more wholsomer, and better for your health for
the future.

My Brethren, the cure consists more in your own good Government, than in
much taking of Physic, which I utterly abhor, and I trust many discreet people
with me. Now for this distemper, observe these infallible Rules.

1. Use labor and exercise, for by (...) thou shall stir up natural heat, and
consum^ those watery humors which causes thi^ Rheum and Distillations: if thou
can no^ walk abroad, busy thy self with some action in the house, this will
prevent crudities and it is the principal way in part to prevent and cure this
grief; for those that labor much, are seldom or never troubled with it, as is
evidently seen, which to those that use little stirring or motion of their
bodies, are most subject unto: for the outward parts of their bodies are cold,
so that their blood, together with the humors, remain within, neither have
they any evacuation by the pores of the body, as Naturrequireth, to consume
this Rheumatick humor, which then seeks another passage. Then the Patient
spits much, or else a continual running at the Nose, or else it slily trickles
downs upon his Lungs, and causes Coughs, Ptisicks, Consumptions of the Lungs,
and Ulcerations: you must needs confess what I say is really true. 2. I advise
you to eat hot meat at meals, and especially well rested, for I tell you hot
meat warms the stomach, and stirs up natural heat through the whole body, and
so digesteth the humors, but withal talk and be merry at the Table. 3. Be sure
to keep thy head and neck warm, and thy feet likewise dry and warm. 4. Drink
sparingly, and touching thy Drink observe these few Rules. 1. Let thy Drink be
somewhat strong, and not small, for small beer is waterish, and so it will add
to thy disease. 2. If thou drink, drink only at the end of thy meals, for in so
doing thou will suppress that moisture which would ascend. 3. Let thy Drink be
not over stale, sour or sharp. 4. Drink neither White nor Rhenish Wine. 5. If
thou drink, take a Glass of good Claret well Sugered in the midst of thy meat.
5. Fast and watch, for these dry the body. I would not have you rise early,
fast long, eat little, and sit up late: but in stead of those eat freely, and
drink little, sleep hard, but lie warm, for then thy body will be as if thou
did labor or exercise. Now (dear Hearts) watching is unnatural, it makes a
dry senseless brain, it causes sore eyes, and a cold waterish stomach, which
is worse than all. 6. Go into a warm air, and keep thy felt warm. 7. Hold your
breath now and then hard, for this forces the blood to the outward parts of
the body, and causes a stronger Circulation, which turns with the stream the
course of these Rheumatick humors.
Now for cure,

If any man will follow these Rules, that so he may continue his health, (or
else it is vain to seek help) first, I advise you to take six spoonfuls of my
Apozem, an hour before he rises, so do for two days, the, third day at night
going to Bed, burn half a Pint of Canary, with a branch or two of Rosemary,
brew it with some Sugar, and the Yolk of a New-laid Egg, and drink it off hot,
and lie hot all night, this will digest and consume those Rheumatick humors:
Drink this Wine so prepared three nights together.

Note, if the party be lean, and full of Blood, in stead of Sack, use Ale, for
Sack will inflame the Blood.

CHAP. XIV. For the Yellow Jaundise, and all Obstructions of the Liver.
THe Yellow Jaundise proceeds of Choler mixed with Blood, and so dispersed
over the whole body.

There are diverse causes of this disease, but I shall only treat of what is
most usual, and only name the rest.

1. The biting of a Venomous Beast will cause it. 2. The going away of an hot
Fever will do the like. 3. The Inflammation of the Liver will make show of the
same. 4. The weakness of the Gall, which is not able to draw from the Liver
those Choleric humors, but suffers them to be carried with the blood
through the body, and so colors it yellow. 5. The Jaundise is usually caused
by obstruction of those Vessels that are between the Liver and the Gall; which
being stopped, the Choleric humor cannot pass into the Gall, but is carried
with the blood into the body, and so staineth it yellow. 6. It is commonly
through the obstruction of the passage from the Gall to the Bowels, for that
being stopped, the Gall is not able to employ it self, but the excrementitious
Choler is repelled, and returns into the body; which otherwise, should color
and stain the excrement yellow.
In these three last sorts the excrement is white, and the Patient seeleth an
heaviness in his right side, and these are common, and are thus infallibly to
be cured; first, cleanse your body with my Apozem for two or three days, then
take this Drink morning and evening after.

cortex interior Sambuci and Barberior. an. p. i. Linaria m. i. rad. Pratensis
maria, Amaradulcis an. ii. Cichor. i. Croci i. Garioph. Macis an. gr. x. Zing.
s. Ser. Lact. lbii. f. decoct. add Colatur. Sacch. rub. q. s. If this
distemper seems rebellious, take this which never fails: rad. Brion. Alb. s
fol. petros. m ss. vini Albi lbi. f. decoct. add Sacchar. i. s. Take a good
draught of this in a morning fasting hot, and sweat upon it, and in thy sweat
drink the rest; and if you are dry afterward, drink Posset Drink, for the more
he sweateth and drinks, the more the vessels are opened, and the matter
digested, and the Jaundise sooner cured. After this sweating, the next day take
six or seven spoonfuls of my un-valuable Apozem, for that will carry off that
corruption. Now if the Jaundise is not cured by once sweating, but shows it
self, then sweat again once more as you did before: after this same manner is
cured all Obstructions of the Liver.

Now, my Brethren, I have shown you to cure many Diseases of the upper
Ventricle, after a new way, and I think with as safe and speedy a remedy as
ever was practiced since Physic has had a being: Now I will show you to cure
methodically the Diseases of the lower Ventricle.

CHAP. XV. For the Obstructions of the Spleen, the hardness and swelling
thereof. For the Black Jaundise, and also the Hemorrhoids or Pyles, and Scurvy,
which is much subject to English Bodies.
AS the Yellow Jaundise comes of Choler, so these distempers of Melancholy,
joining with the blood, is dispersed over the whole body. He that has the
Black Jaundise, has always a dry, withered and black body; and my Friends, it
is difficult to be cured, and likewise it requires great diligence of the
Patient to observe what is enjoined him: for this humor is very stubborn, and
without great digestion yields to no purgation whatsoever, and that is the
reason our Physicians now adays are so much fooled in the practice; nay, that
is the reason so many Quacks and Empiricks are made, which the common people
judge both to be alike able in judgment. And now for the cure of these hard
distempers, observe this method, and you shall not fail of your expectation.
Ceterach Cutis interior. Fraxini radix Brion. Alb. Petros. an. ii. Ser. Lact.
lbxii. f. decoct. add Sacch. q. s. Take of this decoction a good draught every
morning fasting, and in it two spoonfuls of my Apozem, and walk well after it,
or else labor or exercise thy self that thou may heat thy body, and stir thy
blood, that this drink may be dispersed thoroughly in thy body: so do three weeks
or a month together if occasion serves. For I tell you seriously, the drink so
prepared digesteth the melancholy humor, and makes it fit for purgation; and
the Apozem of mine given with it, carries it off sweetly. Good people I tell
you, that all the Authors that ever treated of these distempers, never gave you
an insight of curing rightly, but prescribe a certain sort of Pills, which have
either black Hellebore, Colloquintid and other stuff which is good only to
choke Daws withal. I would have you to observe withal, to embrocate your left
side with Oil of Wormwood, or an Oil made of Briony.

CHAP. XVI. For the Green Sickness.
THis distemper happens by reason of the obstruction of the menstrual course
of Nature in Virgins, so that in time the Liver is so weakened, that it is not
able to convert the nutriment into blood, and then the digestion is raw, and
the whole body is filled with water and phlegm, in stead of good blood. Now the
foolishness of Maidens to abate their high color, and to look fine, forsake
their diet, and eat much trash, as Apples, Plumbs, Pears, Cherries, etc. such
raw fruits, and Oatmeal, and raw Milk, which in stead of nourishing causes
nothing but corrupt humors* so that their countenance looks pale and greenish,
they feel a great pain in their heads, with a continual panting or beating,
they are very faint, and likewise short breathed: Now I will show you a way to
cure it without the Powder of Steel, or letting blood in the foot, which is the
way of most Practitioners now adays. First therefore for five or six days take
of my Apozem four ounces at a time; after the taking of this, take of White
Briony half an ounce, and boil it in a pint of Ale, with a blade of Mace,
sweeten it with Sugar, drink a good draught of this hot, and go to bed and
sweat three or four hours, and in thy sweating drink off the rest hot: the next
day boil some more as before, and drink a good draught in the morning hot an
hour before thou rifest, and keep thee warm, but not sweat; use this order ten
days, or it is better to walk, or to use some exercise to stir thy blood, and
the humors in thy body, than to lie a bed; and withal eat meat of a light
digestion, and so thou shall have thy cure, Cito, tute and jucunde.

CHAP. XVII. For acute Diseases, as Fevers and Agues, etc.
THese diseases are very common, yet there is but, alas, little help for them:
but we are got into the Thicket of Brambles and Thorns, that we do not know how
to get out, nor strive, and so now they are called the shame of Physicians. A
Wilderness of Medicines now made, but hardly any of them good; and so a young
Practitioner getting into this Wood, cannot get out, unless he sees the Sun at
the Meridian, as I may term it, or tract Nature in all her footsteps, and be
only a help to it; not by strong Spirits or Quintessences, or Mineral
Preparations, as your high and mighty Chemists do, nor with Golden Pills, or
with their high Cordial, or their Juleps, the phlegm of Herbs, as your Galenists
use, but with specifical remedies, which I will here show you the way.

First therefore, observe all Fevers to be either an Inflammation of the vital
spirits, or of the blood by too much motion, or else by putrefaction, or by
obstruction: for you may see daily that motion does heat even to firing, and
obstruction does exasperate that heat included, and so it breaks out violently,
especially in things watery and putrid, as Hay laid up wet at length fires.

Now there are three sorts of Fevers, 1. Ephemera, 2. the Putrid, 3. the
Hectic: The first burns the Spirits, the second the Humors, the third the
solid parts: The first like a raging hot Wind, scorching all it meets with; The
second like boiling Water put into a Cask, and heats it with it self; The third
like an Iron Pot red hot, heats the Water poured into it.




Now this Hectic Fever occupies the Bones and Membranes, and consumes them
with an unnatural heat by degrees, and insensibly, till at length it causes
death.

The Putrid Fever occupies the Blood and Humors, by which the whole Body
grows hot.

The Ephemera is a more subtle flame, feeding upon the spirits only, and
therefore it continues not long, for either health or death in two or three
days follows. And of this sort are the Malignant and Pestilential, which two I
shall treat of by and by.

For a simple Ephemera, I shall only give thee a general Specific, which will
undoubtedly give present help, Deo volente. Suc. Pomor. Silvest. iiii. Succi
semper vivi ii. Lactis rec. lbii. Sant. rub. i. f. decoct, add Colatur. Sir.
Pap. Errat. ss. Drink freely of this Drink as occasion serves: but if this
Fever be not very violent, give two spoonfuls of my Apozem in a morning, and
you need not fail of your work. These means are plain and easy, and what grows
in our own Country.

Putrid Fevers are most usual, and they are continual or intermitting: for if
the humors putrify within the Vessels, and near the heart, the spirit rises
against, and kindles them, and never leaves off till it expels the rottenness,
or be extinguished it self, and this Fever is continual, and often deadly. But
if the humors rot out of their Vessels that is in the veins and members, it is
a Fever intermitting. For the spirit rises up at certain time, and opposes
that rottenness by heat: now this conflict made being far from the heart, (when
it is ended) the spirit returns home: now therefore if this putrid humor be
phlegm, it still returns to oppose it the next day: hence it is called the
Quotidian: if it be yellow Choler, it returns to oppose it the third day and it
is called the Tertian: if black Choler or Melancholy, the Quartan.

The causes of these are, first, Phlegm recollects it self soonest, and makes
new work for the spirits, but is withal sooner cured, and so a continual Fever
lasts not long. Secondly, Melancholy is a dreggy humor, and does not so soon
recruit it self, and being tough and vicious, is not so easily overcome, and
these Quartans are of long continuance. Thirdly, in a Tertian the spirit
opposes yellow Choler, which is hot of it self, and then there is a terrible
hot conflict, and from hence they are called burning Fevers, and they are
sometimes changed one into another, according as one putrified humor or
another is opposed. Now I have shown you the signs and causes of these Fevers,
I will briefly prescribe a perfect way to cure them.

CHAP. XVIII. For the Quotidian Ague.
fol. Centaur. Borag. Beton. an. m. iii. Fumar. m. i. Bac. Heder. iiii. Vini
Albi lbi. Bruise the Ingredients, and digest them altogether in Balneo seven
days, and then draw this off in a Glass still with a gentle fire, until you
have all the water, which keep in a Glass close stopped with Wax. Let the
Patient drink a quarter of a pint of this Water hot two hours before his fit
comes, and keep his bed, an sweat three or four hours, and in his sweating let
him drink Posset Drink hot, and in every draught put in two spoonfuls of this
Water: the next two hours before his fit, do the like in all things as you did
before.

Now let the Patient be kept well from the Air, and things prescribed orderly
used is most commonly cured in two days: but if by some oversight it continues
longer, begin again and use the same means for two days more: but if you take
four or five spoonfuls of my Apozem first before thy sweating, it will be cured
the sooner.

Now if a Child has a Quotidian, and we cannot give these things inwardly. I
will show thee a way to cure it by outward things: Take an ounce of
Briony-root, and beat it to powder, and half as much Wheat Flour, and boil it
in a little Milk till it be like a Poultice, and put it on Clothes being
warmed, and spread somewhat thick, and bind it to the Child's wrists; when it is
dry, take more fresh, and apply, and you shall see in four days to be perfectly
cured.

CHAP. XIX. For the Quartan Ague.
THis is a disease so hard to cure, that it has been accounted ever yet the
reproach of Physicians, for it resists the force and power of all their
Medicines, whether Galenical or Chemical, and does in despite of them triumph
over their Patients. Now, even now will I take an hard matter in hand, but I
fear my slender way will be suspected greatly by the Rabbis of this Age, for
the working so rare a cure: But being thoroughly encouraged both by Reason and
Experience, I will boldly proceed on and inform you.

My Brethren, take on thy two good days (as we call them) being fasting four
ounces of my Apozem; the third day, which is thy fit-day, take nothing; the
fourth day take of the water which I prescribed for the Quotidian, four ounces
and better, well warmed, and keep thy bed, and sweat five or six hours, and in
thy sweat drink hot Posset Drink, and in every draught put three spoonfuls of
the Water prescribed, and one spoonful of good Wine-Vinegar: continue this
sweating four days together: if the Quartan Ague have not left thee in that
time, (which I think is impossible) then upon thy next fit-day, two hours
before the fit comes, take the Water as before, and sweat again; do so only
three times on thy fit-days, and observe after this disease has left thee, be
sure to take three spoonfuls of my Apozem for twelve days, for this Water so
taken and sweating withal, does wonderfully digest this melancholy humor, that
it excels all the preparatives in the world, and my Apozem gently cleanses
the body, and carries it off. Soli Deo sit gloria and potestas in saecula
saeculorum. Amen.

CHAP. XX. For the Tertian Ague.
BE careful to observe this method, for I would not bury any thing in oblivion,
or hide my Talent, for non nobis nati sumus.

First, Let the patient take the day he has not his fit six spoonfuls of my
Apozem, the next day two hours before the fit comes, drink a quarter of a pint
of this Water here prescribed, ( Centaur. m. vi. Endive m. xii. distill these
things bruised with a gentle fire, and keep the Water close stopped with Wax,
let the Glass be but half full, for it will keep the better;) and when you have
drunk this Water being well warmed with a little Sugar with it, keep your bed,
and sweat three or four hours, and in your sweat drink posset drink, and un
every draught put in two or three spoonfuls of this Water: use this means the
second fit, and I question not but you will eradicate this disease. For I tell
you seriously I have cured this disease, and many more extreme hot Fevers, by
this Water so taken even in one fit; but be sure after those fits you purge
your body with my Apozem, and then you will do all things safely; if not, there
may happen some relapse.

CHAP. XXI. The Hectic Fever.
FOr the which I will prescribe a Diet, by which many even at deaths door have
been recovered, which is this: fol. Acetos. Calendul. an. m. i. Semperviv. i.
Lact. recent. lbiii. Pomatii lbss. f. decoct. add Colat. Sir. Papav. Rub. ii.
When the party is thirsty, drink freely of this: then make this broth: Take a
Capon and skin it, and get out all his fat, then bruise it in pieces, and put
it in a pitcher that holds a pottle of water, and put in it four ounces of
Raysons stoned, eight Dates, a Pugil of Borage and Rosemary-flowers, and
likewise put in a pint of good Claret, and half a pint of Red Rose Water, cover
the pot close and paste it round, then put this into a Kettle of water, and so
make the Kettle boil six hours, and be careful in boiling no water comes upon
the paste: then take it out, and strain it, and drink four or five spoonfuls of
this morning and evening.

Or use this:

Take a young Pig and scald it, and cut it in four pieces, and put six quarts
of running water in a pipkin, scum it clean, and put a large handful of Sage in
it, and boil it gently till half be wasted, strain it out, and drink it morning
and evening warm. But if the party be not much wasted away, let him take a
spoonful of my Apozem now and then of a morning, for it will cause him to have
an appetite.

CHAP. XXII. For the Plague, and all Malignant Fevers.
THere be three special causes of this disease:

The first is, the just judgment of God for the sins of the people: In this
case I hold our Divines, that it comes as it were by the Commandment of God,
and then vain is the help of man, when the power of the Almighty works to
destroy; wherefore repentance and amendment of life is the salve for this sore.
Yet seeing we know not his determinate will and pleasure, I wish no man to
neglect such natural means as our Eternal Father has provided for the
preservation of our natural bodies, lest by so doing we sin, and tempt our
Creator, and the Preserver of all Mankind. The second cause proceeds of the
corruption of the Air, which is of two sorts, either general or particular: The
Air is generally infected by the distemperature of the Heavens, then the
weather is long dark, cloudy, foggy, stiffling, very hot and moist, and also
our bodies faint, we loath the breath we draw in and out, then it is difficult
to keep meat sweet, and the Heavens do as it were refuse to draw the corruption
from the earth, but yield down again such as they had taken away before. The
Air is particularly infected by the smell of dead bodies, especially in fights,
when those that are slain lies unburied, which infecteth that particular place.
Also a putrid smell in your Fenny and Marish ground, and especially the smell
of such bodies as resort and lodge very close in one small Room, as in this
City of London, and then people are sluttish and nasty, which infects the vital
spirits, and breeds such corruption; which at last burst out into the Plague.
The third cause proceeds of corrupt humors in man's body, engendered by bad
Diet; and these two last comes by Gods permission, as the first comes by his
Commandment.
For preventing this heavy Visitation, 1. Make fires in the streets to cleanse
and purify the Air. 2. Let people walk out into the fields, to take the fresh
Air, and let their Houses be made clean and sweet by strowing sweet herbs, and
airing their beds, and opening their windows to let the Air in. 3. Let no House
be over-pestered with too many Lodgers, and let all vagabond and lazy
unnecessary members be forced out, for this will cleanse a City as a purge will
a man that is full of corruption.


For cure, take these Observations.

Take of Endive-water two pound, Centary-water one pound, Ivy-berries half an
handful bruised, boil these gently a quarter of an hour, strain it out, and
dissolve in it of Mithridate or Venice-Treacle two drams, Sugar an ounce and
half, Wine-Vinegar three spoonfuls:Now as soon as ever the Patient does
complain, and Nature as yet strong, give him a quarter of a pint of this Drink
fasting, being warmed, and let him sweat in his bed eight or ten hours if he
can bear it, and in his sweating drink hot posset drink, and in every draught
two or three spoonfuls of this drink: when he rises, get him some broth, and
be careful to keep him from the Air: if he do not find ease in his sweating,
the next day do the like: this way will cure him without having a sore, or else
it will help Nature so far, that it will force out the sore speedily: unto
which use these Applications: first, embrocate the Tumor or Carbuncle with Oil
of Lilies, being warmed, then take two yolks of Eggs, a dram of Saffron
pulverized, Linseed Oil, and Oil of Camom. of each a dram, spread it upon Cloth
somewhat thick, and apply it: use this course, for it will speedily break it,
then dress it according to Art: After the same manner are cured all Malignant
Fevers, and Epidemical Diseases.

CHAP. XXIII.
MY Friends, I have here given you a brief Method of curing many Diseases, a
way different from the general road of both the Galenists and Chemists; if you
would but fancy them, they are matters of great moment; they are not Coleworts
boiled over and over a thousand times, and crammed in, even to nauseating: but
I tell you farther, it is the only introduction and the right path, if you have
little more wit than is told you, to cure all the Diseases of the Body, both
with speed and safety. It is not a superficial Knowledge that will ever raise
Love or Admiration. We are all placed in Natures Garden, why then are we idle?
but let us learn the Works of Nature, and pry into her secrets, that we may
contemplate more things, and with greater delight and profit than all our
forefathers could ever tell us; for we all know Nature is not barren, to spend
all upon our fathers, and leave nothing for us their children: if we want an
Interpreter, the Maker of Nature is the best himself; is there no God in
Israel, that we should go to enquire of the Gods of Ekron? must we rob the
Indies for poisonous Drugs to cure us, when we have balsamous Herbs enough in
our own Gardens, but far fetched and dear bought always pleases Fools and
Ladies.

I shall now give you some Specificks, or Remedies appropriated for many
Diseases, which things used, and cleansing thy Body with my Apozem, thou shall
find them never to fail thee in thy expectation.

CHAP. XXIV. For the Stone.
R. Virga Aur. pariet. Saxifrag. an. m. i. S. Petros. Lithosperm. an. s. Bac.
Junip. i. Alkakeng. ii. Frax. Clavis i. Licoriza vi. Vini albi lbiii. f.
decoct. add Sir. Dialth. ii. Lapis Prunell. ii. drink of this morning and
evening.

For the Gout.

Album Ovi no. ii. Sal marin. decrepit. and pulv. s. Bol. Armen. ii. Vng.
Popul. s. m. f. Cerot.

Or,

Vng. Popul. ii. Ol. Vitriol. i. stir it together, and embrocate the place
grieved, but withal take my Apozem, or else it avails but little.

For to ripen any Boil or Sore, and to break it.

Ficuum pinguium i. Sapon. alb. s Sal marin. decrepit. iii. bruise these very
well, and with Oil of Lillies make an Unguent.

For a Cough.

Coepar. Coct. ii. There. Vinet. s. Sir. Viol. i. Ol. Amigd. dulc. s. Ol. Anis.
i. Hysop. g. 10. pull. Enul. Came. Ireos an. i. Saec. cand. i. m. f. Electuarium,
take the quantity of a Nut morning and evening.

For a Tumor in Scrotum.

Calom. Arom. Sem. agnus Cast. an. ii. fol. rutae Glastum an. m. i. Farin. Lini
Foernig. an. s. Faecula Zythi non lupul. lbi. f. decoct. add Farina fabarum,
and Ol. Camomel. f. Cataplasm.

Or This.

Vvae passae ruta Sem. Cumini Ol. Lillior, an. q. s.

For Strumes, or scrophulous Tumors.

Emp. Diach. cum Gumm. iv. storax Artanita Assa Foetid. an. ii. Ol. Parthen. i.
Amalg. ii. m. f. Emplast.

Or This.

Gum. Ammoniac. ii. Vng. Dialth. i. rad. brion. alb. pulv. ii. Cera s. Resin.
Pini vi. Amalg. ii. m. f. Emp.

For the Scurvy in the Gums.

Rad. Torment. Bistort. an ii. fol. ros. rub. rosm. an. p. i. Vini rub. lbs. f.
decoct. wash the Gums often with this.

For a Pleurisy.

Olibanum Resin. pini an. i. Cineres Cardui iss. Mel s. f. Elect. take this
upon the point of a knife, and it will give present case, and if you take my
Apozem, it will perfectly cure it without bleeding.

For the Worms.

Mithrid. ii. Aloes i. Ol. Sabin. iss. make a plaster to put to the Navel.

For Gravel in the Kidneys.

Ol. Amigd. dull. ii. Sir. dialth. i. take this in the morning fasting.

For the Pain of the Sides and Spleen.

Rad. Aristol. rot. i. Mirrh. i. Aqu. Cardui ii. Sir. Artemesia i. drink this
off, being a little warmed.

For a old Cough, and Pthisick.

Rad. brion. pulv. i. Mel ii. Lohoch de pull. vulp. s. Sp. Sulph. g. 10. f.
Elect. take the quantity of a Nutmeg every morning fasting.

To cause a speedy Delivery.

Aq. Brion. ii. Mirrh. s. Croci g. 10. drink it out, and if you did but take 2
or 3 days before about 2 or 3 spoonfuls of my Apozem, you will do your work
very easy.

For the Dropsy.

Suc. Cucumer. agrest. Ebuli, an. ii. Ol. Oliv. iii. Cera i. boil these well
together, and make an Ointment, and anoint the Belly every night hot, and take
my Apozem every day, thou shall have a speedy Cure.

For spitting of Blood, or bleeding inwardly.

Hypericon Centinod. plantag. an. m. i. Lact. recen. lbiii. boil these
together, and drink freely of it.

Or This.

Plantag. Lamii albi, an. m. i. Lact. recen. lbiii. and drink it as before.

For Fluxes.

Mastick s. Aq. fontan. lbiii. f. decoct. add Sacchar. q. s. drink often of it,
but carry off the peccant humor by my Apozem: if it proves violent, give this
Glister.

Torment. s. fol. plant. ros. rub. an. m. i. Aq. Cordei lbi. f. decoct. add Mel
ros. i. vitel. ovi no. i. f. Enema.

For a sore Throat.

Auricul. Indae. pipernig. Pirethruman. i. f. pulvis: put this in your Throat,
then apply outwardly a Cataplasme de ficubus rad. Althen. an. i. Myrrh. ii.
Croci s. first embrocate the place with Ol. Camomel. and wash it with this
lotion water: Aqua plant. Verb. an. ii. sacc. Saturni gr. 10. Sir. Crussul. i.
but if you will make speedy have give first 3 or 4 spoonfuls of my Apozem. and
then use the means prescribed, and you will cure it without bleeding.

To cause Urine.

. Rad. Alth. s. rad. foenicul. petros. an. i. sem. petros. Lithosper. an. ii.
Aq. Font. lbii. f. decoct. add Sir. Dialth. iss. drink of this morning and
evening.

For the Hemorrhoids and Piles.

Fol. plant. m.ii. Ol. lini i. f. Cataplasm. apply it warm to the place grieved.

For bleeding at the Nose.

If it be critical, first take my Apozem, then apply this to thy forehead:
Terra Sigill. bol. verus sang. Dracon. an. i. Album ovi. m. f. Catapl. put thy
feet in warm water, and this will do without letting of blood.

For Burning and Scalding.

Fol. plant. semperviv. consolid. an. m.ii. stercus ovil. ii. pingued. ovium
lbi. make an Ointment.

Or this.

Stercus Anser lbi. Axung. Porcin. lbii f. Vng. anoint the place hot twice a
day, and clip not the Blisters till the third day: or else as soon as it is
done anoint it with your common black Soap, and it will never blister.

For a Fellon.

It is very troublesome, and so common, that many have lost a Joint for want of
good means: Take this though trivial, and it will do thy work: Acet Vini opt.
and furfur tritici, boil these together, and apply it hot as the Patient can
endure it, dress it twice a day; so do for 3 or 4 days, if occasion serves; if
the place be tender, anoint it with a little Oil before thou apliest thy
Poultice: after the same manner are cured any hot Swellings, and Erisipepelas
Tumors.

For Ringworms and Tetters.

Bath the place two or three times a day with the Juice of Celendine, and it
will certainly cure thee.

For the Toothache.

Take the Juice of Tithymal and Wheat Flour, and make Past with it, if thy
Tooth be hollow put some of it in, and also put some in a cloth, and hold it to
thy Gums; but if thy body be moist and rheumatick, follow that method in the
Chapter prescribed for Catarrhs and Rheums.

For Worms of all sorts.

Centor. Absinth. marin. ana i. Seen Alex. s. Vini Hispan. iv. Mel iii.
pulverize those things that are to be pulverized, and mix altogether, and put
it in a clean bladder, and tie it close, and hang it in the Chimney till it be
a hard mass, then give it in what you please: the quantity to be taken is from
10 Grains to 30, or 40, it kills all Worms, and causes them to void.

For a malignant Fever.

Radix Scoreoner. i. Licorit. iii. Corn. Cervi s. fol. Melij. m. i. uvae
Corinth. ii. Sem. Coriand. ii. Aq. Font. lbii. add Sir. Limon. ii. f. decoct.
drink now and then a small draught of it.

For Green Wounds.

Panancolon. m. iv. Axung. Porcin. iv. Ol. Oliv. lbs. Cera Citrin. iii. f. ung.

For the Shingles.

Suc. Plantag. semperviv. solan. Acet. Vini opt. (...) ii. misce. bath the
place hot.

For Tetters and Ringworms.

Aloes cicotr. i. Acet. Vini opt. iii. Ol. Vitr. gr. xxx. misce.

For Bruises.

Nost. Apozem. ii. Sperma Ceti gr. xxx. externally.

Ol. Petrolei i. Ol. Tereb. s. Ol. Ros. and cer. Citr. an. ii. embrocate the
place hot.

For Blackness or Blewness in the Face.

Vung. Dialth. s. Sperm. Ceti gr. xx. misce.

For Aches.

Ol. Laurin. i. Ol. Vitr. i. misce.

For the Piles.

Album Graecum i. Ol. Lini ii. Cera i. f. ung.

For a weak Back.

Consolid. Hormin. Centinod. an. m. i. Aq. Font. lbii. f. decoct add Vitell.
ovi no. ii. nuc. mosc. no. i. Sacch. ii. outwardly.

Empl. Dialth. Simp. Diapal. an. ss. Bol. ver. i. Ol. Ros..ij f. Empl.

For Deafness.

Ol. Lillior. ss. Bac. Laur. i. boil this together, then put a drop or two in
the Ear.

For sore Eyes.

Lap. Calam. usti and in ij. Vin. alb. extinct. ss. Sacchar. alb. cand. iij.
misce.

For the Dropsy.

Stere. Vaccin, lbss. Sem. Anis. Cumini pulv. an. ii. apply it hot.

CHAP. XXV.
MY Brethren and Friends, I have given in a Bill likewise to Mr. Fisher
aforesaid, for to make a drink which will really dissolve the Stone, so that
any man may be cured, without that rigid operation of Cutting, and likewise it
is the only way to prevent the same for the future.

CHAP. XXVI.
NOw will I give you rules for to preserve health, which being observed, a man
may live to extreme old age: first, use not these things which greatly digress
from that constitution and mediocrity in which man was created: Now all
Physicians do call every thing hot or cold, in respect of the Nature of man, so
things may be hot in the 1, or 2, or 3, or 4 degree; so likewise on the
contrary for coldness: so we may gather from hence like desires like, and
abhors the contrary: Now those things that are like, and agrees best with
the Nature of man, are good, wholesome, usual Meats and Drinks, a dry, fresh and
sweet Air, moderate Sleep and Labor; which although they were allotted to us
for a punishment by God our Creator, yet mercifully withal he has made it a
necessary means to preserve our Healths. Now those things which disagree most
with our Bodies are these, (which to tell you I am afraid to please all men:)
All Wines, Spices, salt Meats, and all hot things which are so by nature; which
a man may know by the Taste; for they either bite like Pepper, or fret like
Salt, or else leave some manifest heat in the mouth. Now on the contrary, avoid
all raw Fruits, and cold Herbs, and such things of the same nature; much use of
Sawces devised by such whom many times our just God punishes by want of
Appetite, and having Meat at will, as the poor for want of Meat have a good
Appetite. And likewise shun to live in thick foggy air, or idly, and exceed
not in eating or drinking, which we call good fellowship, sleep not too much,
or watch much, or use much those venereal actions, but use these things
moderately and discreetly.

Now, Good People, seeing all people are subject to Death, which was allotted
by our Creator to Man for Sin; and so we are sensible that our Bodies, as
yielding thereunto, do by degrees gather always Corruption: Now to preserve our
Healths, as much as in us lies, until we have run that race which Almighty God
has appointed, I shall commend unto you, and wish you all to make use of, this
Receipt which follows.

Take Borage and Parsley of each an handful, boil in a quart of Posset Drink,
strain it out, and keep it in a clean vessel, drink a good draught of this
every morning, putting therein two or three spoonfuls of my Apozem
beforementioned, and so continue drinking it ten days every Spring and every
Fall; if thy Body requires more, drink it longer: By this means thou may
prevent many Diseases, and keep thy Body in a very good condition: This makes
Women apt to conceive, if (during the taking) they live chaste, and makes Men
quick and nimble in all their proceedings, and, may I tell you, what not. Now
to the only wise God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost I ascribe all Honor, and
Glory, and Adoration for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

