A true Relation of a great VICTORY OBTAINED (Through Gods Providence) BY The
Parliaments Forces in Cheshire, under the command of Sir William Brereton,
AGAINST The Kings Forces under the Command of Sir William Vaughan, near
Denbigh, November 1. 1645. Where were taken of the Enemy, about Four hundred
prisoners, Five or six hundred horse, and above One hundred slain. Sent in two
Letters to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation be
forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the Golden-Dragon near the
Middle Temple, November. 5. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Honorable Sir,
IT pleased God this day to bestow upon us a memorable Victory near Denbigh;
such is the throng of business lying on us at this time, that we cannot
signify the particulars under our own hands, but commit the account thereof to
Mr. Lancaster, Chaplain to the Cheshire Forces, who was an Eyewitness in this
Service; whose relation you may credit as under the hands of

Your most humble and faithful Servants, Tho: Mytton, Mic. Jones, James
Louthian, Geo: Gouldegay.

Denbigh Town, first Novem. 1645.
To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Honorable Sir,
IT pleased the most high, who commands all the Armies in heaven and earth, to
magnify his power this day by a memorable Victory over the Enemy near Denbigh,
of which (being appointed thereunto by the Commanders, whose many other
employments transmit it to this pen) I shall render as full an account as may
be expected from a work yet indigested.

Sir William Brereton upon his return to Cheshire, found the work for reducing
Chester and Beston castle in a good posture; but the Enemy esteeming Chester
the Masterpiece of the Kingdom, extended their utmost endeavors for the relief
thereof, gathered into a body about Denbigh, waiting an opportunity for the
effecting of that high Design, without which they gave up those parts as
utterly lost; sir William reserving a competent strength to make good both
Leaguers, sent away Col: Jones and Adjutant Louthiane, dextrous and trusty men,
with the Cheshire Forces and Auxiliaries of the counties of Lancaster, Derby,
Warwick, Mountgomery and Salop; the whole about fourteen hundred horse, and
one thousand foot, being the cream of all these parts of the Kingdom. The
Enemy, under the command of Sir William Vaughan (as our best Intelligence by
the prisoners gives us) were about seventeen hundred horse, and four hundred
foot: on Thursday night we marched to Moulde, on Friday to Ruthin, where having
Intelligence the Enemy was at Denbigh (reported to be a far greater number) we
hasted thither upon Saturday, Novem. 1. accompanied with that active Gentleman,
Gen: Mytton and part of his Auxiliaries, the rest being left at Chester. The
Forlorn-hope, forty out of every Regiment was commanded by Capt. Otter captain
of the Reformades a gallant Soldier, and Capt. Will: Edwards a Cheshire
captain, and well-deserving Gentleman, who coming to VVhitchurch a mile from
Denbigh, were in a lane flanckt by the Enemies horse and Dragoons, so that they
were forced to make good that pass with the Forlorn-hope and Cheshire
Dragoons, under the command of capt. Finch and capt. Holt, stout and resolute
men, these, with the Forlorn-hope, behaved themselves gallantly, and maintained
the pass till the foot came up, the most part of which, with the Warwick and
Derbyshire horse, commanded by Major Sanders and Major Hokesworth, seconding
the Forlorn-hope, bare the burden of the day, whiles the Reformades, Cheshire
horse, and four hundred Lancashire foot were intended for a greater service;
for, the Commanders finding that strait lane too difficult a pass to fall
through upon the Enemy, who were marshalled in open field; these last mentioned
(by the advice of some who know the country) were drawn thence by
Denbigh-green, a way near four miles in compass, to fall on the Enemy upon
even ground, which whiles drawn off, the foot (exceeding forward to engage
themselves for the whole) beat the Enemy out of the lane, and routed both horse
and foot, driving them under the command of the castle, where they rallyed
themselves, but the forlorn-hope, Derby and Warwick horse, with the foot,
encountered them again, and utterly routed, whom the horse chased eight miles in
the way to Conway, making great execution on them in the way, taking many
prisoners, and five or six hundred horse, and so long pursued, that not above
seven score were left together.

To give every one his due, in this service, would savor too much of
vainglory: But this I may modestly report, That every one endeavored to exceed
each other in Gallantry, whose spirits God had raised to so high a pitch, as
might suit to a work of so high a nature. Its conjectured by those who are best
able to give account herein, that above one hundred of the Enemy were slain,
about four hundred taken prisoners, with diverse men of quality. Its not known
that any of ours are slain, and few wounded.

It is the desire of our hearts, that God alone may have the honor of his own
work, the characters of whose power are so memorably stamped upon it, whose
goodness our sins have not yet so wearied, to make him weary of renewed
mercies. VVhiles we set before us, that which our eyes have seen, the Enemies
compact body, falling off at pleasure, under the protection of the castle, our
distracted body the lesser part engaged with them, the greater at too great a
distance for our own relief, theirs flying, our small part pursuing,
overtaking, spoiling, and now safe returned, after so great travel and hazard,
we cannot but proclaim to the world, that the Heavens rule; to the Church,
that this God is our God for ever and he shall be our guide unto death. By the
next there will be given an exact account of the prisoners, and most memorable
passages, which now cannot be presented by

Sir, Your Honors most humble Servant, Nathanael Lancaster.
Denbigh town, (...) 1. 1645.

