THE PRAYER OF Colonel John Lambert IN CAPTIVITY.
This Prayer is not in the Hebrew, but was Translated out of the Greek by his
Chaplain for the Colonels own proper use.
MOst Plaguye and most Confounded Ill Fortune, Thou that did favor Oliver,
and Bulstrode, Whitlock, that did exalt the Poor and Needy, and for many
years together send the Rich empty away; Thou did bless Clowns with the
blessing of Money baggs, and made Jone as good as my Lady, why, Oh why have
Thou left me in the Mire? I confess Thy Afflictions are Unsupportable, and Thy
Fickle, Giddy, and Whimsical ways, are to me unsearcheable. Yet Thou art not
altogether without Compassion, Thou have ostentimes returned to those whom Thou
have made Miserable, and made them as happy as before thou had rendered them
Contemptible; When will Thou deal so by thy Servant John Lambert? I confess I
did Offend Thee with my Impudence, for I unseated the RUMP too soon, I vexed
the City too early, and showed my Teeth before I was well able to Bite. Yet in
one thing I Obeyed Thee, for I put my Confidence in a Fool, thinking Thou had
favored him. If thy Maxims be not true, that was none of my fault. Thou did
help me out of the Tower by Thy Favor; but Thou did very discourteously
suffer me to be taken again (Hells Curse light on Thee) and now my
Transgressions, are multiplye'd before my Enemies: So that I am only leapt out
of the Drying Pan into the Fire. How long Ill Luck will Thou knit Thy Brows;
and Frown upon him that was once Thy Darling. Remember what Thou have been
toward me, and for shame let not all the World see what an unconstant Whore
Thou art: Yet if Thou be resolved to make me the Sport of thy wanton Hours,
I beseech Thee to provide well for my Daughter the Infanta of Wimbleton, and
suffer her not to be jeered to Death for the Folly of her Father; take not from
my Wife the Comforts of the New Exchange, but enlarge the Hearts and Purses of
the Sectary's toward her, that she may not be forced to keep in and sigh in
Fair Weather, but may still visit Hide-Park and the Spring-Garden, with a Pomp
befitting their Generals Wife. And as for my self deliver me out of Prison if
it be Thy Will, least a worse thing befall me, for I hear Innocent blood, and
that Royal too crying out for revenge. Oh grant that the Portugal Ambassador
may beg me, and send me out of the noise on it, where it may happen that by Thy
Favor I may be Protector in a strange Country, that am so much despised in my
own. But if Thou will have me Dye, Mazzle up the Mouth of gaping History, that
it may not publish my Dishonor, and the ill Success of my Rebellion, my
Effeminate Escape, and pitiful Submission in the Field. More I might say, Dear
Goddess; But I never used to pray long, or much: And therefore do but help me
out at this dead lift; and Thou shall be my only Deity, to which I and my
Successors will ascribe all our praises while the World endures.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.


