Illumination to Sion College.

WHEREIN, Their calling to the Ministry (the foundation whereof not being
built upon Christ) is dissipated, their arrogance hereupon manifested, the
extent of Magistrates power in general defined; the execution of the late
King, and the seclusion of the late members of Parliament farther justified;
the former Declarations of Parliament and Scriptures which they cite,
explained; their Objections from the Covenant, removed in the grammatical
sense thereof; and the Parliament and Army from their aspersions in all
vindicated. Being for answer, to the Representation of their judgments, in a
Letter to the General, January 18. last: Serves also to their Vindication: And
in part to a Pamphlet entitled, Essex Watchmens watchword: Likewise in effect
to a later Libell (supposed Mr. Loves, entitled, A Vindication of the
Ministers from the aspersions (alias the Etymologies) of Mr. Price, in his
Clerico Classicum, etc. To which latter Pamphlet, is annexed a brief answer to
what is not so fully hinted in that to the Ministers.

By J. L. as cordial and fervent a thirster after the Nations prosperity, as
any.

F^^k. 22.25. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the mids thereof like a
roaring Lion, ravening the prey; they have devoured souls, they have taken the
riches and precious things, etc.

Micah 3.6 Therefore night shall be unto you for a Vision, and darkness shall be
unto you for a divination, and the sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the
day shall be dark over them.

2 Colloss 8. Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy,
and vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of
the world, and not after Christ

Mr. Will. Prinne page 201. Sovereign power of Parliaments, etc. To that
Objection that Kings are of div^ne institution, and therefore impunishable: His
second answer, viz. All Ministers of the Gospel are as much, if not more jure
divino, and by God^ own ordination as Kings are; as our Kings Writs to Bishops
in the words, rex eadem gratia, episcopo, attest. but they for their offenses
and misdemeanors contrary to their function, may be both forcibly resisted,
censured, deprived, degraded; yea, and executed, notwithstanding their divine
right and institution; as the Cannons of most Councels, the practice of all
ages; yea, the express letter of the 26. Article of the Church of England,
with all our Episcopal Cannous and Cannonists arrest: therefore tyrannical,
degenerating Kings may be so too, by the self same reason, in some cases.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the
Black-spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's. June 1. 1649.

To the Reader.
Reader,
ACcording to my promise in a former Book (entitled The Execution of the late
King justified) being a chief cause hereof) I now tender thee this ensuing
discourse, desiring (according to the Title) the intended effect thereof: which
if, through obstinacy, diverted and repelled; yet I shall patiently acquiesce
in its truth; knowing, that light and truth are so even when rejected of those
they are offered to (as some more Orthodox assertions hereof have been, though
their labor is not in vain in the Lord;) However, whilst thou read it,
shake off the inclination of thy opinion, do it impartially, and let truth and
reason take impression upon thy heart, where ever they be, according to the
desire of thy affectionate friend herein,

J. L.

Errata.
PAge 9. line 42. for lest read least, p. 11. l. 39. for appear r. operate, and
p. 11. l. 45. is in the place of 46. and 46. in the place of 45. p. 12. l. 46.
for o frequently, r. so frequently, p. 13. l. 29. for a Covenant r. the
Covenant, p. 14. l. 21. for the same end r. to the same end. p. 15. l. 17. for
reign r. reigns, p. 21. l. 37. for imputed r. reputed, p. 22. l. 41. for dutty
r. duty, p. 24. l. 2. for a cupting, r. attempting, p. 25. l. 47. for band r.
brand, p. 27. l. 24. for this r. thy, and l. 43 for did reprove, r. did then
reprove, p. 28. l. 7 for that r. that, p. 30. l. 41 for his law r. the law, p.
31. l. 7. for out r. ought, and l. 11. for when r. where, and l. 30. for
overaigne r. sovereign, p. 32. l. 7. for satisfy r. satisfy.

Illumination TO SION-COLLEDGE.
O ye (self terming, and so imposing) Ministers of the Gospel:
It is not (or at least should not be) unknown to you; what self Intere^t
appears, in your assuming so great a power, only by virtue of that Title:
through which you exceed the sounds of ministerial liberty; and many of you,
being blinded with self (by whom the rest may be spur don, or else the same
lust will appear uppermost in all) are so furious, that you transgress the law
of Christian meekness; which I shall proceed more clearly to discover
(avoiding a long Preamble) in the subsequent Answer: to the subject matter of
your Letter.

And therefore in the Preamble to the following matter in your Letter, you
confess, diverse applications have been made, as well in writing, as by verbal
messages; inviting the Ministers of London, or some of them, to meet with the
Officers of the Army, in their consultations about matters of Religion; which
you say is most suitable to you Profession. And a delay in the propagation
whereof, your selves has often decryed, as a sin in others; and yet now are
guilty of the same: by urging civil (though groundless) reasons, as will
appear in that your concurrence, (which amongst the rest, you make one ground
of this your writing) with your quoted Brethren in their dislike (which you
say, you were willed to signify) of those mentioned proceedings of the Army.]
For your refusal of such meetings: which refusal had it indeed, proceeded
from right principles of foresight, that such a meeting would have inevitably
(through your own busy dispositions) produced a controversy about civil
government (with which authoritatively, you are not to meddle) and so have
frustrated the end of your meeting, viz to consult about matters of Religion:
or from insight to your own unworthines [of so indulgent an invitation in
preference of what you profess, viz. Ministers of the Gospel, [ though your
calling thereunto is unwarrantable] men of parts and the like] through those
many unjust, and public contradictions, and Pulpit aspersions (many of you
choosing subjects for that very purpose) that you have cast upon their
proceedings: upon these grounds, it had been acceptable, and laudable in you to
have refused a meeting; but on the contrary, not being contented with that
preassu^^d title; but soaring to be Ministers of the State likewise, to which
your ambition, the Army having put a stop, or at least, because they would not
depend upon your fallible judgments, and so limit the spirit of God and their
own reason, and consciences to your way of government and interpretation of the
scripture thereto: for these reasons, which are the main, to refuse a meeting
was contemptible.

But that your matter might seem the stronger, you ascribe your selves a large
circuit viz. the Ministers of London, in defense of this your peremptory
refusal under that style: when the^e are as many sound, holy, conscientious,
and (almost if not quite as many) learned, and yet contrary minded men [whose
title is as good to the Mini^tery] as your selves therein. But being carried on
with that lust of self esteem, and continuance in the kingdom, you convert the
reproofs in scripture unto wicked men, to those that oppose and resist this
lust as a sin in you: and whereas you should lift up your voices as trumpets,
to show the people their transgressions, as swearing drunkenesse, whoredom,
pride and the like; and against the Magistrates for bearing the sword in vain
herein; you excite the people to more sin, which is fle^^ly contention, and
opposition, being far distant from your assumed title, Minisers of the Gospel,
and so should be of peace. But justly may that woe be pronounced against you;
Woe be unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good; Is 1.5.^0.
which put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter, for
sweet, and sweet for sour.

But in your 2 page, you discover that so openly, of your selves, that needs
not be discovered to you, for your words are had a conference been desired
with (...) o^^h, to have g^^e^ you resolution, whether the ways wherein at
present you are walking, are agreeable to the word of God; we should have
delivered our judgments, etc.

There needs no farther testimony of your ambition, or discovery of those ends,
for which you first engaged and complied in deposing the Bishops [though you
yet continue your Ordination from them] and conjunction, would supply their
places: then these your own aspiring words, whereby you demonstrate, that you
would be (as claiming a sole right thereunto) the Armies counselors, as if the
spirit of God rested upon you only, that none could discern what is agreeable
to Gods word, or what is rational, and essential to the peace and freedom of
the kingdom, in the establishment of a civil government (the word of God not
prescribing every particular expedient therein) but your selves: and as if
there were no Ministers, that had the same title, to the preaching of the
Gospel, that sided with the Army, and that you are the only men to be enquired
off, concerning the mind of God in his word: but your conjunction herein may
well be compared to theirs in Ezekiel. 22.25. there is a conspiracy of her
Prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion, raving the prey: they
have devoured souls, etc. Many poor souls have been allured to depend upon your
doctrine as infallible, (and so are deceived) through your usurping and
maintaining such a sole right, to explicate the scriptures, especially upon
men's traditions, humane grounds, degrees in leaning; which if any expedient at
all, as receiving it by tradition, yet one of the least, 1 Cor. 1.26.
when the Apostle says expressly, not many wise men after the flesh, etc. but
God has chos^n the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise (that are
so esteemed by the world) and vile things of the world, and things which are
despised: Verse 28.
[such as Cobblers, and Tinkers; let their outward calling be never so mean, by
reason whereof, they are contemned by the world, and thought unworthy, as to
the exposition of the scriptures; yet these] has God chosen of the world, and
things which are not [in the worlds appr^h^nsion, and their own likewise,
capable of such preferment] to bring to naught [to render vain and
unprofitable, not only to themselves, but those also, John 9.41.
by whom they were esteemed] things that are [and none else besides them, in
their own estimation, and the worlds likewise; which say they sco, but
therefore their sin remains:] Nay, unto babes, shall the hidden misteryes of
the kingdom of heaven be revealed, to men of small capacities, Matthew 11.25.
in the esteem of such as have fle^^y wisdom; such babes, [for that the spirit
of God is powerfullest, purest, simplest, and discernably so where least of
humane helps are a^joyned] in Christ's account, have suitable spirits, for
Gospel revellations. But remember, you self conceited and so ascribing men,
that, Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, Isa. 5.21.
and prudent in their own sight.

But had the Army questioned the lawfulness of their ways [in which they are
as confident pro, that they are good, as your selves cont.] and hereupon had
invited you to a conference, you should have met: And have given in this as
your advice, that instead of proceeding further in such unwarrantable courses,
they should have testified their timely and godly sorrow, for which [so clearly
against the direct rule of the word] they have already acted. Who would have
thought, that such self confident men, [in that you peremptorily conclude, the
Armies ways are against the word of God, though your interpretation thereupon
(as hereafter appears) makes the scriptures irreconcileable] should at a
conference seek so much advantage from men, as to desire they should so much as
question, much less deny the justness of their ways, about which they were
to conferr: for those that question the legality of their proceedings, may
easily be persuaded that they are illegal. But you still page 3. find fault
with your invitation As is (say you) your ways were already granted by us; we
were only invited to contribute our assistance in prosecution of what you had
undertaken, which we conceive to be out of your Sphere.

When would think that men [that would seem to be so conscientious as you do]
should grumble that the Army (by their invitation) did repute you better then
you were; yet I believe you mista^e them in it, for they could not be ignorant
of the public impertinent and seditious opposition you made, and still make
against them: therefore it would be folly to think, they should invite you to
contribute assistance to their proceedings, which they know, you so greatly did
and do (though undeservedly) vilify; and all this from a mere conception,
that they act out of their Sphere, gives more just ground to believe, that you
are exceedingly transported with some affianced lust, thus inconsiderately to
act out of your s^heer, even to the reproach of your profession, by contending
for such a power, which the word of God, allows not in any, and wherein to
comply with you, (...) ^.1
is to contradict the Apostles rule, that bids us have no fellowship with the
unsrui^full w^rks of ^^rknesse but reprove them rather.

You proceed now more particularly [though inconsiderately in that you forget
the The (...) the (...)
fast president of attempt against lawful aut^ority, countenanced and ^^^tted
(if not by verbal justification, yet in silence by you) to demonstrate the (by
you so conceived) unjustnesse of the Armies ways, by their (by you called) late
attempts upon authority: and your words are these. It is already suffi^ien^^
known (besides all former ^is^^arriages) what attempts of late have been put in
practice against lawful authority: especially by your late Remonstrance and
Declaration published in opposition to the proceedings of Parliament.

The practiced attempts you speak off are [laying aside the common enemy, who
in this ca^c are not to be our Judges, and indeed have forfeited so much as
nomination] only discerned by your faction of unifo^mists, and consequently,
the lawful authority you speak it, can be but alike opinionated prevailing
faction in the Pa^liament, which upon just grounds being opposed, is accounted
an unparrallel'd attempt against authority by you; when as such a faction is
but jointly int^usted, by the Kingdom with the ^est; now for them, by vi^tue
of a maj^^ vote, to ass^me irresponsible and incontrolea^le power to
themselves, is no l^sse usurpation: ^h^^ that of the late Kings was [which is
amply manifested in a book, en^ituled, the^^ ^^tion of the late King justified
etc. already published by m^^ to the Crown, by ve^tue of succession: and
therefore no l^sse [but rather more because their trust is greater] offensive,
and accordingly punishable, which I shall further illustrate, from your own
parties example in the Parliament, when united with these, from whom they and
you now dissent; both jointly taking occasion [in discharge of that trust was
reposed in them by the Kingdome] to exempt the Malignant party [upon that
forfeiture of trust they made] from partaking in the privileges of Parliament,
and likewise to exclude them the House: And yet after this, your faction in the
Parliament (which you call the only lawful authority) shall recede and
endeavor to resign up, that into the Malignants power, which themselves
jointly condemned, as breach of trust in them for attempting [viz. an
i^thr^lling of the peoples liberties] and therefore dispossessed them, let
reason and the world judge, whether the minor part in Parliament may not
lawfully prosecute the samd forfeiture upon them, though the major part [breach
of trust being the same in any, only the higher the persons the greater their
offense therein] in cashiering them their trust, which they conco^ded should
be, in the same case, upon the first Malignants, therefore what you charge the
Army (the interest of the minor party) for attempt against the authority of
your interest, was only the same advantage necessarily and justly improved by
them, for the deposing of your Parties authority, which both united, took
against the common ^ne^y; for, in that, your party in the Parliament [waving
their late complying with the late King] did only seek the advancement of their
own Interest, with pretense of good to the Kingdom, when it could be so only
to themselves and their accomplices, they forf^^ted their trust; by which they
were engaged to endeavor the good of such that then assisted them in that
cause, as much as their own, which good cannot extend to all that so engaged
with the Parliament, unless established from common princi^les, which were and
are very wide of their and your ten^nts, that est^em not that liberty, which
consists not in others opp^ession; the Army and their party, therefore [being
as greatly entrusted for and in er^ssed in the good of the Kingdom, as those
of yours] finding their liberties to be infringed by them, could not, but (in
discharge of their duty to the Kingdom) clip their prevalency and obstruct
their resolute prosecution of such an interest, merely satisfactory to their
own party: and therefore far from a ge^^rall good: which to effect [in the
establishment of such a government whereunder, as to your selves, you may
partake of as great benefit and freedom, as the present prosecu^ors thereof]
the endeavors of the Army, can be no oppression, and therefore not unlawful,
but expedient for them to attempt; wherein, your accusation of them is
impertinent and scandalous. Yet you still persist page 4. [after several
attempts recited and esteemed so by you, which I have already clearly proved
in the negative] to justify your faction in the Parliament ^s the only
authority, and therefore condemn the Army (though therein likewise you include
the minor part of parliament) for opposing them; saying: All (...) sr^ilues we
cannot but judge, to be manifestly opposite to the lawf^ll authority of those
Magistrates, which God has set over us, and to that duty and obedience, which
by the loves of God and man, and by our manifold Oaths and Covenants, we stand
obliged to render to them.

To which I answer, that if God had immediately (which your words would seem to
imply) instituted and appointed y^u^ party in the Parliament, to be sole
(without others co^joyn'd) Magistrates over us, and had enjoined us universal,
in all cases, (for which we have neither precept nor president in Gods word)
obedience to them; it would have been sin in the Army in resisting them; but
since God sets not all Magistrates (in that h^ sets not tyrants) over us,
otherwise then by permission: those are neer^st unto Gods ordination, that
receive their authority by his rule, which is now only through free election,
and that not to an absolute power, to govern as they list (for then the people
loses their end, viz. their own good in their choice) but to walk according
to the rule that shall be prescribed them [a great defect (through the
usurpation of predecessing Magstrates till of late days) in our laws] to
discharge the end of their respective offices, and to perform the conditions
upon which they are chosen (or at least for which they are intended)
Magistrates; but now those that usurp authority, respects none of these rules,
and therefore not lawful Magistrates for a lawful Magistrate cannot, and
knows not, how to govern well [in that every particular expedient for the
peoples good in civil government, is not written in his heart] without a rule,
[which the people only are best able to prescribe, seeing they know best their
own wants. Now then, in what yon charge the Army of disobedience (as universal
without exceptions to any) your selves are guilty in the same, by complying
which I urge against you (allowing it in your selves and yet reproving it in
them) as an example unto (though just in) hem, (but unjust in you, in that you
now all^dge universal ^bedienc^) not to ye^ld obedience to all Magistrates.)
Against the late King: let your pretense be what it will, viz. that you engaged
against his evil council or the like; in your then engaging against them, you
engaged against him abetting and inducing of them thereto, which is clearly
testined by his approof (in which he dyed, as to all outward appearance) of
them therein: and therefore to what you accuse the Army, for opposing lawful
authority; I ans^er, that (besides that preci^ed, your own example) they have
the reason, and righteousness of the act it self to justify them, in their
opposition to your party, which had then the major Vote in Parliament, and by
v^tu^ whereof you call them lawful authority: Now, though from hence, you would
enjoin the Army, obedience to them, which I have before showed is no plea, yet
pray know thus much more, in answer thereto; that in just dissents, viz. for
the good of the people, the minor part in Parliament (because so) cease not to
be a power, but are the only power (in adhearing to their charge) entrusted,
because the power of the other party is ext^nct throu^h their abuse thereof, by
managing it to a wrong end, which your party was doing ^^edy for advantage to
their own faction: therefore, in discharge of those b^nds both of God and men,
which lay upon the minor part in Parliament, being then the only just power;
they could not but improve (as they did) the^^ utmost indeavou^s to perform
their trust, viz. the peoples Liberties, though against when they saw the
digression of ^^a major party; therefore the opposition that you make against
this present Parliament, (the only just power in be^^^ is practical attempt
against lawful authority; which according to your own words ^ou are bound by
the laws of God a^^m^n, and manifold Oaths and Covenants to o^ey. Now ^h^^^ the
Parliament being then di^^ded into lawful magistrates, and (...) ^hey were
magistrates, let reasonable (not obstinate) men judge, whether the Army deserve
^^^et to be acquitted of your accusation, and justi^^^ in those proceedings,
since the word of God commands them, to abb^^^ that which is ^^^ll, and clea^e
to that which is go^d. Romans 12.9.

But that you might confirm your matter, you proceed to quote scriptures, which
as from God, are purely spiritual, no contradiction in them, all together
righteous; but through men's various and corrupt interpretations, they are put
(as it were) at civil wars, scripture against scripture, and made a cloak for
most lustful errors; therefore the first text you cite, runs thus, in the
advice to Solomon: Fear thou the Lord and the King, P^^^. 24 21.
and meddle not with them that are given to change: I shall (by way of answer)
in these words denote, that the fear which Solomon enjoins to the King [in
which title is comprehended all supreme Offices in power, therefore the same
text commands fear, to a Parliament, or to the authority of any other way of
government; else what the Apostle says should be for instruction to all, is
made useless, and of no force to many nations, that have no King, Romans 15.4.
but are governed by States, someone way and some another] this fear I say, to
the King, is conditional from the precedent fear, with which its coupled; that
is, the fear of the Lord: Fear thou the Lord, and the King; implying that we
are not to fear the King, when it is disjoined, and much more when it will
prejudice and extinguish the fear of the Lord; I would be as clear, yet as
brief as I can; because my time is straightened: therefore

Secondly, when he says, Fear the King, without doubt, he means a lawful
King, a King quallified for the Office; and then the text, inj^yned not fear to
the late King, as will more amply appear in my prenominated book.

Thirdly, He means it not in all ci^ill cases, for then we shall come under
that his reproof, it is not good, that is, it is a ^^n to have ^espect of
persons in judgment, but now, Vose 23.
to respect Kings in judgment (through that former injunction to fear)
notwithstanding punis^able offenses in them, is to respect persons in
judgment, and so this latter text becomes ineffectual: but now that this
latter may comply with the former verse, the latter must be expounded thus; It
is not good, or it is a sin, to have respect of persons in judgment; that is,
a King inclusively (though lawful in his calling) in ca^e of ^^ansgression,
should be so far from being feared, as that judgment without partiality,
should be executed on him: Luke 12.28.
and this is according to Christ's own rule; that to whom much is given, much
shall be required: therefore the same laws that upon breach of trust, or any
other offenses, are (or should be) prosecuted against subordinate officers, or
a Kings (should be brethren) subjects: the same should be prosecuted against a
King, or superior magistrates so much the heavier, by how much, his or their
trust and gifts being the more, his or their offenses are the greater. Now then
it is clear, that Solomon enjoins fear to Kings, or (where none are) to other
superior Magistrates, only upon these grounds: viz. that they ar^ lawful
Magistrates, and as our fear to them, may consist with our fear to God; and
this can be only in the execution of justice and judgment, which he commands:
then lastly, the wiseman speaks this, not to those that have authority and
power above the King, [as (before showed,) the agents in these transactions
has from the people, but to those that are private persons, without any
interest in publiqu^ affairs, as to trust: now in this sense I comply with the
text; that private persons are to fear the higher powers, all such, whether
Parliament or others, being included in this title King: but besides all these,
I shall recite one p^oof more, (though the least) for justification of the Army
herein, and that is your own examples in complying against the late King, which
I wave, because before hinted: Now the application to what has been said, in
reference to this your first quoted text, I leave (because so easy) to be
understood, and proceed (only hinting thus much) that seeing Solomon bids us
meddle not with those that are given to change, (or in other translations, that
are seditious, which is most fitly applied to your selves, (and for the Army to
observe toward you) that instead of preaching peace, the glad tidings of the
Gospel, preach contention and debate.) yet your selves are examples of a
change, else many of you, would have had but small communion with light; and the
reason why you are in such obscurity, i^ because you are not so thoroughly
changed, as you should be; there are yet too many episcopal principles in you,
which particularly to survay, is from the purpose in hand; therefore I leave
them as best known to God, and your own consciences, yet in part to the
Kingdom; but only this, there are blessed changes.

To the next text you quote, and that is, Withdraw from every brother, that
walks disorderly; and not according to the traditions, which you have
received fro^^ us. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.


Though you wave the particular end [in that Saint Paul in these instructions
intende^ them, to that particular act of inordinacy, verse. 8. from which he
clears himself, by administering to his own necessities, and which he urges,
Act^ 18.34.
as a motive for every man, to work from his own example, though he had
authority to have received maintenance from them, yet he saw it more expedient,
to preach the gospel freely, since himself (among other reasons) was able to
work: now though from this sense of that place, you very likely willingly)
digress, yet it is too much veritied upon many of you, that make a trade, and
pin your livelihoods upon the pre^ching of the Gospel, notwithstanding your
abilities to the contrary: but if the Apostles thought it expedient to work;
much more may you (whose authority is not so good) refer your selves to the
benevolence of your Congregations, or at least, not ungospel-like, to contend
for a reward] now I say, though you wave the particular end of the Apostles
words; yet I shall answer a little to them in your own sense: therefore in the
next place, you say, one of the Apostles traditions is,

"Put them inminde to be subject to prin^ipallities, and powers; and to obey
mag^^^;" T^^ ^2.1. For. 13 1, 2.
and to let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc.

These te^^ h^th in effect been already answered, the less therefore will now
serve; now th^n seeing magistrates have a power above them: viz. the people,
the original of their authority: it is clear, that the Apostle exhorts
obedience in the people, D^^^ ^8.^6. F^^^. 33.2.
non co^junction, as they are the center and top of the magistrates power, sed
d^^^s^^, as they are private persons; else you will civide the scripture, and
make the fountain dependant on the streams; and the master, on his servants.

Again he minded them of this obedience, either as a Church (which I rather
believe) or as members of a State; if as a Church (though this interpretation
wi^^ h^^^ good therein likewise) then what you infer, is as wide from the then
present trans^^^tions of the Parliament and Army, as spiritual things are from
tempo^^ll. And if as members of a State, your application of this text is
altogether ^^^ti^ent, seeing it is granted, that private persons ought to obey
lawful magr^^ates in lawful causes.

But ^his (...) t^xt you quote, seems to ^^g^a reason of obedience to
magistrates, yet far from; Romans 13.1, 2.
^ur sense; the text says, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for
there i^to po^er but of God, the powers that ^e are ordained of God: whos^e^er
thereof ^or ^^ieth the power, resisleth the ordinance of God; and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

Now to open this scripture in opposition to your sense of it; I shall premise
these things. viz. full, that there are powers immediately ordained of God, or
by an immediate particula^ command from God: 1 S^^^ 17. 1 (...) 13. 2^ (...)
3.9.3.
that is, when God does particularly institute such, or such a person to be a
magistrate: thus God commanded Sam^^ to single our Saul the s^ist King, and the
same Prophet afterward, to ^^^int Davi^, the youngest of his br^^h en^ in like
manner was J^hu (though a servant to the successive King his master)
in^^ituted; theref^re the text commands not subjection in this sense, there
^eing no such ordi^ation now. But.

Secondly, there are powers mediately ordained of God, that is, God has
committee ^^t to a people, (...) 6.1^.
to constitute their own Officers, whethe^ high or lo^: n^w when a people has
thus elected, and with power invested their own magistrates (upon that general
limitation to their respective Offices: viz. to do equity and righteousness in
all the particular acts thereof, as far as the p^^^l^ a^^ convinced of them)
then that people are enjoined by your precited text, 1 (...) 1^ 9
as private persons, to obey them (in lawful commands) as the mediate
ordinance of Go^: but it being clear (as before amply demonstrated) that the
lawful auth^rit^ you speak of, had not this qualification, or at least, acted
not up to it; it is (...), that this text enjoined not obedience to them, but
consequently oppos^^^ the contrary of subjection: and the Army is to be
justifica (as upon many o^^^r grounds, so upon this) therein.

Thirdly and lastly, in answer to the same text; there are powers permissively
ordained by God, that is, such that God does not prevent or oppose, but
suffers to be; and these are illegal, tyrannical, and oppressive powers,
which God is said to ordain, as he is said to do evil by permitting it to be
done: Amos 3.6.
now for any to think that God is the author of evil because he permits it, or
that God ordains (otherwise then permissively) and enjoins tyrannical powers,
because he does not appear against them: is to charge God with injustice; it
being against his attribute of justice to enjoin obedience to an unjust power,
it is indeed to make God the author of sin, so far as an unjust power is
sinful; and therefore that the Apostle might manifest (as I believe) the
justice of God herein; he limits our subjection to a condition, by rendering a
reason thereof (which though you omit, yet is the very qualification of our
subjection) the command is, Be subject to the higher powers, etc. but why? For,
or because he (that is the magistrate) is the minister of God for thy wealth,
etc. this is the very Hinge upon which the power of magistracy hangs, Romans 13.4.
but take away the Hinge, and the door must needs be down; that is, if the
magistrates actings, for the wealth of the people dies, their power dies with
it: now if omissions of, much more commissions against the common wealths good
(by oppressions in designing self-interest and the like) makes the power of
Magistrates extinct: wherein likewise we are bound to resist them; it being the
complaint of God, that none are found in a Nation, to oppose the exercise of an
unjust power, whether in Princes by shedding of blood, or in Prophets by
divining lies, or in the people (most likely in their Representatives) by
oppression. The Lord says, Ezekiel. 22.30. I sought for a man among them, that
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me, for the land, that I
should not destroy it; but I found none: not only to stand in the gap by
Prayer, but make up the hedge, put thorns in their way; and as the Margin has
it, which should show himself zealous in my cause, by resisting vice, and in
the like neglect, Isa. 59.16. God wondered that no man offered himself to do
judgment; and how acceptably did God take it, Numb. 25.11. that Phineas
(though a private man) did execute justice upon Zimri and Cosbi, though the
chief of their families; and though he had no particular command for what he
did, and so not a rule (as some of you say) yet it is a renowned example
(approved, by God himself) unto us (In case of the like neglect in others) to
act up to that general and universal command, viz. the execution of judgment
and justice, as he did; and such may expect the same blessing, if they respect
the same end: therefore the Parliament and Army (that had both equity and
power; and were entrusted) unto that opposition which they made against your
(tho the major) party in Parliament (in their sought to be established
oppression, and therein to infringe the peoples liberties, tending to subvert
the end and cause of their trust; an offense in any sole power, much more in
them, who were but jointly intrusted] the fear of God did oblige them, though
the minor part, as a happy and most desirable civil change from darkness unto
light, communion wherewith we should most cover to enjoy, free from discontent,
since we should rather secondarily admire the courage and magnanimity of the
Army, then trustfully to adhere to their authority, The first man that preached
at Alderman-bury on the 31. L^^^try last, being, then Fast Day
when there was the lest yet lawfullest (part thereof (which I have showed, we
must rather obey) appearing to discharge their duty

Now then, that can be no plea (though asserted by one of your * Brethren, upon
that subject of universal obedience to Magistrates, seeing he made no
exceptions) the effect of it [ viz. that magistrates are of divine institution,
that they bear Gods image; that God himself calls them Gods; and therefore
disobedience to them is an eternal dan mage, whereas to disappoint the peoples
safety, is but a temporal loss, and so to be less esteemed then an
eternal.] I say, this can be no plea (craving leave a little to digress from
your matter: for satisfaction sake, more formally, though this is effectually
already answered since that the office or duty of the Magistrate not his own
person) is only of divine institution; in the execution of which office [ viz.
1 Kings 10.9. to do equity and righteousness, in as much as therein consists
holines] he bears Gods image; but when Magistrates shall act quite contrary to
the cause, which take away, and the event will be nothing of their
authoritative being, by oppression, injustice, Covenant Breaking, exaltation
above their (brethren, subjects; and all this with that great aggravation of
self, respect: herein they deface the Image of God in reference as to
holiness, so unto dominion which is to rule in righteousness, meeknes and
mercy) in which defect they cease to be either the ordinance of God or man; and
the people are disobliged from obedience to them, and so by consequence and
contrary, may lawfully resist their evil practices. Nay, lawful magistrates
enjoining things (that may ordinarily in themselves be lawful) in all
extraordinary cases, may sometimes err; and lawfully be resisted therein; in
as much as they obstruct a greater good: let all remember therefore, that as of
two evils, the least, so of two goods the greatest is to be chosen: but the
example of David may more fitly insert hereafter, at present I therefore wave
it; and proceed to your fifth page, and there your words are:

We have not forgotten those declared grounds and principles, upon which the
Parliament first took up Arms, and upon which we were induced to join with
them, etc.

Which though you say, you have not declined, yet will prove the contrary: for
the grounds that the Parliament first did (or at least should have done) take
up arms upon; was not so much their own privileges, as the peoples liberties:
and therefore their Iaintry 17 1^^1.
Declaration (which you instance for confirmation, will prove the confutation
of all your matter) upon that attempt which the King made upon their
Privileges; puts such an assault, as an offense against the liberty of the
Subject, before a breach of their own privileges: whose privileges to
preserve, indeed were the isntrumental cause of our first taking up Arms; but
we (not you, unless you confirm this truth) rested not here, this was not our
end; the only thing we aimed at: but we had respect to some thing beyond, and
yet then through the privileges of Parliament: viz. the Peoples liberties, the
very end wherefore they sit: and the grounds of our assistance to them, was not
so much [though our liberties were apparently, because we had no other power to
appear for us, and whose miscarriage would have been ours not subordinately
wrapped up in] their Privileges, as our own liberties; therefore consonant to
this, is the conclusion of the precited Declaration; wherein they declare, the
Person that shall so Arrest any member, or members of Parliament, to be a
Public enemy to the Commonwealth; which clearly shows, that such members
must be acting for the good of the common wealth, or else the Person or Persons
so arresting them, will be so far from enemies, as that they will be friends
to the Commonwealth in so doing: therefore from hence, this flows clearly, by
way of use; that those are no Privileges (but usurped) of Parliament, that are
inconsistent with the Peoples l^borties.

As likewise this undeniable conclusion, that to arrest or seclude (as was then
endeavored by the late King) any Person or Persons in the Parliament acting
for the peoples liberties, is contrary thereunto; and a breach of the
privileges of Parliament.

But the Army [with the consent of those only lawful ones (and so the house)
left behinde] secluded the late members of Parliament, for infringing the
peoples liberties.

Therefo^^ it was no breath of their Privileges.

But it is most manifest by all your precedent arguments and quotations, that
you would make the people the Packhorse to all your imposed burdens, and
slaves to no less then three powers; the King his Honor, and Prerogative; the
Parliament their Privileges which you make distinct from, though if they are
so, they must concu^ in, the peoples liberties) above them; and you your
Ecclesiastical government above all: but your complying with the two former;
from all evidences, is only that they may assist in advancing yours; when in
truth though you indefinitely enjoin obedience in all cases, at all times, upon
all occasion: all three would center in the peoples liberties; they being
ordained for the people, and not the people for them: but herein you prefer
the Box before the Ointment, the Raiment before the body: and you are blinded
with self, yet confidently you say, you see; but therefore your blindenes
remains, and no wonder, if you occasion your own fal^.

Now in what you would have prohibited the Army from acting, because in your 6
page 25. line: you say, that in reference to the power of Magistracy, they are
but private Persons: it seems strange, that you should so forget the
privilege, that both you and we, when united (in a then thought just cause
against the King, by suing out our liberties) took (notwithstanding the
contrary numerous party both of Nobles and Subjects in the kingdom) to esteem
our selves the kingdom: as witness your own words in the 5 p. of your pamphlet,
line 12. upon the attempt of. the late King (destructive to the good of the
Kingdom,) and shall the Army, and their party (which in comparison to yours,
are more numerous, then both of us then were to the Kings) be esteemed as
private Persons, and less justifiable, in the prosecution of the same end,
against the proceedings of your Party only? and can this be a breach of the
Privileges (being only a Purge, which though it makes sick, yet is, in order
to the health) of the Parliament, in acting up to the fountain of their
Privileges: let us not therefore imagine hardly of their proceedings, since
our cies have been witness of the justnes of them; and the rather, because
they acted not alone (very lawful to do justly, should none other appear
thereto) but contributed their assistance unto their solely lawful authority,
which (though for quantity the least, yet for quality the best) being in the
right, a minor Vote, was then ^ver-powred by might, a major Vote; and yet this
does, nor did not extenuate, or lessen the equity of the minor part, which to
maintain (as being bound in duty thereunto) the then appearance of the Armic
must needs be justified; in as much likewise as choosing the good, and eschewing
the evil is justifiable: and therefore for farther confirmation hereof,
(though the premises considered, there needs none) from Junius Brutus (in as
much as such relics chiefly appear upon some) upon the same subject, cited
by Mr Prinne [in his book of the Soceraigne Power of Parliaments, and
Kingdoms. page 198. line 1. to the 18,] from whom I gather them, viz

The King swears that he will seek the safety of the Realm, the Nobles swe^r
every one the same by himself: whether therefore the King, or most of the
Nobles neglecting their Oath, shall either destroy the Commonweal, or desert
it being in danger, ought the rest therefore to desert the Republique; or at
least, but rather then especially, they ought to shows their fidelity, when as
others neglect it, be less bound to defend it, as if they were observed from
their Oath? Especially, since they were principally instituted for that end,
like the Epho^^ and every thing may then be reputed just, when it attaines its
end: whether truly if many have promised the same thing, is the obligation of
the one dissolved by the perjury of the other? whether if many be guilty of the
same sin, are the rest freed by the fraud of one? whether if many
co-guardians ill defend their pupil, shall one good man be less bound with
the burden of the wardship through their default? but rather, neither can
those avoid the infamy of perjury, unless they, end ^^our to satisfy their
trust as much as in them lies; neither can those exempt themselves from the
danger and judgment of a Guardianship ill administered, unless they implead
the other Guardians suspected; when as verily one guardian may not ^uely
implead the rest suspected, and take care of those to be removed, but also
remove them.

The application of this passage I need not insert, seeing the words themselves
are clear and easy to be understood, and that in general it holds forth thus
much, That a minor party are bound in duty to discharge their trust, though in
opposition to the major party neglecting or falsifying it. And although you
would seem to take off an objection from the Parliaments own example in
opposing the late King, by th^se your words.

And although both Houses of Parliament (who are jointly together with the King
entrusted with the supreme authority of the Kingdom) saw cause to take up
Arms for their own defense, against the attempts made upon them by the King
and his evil Counselors; and for some other ends which you cite, though
doubtless experience will produce sufficient testimony of better effected; yet
it has been amply and satisfactorily proved, that the Army have not acted as
private persons, since they assisted the lawful authority (though the least
part of the Nobles, yet the Kings superior and so supreme, it being most
unsafe to leave the supremacy undetermined, as is largely demonstrated by that
Author [Iunius Brutus] quoted by Mr. Prinne in the 196, 197. pages of that his
prenominated Book) in prosecution of the end of their engagements, the peoples
liberty, since likewise they were not instituted the Parliaments servants to
pursue their end, but the peoples good, in as much as the Parliament
represents, and are but servants thereunto also. And therefore, whereas, when
the Parliament first took up Arms, you would [page the 7.] plead their
intentions then, was not thereby to do violence to the person of the King,
etc. yet I answer, that this was not binding either to the Army, or to
themselves, in case of greater enormities committed by him; for I had thought
you had known the distinction, between intentions, and illimited
determinations, or conclusions: because a man at the same time when he intends
a thing; may prescribe to himself the intervening of some other thing that
shall divert his intended act; therefore intention cannot proceed so farte as
determination or resolution, could the Parliament then intend, should the late
King have acted never so high in tyranny, to exempt him from accounting, and so
collude (as the precited Author has it) and not be reputed in the number of
Prevaricators; or connive, of desertors; or not vindicate the Republic from
his tyranny, and not be traitors?

Now then, it is resolved upon the question, That the intentions of the
Parliament then, could extend only unto that present time, wherein had he
returned, they were willing to remit (without (as you term it) violence to his
person) what he had then offended in, viz. attempts upon their privileges; but
the (measure of his iniquity not being then full) not unto that time, wherein
he prosecuted those attempts (not only on their privileges, but on the very
foundation of Government, the peoples liberties) in the blood of thousands;
seeing they adjudged him by that their declaration, you have precited, no less
then a public enemy, for practicing such attempts, and might have justly
proceeded accordingly; but I say, if then, much more now are they to be
justified in that justice, o^ frequently enjoined in Scripture, to be executed
without respect of persons, and so, far from violence, wherein therefore your
accusation is very scandals us.

Again, neither could the Parliaments intentions then (as you affirm page 7.)
extend to the continuance of that government now: for the constitution thereof
must be considered either as good or bad; if as good in the positive (though
the negative may be proved, which I wave, because the affirmative is indurable)
yet better, or best, is to be preferred before it. Now then, could the
Parliament then intend (or should they, yet were it binding either to
themselves or us) the establishment of that or any other government? when
greater light (in reference to the end for which government should be
constituted, viz. the peoples safety) should be manifested; nay, could the
accomplishment of such purposes be esteemed otherwise then a rejecting of the
light, and a loving of darkness rather then light. To instance this in one
particular, Episcopal government (then constituted it is likely in the greatest
measure of light they had) had it been binding either to future years or ages,
then your abolishing of it was illegal; but through pretense of a greater
light, and so lawfully, you have ex^irpated it therefore the constitution of
what government you mean, was conditional (not upon yours, but our own light)
and so not binding to us.

But whereas, in the same page, you say you apprehend your selves obliged thus
to appear for the maintenance of your Religion, Laws, etc. as against those
that would introduce an arbitraty tyrannical power in the King: so on the
other hand against the irregular proceedings of private persons (as you term
them, though I have showed they are public) to introduce anarchy, irreligion,
etc. the former of which justifies the Army in that opposition they made
against your major party then in the Parliament introducing, by tolerating, if
not tyranny, yet such a power in the King, whereby at any time he might
contradict and obstruct the welfare of the people; and the cause of your
obligation to the latter, is taken away, since you may enjoy under the
government to be set led (laying aside your principles of oppression) as much
benefit in the exercise of your Religion or otherwise as any: whereunder
likewise, as may be (because the best way) continued love and amity, so in
stead of irreligion, a free religion most suitable to the Gospel (not compulsive
or constrictive) may be introduced.

But now, that your former matter might seem infallible, you reinforce it with
a Covenant, though never intended for such an abuse; you include the Army
(making them ^nparaleld Covenant-breakers) as liable to those judgments which
God inflicted upon such (as you instance from Scripture) who violated an
absolute, pure, simple Covenant; whereas ours was limited and conditional, only
the bond or rye of both being alike, the breach whereof was the cause that God
powered down his judgments upon them: In this therefore your hold-fast will
prove as infirm as in the rest, and according to the literali sense of it, (not
to mention here your omission of the end) your selves will be found more guilty
of perjury then any, and so your texts are misapplied.

You say then, page 7. That you are the more strongly engaged to adhere to your
former just principles, ^y reason of the several oaths and covenants
generally taken throughout the Kingdom; and therefore you instance that
protestation of May 5. 1641, wherein (as your words are) We do in the presence
of Almighty God promise, vow and protest, according to the duty of our
Allegiance, to maintain and defend with our lives, powers and estates, his
Majesty's Royal person, honor and estate, and the power and privileges of
Parliament.

To this I answer first, That your first engagement upon these precedent
principles (as if they were independent, and the peoples sole happiness did
consist in them, as you positively cite) was unjust and without understanding.
For mark you how the former particular in the oath does depend upon the latter;
you did not swear (give me leave a little to inlighten lighten you, it being a
sin to take an oath in ignorance, but a greater to continue ignorant of it) to
maintain and defend the late Kings Majesty's person, etc. in case he should
with his person, make use of his honor and estate to infringe the power and
privileges of Parliament, which (unless you be turned malignants obstinate)
you cannot but confess is a limitation to the former clause in that oath, and
indeed with which you complied against the late King, and never violated the
oath, as to that particular, because otherwise when the one is set in
opposition to the other (as experience has witnessed) by cleaving to one and
forsaking the other: we break the oath unless we make one conditional and
dependent upon the other, which was the late Kings case, the Parliament being
more entrusted, and so more supreme then himself. This your selves have
granted: herein therefore the Army may well be vindicated from the breach of
Covenant.

Again, as to that latter clause [to defend and maintain the power and
privileges of Parliament] I answer, that this likewise does rely and depend
upon something, which though you insert not, and if neither expressed in the
oath, yet is consequently and necessarily understood to be the top and end of
both. For in what you did engage against an unquestionable and tyrannical
power in the King, to set it up in a major vote of Parliament, you did it void
of understanding, and a great deal of blood was shed to no purpose, which
(upon such an engagement) for ought I know, may as soon lie upon your account,
as elsewhere But to be short, because before insisted on, the Parliaments power
and privileges continue in such force above a Kings, whilst they act for the
good of those for whom both were constituted, and from whom the same end both
did and do receive their power, which Mr. Prynne proves at large in his Book
of the Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdom, particularly these words,
[Iunius Brutus, p. 154.] A King exists by and for the people, and cannot
consist without the people, and that all Officers are chosen by the people.
Several other Authors to the same purpose he quotes: but desirous to hasten to
a conclusion) I wave, and proceed to discover how palpably your selves are
guilty of the breach of this oath.

First, as to that particular which you did swear to defend the late Kings
person, etc. you are guilty of perjuty, for that you never ventured your lives,
persons, and estates, to preserve his person, many times (perhaps not
intentionally, yet accidentally) in jeopardy from the Parliaments Forces,
against whom according to this clause in your oath, with your temporal All you
should have defended him.

Secondly, as to the maintenance of his Honor, you fail likewise, since you
have complied with the Parliament, a^ least by silence, to detract from his
honor, by intending to dimini^h that Authority which formerly (though
unlawfully) he had in the Kingdom.

I hirdly, to be brief, by your sileatiall complying with the Parliament, in
depriving him of his (because possessed of it, though it were and is the peoples)
former estate. M. Prynne proves this at large in the 162. page of his
Sovereign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, in his seventh Observation, his
words are, That Emperors, Kings, Princes, are not the true proprietary Lords
or owners of Lands, Revenues, Forts, Castles, Ships, Jewels, Ammunition,
Treasure of their Empires, Kingdoms, to alienate or dispose of them at their
pleasures, but only the Guardians, Trustees, Stewards, or Supervisors of them,
for their Kingdoms use and benefit, from whom they cannot alien them, nor may
without their consents or privities, lawfully dispose of them, or any of them,
to the public prejudice, which if they doc, their Grants are void and
revocable.

Now, as to this first clause in that oath, in which I have showed you are
guilty of a breach) the Army is clear in what they have adherd to the end of
the Covenant, the peoples safety, which they are principally to endeavor,
though against other subordinate inclusions that prove prejudicial thereto: as
to the Oaths of Allegiance, the obligation is void, since he has violated the
conditions of his Kingly Office to us, as Subjects; which Junius Brutus
effectually proves in the 192. page of Mr. Prinnes precedent book, where he
says, There is every where between the Prince and People, a mutual and
reciprocal obligation: be promises that he will be a just Prince; They, that
they will obey him, if be shall be such a one: therefore the people are obliged
to the Prince under a condition: the Prince, purely to the People: therefore if
the condition be not fulfilled, the People are unbound; the contrast void, the
obligation null in law is self: therefore, the King is perfidious if be Raigns
unjustly: the People perfideous, if they obey not him, who Raigns justly.

To which I add, that the Magistrate, being but a servant in duty cannot call
them to account, for their perfidiousnes (God properly being the avenger of
that in them) but they him: since the wrong and hurt is chiefly done unto
themselves, not unto him; who discharges his duty in gentle persuasion and
admonition.

But the People are free from all crime of perfidiousnesse, if they publicly
renounce him who reign unjustly: or if they endeavor to evict him with Arms,
who desires to retain the kingdom unlawfully.

Again, as to the defense of his Person, the Army is clear, as to that time
(the Oath being then the same) since he was out of their power, and in the
possession of others; and might (if he would) have destroyed himself: there is
this limitation to it, likewise to justify the Army in their late proceedings
against him; that our defense to his Person must needs be understood to be in
just ways; else such would be partakers in his sin, and become liable to the
same punishment, as the justly executed Hamll^ton
Lords were, Holland, and Capell.

And then as to the latter particular in that Oath, viz. The defense of the
power and Privileges of the Parliament: the Armies refining their House cannot
be reputed a breach of that Privileges, no more then the rectifying of one
crooked line to the Center, may be esteemed the disordering of the
circumference: since likewise, that the convening, or assembling of the
Parliament is not (but their representing the People, not only in their
Persons, but in their qualifications, which does distinguish them from Slaves:
is) the original of their power and Privileges: the which therefore, can be
no longer reputed theirs, then they are the peoples; and the endeavors of the
Army to repossesse them of their own, can be no breach of Covenant.

Again, concerning the Vow and Covenant, taken to unite us against those
conspiracies and designs that were practiced against the Parliament; you are
likewise guilty of a breach, (though herein you have acted, yet now it appears
it has been for ends of your own) by disjunction of what tended to unity, and
wherein you were as greatly tied to us in every respect, as we to you;
notwithstanding your labor has been spent to hale others to Conformity to
your way: In which (laying aside their endeavors to free themselves from your
oppression) they are clear toward you.

But now, your last and greatest seeming prop, upon which you build all your
arguments, as to your sense upon it will prove as invalid, as all the rest; and
those scriptures you cite for proof thereof, misapplied. You cite the Covenant
thus:

That you will sircerely, really, and constantly, in your several Vocations,
endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments; and
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms.

Concerning the two former particulars in this Covenant, I shall not here
farther enlarge, because before insisted upon, and proved that they have
(though you exempt) conditions understood as limits and bounds to our defense
and preservation of them. Therefore I shall only commemorate you a little of
the conclusion: The Independent part (as to temporals) of this Covenant, which
when first instituted, was intended for a general good; therefore that party
that has sought to over reach any other thereby, and design it only for their
own good, must needs be guilty, as of fraud, so of a breach thereof; but I
leave this to your own Consciences (if not dead) to apply, and proceed to
recite the engagement: viz. We will, etc. indeacour to preserve and defend the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Kings Person, etc. But how? In
the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdoms: that is so far, as the two former does concur and incur, to the
preservation of this latter; so far, as the maintenance of the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament do; and as the Person, Honor and safety of the
late King did Center in the safety, preservation, defense, and propagation of
the true Religion, and the liberties of the Kingdom: but now should the
Parliament, as your party therein, and the late King did) usurp Privileges and
Pr^^ogat^ves, as to establish themselves in the government; so likewise
forcibly what form thereof they please upon others, and turn enemies to the
liberties (the very spring of all their most as and actings, as lawful
Magistrates) of the Kingdoms; By this Covenant, we are not only disobliged from
obedience to them, but also engaged to oppose them, as enemies to the true
Religion: it being free, and to the Liberties of the Kingdoms.

Furthermore, we are the more firmly obliged hereunto, by that relation and
union, this oath has with the former; wherein both you and we [supposing my
self (had I been through age capable) to have taken the Covenant] equivalently
did engage against those conspitacies, that were and after should be contrived
against the Parliament: but now, was not our, conjunction and colligation
against such confederacies, more with respect unto, or for that they were
designed against the public good of the Kingdoms; then merely or principally,
for the defense and preservation of the Parliament therein: who were only, as
an assembly of men, without qualifications accordingly. Now then, this being
granted (as necessarily it must, unless you will be unnatural, and
irrational, to prefer so few singly before the safety of the Kingdom, wherein
your selves likewise are interested) I say, this being granted, it undeniably
follows, that if the Parliament (as is sufficiently proved your party thereof
did) should turn enemies to the good of the Kingdoms (which primarily by our
Oaths we are to advance, and them no otherwise then they shall concur herewith)
we are bound by those precited Covenants, as to oppose them, so to inflict
(without respect of persons) the same (if not greater, because their trust
aggravates their fault) punishment upon them, as upon others in the like
offenses; provided that right take place.

But now I shall proceed to speak a little to these two particulars in the end
of the Covenant; We swore to defend the Person of the King, and the Privileges
of Parliament, etc. in the defense of the true Religion, etc. because this is
one of your main accusations against the Army that (you say) they have not
endeavored to preserve Religion: in as much likewise as that it is distinct
from the Peoples civil liberties, and the first thing necessary, could it
infallibly be determined.

I shall propound some things to your consideration, as to clear the Army from
your aspersions herein; so likewise to illuminate your selves and stop (if
reason will) your invectives: And

The first is this; did we in covenanting to preserve and defend the true
Religion, swear to maintain your Religion? Especially, when we were not
convinced of the truth of it; and then though it were so, if we knew it not,
how could we keep the Covenant in maintaining it as true? And therefore I
answer in the negative, we did not (wear to defend your way of Government,
because this were sinfully to depend upon your judgments for the nuth of it,
which your selves cannot make out to be Iure Divino, and so infallible, and
therefore not to be imposed upon others. Again, suppose we had engaged to have
maintained your Government of Uniformity, as being (to our light) the truest
way then extant; yet could this engagement firmly extend to times of greater
light, and not sinfully suppress the truth? As for instance, Had you in the
days of Episcopacy, taken an Oath (without any limitations expressed) to
maintain and defend it, yet could you think your selves obliged to have kept
it, when convinced of the way that you are now in, and not forget that a
greater light always extinguisheth a lesser, as the light of a Torch that of a
Candle? Now then, what I would infer herefrom, is, That seeing it cannot
infallibly be cleared which is the true [in that we expect, and do or should
patiently wait (according to Gods promises) for a more perfect] Religion, which
needs no bodily defense from the power of Man: the best way to preserve this
Covenant unviolated, is to tolerate many opinions, or (if you will) religions:
For by this means there will be a door opened for the truest to have free
passage, which through the power of the Spirit will at length triumph; but
otherwise, constrained conformity to one way, not the perfectest, is to limit
and consine the Spit of God to a general illumination; which limitation, how
sinful; and dispensation (if at all) how seldom, let any reasonable men
judge. Therefore such a predicted toleration endeavored by any, cannot be
reputed a breach of covenant.

Now then, the other particular, viz. the peoples liberties, in the end of our
Covenant (the first, viz. true Religion being yet in obscurity) does appear to
be the sole and visible end of our engagement, and therefore the Master-wheele,
upon which the motion of the power and privileges of Parliament, and the
person of the King (though by this Oath (waving his Office being the cause of
his greatness) we are no more tied to his, then a private man's person) as
being under and lesser wheels does depend. Now therefore those that have
complied with the two former, which indeed are but instruments, (and as men
cannot build without tools, so a people cannot rule without some elected and
compendious form; yet as the instrument cannot ascribe any thing to it self, in
the work it is appointed unto, being made, guided, and acted by man; even to,
the Parliament or any others (...) whom the people shall contract themselves to
govern, and prescribe them Rules accordingly, cannot ascribe the good discharge
of their trust according to those rules, unto themselves, so much as to the
people that instituted them, since likewise that the burden of the ill
managing of their power, if not redressed by, would most of all be laid upon
the people) I say, these that have complied with the two former, that are but
as instruments in the peoples hands, and herein have preferred the shell before
the kinnell, the effect before the cause, their motion before the suggestion,
and this against the liberties of the people, the very end of their and our
Covenant; those are the only persons that have violated their oath.

For in all Obligations (as well temporal in which the liberties of the
people, as in this of ours, is principally aimed at: as in spiritual, in which
the glory of God is or should be chiefly intended;) the end, the thing aimed
at, the cause of the obligation, is above the bond or tie thereof; because, not
endeavoring, or neglecting to attain the end, does occasion the breach of the
bond and tie of a Covenant: And therefore the use of an oath in this case, is
only to incite [in that there is an engagement lies upon the spirit of those
that sweare] firmly and undauntedly to prosecute their end; which they cannot
do, as that Oath against Conspiracies testifies; but in opposition to all the
enemies thereof: therefore if Parliament, as your faction therein did, and the
King not only desist from endeavoring that end of the Covenant, viz. The
peoples liberties, upon which condition they were included in preservation; but
also turn enemies, though intended for the former end, to the good of the same:
the covenanted ones cannot be free from the infamy of connivance and perjury,
unless they courageously in prosecution of their cathes end [notwithstanding
all other literal, conditional, and subordinate inclosions therein] oppose
them as enemies thereunto. But now unto this effect, the Army in their late
transactions has manifested their opposition unto the two former, therefore
they have performed the Covenants, insomuch that the world may bear witness
with their consciences, that they had no th^ughts [the premises considered] to
diminish his Majesty's [just] power and greatness.

Now then, your grand objections from the Covenant, being fully answered, and
the Army from your aspersions hereupon vindicated, as I hope all reasonable men
will clearly discern, it were an easy thing to reply all your subsequent
quotations of examples of Gods judgments upon Covenant-breakers, upon your
selves, since you have neglected the end, and so are guilty of the breach of
the bond and tie of your Covenant; but I wave this, and shall with more brevity
and lesser pains, prove the said quotations misapplied and impertinent.

And therefore to the first of them, viz that oath of Zedekiah [ Ezekiel. 17.14,
15, 16, 19] King of Jerusalem, of obedience to the King of Babylon; I answer,
that his oath was absolute, and without any conditions to be performed on the
King of Babylons part, so is not ours, as has been amply proved. Again, the
end of his Covenant was perfect obedience as to civil affairs; ours, limited
to the peoples liberties; his attempt of the peoples freedom (or perhaps his
own rather then theirs) being against the will of God, in that his oath was
inconditionall, and he had no such superior relation and power above the King
of Babylon, and so exposed the people more unto his tyrannical will and power
then before; ours, being agreeable to the will of God, in executing justice,
especially since the people are the root of the Kings and all other Authority:
and he, their servant to act for their good, and therefore accountable; put in
trust by them, and therefore their Steward, and so required to give an account
of his Stewardsh: as to God in the things he hides from men, so to his people
in public neglect of his trust. I need not further amplify the disparity of
our Covenant with his, since it is clear, that therein we had an end above the
preservation of King or Parliament; which to endeavor, can be no violation of
the tie of the Covenant (of which Zedekiah was guilty) and therefore I believe
(as to the merit of such a sin) we shall not partake of his judgments.

Now then, my serious (and therefore let it not be rejected) advice to you is,
That you would consider and confer you covenant with what I have dilated
thereupon, and confess and revoke your mistakes and breaches thereof in those
several particulars whereof (and as I have cleared you are guilty, in our
public assemblies, that through your hearty sorrow for the same, and such a
real testimony of your illumination, the Parliament and Army may be again
induced to invite you to their Consultations. And whereas you have been
instruments of sedition, you may be so now of inlightning and composing the
spirits of those you have seduced and incensed against the public good; and
that hereby you may redisplay what excellencies has been all this while under
a cloud of self-interest in you, that so you may recover our hearts, helps, and
prayers, that the blessing of God may be upon you, and that you may relinquish
revilings and invectives with mixtures of self esteem in your preachings, that
so the Gospel in the simplicity, purity, and truth thereof, may be dispensed by
you, to the comfort of all those whom now you (undeservedly) oppose, and that
by your serious and cordial application of this matter, you may become their
professed friends in one day, to the terrifying of both your enemies, that yet
rejoice in your dissension. But in your tenth page you still brand the Army,
(as being your greatest eyesore and heart-sore) with Disobedience to
Magistrates, which indeed were a great sin, as by the examples of Gods
judgments (which you cite) upon it, did you rightly apply it. But because your
particular designs are obstructed, and prevented, therefore you will unpreach
what ever formerly with vehemence you have conjured the people unto: I cannot
but reply (since you are conscious of the frequent commands in Gods word to
yield obedience to Magistrates, does not include tyrannical Magistrates, or
lawful ones in all cases, which has been sufficiently proved, yet the example
of Jehu, remaining for our instruction in the like case, does more confirm, who
(though a private person, yet was commanded from God [2 Kings 9.7.] to avenge
the blood of the Prophets upon the House of Ahab, by whose authority or
connivance they were destroyed, which accordingly he executed, as in the 24
verse upon Jehoram, that had an hereditary right to the Crown, and succeeded in
his stead.) You know the word of God frequently enjoynes universal and
unpartiall justice, without exemption and respect of persons; and yet you speak
contrary to your knowledge, by seeking to impell total obedience in the Army
to Magistrates, when through some defaults from Scripture-warrant, they may be
exposed to a condition of punishment, and then very incapable either to command
or be obeyed. And then you practice otherwise then you speak, when your own
interest is uppermost, and obstructed by the Magistrates (as now) none more
forward to oppose them, and excite others thereunto, then your selves, as
witness your resolution against tyranny in the King, in the seventh page of
that your Book, and your groundless impudent opposition to the Parliament now.

But to your exhortation page your 11. and 12. for the Army to examine
themselves, whether they should not have opposed those proceedings (there
largely recited by you in others if done by them, which they did approve of and
esteem as a virtue in themselves; I answer, that one and the self same act
done by distinct persons, may become just or unjust according to the cause or
end thereof for which the party acts it: Now then, it is just and unjust to
seclude a Major part of Parliament; just in them, that secluded your party
their trust, when they were apparently acting against the end thereof, the good
of those that entrusted them; and therefore I cannot but remember, how when the
Army was first before the City, they voted in the King, and proclaimed to make
humble addresses to him for peace, without any conditions, and how easily, (if
excepted against at all by them) in the treaty with the late King, they let
slip his negative voice (though the chiefest ground of so long a war) if I am
not mistaken. Again, it would have been u^just in your party from their
principles of self-interest, to have secluded any other (though a minor) part
in Parliament, endeavoring only their own liberties, not prejudicial to
others, when indeed they might (as now they do) better extend freedom to the
whole Nation. And lastly, it would have been more unjust in malignants from
their superlative principles of tyranny, to have attempted the seclusion of
either. It was Ichu's unjust end in his act, not the ^ct it self which was
just, that brought a judgment upon his posterity. And in 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
Amaziah did those things that were upright in the sight of the Lord, but not
with a perfect heirs. Hypocrisy in a duty makes the manner of its performance
become abominable in the sight of God, it makes the manner which God most
respects in a duty, become the object of his hatred, and greatly inferior to
the matter of the duty Now then, the reproofs in Scripture that you allege
against the Army, as disobedient to Authority, may most fitly and deservedly be
repl^ed upon your selves. Therefore give me leave a little to urge your own
interpretation of the Scriptures upon your selves. The first is, Tit. 3.1. Put
them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates. You kn^w Sirs, where the Powers are, since you make
Pulpit-confessions of them (though not as a Parliament) most intolerable
contempt in you, of no less th^n the ordinance of God, (waving the justness
thereof as from Man, because larg^ly p^^d^m^nst^ated) for that the Apostle Romans
13.1, 2. commands, Let every sou^e of yo^ be subject to the higher powers, for
there is no powers but of God. Here are the reasons of your obe^i^nce; The
power, that be are ordained of God; and they thu r^sist, r^si^^ the Ordinance
of God. etc. Mark Sirs, the Apostle speaks it in the present tense, or time,
The powers that be are ordained of God, as being the word of God that is
everlasting, yesterday, and to day, and the same forever, firm and effectual
in all generations. Now then, what is the reason you so much oppose them, and
resist the Ordinance of God, by di^av^wing their authority? Surely this among
others, that they are so honest to su^er other men to p^a^tue what you
profess, and not to cause them hide their Talent in a Napkin, but as they have
received freely, so, freely to give (the Spirit of God not being limited in his
gists, only where such a traditionall and humane calling (as yours) is.) This
b^n^ likewise agreeable to Mos^ this public p^^^t for Gods glory, that would
that all the L^r^ people were Prophets; and I cannot conceive so hardly, as
that he should with them gists inf^^^^ in to his own.

Now therefore I entreat you to consider, that your centempt of this Gods
ordinance, depends upon no less then an ternall penalty, viz. damnation,
unless you timely recover it by your future and sincere obedience; which in
neglected, you likewise come under a brand here, that Iu^^ verse 8, 11. sets
upon those that despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities (it must be
those that are present then) woe unto them, faith he, for they are gone in the
way of Cain etc. You know likewise the sad effect of Corah, ^athan, and Abirams
unjust rebellion against Moses and. Aaron, appointed by God over them; as also
how I have proved the lawfulness of this present Parliament, and their
proceedings which you accuse, and how the same judgment remains for the
disobedient in their degree; let this therefore be a means to reclaim you,
surely, else the judgment of God is according to truth against those that
commit such things, who will render to every man according to his deeds: For
there is no respect of ^^rsous with God, Romans 2.2, 6, 11.

But whereas you fear, Lest Jesuits should have too great an Influence upon
the Armies late transactions, especially against the King; I shall not insist
upon this, but tender you conceptions, that it is inconsistent with reason, to
think that Jesuits should so much destroy their own interest of ^opery, as to
foment and prosecute such an act of justice upon the late King. But h^wever,
suppose it were so, yet all I^le say, as to this, is, That the justness of the
things managed, not the managers, is to be respected: Therefore as to other the
Armies proceedings, let the equity of them acquit them from any such
Jesuiticall influence (as you fear to be) upon them. And seeing no party can
clear themselves of such a concurrence and influence in their own way, let
them have a care of making it heinous in others, especially knowing, that where
God sowes his Word, there the Devil will sow Tares, and such a mixture is so
far from disparaging and clouding the word of God, as that it makes it more
splendent.

But I proceed to your 12. page, wherein you dissuade the Army (as being the
But you aim at, because the greatest impediment to the advancement of your
interest) from too much confidence in former successes. The which advice indeed
literally is good, not to respect blessings and m^^^^s above the God that gives
them; but in your sense, is directly to digresses^o^n that excellent Rule,
Deuteronomy. 3 27. to 15. To remember the days of old, etc. not only (...) praise
God for them, but make them encouragements in greater straits to trust to Gods
providence for d^^^^^^nce. This use David made of his former success against
the Lion and the Bear, therefore (says he, 1 Samuel 17.3.) this uncircumcised
Philistin (Goliath) shall ^^c as one ^^^h^m etc.

And is not the Army obliged to s^ck out the like encouragements from former
successes, in so good a caus^ to prosecute the and thereof, viz. the liberties
of the people? it being the will and ^^nd of God the they should live free from
the molestation and oppression of any, much less their servants: in the which
way likewise God had fo greatly blessed them. And (as you say) though S^^omon
says, Eccles. 8.14 7.1. that there be sometimes just men to who^ (...)
happ^neth according to the work of the wicked; and to wicked men according to
the work of the righteous: And, that there is a just man that perishes in his
righteousness, etc. yet this is no argument for a godly man to forgo his
integrity, or a wicked man to persist in his wickedness. The Benjamites twice
good success lessened not the evil of their cause, or the Israelites bad
success the goodness of theirs, who at last had victory, Judge. 20. Though God
walk in the Sanctuary, yet we are not to decline the Sanctuary: can we do good
unless we have a providence to effect it? And though we should perish in it,
yet were it not a sin to omit such a providence. David. in such necessity are
the Shewbread, though in it self unlawful. In civil affairs the providence
of God rules, where his Word does not meddle; the which then is a safe rule to
walk by, especially in such acts that promote freedom, judgment and
righteousness, which the word of God justifies: As when a man is in slavery,
having a providence, (it is a ground for him) to escape: which if he should
neglect, his perpetual bondage would be but just.

Now then, it being before clearly proved both from the word of God, the law of
Nature and Reason, that the late transactions of the Parliament and Army (for
which you accuse them) are just and g^od: it as clearly follows, that the end
of those actions in it self, is just and good; the which therefore to pursue,
providence and the necessity of improving the same when offered, besides what
the good end it self requires, and what evil the neglect thereof may produce,
as likewise impulses of spirit thereunto, all which concurring in the self same
act, to promote the self same end, must needs be not only an incitation, but
a Rule for the Army to walk by, especially in those ways which the word of God
justifies, as well as in th^se with which it meddles not. For we must thus
far conclude, that the word of God directs not in the ordering of a civil
State, and that neither the law of the land (it not being civilly perfect)
comprehends all things rationally requisite thereunto. Whether then it can be
imputed irregular, and so transgression, that has both the light of reason,
providence, necessity, and an impulse of spirit (which you say is no rule
without the word of God) assisting the establishment of what (as beforesaid)
the word of God directs not, and the law of the land is defective in? Nay
surely, since that which is needful at one time, may be hurtful at another,
and the mending cannot be esteemed the breaking of the Rule, likewise, that the
making the law more impartial, cannot be thought to be an abrogating of it.

Again, as to what the word of God enjoynes in general, as in that command
generally without exceptions, To execute justice and judgment, it prescribes
not every particular act of justice and judgment, but leaves it to an impulse
of his Spirit, to our understandings, the necessity of it, and his providence
together: all which in this case, must needs be a rule to walk by. Again, (to
touch upon what before promised) if two commands should come in competition (as
in this case they do not) yet the greatest is to be first respected and
obeyed. There was a command not to eat the Show bread, but David had a greater
command, Not to murder, least of all himself, when there was such sustenance
before him, which he rather obeyed. If then universal obedience were (as it is
not) enjoined to all Magist^ates, yet the execution of judgment and justice,
as a greater command, more force in it, must be preferred before it, without
respect of persons; and this from an impulse of Spirit in those empowered for
the office: and that there are such, the very command ^mplies as much, ^^^e
that a people cannot execute judgment and justice, without illimited power to
do it.

Moreover, to your objection of an Impulse of spirit falling upon multitudes at
the same time, patting them all at once upon performances, contrary to moral
precepts (as you say) or whether those that have such an impulse of spirit, can
command others that have it not? I partly answer, that if the transactions of
the Army (that you speak of,) were contrary to moral precepts (as you
peremptorily conclude they are) then they must be contrary to Gods word: but it
is before clearly proved, that they are in general and so in particular,
agreeble to Gods word, therefore they cannot be contrary to moral precepts.
Now then, for fuller resolution to this your Question, we must consider whether
the things thus impulsed by the Spirit, be against a command greater or lesser,
whether against a greater command that is absolute, and will in no case admit
of a breach: or whether against a lesser command, as in some cases (as that a
greater may not be violated) will admit of a breach of the letter of i^, thus
the fifth Commandment is subordinate to the first, viz. to own God, though in
the denial of our parents. Thus likewise in two necessities, the greater is to
be p^efer^d before the lesse^.

We read that the rigor of the punishment due to theft under the Law, was
mitigated when committed merely to preserve life. The fourth Commandment
likewise dispenses with needful acts, it holds good likewise in the example
of David which you instance, wherewith I thus far comply, that for David in
revenge of his own private cause; being especially a private person, to have
improved those providence he had to have killed Saul, might have been a sin,
as in the case of Nabal; that also being no ground for any to take away another
man's life, because he would have taken away his: but now had it thus happened,
that Saul in pursuit of David had so st^ai^ned him, that either he must have
killed Sa^d, or by him have been killed himself; in this case I believe the law
of Reason and Nature affords a man all means to preserve his own life. Upon the
aforesaid limitation, the Margin (upon that providence given David) has it to
the same effect, and for proof instanceth the example of Ichu.

Now then, much more the impulses of Spirit [upon (though not the multitude,
yet) such that have the command of them, unto the execution of absolute
commands, free from all exceptions, which ten is not likewise to the breach of
others qualified with conditions, as (has been amply showed) our subjection to
Magistrates is] are to be followed. And seeing it lies as a dutty upon all to
act in obedience to these commands, especially such that are convinced of the
justness of them, and much more those that are incited by the Spirit to obey
them. It is clear that the persons that have this impulse of Spirit, may
incite, and (especially in that they have authority over the multitude, as you
call the Army) command those others that want such an impulse of spirit (though
they were never yet compeld) to act in discharge of that their duty; seeing
likewise we are to perform duties, though we want that spiritual quickening
that is most acceptable in them.

Again, toward a conclusion (though I needed not thus largely to have
proceeded up on the last part of your matter, which depends upon concession;
that those actions of the Army were illega^l, since I have proved the contrary,
that they were lawful and just; and therefore all your discourse of
providence, impulses of spirit, and no necessity to sin, has been to no
purpose, but, because I would as f^lly satisfy as I may: I shall speak a little
to that your last objection viz That there is no necessity can oblige a man to
sin, from whence it clearly follows that, to what a man is obliged by
necessity, that is no sin: now then, the Armies necessity unto those
transactions was absolute (besides what expedition the goodness it self of
them required) in that they aff^ied other means in vain, when reason would
allow them no other then the stric^nesse of justice: their necessity was
likewise present, because post est occasio calva, opportunity once neglected is
not their own to recall; and also clear (though you say only to themselves)
since the truth is only discerned of those that have it; therefore the means
they have used being clearly good, it cannot consist with your charity, to fear
their ends aimed at less justifiable.

And then lastly, your exhortation, page 15. to the army, to recede from these
evil ways, as your words are; is altogether useless, and which if followed
would prove very prejudicial, since the justness of these ways is clearly
manifested, and as far as the omission thereof, and receding therefrom would be
prejudicial; and therefore to what you would incite the Army from John
Baptists lesson to Soldiers Luke 3.14. viz. Do violence to no man, etc. is
already practiced by them, since that command forbids not, but that they should
do justice to all men; or may run thus, do violence to no man, but legally
try, and let justice take place upon all men (as the f^llowing words shows) not
accusing any man falsty, and be content with your wages: this last clause
likewise is so candi^ly observed by the Army, that the whole Nation can bear
witness to their patience and cententednesse, with what little they have
received, notwithstanding the great arrears due to them, and their necessities
f^r the same: but in your conclu^i^n though you have so boldly proceeded
hitherto you cenf^sle and confine your fear of the Armies theatnings (for so it
seems they are interpreted by you, which were only brotherly premonitions,
what would be the consequence of your seditious doctrine should you persist
therein) unto their general return, unto that which is only conceived by you
to be their duty: truly this is very disagreeable to your Profession, to desire
and persuade men to return from what is so clearly manifested to be enjoined by
the word of God, viz. to execute justice and judgment, and the establishment
of the Peoples liberties, for which they have Covenanted; and from which (the
prayers of honest men will be) Lord let them never digress* but persevere in
the truth: though occasionally thereby men be scandalized and offended never so
much; but being m^re willing of your conviction, then forcible suppression, I
entreat you to apply your s^l^es more sincerely to discharge your own duty,
before you presume to censure wherein you conceive others fail; and labor after
more charity toward your brethren, ceasing to be any longer like children,
whose hearts are big, but* dare not cry because the ^^d of the patent is over
them. It is a sad thing when you that pretend to have the keeping of the
Oracles of God, and to receive (as it were) the law at his mouth; should walk
so irregularly, as to deserve to have laws prescribed by authority to keep you
within your own sphere, to direct you how far the liberty of your profession
will extend: I say, like children not for innocence; but you are no longer
quiet then the rod of the Army is over you, nor then neither; but you must be
sobbing and sighing, you must have dry slings at them; my what would you not
speak if you durst, since you dare to speak so much as you do: and therefore,
whereas (in case of sufferings for your deserts) you seem to extract comfort
from more peculiar servants of God, that suffered for clear infallible t^^ths,
without a ^empting to compel others to conform thereunto: yet I am confident,
that if (through your own all tri^pi^copall spirits meddling in matters
impertinent as to your selves) you acquire to your selves sufferings; you
suffer not for Christ, but as busy bodies, and your comfort will advene
accordingly. What isntrumental good you have been f^^^erly unto any in the due
exercise of your calling, cannot but be acknowledged as by o^^^, so by my self,
that has had a share therein: but this is no argument to jus^^^ey you in you^
late and present exorbitancy: That smal^ esteem that many formerly, when
des^^ved, respective you (...) has now of you, has been the product of your
own miscarriages, ^^s^rde^y walking, beyond the line of your profession, both
in words and actions: you have and d^e endeavor to power contempt upon the
lawful authority of this Kingdom; some of you actually disobeying them,
others baulking the observation of then commands notwithstanding the several
places of scripture, which your selves have qu^ted, f^^ ^^proof to such
disobedient ones herein) and all this being aggravated with s^lt respect, does
render your proceedings the more odious, and your Pulpit contradictions, your
d^^t^m^ more lame and invalid: yea, very unprofitable; giving just cause to
fear, that the slender returns to all your Pastings and Prayers, has been,
because you have performed th^se and other duties to a wrong end: Like to those
which the Prpph^^ Isa^th speaks to: Isa. 58.3.4. Behold, in the day of your
fast, you will seek your will, and require all your del^s. Behold, ye fast to
strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wh^le^nesse, etc. How often
upon such days have you in your Prayers spread abread general^ sins, seeming
to include your selves in them; and yet it has appeared by after expressions,
that you have intended them only for others, to cast reproach upon your
brethren, that have so little deserved at from you, and patiently forborne to
(though justly they might) inflict the due punishment of your opposition upon
you; and what themselves might have expected from (it they had but lawfully
opposed) your party in the like power, (though more unjustly) to have been
executed upon them; but taking more pleasure in your reversion then in your
rejection: I mind you of this as your duty, viz. That you meddle less with
the State, and more in the word of God, most agreeable to your profession,
less to divide and interpret it to your own ends, and more to reconcile and
declare the truths thereof; less in Self, and more in advancing the Scepter of
Christ; not in tyranny but truth, that hereby you may regain the hearts you
have lost, more glory to God, and comfort both to your own and hearers souls.

Before I proceeded thus far, I perceived a pamphlet abroad, supposed to be
Mr. Loves, in vindication of the Ministers Letter, being an Answer to Mr. John
Price, and being willing (had I found it any thing satisfactory) that it should
have prevented my labor to finen this, in wel-nigh a period: upon survey, I
find all the subject matter thereof in effect (though not so formally as a
particular Reply) before answered, and being willing fully to satisfy, I
sub^ex a very brief Reply, to what I think is not so fully before hinted.

A brief answer in what may not be fully prehinted to a late Pamphlet
entitled, a modest (immodest) and clear (obscure, unsatisfactory) vindication
of the serious representation, and late vindication of the Ministers of London,
etc (so termed for distinctions sake) in answer to Mr. John Price his late book
entitled, clerico class^cun^, etc. but the said answer not subscribed, yet
supposed to be Chri^lopher Loves, one of the same profession, and that is all.

I shall not undertake to speak to every impertinent passage in the aforesaid
pamphlet: but chiefly to what is objected therein, to justi^e the
representation of the Ministers; a little hinting likewise at his groundless
carps, upon some particulars, in former of Mr. Price his Books; and therefore
(waving his great uncharitablenes in his epistle Dedicated to the Ministers,
where he calls all that oppose them sons of Beelzebub, though they are known to
be as godly, and some, in every respect, as able as themselves.

I proceed to his second page, where upon this ground only; Mr. Love, or the
right author whoever it be, is induced to believe Mr. Price, not to be himself,
when he made his late book: viz. that he justifies the l^te act of justice upon
the King, and in a former book some years since speaks thus (as the said
Author) cites it: You sight, (speaking to the souldie^s) for th^recovery of
the Kings royal Person, out of the hands of those miscreant; and reinstate him
in his royal throne and dignity, that both he and his Posterity (if God will)
may yet flourish in their royally; so that notwithstanding all contradictions,
you sight for your King: Now Mr. Love, let any reasonable man Judge, whether
this passage tends in the least, in case of demerit, to exempt the King from
death; for was Mr. Price to cha^table and sober spirited (as you say) as (when
nothing from the King appeared to the contrary) to believe that he was seduced
and withdrawn by evil Counsel? (though an ordinary man should suffer to obey
that) and can it consist with your charity to judge, that the same spirit is
not in him, and that he is besides himself, to justify what the word of God
justifies: viz. the late act of justice upon the King (notwithstanding his
former words were they in themselves absolute) when sufficient testimony was
given to the whole Nation, that the King instead of being seduced was the
seducer, and evil counselor; and as the Load stone to draw all the rest
after him: Therefore it is no argument, that because Mr. Love professes to be
a Minister of the Gospel now, and thereupon some think him to be so; that
therefore they should believe so, if he should turn a Prelate or a Jesuit:
Again, Mr. Love, if you mark the same words, and turn your self when you read
them, there is a limitation in them, thus and thus, they fight for the King (if
God will) but it being clear, that the will of God is executed upon the King in
his death: are you angry and in your judgment, others besides themselves, if
they repine and resist not the w^ll of God? now then, the only ground of this
your belief, being taken a way; it follows from your own words, that you were
not your self, when you read Mr. Price his said book. In the next place, you
are offended that Mr Price questions the truth of the Ministers calling; and
therefore mind him of another passage in the same book, where (you say) he
calls them learned and conscientious Ministers, Orthodox and godly Divines? to
this I answer (though he might not ascribe that to the letter Writers) that
though the Ministers, as to their actings, then (seeming pure in opposition to
the Bishops) might deserve that which was before attributed them, yet (as a
Saint can no longer be reputed so, when in the state of Apostasy, but a Judas)
so neither are these men worthy of that predicted charity, now it appears, that
what they acted to subvert the Bishops, was to instate themselves, under a new
notion, in the same power: but pray remember, that those you now band for
Heretics, were your example to oppose the Bishops, though not for the same
cod. Again, you are touched with the manner of his argument: viz. that we have
nothing, but their own sayings to prove that they are Ministers, and would Mr.
Love make this a foundation? Indeed it is just like their own argument n the
beginning of their vindication, tiz. that Paul was counted a seditious
pestilent fellow. And here lies the force of their Argument, that because (upon
good grounds) they are counted seditious pestilent fellows, therefore they are
Paul's. Upon the same grounds every seditious person is a Paul, and that is the
way to make Paul sediti^us indeed. You see now the weight of your argument, and
that for want of better proof then words, and th^se only to affirm it, your
calling is built upon a sandy foundation, which your self more clearly
discovers, page 3. where you count any man unworthy to speak to you in
confutation of your Doctrine, that has not a smell of the University; which
truly in your sense stinks, and would keep men from coming thither as much as
they can. Again, in the same page you find fault with Mr. Price that he should
question the Ministers divine origination, but you neither assert nor prove it.
Truly, this gives more cause to fear that it is weak, and affords you no such
liberty as you take from it, viz. Ministers of the Gostel, Ambassadors of
Christ, Stewards of the Ordiuances, and that you are in Gods right hand, and he
will hold you fast, you shall not be removed. But you were best make better use
of your liberty then you have done, or I am confident your faith herein will
fail you. Indeed you scoffingly summon a testimony of his calling, when your
own is more ridiculous, and less justifiable then a Cobblers from the stall Do
you not remember the calling of Peter, Andrew, James and John? for they were
Fishers, Mat. 4.18. Again, neither can you conclude from those Mr. Price his
words, viz. that they are judicious, learned, gra^e, wise and good men, that
therefore they are able for the Ministry: For then you will confine judgment,
gravity, learning, wisdom, and godliness to them only: or allow thousands
besides them, as great a right and title to the Ministry, (and yet not from
the University) as themselves, but that you will never do Again, judgment,
wisdom, gravity, etc. will not serve, but there must be such a degree of each,
that must render th^^^ capable of the Ministry; or else still more are fit for
it then themselves. We read of Apollos an eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scriptures, yet more perfectly instructed in the way of God by Aquila and
Pris^^lla, Acts 18.24.26. Again, as nothing does justify honest words so much
as honest actions, so nothing the true Ministers of the Gospel, so much as
qualifications accordingly. Now true Ministers of the Gospel (as they are
rightly ordained (not by such whom themselves have deposed as unjust) and
elected, so likewise) they are qualified with graces thereunto, the peculiar
free gift of Gods Spirit, but not common. But now these present Ministers
profess their chief qualification to be the University, wherein the worst and
most of men may attain to as much, if not more learning, as being common to
all, and from thence plead the same privilege to preach the Gospel, as
themselves, and so not from the Spirit, and therefore not true Ministers of the
Gospel. Indeed we had need pray for better, or a more special gift of the
Spirit, or for all these, we are like to be in darkness in reference to many
truths. I am sure of late their doctrine has been very unprofitable: they
tail against heresies in general, but very seldom confute any one in
particular; and they fix that as heresy upon others, which (if it came to
trial, they cannot confute by argument.

But I proceed to your sixth page, where you insert the good effect of the
Ministers preachings, as being likewise acknowledged by some of our own party:
To this I answer, That we are not disputing what good they have done formerly;
but of late days: whether most of their Doctrine (since the consciences of
many could not comply in their way) has not tended more to distention, and
making the breach wider, then lesser, or to edification? Or whether the good
they have done formerly in their pretended places, be any support to their
Callings? since by the same Argument many of the Bishops, whose doctrine has
been profitable, should yet have been continued in their offices: But though
many of us cannot but acknowledge the power of God, even through darkness to
bring light unto us, and reach our good to our souls, through such weak
instruments as the Ministers; yet this is no ground unto us to suppress the
illumination of Gods Spirit, If he please to afford us (not to boast but to his
glory) as much if not more then themselves; neither is it for want of more holy
and spiritual performances in those whom you count perverters of the truth (if
few are converted) but rather through the opposition of the contentious
preaching of the Ministers you so much esteem

As to the days of union you speak of, it is confessed, in the Bishops days, we
were under the power of such conformity, that the truth could hardly appear,
but be suddenly suppressed with some reproach or other upon it; at which time
likewise there were daily declinings from that little light there was; if these
be your days (for other I know none) of union, and so desirable, the mercy of
God in freeing us from them, is ill requited by you; otherwise you much
degenerate from that general duty (Do as you would be done to) to endeavor a
compulsive conformity by others unto your way; since you so much pleaded for
(and against the restr^nt of) liberty in the worship and service of God, when
attempted to be^ imposed on you, under the Prelaticall prevalency. Neither
therefore can our separation be reputed Schism or Faction criminal, since
(upon the same grounds as your selves did) we avoid the continual flashings of
conscience in our faces, that attend a compulsive worship.

As to that forced interpretation you make of Mr. Price his words, viz. Which
is all the benefit thou have received by the exchange of this late Diocese for
the Province of London, that therefore he would rather have London a Diocese
then a Province. I say, this interpretation is merely forced; seeing the words
are only the result of a discovery of what little benefit has accrued by that
change, from which (had the conditions thereof been rightly managed) we did
expect and might accordingly have enjoyed our hearts content, the benefit
intended. In a word, he mislikes the ill use of the change, not the thing it
self; but should I yield to what you would imply in them, I tell you, we should
never have been so willing (had we known your intentions before hand) to have
assisted with our temporal estates, to depose a coercive power in the Bishops,
to exalt it in you, and so more irksom, from whom we expected better, (as David
from his friends) it (indeed) not being worth a tithe of seven years such
expense, war, and trouble, only in name (and not in nature) the province of
London for its Diocese.

Again, to your exceptions against his quotation of Gregory, viz. That it is
the language of the Beast, and therefore makes it incogitable that he should
study it. I answer, that in Mr Loves sense, if he will avoid the language of
the Beast, then he must avoid preaching and praying, with many other good words
and deeds that they both speak and do. But secondly, as there is the greatest
motive upon Christians to perform some good duties, lest they should come short
of Heathen that do the same; so does this reproof lie heavier upon the
Ministers that are found seeking to themselves names of vanity, which even the
Beast (as you call him) did reprove.

But secondly, Mr. Love is very captious, to comment so much upon an error in
printing, viz. 323. for 32. and I cannot but think himself believes to be a
mistake therein: and yet inlargeth half a side upon it. Truly, it is a sign he
wanted good matter enough, when he causlesly insists so much upon
circumstances, neither can he keep himself close to this, but upon the mistake
grows very pastionate, and tells us. (though directed only to Mr. Price, yet
we must all expect the same since) that if we persist to justify the ki^ling
the King, (as h^ calls it, etc.) Gregory (the Executioner) may not mistake our
necks to be more then we have. Who would have thought that Mr Loves Nature
should differ so much from his Name? What a bitter spirit does he here
discover? He tells us plainly what we might expect (se^^dice) if he were our
judge; at least that we should despair of him as an ad^ocate, though it came
to that extremity by his own party; but blessed be God that we are not as yet
fallen into your hands, neither rewarded you evil for evil, though
(^bstra^tively considered) it is no evil to render you impartially according
to your deserts. But I rather desire concord.

Th^n thirdly, Mr. Love would fain justify his brethren and himself likewise
from seeki^g those names of vanity that Gregory there reproves, as universal
Bishop, and the like; but all this will not serve: for in seeking the same
authority that is denominated by those names, (though for shame of the world
you omit the names thmeselves, yet) you are liable to the same reproof, it
being intended to the sought for arrogant authority, not so much the name of
the person. Again, what though you should not seek after the same names and
substance (though in comparison there is none in it) of vanity, yet in seeking
others really vain, you are as culpable. For Christ never allowed a sole power
to his Apostles to preach the Gospel and unfold the Scriptures, them only, and
none besides them; but the Ministers (though they come not in by the door,
yet) assume this power. And though you say that they seek no other names but
what Christ gives, viz. Ministers of the Gospel, Preachers of the Word,
Ambassadors of Christ, (but I am sure they want his commission) yet Christ
never ascribed these names to an Academicall University calling, to a vain
calling: And therefore as to the unclean all things are unclean; so for the
Ministers, upon so vain a title to assume these names, is absolute vanity; and
one act hereof (by the way) I shall mind you of, and that is, because
Ministers, you shall see some young boys, with hardly a hair in then faces,
take the wall of some that are thrice better both in estate and age, but if you
mend not, you will work out your selves.

To conclude this answer, I cannot but take notice how Mr. Love has all this
while labored to vindicate the Ministers, left they should fall under that
Pope Gregory's reproof; and therefore cannot but grant it is just, and yet in
his first answer thereto, calls it the language of the ^^^^st. This is a plain
contradiction in his own words, and is the mark of a ^aw no^^^e, then any thing
he can fix upon the person he would reproach therewith.

Again, to what he charge the Army [ page 8.] for kindling the flames of a
second war, and therefore alleges these reasons, viz. That one while they
erred up the King, closed with the Maligna^^^, etc. And at another time forced
the Parliament (as he calls it) to Nonad trasse^, etc. these did irritate the
Malignants to now insurrections etc. To this I answer, That this s^^lenesse in
the Army, as you call it, is no less justifiable then that of a wise and
tender he ^^ed Father toward an obstinate disobedient child: the Father will
first assay all means, as mild pe^^wa^ions and gifts; and if that will not
do, then threatenings, and long fo^b^a ance, and stripes before he delivers up
his child to the Judge to be stoned. Thus, wh^^ ^^ll m^anes would not prevail
with the King, there was no way but one. But it may be you will object, That
the Army it self in their last Remonstrance, confessed this (...) col^^^ing to
be a miscarriage: Then I answer, the more shame for you, so to neglect your
duty, in forgiving and forgetting, as to upbraid them with it. But, if your
words be (...), that this was a cause of a second warte, how comes it that so
many of your own party are found guilty? I shall proceed little further to
answer circumstances, and indeed had I ^une, it would be ill spent justly to
aggravate your folly in them, it being more easy to judge of the rest by what
is already spoken; therefore I pass over to your 32. page, where I wave that
Ordinance of Parliament you cite, to speak further to it then before, seeing
likewise the express ends, as the conditions of the Armies service therein is
demonstrated: as likewise in the Covenant to be in the Grammatical sense
thereof as limits to their defense either of King or Parliament, both being
servants, and to command the Army in nothing derogatory from the peoples
liberties; and therefore that your objection, that we are but a party of the
people, is invalid, since you can dee no less then allow us as much power as
your selves, and in number we are more; yet you a^^ume the power of the people
to your selves in the 16. page, where you seem to make the Malignants and us
e^ill Instruments, and therefore as well to be brought to condign punishment
as they. Surely there is none left their to be Executioners but your selves:
and me thinks you should not offer to blame the Armies party for assuming a
power as the people, when more interested therein then your selves, who was
likewise their example. But to your Concession in the 32 page, viz. that the
Ministers are for justice, and that according to the Covenant, on the chief
delinquents. For answer then, Mr. Love with all his Divinity cannot (it being
no part thereof, to) exempt the King from justice, since none was so great a
Delinquent as himself, the rest had not been so but for him countenancing and
abetting them therein; else they could not have subsisted so long unpuni^^ed as
they did: And did not the late executed Lords plead his authority for their
actions? that what they did, was in obedience to him their Master? Does it not
appear by this, that he was their evil counselor, they not his? And might
not this be a reason why he so much insisted to have them indemp^^^^ed, because
he know himself to be their chief seducer? And yet Mr. Love from the Covenant
would have the King exempted, when it runs expressly to bring chief Delinquents
to punishment, and the King so in the superlative degree, and yet freed: Were
not this indeed to make the Covenant a contradictious thing? But now this being
granted, that the King was the cause of all that opposition and bloodshed in
the Kingdom; that your supposition page 16. to clear Mr. Love, that if he had
laid the guilt of the bloodshed upon the King, yet that there was nothing in
that his Sermon touching his punishment. I say this supposition is fully
answered by your own words (th^ugh you declare not your intentions whether to
the King or no) That men of blood are not meet persons to be at ^ene with till
all the guilt of blood be exp^ated and avenged, either by the sword of the law
or the (...) of the sword, etc. Chr Love in his Englands distemper, page 37.
Their it follows from these words, that it the King were guilty of blood, the
expiation thereof by the sword of the law was just upon him. But this point
being largely discussed in that late Book, The ex^^^tion of the King justified,
I shall for hea^e to speak much (yet a little) more, (because so much opposed
by you) unto it, and therefore proceed to your 39. page, where you say, First,
that one end of the war was to preserve the iugsperson. Answ. But
conditionally, to be in our protection, and to act nothing against his trust,
being to give an account thereof, as any subordinate officer. Secondly, in
defense of the Kings person, you say many full sequent oaths of the Parliament,
etc. for the preservation of his person. Answ. These oaths could not extend to
greater deserts of his, as in the precedent answer to your brethren is largely
demonstrated. But further, if in all cases they swore to maintain his person
then in sinful ones likewise, and so they would have become preservers of sin,
and p^^^ably a constant course of sin, even the introducing of Popery it self,
by him. Your third aggravation of his death is, That he was the first
Protestant King (as you say, though in the former page you were uncertain
whether he was so or no; but suppose it, that he were so, the first) so put to
death of his own subjects, yet you mean in such a regular way; and would you
find fault with that? but rather have more condemned them, had they literally
and directly followed the example of Iehu: for so far as judicial proceeds
by way of lega^^^^ll are preferred before immediate execution, are they not the
rather justifiable th^r^m?

Y^^^ fourth objection is, That in killing him, they likewise killed the King of
Scotland and Irel^^^, who had as much right in him as their King, as this
kingdom had. For answer, First, w^ (...) to walk, (especially a Nation) by
other men's light, but our own. Secondly, that the ^^ne Rule (upon
transgression) by which an Israelite was punished, the same likewise ^xtended
to a stranger inhabiting among them, which the late King was not altogether
(...) unto us.

Your fifth objection, That he had granted more for the good of the Kingdom,
etc. then any before him. Answ. For the people to expose themselves to his
grants, is to confess themselves slaves, and to yield up their rights and
liberties into his will and power, the which likewise (the^^ he might ^eca^^
when he pleased.

Your sixth Objection with your eighth in the 43. page viz. That the House of
Commons if full and free) cannot take away the life of a King, seeing they
cannot administer an oath, etc. And your eighth, That the House of Commons* if
full and free cannot by law erect a new Court to take away the life of any man,
much less the Kings: I answer the last first, viz. That the Pa^^ament being
full as to the number requisite for their being, and free having no ^est^^^^t
upon them) is not limited unto the law, neither is it obligatory unto them,
where d^^^^^ent: e^s^ they cannot discharge their trust, and their assembling
would be to no purpose^ the chiefest put thereof being to redress and amend
what is amiss or prejudic^all to the Peoples welfare, as to establi^h what is
good: now then (if neither the law would (as you say and likewise did we the
Parliaments hands, that they could not execute justice upon the late King
(though his Person acted never so much hurtful to the commonwealth) to what
effect was their convening and sitting? what profit would ensue therefrom. or,
how could they discharge their trust to the Kingdom? since also the laws if
rightly constituted, are usually prescribed by them.

Now then, upon these considerations, the Parliament had power to erect the
Court of Justice, which (in answer to your first of those objections) when
constituted and invested with power (had the King pleaded) oaths were ready to
be administered. But I cannot but observe how punctual you would be in every
tittle of the law of the Land that serves your turn, and yet so partial in the
law of God and our law likewise. For, can the law be justly administered, when a
King is known to break such and such points thereof, and yet be exempted the
penalty because a King? Would not this make his Authority or Office, which
simply is just and good, become a protection to the vice of his person? Can you
not as soon make good to have communion and fellowship with evil? Again, do
you not hereby frustrate all the force that lies upon the example of a King, to
induce his subjects likewise to yield obedience to his law? And is it not a
means to make him live more carelessly and licentiously without so weighty an
argument against the appearance of evil, when he is tolerated to live
uncontrollably? And do you not make partial the law of God? when thereby you
will take liberty to restrain and oppose, yet leave unpunished (when you may as
lawfully punish) the ill manners of a King: But rather may not the law take
hold of a King, if murderer, adulterer, or offender in any other point thereof,
according to the penalty of it, and yet be no attempt or prejudice to his
authority or Office? when indeed it appears purest, when impartially executed
opon his own person? Of this le^ ^easonable men judge.

But not to leave it altogether upon my self, I shall confirm it with the
opinion of others, and therefore take what Mr. Prinne cites of Mariana in the
59 p. of his Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms: viz. That all Kings
and Princes, among others, the Kings of Spain, are and ought to be bound by
laws, and are not exempted from them: that this doctrine out to be inculcated
into the minds of Princes from their infancy, and to be believed; yea, often
considered of them: that they are more strictly obliged to observe their laws
thou Subjects, because they are sworn to do it, they are the conservators of
the laws, the avengers of those that infringe them, and their example are the
best means to draw Subjects to obey them: When he likewise affirms that the
whole Kingdom is above the King, and may not only bind him by laws, but
question him for the breach of them.

Again, the same Author likewise argues there against succession, if any ways
defective f^r the Office, but more particularly in the 55. page lin. 5. he
says thus much: That if the King degeuerate into a tyrant by subverting
Religion, Laws, ^iberties, oppressing, murdering, ^r d^^^ouring his Subjects:
the whole kingdom may not only question, admonish and reprehend him, but (in
case he prove incorrigible after admonition) deprive him, and substitute
another in his place; which (says he) has been done more then once in Spain,
and there instenceth many Kings that have been thus dealt with: and for a
conclusion he adds, That such a tyrannical King continuing incorrigible after
public admonitions of the whole state (if there be no hopes of amendment) may
not only be deposed, but put to death and m^rthered by the whole State, or any
particular persons by their appointment; yea, without it, if be be declared a
publisk enemy by the whole State: he proceeds likewise to justify the act in a
private person, which I need not cite: seeing this serves my purpose, now that
the lawfullest part of this Nations authority (though Junius Br^^us extends
this power to one single person in^usted in a Kingdom, against both King and
the rest of the Nobles deserting it commanded what has been executed upon the
late King, has been sufficiently proved; and not so much to be their command
as Gods: therefore I shall proceed to cite what Mr. Prinne himself says upon
this point, in his So^^raign power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, page 130.3.
Position: viz. That the Kings of Judah and Israel were no absolute overaign
Princes; ^^^^^^ke their Crown with and upon such divine conditions. For breach
whereof, they and their posterities were often times by Gods command, just
judgment and special approbation, deposed, de inberited, destroyed and the
Crown translated to other familyes. For this he quotes Iunius Brutus (though
you would so much vilify the same (as from a Jesuit) being quoted by Mr.
Price) as likewise diverse scriptures; and Josephus upon one text to the same
^slect: but especially in the conclusion of this his Position, he cites, that
Swinglius with B. Dilson, expressly resolves, that the People were bound to
refist, question and depose their Kings for Idolatry and breach of those
conditions, as before demonstrated, and that God himself jusily punished them,
viz. the People for Manassahs sins and wickedness, because they re^i^^ed and
punished him not for them, as they were obliged to do: where he affirms
likewise page 136. that the children of Israel their Rulers, Kings, and People,
did joymly make a Covenant frequently to serve the Lord, and the violators
thereof to dye the death; where he says (the King and the Queen not excepted)
in six or seven of those pages he treat^ of the same subject; but I know this
is sufficient testimony to this truth: and therefore shall for bear to insert
more of his authors hereupon. Therefore lastly, to your objection which I sinde
thrice asserted literally, and oftener to the same effect: viz. That it the
Murderer should be put to death, which you grant is a known precept; why then,
were not Goring and Owen, say you, with the rest of the Kings party that in a
military way have shed blood, put to death? To this I answer, that as the
killing of one Zimri and Cozbi, heads of their Families, appeased the wrath and
Law of God; (though doubtless had Moses proceeded to the condemnation and
execution of some of the rest guilty of the same fact, it would have been just,
as neither his omission thereof (through mercy) could be no neglect of the
Laws injunction) so likewise may the execution of such persons as are found
principal causes (and most of all the chiefest) of bloodshed in a military
way, satisfy the Law, (though themselves might not actually shed blood) when
such that (as we say hab nab) might act therein (through the others seductions)
may justly and mercifully be remitted, even as the seducers are usually
punished when the seduced (though both in the same fact are (through the mercy
of justice) absolved. Many instances of this might be produced, but finding the
scope of your matter fully answered, I shall wind up all in this advice to you,
viz. That (if you be Mr. Love, or of his profession) you would (according to
your calling) meddle more in your study, and less in the State; more in
tuition, and less in sedition: then shall the Nation be less disturbed,
Authority more obeyed, and your Parishioners better instructed.

FINIS.

