LONDONS New Colors displaid: OR, The SNAKE in the Cities grasse-green
Petition discovered. For preventing the horrid mischiefs thereby intended,
against the Army, and all the well-affected people in City and Country.
Viridi latet Anguis in herba.

NOthing is more evident, then that London has been long in dispute, what
Colors to hold forth, that should demonstrate, who they were for, and who they
were against; and lo, now they are resolved to bear the very same with the
Malignants in Kent, the Common Council having so determined it, the Petition
of the one and the other, being both of one and the same Color and frameing.

But good, honest, understanding London, (I pray thee) will thou now suffer thy
self to be thus cheated, surprised, and abused, by a confederacy of Malignants
crept into thy Common Council? Have thou so many years been a maintainer of
the Liberties of the people, and that with the strength of thy youth, thy blood
and treasure, against all arbitrary power in whomsoever; and will thou now be
made more isntrumental in the thraledome and misery of the people, then any
other part of the Nation? Wast thou first in opposition to oppression; the
first example and leader toward freedom? Did thou burn as a clear light
unto others, to go out thus like a stinking snuff thy self? Oh, far be it
from thee! shame not thy judgment and conscience thus to all Posterities. Let
it not be said, that London was so foolish, so mad, as wilfully to betray it
self and the whole Nation into bondage; and through ignorance and sottishness
to run headlong into those traps and snares, which no terror or danger could
ever drive them into: nay, to beg, petition and give thanks for being put into
the most ready way to be made irrecoverable slaves. Open your eyes and see, if
it be not so: and if you find it so, consider what those men deserve, who have
thus abused and deluded you.

In the first place, ye are made to fawn and prostitute your thankfulness to
the Parliament, for their many favors, in granting sever all of your
Petitions; but sure you are not so far blinded, as not to see this palpable
juggling. Do you not know, that diverse in the Parliament and Common Council
are confederates to deceive you, and all that have opposed the King throughout
the Land? Do you not see they are resolved to do that for him by craft and
fraud, that he was never able to do for himself by force? What Petitions did
they ever grant you, that were not first contrived and plotted by themselves,
and then cunningly laid to be acted in Common-Councells, and so to come in
State and formal Equipage presented by your Aldermen and Common-Councell-men,
and then be printed with an Answer suitable, to beget repute and credit abroad,
and consequently, the like Petitions, from all parts?

Just thus it was with that great Remonstrance of your City, which bred the
first scab between you and that worthy Army, which under God preserved you,
your wives, children and estates, from that misery and ruin lately threatened
against you by the King, (though these deceivers would make you forgetful of
it) and which bred you so great mischief, that it is wonderful the same
deluders should presume, you could be so so one again liable to the same deceit.

Is it possible you can forget the late dismal time you were in, when, by the
insolence and treachery of these violent and treacherous men, the Army was
enforced to march to London. You cannot but remember the many scandalous
reproaches they then cast upon them, under what bloody and ravenous shapes
they presented them to you, on purpose to engage you into a war against them:
And when their orderly and harmless march through your wealthy City, had
proved them all to be false, how suddenly did they turn this their goodness
into poison, perverting, what they did (merely to let you know the Army
intended not your spoil or ruin,) into an Argument of their Pride and
Haughtiness, as if they had done it in way of triumphing over you, manifesting
that nothing can be in it self so innocent and harmless, but malice can turn,
into the most hellish Construction.

Then the decay of trade, deernesse of food, continuance of the Excize and all
the burdens of the Land, must still be laid to the charge of this Army, not
that they deserved such a charge; but because this Army must be made odious,
before the People would be induced to rise, or a clear way be made for the
King. And this work is plied all the winter long, girding at, and provoking the
Army beyond all patience. Which, (as one evil ever begets another) brings a
part of the Army to White Hall and the Mewes: And oh, with what art this was
descanted upon and heightened! This was such an affront, as was not to be
borne. Then after a while comes the tumult, no way to be appeased but by the
Army, none other regarding it. And the very appeasing of it, is with all
possible skill made a crime equal to, nay, surmounting the tumult it self.

Well, in this time motions are made for a reconciliation, the Militia is to be
changed, the Mayor and Aldermen in the Tower to be released, the 11. Members
and others to be restored, and the like. And all this and more is done and the
Army opposes not, nor repines, as being willing to pass by as much as is
possible. But no sooner is this done, but to the old work again. And this
City, that in most dangerous times, could send a full relief to Gloucester,
affords no assistance for subduing either the Kentish or the Colchester
malignants, nay, suffers Goring, that arch Malignant and old Projector, to nose
them at Bow for many days, without any check or control from this City.
Which yet in these men's conceit and resolution, must eat up and devour the
whole Army. But all parties are not yet agreed, neither ever will be, to so
base, so ungrateful an end.

And now in this nick of time, whiles the Army is employed part into Wales,
part into Kent, part into Essex, and another part in the North; whiles the
Scots and other foreigners are expected, and danger every where threatens;
now, now only is the time (as these men would make you believe,) for you to
petition for a personal treaty, as the only means to put an end to all these
differences and disputes. And certainly so it would; but how? Not as you
expect, but as these deceivers intend: for you and they are not one in this
business, how fair soever they pretend. For you have (even multitudes of you)
voluntarily and faithfully expended of your estates and ventured your persons
in the late wars against the King. Many of you have spoken largely, and some
of you have bin isntrumental in bringing his instruments and agents to condign
punishment. Many of you have served in Committees as assessors Sequestrators or
Collectors; With most of these you will find it otherwise. When plots to
destroy you have been deeply laid and lists found; they have been far enough
out of danger. The sad condition of Major R^lph (being a health, ye must all
look to pledge, when it comes to your turns,) they have (ye see) fine
contriving wits, and want not swearers on theirside, O Wretches? Moni^s it is
confessed, they have disburst, but how much to the King more then to the
Parliament (in the time of its integrity) they fear will one day be
discovered, except by a personal treaty, they and their friends get above you
all.

Now, that you may not (if possible) suspect their pernicious meaning, (knowing
that neither Aldermens and Commons-Councelmens gowns will cover their gross
hypocrisy) they put on that Cloak of Religion that seldom has failed them
in hideing their deceits; making very sour faces (in this second page) for
the growth of superstition, Heresies, Shismes, and Profaneness, occasioned
(forsooth as they say) by the long unsettlement of the Churches. O the growth
of Hypocrisy and Presumption, thus to gloss their treacherous and bloody
intentions with pretenses of Religion!

But what mean they by the growth of Superstition, except the reviveing of the
Service-Booke, which in their Hearts none love more then most of these? As for
Heresies and Schisms, though most of them understand not truly what those
words mean; yet, it is easy to discover they intend thereby, to make odious
all that have cordially opposed the King, or show any respects to this Army.
And as for profaneness, certainly they mean neither lying, nor overreaching
nor deceiving in traffic, neither pride, nor covetousness, nor abusing the
name of God and Religion to villainous purposes; and you will easily believe a
personal treaty will occasion neithe^lesse swearing nor less drinking, nor
any fewer of these vices, insomuch as if they are taken, as they seem to mean
by contraries, they will then appear rather to intend the growth of all these,
then of the contrary virtues.

As for the unsettlement of the Church, they use this phrase of speech, as the
rest, even merely to deceive. For assure your selves, you intend one thing and
they another, except you mean the restoring of Episcopacis or Prelacie, and of
all their sequestered delinquent Ministers, whom you know they dote upon and
idolize above measure.

And for the late Commotions in several Counties, which have been faithful
and serviceable to the King and Parliament (I, there is the Snake in this grass
green,) King and Parliament. O that was wisely remembered! The Parliament to the
hearts grief of these his trusty-servants, have too long forborne this
Oracle-like expression, by which so many thousands were in snared: wherefore
these men longing to see them at it again, do help them to one personal
treaty, that it may be so for ever, King and Parliament, which by the way is an
Hysteron Proteron, the Cart before the Horse, not thought on.

Are there Commotions in several Counties? no mervaile, when both
Parliament Men and such grand Citizens as these, foment them. No doubt, the
Counties had continued faithful still, but for these faithless ones; and the
blood that is spilt in them, will at the end be seen at these men's doors;
though now lap-wing like they by their crying and condoleing would put it far
from them And it is hoped those Counties al^eady see their error, and will be
wiser for the time to come, and listen to more honest and wholesome Councels.

And who will believe, but the revolt of the ships is a whelp of the same
litter. For who have hitherto bin more faithful to the interest of the People
and freedom of the Nation, then the Mariners in general have bin? And who
more rejoice in their revolt then these men, who are chief stirrers in this
Petition, and hopeing thereby a necessite of compliance in Parliament to their
desires? But how abominably base is it to plot these things, and then to cry
out, that this threatens the eminent destruction of trade? O friends! could
these rich and wealthy. Aldermen and Common-Councellmen, as ill brook these
stops and decays of trade, as most of you can, they would not be so brisk upon
these disasters, nor so forward in these wicked practices. But by this they
evidence, that they regard not the good of Mariners nor Cittyzens, but would by
all possible means, though by impoverishing and beggering all sorts of
inferior people, necessitate them to promote their wills, by crying out with
violence for any thing, as impatient of delay; and rather then fail, to rise
in tumults and uproares, to force these wicked men's ends. But it is hoped both
seamen and Land-men, Cittyzens and Country men, will be warned out of hand,
and return to their first love, even the freedom of the Common wealth.

But this grieves them not so much, as that it also tends to the utter ruin of
King, Parliament and Kingdom. Here are two Carts before the Horse. For in true
Heraldrie, the Kingdom or People should have bin first, as the original of
power, and next the Parliament as representing them, and last the King, as
being at most, but the chief officer of the Common wealth, and only singulis
major; But it seems this will not digest with Aldermen.

O, but all this while, the King is in danger of utter ruin! I pray you
friends, enquire how. In whose hands is he? What has the man done, that any
one should think him worthy of ruin? Alas, the King can do no wrong, nor
has done any in these men's Divinity and Morality too. (Say you) What has the
Man done? O blasphemy! Here Is profaneness indeed! The King a man? He must
surely be more then a man, that can do no wrong. But so it is, or no credit
is to be given to these his dear friends. All the deferrings, dissolvings,
and abolishings of Parliaments, with all arbitrary Patents, Ship Money, and all
sorts of other Projects were no crimes in him. All this long and bloody war
carried on by him is nothing. All the Plots against this City and Parliament,
nothing. All these late Commotions and Insurrections, nothing? All the blood of
Rochell, Ireland, England and Scotland, spilt by his means and procurement,
nothing? yea, and in a word, all the Parliaments heavy accusations, of all the
heinous, odious, and bloody crimes against him nothing. and so we must all
swear, they are, if not less then nothing, if now after all, nothing can
preserve us nor settle the peace of the Nation, but a Personal Treaty with him.

Oh, thou just and righteous God, that see and know these things, and who
in this their Petition art made use of frequently to serve the wicked ends of
these men, do thou blast them with the breath of thy mouth, and turn all their
Machiavilian stratagems upon their own heads. And we beseech thee (in such
measure) to open the eyes and enlighten the understandings of those whom thou
have authorized with power, that they may not only see and consider, that thou
judge righteous judgment without respect of persons, and bindest Kings in
chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron, but that they may learn also to judge
rightly without respect of persons, and reward every man according to his
works.

You all hear, (friends) how things go in Scotland, that they have had a
Malignant Parliament, endeavoring might and maine to raise forces and bring an
Army into England. To do what? why to establish Religion, and for defense of
the Kings honor and greatness according to the Covenant, just in the very
language of these Petitioners; and especially for a personal Treaty with his
Majesty. It Is marvel the word Sacred is not added by them or our Aldermen. But
it seems that is forborne, till his Majesty have left swearing at every other
word, or till after the personal Treaty, and then the King shall have all his
greatness, honor and prerogative again.

But sure the Parliament of Scotland is not malignant. They are abused and
injured. It Is not possible, after all their strivings and opposition to the
King, that those people should be so foolish as to choose a malignant
Parliament. Yet, so it is, the weakness of well-meaning people has been such,
that for fear of choosing such as favor Sectaries (by whom they as well as we
have been preserved) they have chosen absolute Cavaliers and Malignants, sworn
vassalls to the lusts of the King, such as hope to be sharers in the spoil of
his future Tyranny, and to be petty-Tyrants under him themselves, which is the
great interest of all the degenerate Gallants, that formerly have or do at
present war against the Commonwealth on his behalf: This the honest party
have perceived too late, to their grief.

For already, they begin to imprison the best-affected and most zealous
Ministers and others; and it is reported, they have executed some of the
Ministers. But sure they are not as yet so impudently base, though it be much
to be feared, they will do it, if timely help appear not here; which must be,
even by your disclaiming and renouncing these wicked men, and this their
accursed Malignant Petition, which is a thousand times worse then that which
was called the Plush Petition, and would have been so taken, but that some of
you who (otherwise are godly minded) are seduced to appear therein. Nay, if
both Lords and Commons were now, as in the time of that Petition they were
affected, in stead of thanks, they would have showed them their error, and how
contrary such a Petition is to the freedom of the Nation.

But it is evident, they are now Confederates with these men, and intend under
the cunning plot of a personal Treaty, fairly and handsomely to seal and
deliver up to the King, not only the just Freedoms and Liberties of the
people, with Excize, and all their oppressions to boot unreckoned for, and
unpunished: but also the lives and estates of you, and all that have cordially
opposed him.

And for this end it is, these false Common Councellmen, and Aldermen (who to
distinguish them from you, shall henceforth be called Common Hall men, for that
you know is their right title) for this end (I say) did these Common Hall men
so earnestly petition for a personal Treaty, and continuance of the brotherly
union between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland. Their meaning is,
between the Malignants Parliaments in both, According to the Covenant, O^ that
was well remembered, that covers and colors all Malignancy. O this Covenant of
ours, serves for many good purposes. For we can neither preserve our Enemies in
our own bosoms, divide amongst our selves, nor find quarrel enough to destroy
our friends, without the help of this Covenant. Which though many of us have
taken in the sincerity of our hearts, yet we see it is now made use of, to all
sorts of ungodly, close and treacherous designs.

And what is there now wanting, but that by the happy union (of the Malignants
in both Nations) between the King: Majesty, and the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, all whom they call Roundheads in England and Scotland, shall very
speedily be destroyed, even with as good a riddance as the Protestants in
Ireland were, by His Majesty's good catholic Subjects there, who may hereafter
be invited to complete this happy union? Yes, this is yet wanting: the
Committee appointed, must first agree at what place and time this personal
Treaty must be. Then the King must be demanded out of the hands of the Army.
This they suppose, will be some what disputed, as tending to the ruin of the
Army, of all the honest party in England, and of the cause for which so great
floods of blood has been spilt, and oceans of treasure spent, and being no
less in effect, then to give up their Swords into the hands of their
perfidious vanquished enemies. But here is the plot; if the King be denied,
then presently flies out Declaration upon Declaration, against all the Officers
and Soldiers of this rebellious and disobedient Army, declaring them once more
traitors and Rebels in the highest degree; denouncing death and sequestration,
to all that shall any ways assist them with Men, Horse, Money, or Plate, in
these their treacherous and rebellious practices, tending to the dissolution of
all Government, and the u^ter ruin and decay of Trade; (for it must be in the
Kings old terms.) And then up goes another Army under Major General Brown,
the Presbyterian Cou^tier, whom it is thought you that are honest will so far
favor, as to assist in raising of those new forces, which if you do, then they
are past doubt of carrying on their work against the Sectaries, (according to
the Covenant) not seeming to be against you, but rather for you, till they have
got you all within their clutches, and caught you it this Trapp. For if you
that are godly countenance not their work, all is lost; the Trained bands and
Auxiliaries will not then go out, not withstanding all endeavors and Devices
to engage their Commanders, the Countries will not be deluded not come in to
any purpose.

But be you sure, to keep Scotlands proceedings in your eye, and look no other
way. Think upon their imprisoning of godly men already, and adhere no longer to
these wicked dissembling Common Hall men, but separate your selves from amongst
them; do not you assist these workers of iniquity, and you shall see them
confounded. But if you give them the least countenance, you will find such a
confluence of mad and rude people instantly flock to them; that, though they
are never sikely to prevail against the Army and their friends, yet so great
may be the disturbance, that your City will be much endangered, your wives and
Families affrighred, and what will then become of Trading? Certainly this is
not the way to a speedy end, (except by your destructions) but to the
lengthening of your distractions. For it cannot be immagined, that the Army and
honest party throughout the Land, will be so easily vanquished, as these
hot-spirited men conjecture. It will cost hot water, before that be done. They
have not yet showed themselves either Fools or Cowheards, neither has the
providence of God been wanting, to further their just and honest undertakings.
And if these new stirrers had either Wisdom, Grace, or Thankfulness in them,
they would consider their lenity and unbloody disposition when they prevailed,
and not provoke them into a worse and more violent temper.

But what mean the Petitioners, by grounding their hopes upon several
expressions of his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, in their several and
respective Declarations? A Declaration there was indeed lately of the
Parliaments, setting forth diverse high crimes and offenses of the King, and
resolving to make no further addresses to him, but to settle the Kingdom
without him. There was also some time since another Declaration that told him,
it was not safe for him to come to the City or Parliament, until he had given
satisfaction for all the innocent blood that had been spilt.

Had our Common Hall men (think you) these Declarations of both Houses in mind,
when they framed this Petition? The King also has set forth so many
Declarations of his love to this City, that its hard to judge which they mean.
As when this City was in most straights, and he in greatest hopes and power, he
declares it death for any to hold Trade with the City, or to bring any kind of
provision to it. And he gives them another secret token of his Kingdnes at the
same time, in the Plot of Tomkins and Challoner, and declares the Parliament to
be no true, but a counterfect Parliament, and sets up another at Oxford, by
Declaration too. And now of late came out a Declaration of his, of the old
stamp in high prerogative terms, as high as Kent or these Common Hall men
could wish or desire. Be like Osburn was then at work, and this language of the
Kings was coined for the head of an Army, what Declarations they mean, they
have not expressed, and till they do, it will be good for every wise and
Religious man to be mindful of these, and to consider whether the Leopard be
yet without his spots, or the Black-more have changed his skinn, and by wisdom
to prevent the great mischief intended; And be not now, after so many years
experience, like young birds, to be caught with so palpable chafe as this.

But this, may you and Scotland see, comes of warming Snakes in your bosoms;
no sooner get they heat, but they swell with venim, and threaten your
destruction. Who would have thought the late exiled Members, and the late
imprisoned Major and Aldermen would so so one have returned to their old Vomit,
and so greedily, lick up the filth of their former Remonstrance? O shame! O
ignorance! O ingratitude and sottishness! why, what do they immagine? can they
think, that all the well-affected in England will not gather themselves together
from all places and corners of the Land, and unite with the Army, rather then
to be over run and over reached thus? What? to be petitioned out of their lives,
liberties, Estates; to be covenanted into bondage! No, may he be beared through
the ears, nay through the nose, and burned in the forehead for a vagabond,
that will not come forth to help the Lord against the mighty. Yea, curse them
bi^terly that comes not forth now to help the Lord against these, who are so
mighty in their deceit, and bloody in their intentions.

See, but where these men would have this personal Treaty; in the City of
London. That Is their desire, though the words following show they are ashamed
to speak it absolutely, and therefore add, or in some other convenient place;
convenient for raising of Tumults, else what ailes the Isle of Wight? No, but
where it may be most for the honor and saf^ty of his Majesty's Royal Person.
What could Goring have said more like a flattering Courtier?

And unto this personal Treaty, they humbly desire, that the it brethren of
Scotland (that is the Malignants, especially Duke Hamilton) may be invited,
that so according, to the duty of their Aliegiance, Protestation, solemn League
and Covenant, his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, Greatness and Estate may be
preserved, even to the use and benefit of the Malignants, that so they may be
enabled to revenge themselves upon the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of the
Roundheads and Sectaries, and all peaceable people under these titles; and at
best, bring them to sequestrations and compositions; to hang up the Ministers
(after their brethren of Scotlands Method) and so restore the Bishops; for that
is it, they really intend, though their words be smooth and fair as the
greenest grass, and garnished with His Majesty's own flowers, of preserving the
power and privilege of Parliament, the just rights and liberties of the
Subjects being restord, the establishment of Religion and Church Government in
purity, and the continuation of tho union of the two Kingdoms: (O admirable
Hypocrites) according to the Covenant. (But here peepes the Snake) All Armies
disbanded, and all your Soldiers just Accounts satisfied, the Kingdoms
burdens cased. What a turning and winding this Snake keeps to hide himself
King ^ Viper! so full of goodness, so many seeming good desires heapt together
Appear boldly as at first. Men are but Adams, and Women Eves; thou need not
despair to deceive. But as that old Serpent thy Father, make account to deceive
thy self most. Thy Head, thy Head proud Hydra-Monster, by this thine own
malicious policy, shall receive the forest bruise. And then (as at first) from
the same seed of the wom^n, God, to thy torment (thou shall see) will raise up
a seed, even a Generation of men, that shall discover where thy Skalie Helm is
penetrable and smite thee there, so that thou shall stumble and fall, and never
rise again; but upon thy belly shall thou creep, and dust shall thou eat all
the days of thy life: and that because thou have lied and desembled in this
Petition and the like, in the name of the Lord, and have again lifted up thy
hand against his dearest and most precious Servants.

O ye Men of the Common Hall, flatter not your selves in these your mischievous
practices, but speedily repent, for so sure as God is in Heaven, he cannot
suffer you to prosper in it. All the people will see, that most ungreatefully
ye seek revenge and power, that you may have your wills without any regard at
all to the Commonwealth, which but for you, would be quiet enough. This way
which you take is a way that no considerate man can once immagine, will tend to
peace; but that it is a mere trick and device to raise a new War against the
Army, and all those ye call Roundheads; it being impossible to do it by any
other means, and which being done, what then will become of Trade? what then
will become of Peace? why, then the Scots must be called in, and the Irish with
other Foreigners. For what? To make Peace. Excellent Peacemakers to this
poor Nation, they have prooved indeed. No, rather, call in Rupert and Maurice
and they will do it, as soon and as effectually.

It is incredible that Affliction, and Imprisonment, and fear of death and
imminent War, should not make those grave ancient Gentlemen more apprehensive
of the danger they are already again hastily casting them-selves, and the
whole Kingdom into, that Men of Estats, Honor and Judgments, should attempt
things so hazardous, when as (no doubt) reason is to be had in ways more safe.
Doubtless, if they would sit down, and with greatest deliberation, study a
way to ruin the King and his Posterity, to re-embroile this Nation in blood, to
destroy themselves and their parttakers, certainly no course would be found
like unto this. For what will not those men do, who have cordiallie opposed
the King in the late War, rather then suffer the conquered Malignants to be
their Masters, as by a personal treaty is really intended.

No matters could be in a fairer way toward an accommodation then our
differences lately were: They could not but have bin composed by this time, if
men would have contented themselves to live as friends one by another, and to
have ceased to strive for Masteri^, good men there were and are, both in
Parliament and Common Council, who made it their study, to have proposed a
safe and good condition to King Parliament City and all sorts of People. But
this new hurrie and maddness of a general rising, under the color of a
Personal Treaty, has put of their endeavors, till this heat be over, and
men's experience of the misery of their own evil ways, should make them more
apt to hear things reasonable, and such as really tend to the preservation and
just satisfaction of all parties.

Cease therefore, as you love your selves, wives, Children, and Estats, as you
love the Peace and settlement of your Native Country (too long turmoyled with
an unnatural war) cease (I say,) and give over this underhand raising of new
forces, under color of settling the Militia in all Counties and Cities, ye,
as well as others will find it bitterness in the end. It will but increase your
own trouble, lengthen out the miseries of the People, consume their wasted
Estats, destroy their trades, which they will soon see, and Curse and hate you
for it. The Cry of the poor pei^ces the Heavens, the torments of a guilty
Conscience are insupportable. Lay to Heart, I beseech you, how drcadfull your
condition will be, when you shall be so surrounded with Miseries at once, a
never dying Worm, gnawing your hearts within, and from without, the Vengeance
both of God and Man, for your Hypocrisy, Treachery, and perfidiousnesse ready
to over-whelm you.

Cease for shame, to depend any longer upon lies and falsehoods wherein ye
abound; God (ye see) has already manifested his displeasure against your
bloody purposes, giving up your greatest hopes of success in Wales, in Kent,
in the North, and now lately in Surrey, into the hands of those, whom through
pride and malice ye despise; your Dukes and Earls and great ones, (striving
against him) being no more then the meanest persons.

And this great heast of the Lords in running so swiftly before the Commons, and
voting a personal Treaty, shows but whose Lords they are, and whose work they
do, and the mischief intended thereby, will surely fall upon their own heads.

They also but abuse you and themselves, in plotting to disband this Army by
tricks and Court Arts; and it is strange ye should not think, that more belongs
to it, then now after all Victories, to give up their Swords for a personal
Treaty, yet ye are so transported with vane hope, as to believe ye have them
upon a free lock: for say you a personal Treaty is voted, and the King must
come, and being once out of that power of the Army, is resolved not to treat,
until all forces in all parts be disbanded.

If the Army then refuse, O then say you, the whole Kingdom will instantly
engage against: but stay a little, surely ye will be mistaken, the whole
Kingdom doubtless will be wiser and honester, then to expect such folly and
madness in the Army, and will-be more careful of their own quietness, then
to engage themselves into a new War, upon such unreasonable and
unconscionable terms.

If then ye will be happy, study things more equal and forsake the Councels of
wicked and treacherous men: for however ye may flatter and deceive your selves,
yet God is not a God that will be mocked, he that fitteth in Heaven laughes you
to scorn, the Lord will have you in derision, and will dash you in pieces,
like a Potters Vessel.

Cease therefore, to do evil, learn to do well, seek Peace and follow after
it, least if ye persist in your ungodly courses, he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to help you.
FINIS.

