Look about you now or never, OR, Two Groats-worth of good Council for a penny.


FIrst, there are few men so simple, but can give council in some Cases, but
especially where there is no need: neither is there any man so wise of himself,
but may stand in need of the council of another, nor so obstinat but will
accept the council of another, especially in a time of necessity.

2 It is the easiest and commonest thing in the world for a man to give good
council to another; and yet it is a rare and hard matter to follow the same
himself which he has given to another.

3 Of all men he is the veryest fool, that presumes to give good council to
another, and follows not the same himself.

4 Council is very good if the Giver thereof be wise, and the Receiver the^eof
very observant: but council may do more harm then good if the Councellor be no
both wise and honest, and the counc^lled both wary and circumspect.

5 In Council it is good to be hard to resolve [especially if the Case be hard
and difficult) but after consideration had, and Resolution taken, it is good to
be constant and resolute in putting thy terminations into execution.

6 Beware that thou take not hasty Council from the mouth of any angry man, for
anger makes man to differ from himself, and indeed has been fitly compared to
a Cloue that makes every thing seem b^gger then it is.

7 If thou talk ke^p measure and ^ethod in thy d^scourse, for if t^ou be too
brief, thou will hardly be u^d^^stood, and if thou be over-large, then thou will be troublesome to the Hearers, and not well born in mind: and if thou
observe method and measure, then shall thou not only ^elp thy own memory, but
also help the understanding of the Hearers.

8 When thou art in prosperity remember adversity; and in adversity hope for
prosperity: for it is good for a man to hope for the best, to be content in the
worst, and patiently to suffer whatsoever shall happen: so shall thy life be
more comfortable, thy death less terrible, and thy future estate more durable.

9 If thou enter into friendship and familiarity with any man, be sure thou try
before thou trust, lest thy friend be found like the Carbuncle, which at a
distance seems to have sire, but being touched has no heat: so thy friend when
he comes to be tried be found to have no faith,

10 And if thou will prove or try thy friend, take Time by the fore-top, and
stay not till thy necessity constrain thee, lest thy friend not only deceive
thee, but add to thy misery, and thy trial be not only profitable, but also
prejudicial.

11 A true friend indeed is a pleasure in prosperity, a comfort in adversity,
in grief a solace, in joy a merry companion, and at all times a second self,
and no time hiding secrets, nor denying money: so that true friendsh^p
resembles a man and his wife, whose two bodies are become one in will and
affection.

12 But feigned friends resemble a flock of Crows that make their repair to no
place but where there is Carrion to be fed upon, and he that seeks a swarm of
such friends needs not be long in his search, but if he takes not the better
heed before he be a ware, perhaps may find himself in a Wasps Nest of enemies.

13 Be slow to fall in friendship with any: but when thou art in friendship,
continue sirm and constant: but before thou admit any man to thy friendship and
familiarity, be sure thou first consider how he has dealt with his other
friends before time: for look how he has served his former friends, be sure so
he will serve thee.

14 Believe after trial, and judge before familiarity, and if thou find
faithfulness, be thou no cause of breach: and as thou would do with Gold, so
do by thy friend: be sure thou tryest it before thou have too much need, lest
when thou have most need, thou have least help.

15 Beware of the promises of great and rich men, for they both will deceive
thy expectation when their own turns are served: for if thou art poor, the one
by his power, the other by his purse, will depress thee: and there is no
contending with a mighty man be thy Cause ^ever so just.

16 And if a great or rich man do promise thee a great recompense to do any
thing that may be either hazardous to thy self, or prejudicial to others, or
both, before thou begin thy enterprise consider that he that never trusted, was
never deceived, and that it is more safe to sit still, and contented with what
thou enjoyest by thy own industry, then to rise up in expectation of great
things, at the promise of others, and with the Dog in the Fable lose the
substance by snatching at the shadow, and so to fall into a precipiece of
beggary and penury, from which thou will have much trouble before, if ever thou
recover; and as thou may be pitied of few, thou shall be sure to be envied of
many, but helped by none, derided by thine enemies, forsaken of thy friends, and
well spoken of hardly by any.

17 Remember that great men and rich men would do by poor men, as they do by
their dogs and horses, that is, keep them til they are past use either for
pleasure or profit, and then either knock 'em on the head, or hang them, but
that the Law stands in the gap: at best they deal by them as they do by their
old shooinghorns, make use of them for their necessity and when their turns are
served, cast them by as useless, till the next time they stand in need. Alas
poor souls.

18 Great men and rich men seldom promise with purpose to perform to poor men,
but never perform but with purpose more to deceive: and therefore it is said,
that he that knows not how to dissemble, shall scarce ever be either great or
a rich man.

19 As it is not good ^o be too niggardly or sparing because thereby a man robs
himself of the benefit of enjoying that he has in possession: so by too
profuse and prodigal spending, a man exposes himself to many hazards: for what
neither power nor policy can compass, gold both conquers and commands.

20 Be loving and kind to all, but be good to thy self, intrusting to thy self
next unto God: for it is better to be envied for thy wel-gotten wealth and
plenty then pitied for thy wilfully procured poverty: besides, he that is in a
low or declining condition, shall be forsaken of his nearest acquaintance,
whilst he that is thriving shall have more kindred then ever he had foes by
John of Westminster.

22 He that knows how to use money, to him it will become an handmaid
servant; but to him that knows no how to use it, to him it will become a^
Lord or Master: and therefore it is ill bestowed upon a covetous man, for the
more he has, the more he desires.

23 If thou art poor, ^pply thy self to Learning and Science, which is more
commendable then Riches: for rich men without wisdom are accounted of but as
sheep having golden fleeces.

24 Be diligent, for Diligence is the Mistress of Learning: without which,
nothing can be done concerning this life with commendation: and without
diligence, it is impossible either to become learned or excellent in any
Science.

25 As the sweetest Eose grows among the sharpest prickles; so the hardest
labors bring forth the sweetest profits.

26 He that endeavors attaineth, but he that neglects, repents either
first or last.

Imprinted for G. Horton.


