HIS Majesty's Demands to Colonel HAMMOND.

Delivered in the Presence Chamber, upon the discovery of another great
Design, for the conveying of His Majesty's person from Carisbrook Castle. With
Colonel Hammonds Answer thereunto.

Also, the Oath of Secrecy taken by the Seamen of the revolted Ships,
concerning the King, and the dispersing of them and their pretended
Vice Admiral, on the Irish Seas.



Together, with the taking of Tinby Castle in Southwales, by Colonel Horton;
with all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition; and the further proceedings of
Colonel Poy^r at Pembrook Castle thereupon.

June 8th LONDON. Printed by I. C. for R. W. 1648

A LETTER FROM THE Isle of WIGHT. CONTAINING, His Majesty's Speech to Colonel
HAMMOND, upon the discovery of the great design for conveying His person from
Carisbrook Castle.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last unto you, we have received further intelligence from our two
Frigots at Sea, that the 5 ships which which lately revolted from the obedience
and authority of Parliament, had a great design against this Island, and for
the better success and accomplishing thereof, had tendered an Oath of Secrecy
to all therein; which was to this effect, That they would live and dye
together, in prosecution of their Design, for the re^toring of King Charles to
his just Rights and Authorities, and for the aid and assistance of all those
now in Arms for the King in several Counties within the Realm of England, etc.

The greatest S^ickler in this business, was one William Lendall, a Seamen
formerly a Boastons Mate, but now Vice Admiral, of the Rebellious and Revolted
party at Sea, And for the be^ter carrying on of this D^signe, they hoysted
sail, with a Resolution, to cast Anchor before this Island, not knowing that
their former confi^eracie were discovered, for the conveying of His Majesty
from this Castle (the further particulars whereof, I have here enclosed) But it
pleased God, that when they were sailing upon the Nepture streams, and within
4. or 5. Leagues of this Island, there arose a great Tempest, and violent
storm, insomuch, that they were not able to sleere toward any Harbor for
shelters, but were left to the mercy of the furious B^llowes, and at the last
drove upon the Jrish Coast: We do not hear of any of their Ships that are
Shipped wrackt, but it is believed, this will be both a convection and
conversion, to their arrogant and selfe-aiming ends. It is supposed, that there
was a strong confederacy betwixt them, and diverse of the Inhabitants of this
Island; as also, by some who were entrusted about His Majesty, as appears by
their late D^signe for the conveying of His Majesty ^gom hence, who most
subtly and politikely had areed with 3. Soldiers for 300 l. to be Actors in
this Design, who had applied Aquafortis to the Bars of one of the windows,
where his Majesty should have bin let down; the very time for effecting
hereof, was within half an hour of that instant, in which it was to be
accomplished, and although the design had been many days on foot, yet it was
not discovered, till those which were by appointment to receive His Majesty at
his coming down out of the Window, were attending upon that Office: In which
instant of time, one of the Soldiers which was privy to the Design, revealed
the whole matter to Col. Hammond, who immediately went up unto His Majesty,
and doing his obedience to him, went unto the Window, and viewing the Barr^s,
shaked his head: His Majesty being but a small distance from him, came unto
him, and said, How now Hammond, what is the matter, what would you have? to
which Col. Hammond replied, May it please your Majesty, I am come to take my
leave of you, for I hear you are going away; His Majesty hearing the said
expressions, returned no Answer, but went away, and took no further notice
thereof. We have had some small insurrections and risings, about Newport, and
other places; but now all is quieted, and the Island in a peaceable condition.

Carisbrooke this 3. of June 1648. Sir, J am your assured friend, I. L.

The Copy of a Letter from the North, relating the condition of our forces in
those parts, and their intentions to give battle to Sir Marmaduke Langdale.
SIR,
I am commanded to acquaint you with the chief heads of business with us, and
of our sudden advance toward the Enemy. Now in the first place be pleased
to take notice, that Colonel Lambert and Colonel Harrisons Brigade of horse
will be united about the sixth of June, with some other forces that Colonel
Harrison is appointed to command, which when they are all united together, it
is confidently assured, they will amount to 4000 foot and horse, or
thereabouts, and then we conceive Major General Lambert with the whole Body,
will march toward Langdale, who at this present is in Westmerland; where he
plundereth and pillageth the poor Country people, not making any distinction
betwixt Royalists or roundheads, but all is fish that comes to net; he has 16
troops of horse and two thousand foot: It is also reported, that he has taken
a house in that county, which the Committee had made the chief Magazine for
those parts, wherein were 4000 arms and much powder. Diverse genlemen and
others of that County generally rise with them, yet neither Officers nor
soldiers, blessed be God for it, are any whit danted at it; but are fully
resolved by the assistance of almighty God, to go thorough stitch with the
work. Likewise, we hear for certain, that the Scots will be in with Langdale
about the midst of June at the farthest, unless it pleafe God to strengthen
the hearts of our soldiery and make them isntrumental in giving him a sudden
defeat before their forces are united. Sir, this is all you can expect for the
present, from your assured friend

J. W.

The Copy of a Letter from Southwales.
SIr,
Since Lieutenant General Cromwels withdrawing off from Pembrook, and Tindall
in Southwales, Colonel Horton followed the work very close, and has been
exceeding diligent and careful, for performance of the trust reposed in him;
He has sent them several Antidotes for preservation of their health, and has
been an isntrumental means to purge their sottish and frenzy brains, from
too much drowsinesse, by his often Allarums; insomuch, that they now become
very tame and gentle, and are fallen into the hands of the besiegers, and
submitted to their mercy. For by a Messenger from those parts, we have rec^ived
Intelligence, that Collonell Horton h^th p^ssessed himself of the Castle of
Tinby, together with all the Arms and Ammunition, and about 570. Prisoners,
besides Colonel Powell and divivers other Officers of note; which is said to
be, by reason of the great discontents of the Soldiery within the Castle. The
Siege continues still at Pembrook, and Coll. Poyer holds out, and will upon no
terms surrender; but it is said he begins to incline toward a Treaty, and its
thought he will hearken to Conditions very suddenly, for the surrender thereof.
We hear Major General Langhorne is joined with Sir Marmaduke Langdale in the
North, but not much esteemed of by that Party; and its said, that Langdale will
not repose trust in him. It is further said, that Collonell Horton, has took
14. Pieces of Ordnance in Tinby Castle, 1500 Arms, and great store of powder
and bullet, which does much abate the pride of the most insolent spirits in
those parts, Sir by my next, you shall hear further from

Gloucester, 5 Junii, 1648. Your assured Friend, G. H.

Jmprimatur,

Junii 6. Gil: Mabbot.

FINIS.

