A Looking-Glass (or VVarning-Peece) for all such as Profane Churches, and
neglect Prayer, against the Laws of GOD, expressed in his Holy Word, The Sacred
SCRIPTURES.
In the reading hereof, I. pray observe the A, B, C, etc. first look on your
left hand for A.
A. Holy Scriptures against the heinous sins of these Times, in Profaning
Godsholy House the Church.

Remember God says, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: I
am the Lord, Lev. 19. 30. Chap. 26. 2. And the Lord said (unto wise Solomon) I
have heard thy prayer and thy supplication that thou have made before me: I
have hallowed this House which thou have built, to put my Name there for ever,
and mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be there perpetually, 1 Kings 9. 3. Cha. 8.
29.

Mark here Gods Punishments for the sins of the Priests and People.

The Chief of the Priests, and the People transgressed very much, afte^ all the
Abominations of the Heathen and polluted the House of the Lord which He had
hallowed in Jerusalem. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Caldees,
who slew their young Men with the Sword, in the House of their Sanctuary, and
had no Compassion upon young Man or Maiden, old Man, or him that stoops for
Age: He gave them all into his hand, 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, and 17 ver. (Look up to
the Top of the Steeple for B.)

B. Holy Ground,

Put off thy shoes (says God) from off thy Feet, for the Place whereon thou
stand is Holy Ground: Ex. 3. 5. Act 7. 33, Sec 1 Cor. 11. 4. (Take heedto
thy Foot) or, Keep thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God, Ecl. 5. 1.
see 1 Timothy 3. 15: look on your right hand for C

C. Gods House.

How dreadful is this Place, this is none other but the House of God, etc.
Genesis 28. 17. Ye look for Much, and lo it came to Little: and when ye brought
it home, I did blow upon it: Why, says the Lord of Hosts? Because of mine
House that is wast, and ye Run every Man unto his own house. Hag. 1. 9. Look
again up to your right hand for D.

D. (Mark here, I beseech you, mark) Jesus went into the Temple of God, and
cast out all them that Sold and Bought in the Temple, and overthrew the Tables
of the Money Changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves, And said unto
them, It is written, My House shall be called a House of Prayer, but ye have
made it a Den of Thieves. Mat. 21. 12, 13. Mar. 11. 15, 16, 17. Luke 19 45, 46.

(Now mark) here Christ did not pull down the Temples, or Churches, for the
sins of the Priests and People. But, then he made a scourge of small Cords,
and drove them all out of the Temple, with the Sheep and Oxen, and poured out
the Changers money, and overthrew the Tables, And said unto them that sold
Doves, Take these things hence: Make not my Fathers House an House of
Merchandise, And his Disciples remembered that it was written, The Zeal of thine
House has eaten me up, Joh. 2. 15, 16, 17. See for E.

E And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, surely the Lord is in this
place, and I knew it not, and he was afraid, G^n. 28. 16.



DEar Brother, the Psalmist says, Holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for
ever, Psalm. 93. 5. And the Almighty God says, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and
reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 30. Answerable to which his
Saints and Servants have ever carried themselves, esteeming the place of Gods
worship holier then other places. So Jacob did before the Law, Genesis 28. 16, 17.
and said, How fearful is this place, this is no other but the House of God:
And for the people of God under the Law, they did so respect the place of Gods
worship that David said, Psalm. 26. 8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy
House, and thy place where thine Honor dwells: And moreover said, as one that
had been ravished therewith, How amiable are thy Tabernacles, thou Lord of
hosts, Psalm. 84. And in his absence, said, My soul longs, yea, and sainteth
for the Courts of the Lord: And esteems even the Swallows and the Sparrows
happy that might make their nests near it, verse. 3. And in the time of the
Gospel, while our Lord was on earth, he showed more wrath and jealousy against
such as profaned the place of Gods worship, then he did about any other thing;
for he made a whip, and drove the cattle that were for sacrifice out of the
Courtyard, overturned the Tables that they told money on, and said, Make not
my Fathers house a house of merchandise: And he would not suffer that any
should carry any vessel through the Temple, Ioh. 2. 14, 15, 16. Mar. 11. 16. And
after our Lord was ascended, before Churches were built, having only some ^ooms
dedicated to that use, S. Paul sharply reproves the profaners thereof. What
(says he) have ye not houses to eat and drink in, but despise ye the Church of
God? 1 Cor. 11. 22. This being so, it shows plainly, that those which put no
difference between a Church and a dwelling house, are not of God; for his
people neither before the Law, or under the Law, in the days that Christ was
upon the earth, nor after his ascension, never did so: and whose example such
do follow, I know not, except it be King Belshazar, Dan. 5. that made the
vessels of the Temple common drinking bouls, he is the father of such wretches,
and let them expect to inherit his shame, either here or hereafter. But some
will say, How can there be difference in days, in places, in vessels, in
persons, in vestments, etc. For the light of every day is of the Sun, and he
has made of one blood all Nations, Act. 17. 26. The son of Sirach gives
answer, Ecclus. 33. By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished: Some
he has made high days, and hallowed them, and some of them he has made
ordinary days; though all men be from the same earth, yet in much knowledge
has he divided them; some of them has he blessed, and exalted, and made
Kings, and some of them has he sanctified, and set near himself, made Priests;
of whom he says in another place, Touch not mine Anointed, nor do my Prophets
no harm. And therefore I will conclude and say, he that regards not these
distinctions, is a most profane wretch to his God, and in his mind little
better than a enemy to the Commonwealth.

Now Peter and John went up together into the Temple, at the hour of Prayer,
being the ninth hour, Act, 3. 1.

Postscript.
ONe thing I prayed you to consider, that if we must have no set-form of
Prayer, no solemn worship of God, no evening and morning sacrifice, but that
which every man in his fancy, extemporarily powers forth, in what condition
then will this English Church be in, and if it once be so, whether it may not
then be truly said, The glory thereof is departed: for the stream will be as
the fountain, what is in the heart will out at the mouth, and then may we truly
say, Good Lord what stuff shall we have: One man though zealous, yet but silly,
ye shall have from him a great deal of nonsense and vain repetitions, O Lord, O
God, O, Oh: and another, he affects words and ostentations, by which he
ofttimes appears to his auditor like one preaching or acting a part upon a
stage; another, his memory being not good, especially beng out of his method,
he hackers and hammers, but brings forth nothing readily: another, being given
to stzife and contention, lets fall passages tending to anger and wrath,
exclaiming against such, as he supposes, has done him wrong: another, being
affected with superstitious customs, his affections and words in prayers will
be byased thereafter: another, being a Schismatic, prays against the Customs
of that Church whereof himself is a member, and he cries out for reformation,
and removing of such things, as in his profound judgment should not be, he
also prays for vengeance upon such as are the hinderers of his supposed
reformation: another, being an heretic, his sacrifice tends to heresy and
blasphemy: another, being seditious, as his mind runs upon state business, so
answerable thereto, his prayer is interlaced, sometimes with matter no better
than treason it self: in this woeful condition should we be in, if for our sins
God should cause our daily sacrifice to cease, and suffer the idle fancies of
men's brains to be offered in stead thereof. From the which good Lord deliver us.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton at the sign of the Horseshooe in
Smithfield, 1652.


