A Looking-glass FOR THE VVELL-AFFECTED in the City of LONDON.

WHEREIN They may behold those dangers and miseries which are ready to fall
upon them if they do not speedily make a firm Combination against the Common
Enemy.

Printed in the year 1648.

An Admonition.
NOw dangers us assail,
And troubles us surround;
Its time for us t'be friends,
For fear our foes get ground.
Religion's now at stake,
Our Lives our Liberties,
Wherefore let us draw our swords,
And join our Companies.
Let all our quarrels sleep,
Our Church dissensions flee:
Lets join together in one,
Live, love, and brethren be.
Let Us wrest these swords and spears
Out of our Enemies, hands:
Let Us seize their Ordnance,
And rout their swearing Bands.
That Legacy which we
From our fore fathers have,
Before we will lose it thus
Our bed shall be a grave.
Though Presbyterians,
And Independents jar;
These know their misery,
We Will never fall to war.
Dear fellow Citizens,
DAngerously are we distracted by the Common Enemy abroad, but more dangerously
by the Common enemy at home, I mean our dissensions, divisions, and
Discontents. They are the battering Rams, wherewith the strongest walls of our
safety, love, affection, and unity are shattered and broken in pieces. The
Artillery, which in time will Level the Highest Turrets in our Commonwealth.
The Powder Plot (which if not prevented by your close sarrying together) will
blow up this, and all succeeding Parliaments; There is no way to undo us, but
by our own procurement: we cannot fall into our Enemies Traps and Pitfalls,
unless we be artificially miserable: Our safety is impregnable, unless we
give the hand to our enemies, tear our Colors, march, and receive pay under
our adversaries standards. Our own Divisions in Parliament, City, Kingdom,
and Army, may reduce us to a confused heap. Our heart-burnings may cause our
unbred, unborne, our unthought of Posterities, to have heart-akings, when they
shall wear yokes of iron, be whipped with lashes of slavery, inflicted by the
hand of Monarchical, and Princely Tyranny: what danger by reason of your
frivolous and needless Discontents, may, and are ready to charge you? read
and peruse, it may be here you may find them: what may be the best and most
probable ways for your safety, read here, and if you please, you may use
them. The safety both of you and yours is now concerned: it is within the
sphere of your power, either to vanquish your enemies, or by fore-slowing
relief and assistance to the Parl. and to your other friends and allies to
enslave and beggar your whole posterity. Did not a certain foresight of your
Imminent ruin upon your neglectings and slighting the Parliament, and your
honorable Genesis compel me to persuade an accord, union, and sweet Compliance.
I had never published such an Exhortation, but seeing the unbridled and
Tempestuous fury of our old, once dead, but now revived enemy will not be
assuaged, or be calmed, without either bringing us, or, being brought
themselves into a perishing and forelorne Condition: I thought it not
altogether inconvenient, if I induced you to recollect all the dangers, which
may hazard the ruin of your Religion, your Lives, and your Liberties. Never
were our lives more aimed at then now, by the Abners and Amaziahs of our days,
who make the murdering of us, but playing at the worst, or looking one another
in the face. Never could a more bloody, merciless, and barbarous Enemy have
opposed us, who will either ruin us, or be ruined themselves, either their
blood must be spilt or ours, their estates forfeited or ours, their or our
posterities beggered and overthrown to all Eternity. If we in this time of
imminent danger, and greatest extremity, should start aside and detract a joint
compliance with our Grandees of State, and Military affairs; if we should
withdraw our assistance from our old Companions, and fellows in Arms,
reposing confidence in the glozing speeches of a Butchering party: This favor
dear Countrymen and fellow Citizens, you may expect from the Polyphemuses of
our times, to be the last that shall be devoured. Never were any so woed,
Courted, and when they prevailed not, threatened, because we would not sell our
birthright for a mess of pottage, renounce our right bequeathed to a Legacy,
full dearly bought with the blood of many of our noble Ancestors. How do
vassalage and slavery threaten to banish Liberty, and Lord it over us, when the
P. of Wales is landed with a power of mercenary Walloones, a hotchpot of lewd
forraigners, all Papists, and Venetian Adventurers: merely like the Turkish
Allies, the Tartarians, whose only pay must be the plunder and pillage of whole
Cities and Counties? Will not these be to you in time, what the guard of
Switzers are, and have been to the tumultuous Parisiens? Will they in time be
any more favorable to your City, then the Spanish garrison to the poor
Neapolitans? Will not these prove Lord Danes to your houses, wives, and
Daughters? the sweat of your brows shall be in vain poured forth, for the
maintenance of idle and Drone Be foraigners, when these miseries have taken
you prisoners and enchained you, it will be bitter to your remembrance, that
ever you contested and daggered together, whether Presbytery, or Independency
shall obtain the Superiority. Our fortunes too, must be the object of men of
fortune, Scottish, Irish, English, French, Walloones, all Rebels, or
disaffected persons to our state, though well-affected to our lands and goods,
must (if possible by armed violence) be made Joyntenants of our Inheritances.
These Exoticke Mermidons, must be enriched with our Possessions by Charter from
the King, because they did overthrow our great Charter, which they are to hold
in pure villenage; for where the authority of a King is, there is power, and
who may say unto him, what do thou? Our Religion and glorious profession of
the truth, is endangered to suffer shipwreck, openly scandalized by the Giants
of our days, who would make war with the Almighty, were not the Thunderbolts
of Gods vengeance ready to strike their souls out of their bodies, and death
armed with a Capias ad respondendum before the great Judges tribunal of Heaven
and Earth. How will the Crystal clearenesse of our Protestant Profession be
obfuscated and fowly beslimed by the frogs of the great river Euphrates, the
Prelates and the Prelaticall Clergy, those Locusts of the bottomless pit, who
have cropped our harvest of a glorious reformation, for many years, even in the
Blade? these will recall your old stout behavior, and deportment against them,
and their Terrestrial, nay rather their Celestial god, the book of Common
Prayer, that old devil, which has so long bewitched and deluded the world,
not under the specious garb of a Munkes Coat, but of a Saints Doublet.

The Papists too will not only rise up in judgment against you, but aggravate
your Condemnation: These have underpropped the Devils Cause, with foreigne
Contributions, with foreigne and Domestic arms, and with Domestic
Contributions. My judgment apprehends what thoughts these kind hearted Papists
idolized in their fancies, not the reenthronizing the K. in his temporal
regailty, but the reinstalling of the Pope into his antiquated spiritual
Hierarchy. Will Henretta Maria be content we should enjoy our Religion in its
purity, and undefiled? Will she be deprived of the privilege to be accounted
the second Saint in the Popes Calendar, resting satisfied with the brand of a
Traitor in the Parlia. Diurnall? Will her Crew of Babilonians supercede the
attempting our ruin, and the ruin of the Protestant profession? if we
disasterously contend brother against brother, and Christian against Christian,
and so be quashed by a third party. Nay surely, they would have long since
executed their bloody Contrivances, and conspiracies against us, had not our
hands been armed with long Rapiers, but they themselves scarcely with short
daggers. What hopes they may foster let the world judge, if we dissenting upon
Circumstantialls in matters of Religion, should suffer the King to be Charles
the Conqueror. Especially when they have such a notable Legatus a Latere as
she, who can as powerfully mediate for her English Catholics to his Majesty,
as the Virgin Mary to Christ for Christians, which is to pray, beseech, and
entreat, if they will not do, compel him to perform what she requesteth. I
am bold to give her a name of Dignity in the masculine Gender, because I hear
that of late, it has been a fashion amongst our Ladies in the English Court,
to like, to love, to wear the Breeches. Small safety, but much more
encumbrance may be divined from the Scottish Dissembling Brethren, those
special Dragooners to our State, to whom Hedges and Thickets may give
advantage unawares to suprize us, and by unthought of Ambuscadoes to supresse
us. Who dare not oppose England but overthwartly, who dare not dare us to
Battle, nor erect a fire-Crosse against us, without cheating and dissembling
pretenses. Those Ioabs of our days, who will take you by the beards and kiss
you, but strike you under the fifth rib with their Scottish Daggers, and murder
you. These can pretend liberty and restoration of broken Covenant, when they
intend an introduction of slavery, and Antichristian Prelacy. There is no
device to make Hamilton our friend, unless we will help Hamilton to be a King;
No way to make the Scottish invasion fruitless, unless we can persuade
Hamilton to be faithless; which will not be, if he depart Crownlesse, or his
miscellaneous Regiments depart Plunderlesse. How be we concerned to oppose the
Chieftaines of the Northern rabble, whose aims are to be our Masters, and
perpetual Dictators; how are we concerned to oppose the Excrementitious
Commonalty, who are resolved to be our perpetual Plunderers? From irreligious
persons, what hope of Religion? From strangers to English Liberties, and
Immunities, what hope to augment or enforce our decayed priveledges? I wonder
sober (and as I hope unbyassed) Judgments can expect from, or look upon
foreigners, other then as men of Galilee, from which no good can proceed. King
James promoted the Scottish Lords to gainefull preferments, but the English
Nobility (as they say) to name honorable, and no ways beneficial advantages.
No marvel though the Scottish Nobles take it in great indignation to be
delayed or frustrated of their private revenues from his Majesty, when their
greatest subsistence was from him, as he bore the repute of an English
Majesty. Their belly is both their god, king, and Equity, which if they can
satisfy with our English Delicacies, they will forswear fighting either for
God, King, or Equity. All is equal, if proportioned to their appetites of
English honors and promotions, if not, the advancement of King, Covenant, and
Presbyteriall Government, must be as Fox-Skinnes to cover the Lions nakedness.
Suffer the Scottish Lords to be Contentious for our honors, they will surcease
contending against us, dawbe up their mouths with our fattest promotions, the
dogs will cease to bark against us; thrust but an English Crust into the
mouth of a Scottish dog, well buttered, he will without clamor, or pulling
by the Tarrier, retreat to his kennell. Their quarrel against us is, they
cannot in the present tense be promoted amongst us; their quarrel against us
is, that a Confusion of interests is violently withstood by us. There is not a
better way to force our Brethren to sound a retreat, but by a golden storm:
which will react the miracle of Theodosius against his adversaries, turn all
the Muskets, Pikes, Swords, and Artillery against themselves, rather then they
should damnifie such loving and kind Brethren as the Armed Sectaries, the
Schismatic Bands of the Independants. As the Gauls tasted the sweetness of
the Italian wines, the Romans and Carthagenians of the Spanish Mines, the
Saxons of England; so our Brethren have tasted of our Land, flowing with milk
and Honey; who will never depart our Land until they cannot depart, who will be
supping and licking, until an English well whetted Sword do mingle their Blood
with our Daintyest and Princely dishes. Greatly are we endangered by the
Cavaliers, those Achillean warriors, who Laboriously Project not with sword
and Target only, but by commotions, lies, slanders, and infinite Treasons, to
murder the Hectours of our City and Kingdom, this present Parliament, whom if
we protect, and defend, according to our solemn Engagements, this Troynovant of
ours shall never be Plundered, either of Religion, Lives, or Liberties. These
who have been our only Saviors, and Protectors, our honorable Lords and
Governors, the grand Engineers of our State, who have Countermined the
Underminers thereof, must now be forced (if their swords be not long enough) to
act a Tragedy upon Tower Hill, of whose executions, you are desired to be the
occasioners, to labor the cutting off the head of your Liberties, and the
destruction of the soul, spirit, and blood of your Sounding, and Paralyticall
Country; who, although they be infinitely traduced by the suggestions of
Malcontents and Incendiaries, whose hands, although much weakened by
inconsiderate friends, and Favorites, yet, how have they been before obtained,
hoped for, how loved, honored, and respected, when once obtained? These were
like Nebucadnezzars great Tree, to which all the beasts of the field resorted
for shelter: These were then your gourd to shelter your heads from the heat of
Prelatical persecutions; the ships out of which ye first durst thunder against
ship-mony: Briefly, these were the men on whom some honor is to be bestowed,
because they rescued England from the Pope, who would have made it his Ass:
Because they have freed us from the clutches of him, who would have turned a
Mower, so you might have been the Meadow: Cut not down this Tree, lest you be
scattered; let not a worm smite this gourd, least not only the Eastern, but all
the four winds beat upon your heads; sink not these ships with your Bullets of
discontents, and divisions, neither unequally Ballace them, lest you lose your
best wooden walls, so that the Boors of the Forest, the false Scottish
Covenanters may enter, and spoil the remainder of our vineyards; lest the
crafty Foxes, the Jesuiticall party do undermine our State, and Liberties. If
Parliaments be but sauces, and Kings good meat, throw aside these superfluous
dishes, and you will quickly loath this Manna, unless Quails be conjoined.
Though you be burdened with Impositions, it is that you may not be perpetually
burdened. Though your tender stomachs rise against month Assessements, and
Excise, yet our wise Physicians use them for the present as an Ingredient to
that Potion, which must expel the noisome humors out of the body Politic. Could
Armies be maintained without money? or this Kingdom for the present defended
without Armies? neither Armies would oppress you with free quarter, nor the
Parliament oppress you with variety of Impositions; but seeing the necessity
and danger of the times enforce the Parliament to stroke their hand ungently
over this Kingdom, patiently must we abide it, because our safety is preserved
by it; wherefore, in being good and kind to them, we are but good and kind to
our selves. How uneasy, and impossible it is for the Parliament to be
subservient to every man's fancy and disposition, is obvious to the meanest
Capacities and Considerations; to settle a half mortally wounded Kingdom
suddenly, is to play the foolish Surgeon, skin over the wound, never caring
whether cured in the bottom, or no: Not to stay the best opportunity to settle
us, is never opportunely to settle us; not to observe the time when we may be
conveniently Cured of our Maladies does betoken a careless resolution in drying
up, and curing the running Plague sores of our Native country. If they would
settle affairs of Religion, quacunque via dato they held a Wolf by the ears; if
rigid Presbytery, the Canons would have roared from Putney and Windsor; if
Independency, the Northern Bag-pipes would have sounded an Alarm at
Edenborough. To call the King home upon our own conditions, impossible; if upon
his, improbable; if upon those of the 11 of December, unreasonable. If the
Militia be granted and the Parl. dissolved, it is but a dissolved Militia
before it be granted. If we must Treat concerning the continuance of this
present Parli. why should we Treat concerning the continuance of the Militia?
seeing one dying, the other will dye too: Et duo tunc morientur in uno. I durst
never confidentially repose my self upon him, who has once faithlesly behaved
himself toward me: I durst ever confidentially repose my self upon him, who
equally in a danger was concerned with me. If Princely Oaths, Vows, and
Protestations have proved Spiders webs, no safety without a Parliament, who run
joint hazards with us, upon the breaking of these Spiders webs. Historians have
bewrayed to future Posterity, that Oaths and Protestations of Princes, have
sometimes proved like the grins which the Spider weaveth, to incircle the
Hornet. The manes of the guests at Stockholm Banquet, the manes of Guise and
Bourbor, persuade non-trusting of injured Princes, unless your safeties be
fenced with strong Barracadoes of Power and Authority. What gross madness
were it to stand Neuters, or coldly to assist the Parliament, hoping the
Cavaliers brains are as often dipped in Lethe, as washed in Bacchus fountains;
that they will commit an Amnestye of all past wrongs and injuries formerly by
you offered; So you will either turn absolute Kinglings or humbly Petition the
2 Houses for a personal Treaty: To expect favor and Pardon for all bypast
injuries and discourtesies offered to an old friend, is a matter of
probability; to expect favor from a reconciled Enemy, is a matter of
possibility: But to expect pardon from an exulcerate enemy, a so often by you
beaten, banished, expulsed enemy, is a matter of impossibility: who will cast
himself willingly into the Arms of his sworn Adversary, because his friend has
not been so kind as he either desired, or might be reasonably required? If the
Parl. your old friends have not satisfied your expectations and longings, with
what wisdom do you labor a close with your Enemies, offer your throats to the
Poniards point? As though we could be sufficiently revenged upon the Houses, if
we and they were burned together upon one Funeral pile.

The same Reasons which at first moved you to an Engagement with the
Parliament, enforce a continuation of your resolutions in this Engagement. The
same party against you, and therefore the same quarrel, though wrapped up in
fine linen, painted over with the specious colors of Covenant, rescuing the
kingdom from an Army of Sectaries, from free quarter, and intolerable
impositions. It were strange a Leopard should change his spots, or a Black-Moor
his hue; that Langdale, Glemham, Goring, Lucas, Louborough, should be
Covenanters; that your notorious Enemies should now fight under your Ensigns,
and yet Proclaim open Hostility against your old friends and allies, the Lord
General and his Army. The same persons who were the Chieftains in the former
Combustions, have anew kindled the flame, and raked up the sparks close covered
in warm ashes. Those who persuaded the King (though inclinable enough) to
forsake London, and raise an Army under the pretense of a guard, who plundered
your houses, and burned them, ransacked country Villages and Towns, ravished
their wives and daughters, and after exposed them to the frosty winter nights,
to the mercy of the dropping clouds, and cold Northern storms; who murdered the
husbands and sons of miserable wives and parents in the streets, and open
fields; who dashed out the brains of the old men in their Chambers, of the
infants and sucklings in their Cradles; all these I say, are now bandied
against you, intending to exercise far greater cruelty then ever, by how much
their rage, spite, and indignation, does boil, and foam in a higher degree, by
reason of the overthrows and disgraces received at your hands. The quarrel
being the same, your friends must needs be the same; those that engage their
dearest blood in opposition to your old Adversaries, cannot be your enemies,
the Army labor through all manner of difficulties and extemities, through a
sea of their own blood, through cold, hunger and nakedness to overthrow and
quell your almost seven years deadly foes and murderers. He that awards the
blow of a Sword which was intended for my head, shall be esteemed of me a
special friend, because he performed a special courtesy. They fight not only
for their own, but jointly for both our safeties, if they would be Treacherous
and revolt to the Kings party, not only Liberty of conscience would in a large
Dimension be granted, but the Presbyterians estates would be shared amongst
them, as a Kingly munificence conferred upon them, so Loyal, true hearted, and
affectionate Subjects. If these had been disbanded, the Cavaliers would have
been your Disseisours, whose force, if you now hardly sustain, how, if the
Army had been wanting to repel their violent assaults? if you think they were
an impediment to the Kings being called home; I wonder upon what terms? ours?
never a Syllable granted, his? unreasonable, our safety being herein concerned:
if upon neither? How could this be effected? If not effected? How did the Army
impead the Kings coming home? If their coming to London in a warlike manner
were a disturbance to the Kingdoms quiet, why was not that party in the City
esteemed as great disturbers as the Army? who subscribed great and considerable
sums, chose a General, listed soldiers, prepared a new Army to destroy the
old; wherefore a necessary engagement lay upon them to march to London, to
extinguish those already raised Garboiles; those new kindled Coals of
combustions: if any fled from the Houses, it was their fearfulness, not the
Armies Dreadfulnesse which could cause them to foster such over suspicious
jealousies. Though to speak plainly, the raising of an Army without sufficient
authority, is an action which carries little less then Treason in the
forehead, then a tincture of Rebillon in its very complexion. But I could wish
rationally to be informed, what the estate and condition of our affairs would
have been, if the Army had been shuffled off with a small Pittance of money,
debentures thrust into their hands, and so sent packing homewards; whether
would the King have instantly granted our Propositions or no? if this. The
oppsition betwixt the Parliament and his Majesty would have continued, for
whose release the Cavaliers would have acted all their now begun designs, and
many more against us, by how much greater opportunity had been offered upon
their dissolution, every one would be willing to engage in such Clandestine
Contrivances, where a small, or almost no visible force appeared to thwart and
strangle their new Plotted Conspiracies. Now that the King upon their
disbanding would have yielded to our Propositions, is merely improbable,
Considering the hopes he might cherish of a new resurrection of his party, this
army suffering a dissolution; And fortune, who had for a long time drawn a
curtain betwixt her self and his Majesty, might seem now to withdraw it, and
refresh him with the smiles of her, for so many months Clouded Countenance.
Again, if he refused to sign the Bills in his lowest, and half desperate
condition at Carisbrook, would he have signed them in his best Condition at
Holdenby? wherefore, the Army refusing to disband, showed both wit and fortune,
joined with a notable discerning judgment; Teaching, that weak
Commonwealths, for that they know not how to resolve, never take any good
resolution, except perforce, and some others must procure their good for them,
even against their wills.

Now therefore should any man well affected to the Parliaments Proceedings,
behold this Army with Basilisks eyes, be stoned by any of the well-affected,
unless it be for their good deeds, their Noble acts of Chivalry, it mounteth
above the sphere of my Intelligence; wherefore, the Lieutenant General, who
by his noble exploits and achievements has mawled the Kings Party, been a
Scanderbag to their stoutest Cohorts, and Legions, wherefore (I say) should he
be the subject of our obliquie, or his Honor darkened with our black
aspertions, I do not know, unless the cause be, the fatal inconstancy of the
unpolitick and giddi-headed Multitude, who exalt some, and labor to depresse
others, who love to day, hate to morrow, whose resolutions are orbicular, their
actions like windmill sails, turning upon the blast of ever wind, never
constant with themselves, and therefore cannot persevere in Constancy toward
others.

However, I will not labor to defend all, whatsoever has been acted by the
Parliament and Army, unless they were of the Heavenly race, not of the dust of
the Earth; unless begot of Jupiters Brain, and not of the flowers of the
field: Thus much I know, that all their errors be venial sins, and
therefore excusable, not sins against the holy Ghost, and therefore
unpardonable. But however the case stands, seeing such infinite storms and
troubles do on all hands assail us, and the Billows of raging wars are
ready to overwhelme us, wisdom wills, that we join hand in hand, live,
love, and be brethren still. And seeing all our differences are but about
Circumstantials, either concerning Church or State, ordinary Policy, and Common
safety enjoyneth us, that we do not so violently contend, lest we totally
exceed the litmits of Circumstantiall differences; we are like two Earthen pots
floating in the sea, Si Collidimur, frangimur, like Meleager and his fatal
firebrand, the one surviveth not the other. The Cavaliers cannot break our
Array, unless we open rank and file, to double distance. They cannot disarme
us of our rapiers, unless we set Crablocks upon them; nor uncase us of our
Buff-coats, unless our Companions help to unlase them. If all these before
mentioned dangers to Parliament, City, Kingdom, which threaten not only an
invasion, but an extirpation of our Religion and liberties, will not be
sufficient to incorporate our affections, and draw our swords one in defense of
another, it is a sad presage our ruin is at the door, our destruction sleeps
not; but in the midst of our quarrels will throw us out of our Houses, Lands,
Religion, Liberties, and whatsoever is dearly prized and esteemed of us. Let
not the Cavaliers glozing speeches bore out your eyes, to whom, if you wagg the
tail, give sugared words, and sawning carriage, oleum and operum per didistis,
you but carry water in a riddle, no safety from them to be expected, though you
offered a thousand sacrifices on his Majesty's Altar at Carisbrooke, if before
you offered up but a Wax Candle to the Parlia. shrine at Westminster.

Could any thing charm their bloody hands, unless they were first washed with
your blood; I should think it no miracle, if the Lamb lay by the Lion
untouched, the Sheep by the Woolfe undevoured, the Goose by the Fox unworried;
can there be continued a near union amongst us, a neraer union will be effected
betwixt a Cavaliers neck and Tyborne. This they know, and are afraid of what
they deserve; and therefore all fly from London, and bandy themselves together
in remote or near adjacent Counties, fearing if they be taken, such Hoggs as
they are like to be sold to those Butchers, whereof Gregory is one of the
fraternity. And the Devil, with Machiavell, his chief Secretary, have
dictated this project unto them, divide and impera, either alienate them, and
so successively Conquer them, or cause them to sheath their Swords in one
another Bowels, and then Moab up to the spoil. If our contentions about
Church Government be laid aside, and lulled asleep, we may be happy if this
unfortunately begotten Child, be rocked so long in its cradle, until it have
taken up its lodgings in deaths pavilions; if otherways it awaken, the hope
is, we being all Christians, and of the household of Christ Jesus, may friendly
compose the occasions of honest men's grudgings and disastrous quarrellings;
when the common enemy has whipped us, we shall be wise and join together,
dearly rewarding them for their Tyrannous behaviors, and audacions
presumptions.

Why should we run a whoring after a Personal Treaty? That new smoking --
which the Commissioners of Scotland first voydded out of their ingenious
breeches, and now the Cavaliers of England offer it up unto your Nostrils as a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor; As though Poison were wholesome Physic
for Natural bodies, Or that any thing so violently prosecuted by the Cavaliers
of Engl. would prove a cordial for our differences, a remedy to advance, or a
Pillar to underproppe the Tottering state of our. Religion and Liberties. Nay,
rather let us all be unanimous as formerly, if we can be but joined into one
bundle of rods, we need not to doubt but we shall soundly whip these lying
dissembling Scots, these more then falsehearted Cavaliers.

The great Capt. Julius Caesar, quieted his mutinous Countrymen with eight
Letters, all making one word, Quirites. It were a shame for us in these our
dissensions, who are all Christians, not to stop one another querulous tongues
and clamorous mouths, with that of Moses to his dissenting Hebrews, why do we
contend, seeing we are all Brethren? the Turks can take up a debate with a Fie!
Musselman Fie! fall out and all the Controversy is dashed in pieces. And shall
not we, who are indeed the true believers more easily be appeased and join
hands, then a Crew of execrable Mahometans and ungodly Infidels?

To conclude this my earnest exhortatio^to old friends, though somewhat
estranged in affections: This know for a certain, God is highly displeased at
your quarrellings, seeing you give the enemies occasion to blaspheme the name
of your God. If you will not yet be appeased one toward another but cause more
rents and holes in the Lords Coat, God himself one day will severely reckon
with you, for that you have endangered his Church and Honor It may be remove
your Candlestick, when you your selves have been the Occasion, wherefore that
glorious and bright shining Lamp has been extinguished by the Haters of his
Glory.

FINIS.

