THE LORD GENERAL CROMWELL His march to STERLING.

BEING A DIARY of all proceeding in the Army from their march out of EDINBURGH,
to the 25 of September 1650.

ALSO, The Lord Generals Proclamation in relation to Edinburgh and Leith.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. in the Old Bailey. 1650.

THe Army having stayed in Edinburgh and Leith for the space of six or seven
days, both for their refreshment, and the securing of those parts, which his
Excellency thought fit to Order, after so many difficulties endured by them
without any intermission.

On Saturday Sept. 14. His Excellency with the Army (who had then seven days
provisions with them, marched to Netherish about six miles from Edinburgh, his
Excellency returned that night to Leith, leaving Major Gen Overton to be
Governor of Edinburgh, with Colonel Fairfax and Col. Coxes Regiments, and Col.
Daniels Regiment in Leith, all these Regiments being of Major General Overtons
Brigade.

Sunday, Sept. 15. the Army marched beyond Linlithgow toward Sterling, but by
reason of the extraordinary Rain and storm they were necessitated to retreat
back to Linlithgow, where they quartered all night.

Monday Sept. 16. the Army marched toward Falkirk, and being informed by the
way that there was a Garrison kept, a Trumpet was sent to summon it: Answer was
returned, that they were all Gentlemen in the house, and were resolved all to
die rather then yield it; but if Sterling were taken or yielded that should be
given up: That they would offer no violence to any of our Army in their passing
to and again, but such as carried themselves disorderly.

Tusday, September. 17. we marched from Falkirk within a mile of Sterling, where,
the Weather being extraordinary wet and stormy the General was necessitated to
quarter in the Church there being no house or accommodation for him.

Wednesday Sept. 18. it rained very sore till afternoon, in the forenoone there
was a Council of War, and a Letter was drawn up to be sent to Sterling,
expressing their constant affections to and tenderness of the people in
Scotland, which yet had not taken the desired effect, And now being so far
advanced with their Army, that they would take into consideration their former
Papers, and that they would yield up that place to the service of the
Commonwealth of England. A Trumpeter being sent with this Letter, a Gentleman
on foot with a Pike in his hand met him, and told him he must return back, for
they would not let him come in, or receive his Letter. In the afternoon came a
Trumpeter about the release of Prisoners, desiring that they might be releast
upon Ransom: To which the Lord General writ an Answer, that we came not
hither to make merchandise of men, or to get a gain to our selves, but for the
service and security of the Commonwealth of England.

About one of the clock in the afternoon there were Orders given for all the
Foot, and likewise the Horse, except three Regiments, to march toward
Sterling, in order to a storm, Ladders and all things that we could possibly
expect being provided for that purpose; but upon the result of the Council for
many considerations, it was thought sit to retreat and draw off the Army to
quarter in the same ground they had done before.

Thursday Sept. 19. It being not held advisable by reason of several
disadvantages, the strength of the town and enemy to engage at present against
Sterling. The Army drew from before Sterling, and marched to Linlithgoe, where
his Excellency viewed the Town.

Friday Sept. 20. His Excellency came to Dundasse, where General Deane (who
came in the Faithful Speaker, and rode before Leith the Sunday before) met
him, they both returned to Lithgoe.

Saturday Sept. 21. This Morning his Excellency went with General Deane, and
other Officers, and an Engineer, and viewed the place round about Lithingoe,
and gave Orders for several works to be made for security of the place, and
left Col. Sanderson, and Major Mitchell with five troops of horse, and six
commanded companies of Foot to secure it, which will be a very considerable
Frontier Garrison, being in the midway and heart of the Country, between
Edinburgh and Sterling: that night his Excellency, and the rest of the Army
came into Edinburgh, where he had intelligence of the death of the Lord
Libberton, who was wounded in the late fight.

Sunday Sept. 22. His Excellency stayed at Edinburgh. The Castle have been very
quiet, since our coming hither, only discharging some Muskets at our Guards
as they are relieved, and at our men when they see opportunity; they have not
killed any of our men, but one or two of their own walking the streets at
Edinburgh, the last night they discharged four Pieces of Ordnance at the
relieving the guards but did no hurt.

Monday Sept. 23. The General and Officers kept a day of Humiliation; the same
night came in six English Cavaleers from the enemy, who declare their being
weary of the Court and Camp; and that there are so many divisions in both, that
they will suddenly break to pieces.

This day the Kirk appointed aday of Humiliation. First, to bewail the sins
of their Nation in general. Secondly, the sin of their Commissioners in
bringing over their King so soon. Thirdly, for their acceptance of their King,
before he had more sufficiently repented him of his by past sins. Fourthly, for
their not purging their Army. Fifthly, for their too much trusting in the Arm
of flesh. We understand general Leven is gone to his own house, Lieut. David
Lesley is with the Army near Sterling, Co. Straghan, and Col. Gibby Car, are
gone to raise Forces about Glasco. The Committee of Estates divided some to one
place, and some in another, one party acting for the Kings interest, the other
for the Presbyterians.

Last Tuesday Sept. 24. Nothing considerable happened, only some Regiments of
Foot were disposed into the Country for enlargement of Quarters. Edinburgh
Sept. 25. 1650.

A Proclamation by his Excellency.
WHereas it has pleased God by his gracious Providence and Goodness, to put
the City of Edinburgh, and the Town of Leith under my power; And although I
have put forth several Proclamations since my coming into this Country to the
like effect, with this present: Yet for further satisfaction to all those whom
it may concern; J do hereby again publish and declare, that all the
inhabitants of the Country (now not being nor continuing in arms) shall have
free leave and liberty to come to the Army, and to the City and Town aforesaid,
with their Cattle, Corn, Horse, or other Commodities or goods whatsoever, and
shall there have free and open Markets for the same, and shall be protected in
their persons and goods, in coming and returning as aforesaid, from any injury
or violence of the Soldiery, under my Command, and shall also be protected in
their respective houses. And the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City and
Town shall (and hereby likewise) have free leave to vend and sell their wares
and commodities, and shall be protected from the plunder and violence of the
Soldiers, And I do hereby require all Officers and Soldiers of the Army under
my command, to take due notice hereof, and to yield obedience hereto, as they
will answer the contrary at their utmost peril.

Given under my hand at Edinburgh the 14th of September, 1650. O. CROMWELL.
To be Proclaimed in Leith and Edinburgh, by sound of Trumpet, and beat of Drum.



FINIS.

