A Looking-glass for a Drunkard, Or a DRUNKARD Defined.
IN which Description is plainly showed the filthy abominable sin of
Drunkenness proved by many places of Scripture; How through Drunkenness many
have been punished, others threatened and admonished, very needful to be set up
in every house, for the Information of the Judgment, and the Reformation of
the lives of those men and women, who take pleasure in the sin of Drunkenness,
the common sin of these times.

The Definition of a Drunkard.
A Drunkard is the annoyance of Modesty; The trouble of Civility; The spoil of
Wealth; The destruction of Reason. He is the Brewers Agent; The Alehouse
Benefactor; The Beggars Companion; The Constables trouble. He is his Wives woe,
His Childrens sorrow; His Neighbors scoff; His own shame. In sum, a Tubbe
of Swill; A spirit of sleep; A Picture of a Beast; A Monster of a man.

The Evils attending Drunkenness hurtful to the Soul and Body.
Drunkenness confounds the Memory, dulls the Understanding, distempers the
Body, defaceth the Beauty, hurts the Mind; It inflames the Blood; It ingenders
unnatural Thirst, a stinking Breath, redness of the Eyes; It diminishes
strength; It brings Woes, Sorrows, Wounds without cause, corrupts the Blood,
drowneth the Spirits; It enricheth the Carcass with Surfets, turns Blood
into Water, turns Reason to Poison; It causes vomiting and filthiness. By
excessive drinking comes Dropsies, Consumptions, and cold Diseases, with
untimely Deaths. Many by drinking Healths to others, leave none to themselves.
Drunkenness is a flattering Devil, a sweet Poison, a delightsome sin, which
who so has in himself, has not himself; And he that uses it, is not himself
in the Concrete, but sinfulness it self in the Abstract, being a voluntary
Devil, the common Shame of Nature, and the prodigious Disgrace of Mankind.

Examples laid down in Scripture, showing how Drunkenness made some fall by
the Sword, Others became Murderers, Others being drunk were murdered, betrayed;
Incest committed, many destroyed in the midst of their sin-sporting, etc.
Through Drunkenness.
The Amalekites lay scattered on the earth, so that David slew them, 1 Samuel 30.
16. Ammons heart was merry, so that Absaloms Servants slew him, 2 Samuel 28. 29.
Benhadad with fifty two other Kings, were by Israel overcome, 1 Kings 20. 16.
etc. Belshazzars countenance fell down, and the Medes took his Kingdom, Dan. 5.
31. David uses means to move Vriah to cover his sin committed, 2 Samuel 11. 13.
Elah was by his Servant Conspiring against him, murdered, 1 Kings 16. 9, 10.
Gaal with his Brethren against Ahimelech Conspired, Judge. 9. 26, 27. Herod in
his drunken Banquet caused John to be beheaded, Mat. 14. 10. The Israelites
drank till they were thirsty. Hell was prepared for them, Isa. 5. 12, 14. Lots
Daughters lay with their Father, two cursed Nations came of them, Genesis 19. 31.
Noah was uncovered in his Tent, and discovered by his Son, Genesis 9. 21, 22.
Nabals heart was merry, and suddenly died within him, 1 Samuel 25. 36, 37. The
Philistines sporting with Samson, were by the fall of an House slain, Judge.
16. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Priests and Prophets stumble in Judgment, and fail by
Vision, Isa. 28. 7. The Corinthians profained the Lords Supper by their
immoderate drinking before, 1 Cor. 11. 21.
These forementioned places of Scriptures and Examples, prove plainly the evil
Consequence of Drunkenness. Now follow Threatenings and Exhortations to
Drunkards.

Threatenings.
Woe to them that rise up early in the Morning to follow strong drink, that
continue till night, the wine inflaming them. Isa. 5. 11. Woe to them that are
mighty to drink Wine, and to men of strength, mingling strong drink, which
causes men to err, and to go out of the way, being swallowed up with wine and
strong drink, Isa. 5. 22. chap. 28. 7, 8. etc. Awake now ye Drunkards, weep and
howl all ye drinkers of Wine, because of the new Wine, for it shall be pulled
from your mouth, Joel 1. 5. etc.

Exhortations.
The Drunkard shall come to Poverty, Rags shall be his clothing, Prove. 23. 21.
Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby
is not wise, Prove. 20. 1. Remember Christ's Admonition, Take heed of
Drunkenness, Luke 21. 34. Forget not Paul's and Solomon's Counsel, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
Prove. 23. 20. Company not with Drunkards, etc. And know that no Drunkard shall
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 26. 10, 11. Therefore be not drunken
with Wine, wherein is Excess, but be filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18.



London, Imprinted for I. D. and are to be sold by George Wilford in little
Britain near the Hospital gate. 1652.


