THE COMBAT BETWEEN THE FLESH and SPIRIT. AS ALSO The woeful withdrawing of
the Spirit of God, with the Causes thereof: And walking in, and after the
Spirit, together with the blessedness thereof.

Being the sum and substance of XXVII. SERMONS: Preached a little before his
death, by that faithful servant of CHRIST, Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Late Minister
of the Gospel at Lawrence Jury LONDON.

To which is added The CHRISTIANS DIRECTORY Tending to direct him in the
various conditions that God may cast him into. In XV. Sermons.

Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption.

Res delicatula est Spiritu Dei, ita nos tractat sicut tractatur. Tertull.

London, Printed by T R. and E. M. for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear
in Goldsmiths-row, in Cheapside. 1654.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, My Worthy Friends, Mr. EDWARD BRADSHAW, Major of the
City of CHESTER: AND Mrs. MARY BRADSHAW his wife.
Right Worshipful and Honored Friends,
I Shall crave your favor, to give you a short account why I put this Treatise
into your hands in this public way. It is not that the works of this worthy
Author need any Patrociny, the grateful acceptance which many of his books
already published, have found with sober and experienced Christians; bears
abundant testimony to the profitablenesse and usefulness of his labors, and
that his precious name, shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and is still
unto those that fear the Lord, a sweet and precious ointment: But indeed, the
reason of this Dedication (besides the public expression of my respects to you
both) is the consideration of that special interest you both have to any thing
of Master Loves. Your interest, Sir, is undoubted to this Treatise, as having
married his widow, whereby God has made the solitary to dwell, and rest in the
house of her husband, and has caused a mournful widow to forget her sorrows.
And your right (dear Mistress Bradshaw) is very great to the works of this
worthy man, as having had the honor for several years to be the wife of this
eminent servant and Ambassador of Jesus Christ.

And my hope is, that as your coming together in this dear relation, was the
answer of many prayers: so you will in the strength of prayers, still
comfortably live together, 1 Pet. 3.7.
as heirs of the grace of life.

To help you forward in the ways and practices of real godliness, I commend
unto your most serious perusal this, and other useful and practical Treatises
of this reverend Author; which though it cannot be expected, that they should
come forth with that exactness and accomplishment as they would have done, had
the Author lived to publish them himself; yet I do assure you, that these
Sermons have been diligently compared with his own papers, and notes taken from
his own mouth, by the pen of a ready and intelligent writer.

The world, ^ confess, is now filled, even to satiety, and surfeit with
unprofitable Pamphlets, 2 Timothy 2.13.
whereby many foolish questions and disputes have arisen, which do engender
strifes; 2 Timothy 2.16.
and many opinions have been vented which do increase unto more ungodliness;
but this book now presented unto you, is plain, practical, and spiritual, and
will, I hope, be of great use unto Christians, to help them to a right
understanding of their spiritual estate. These Sermons (as the date of them
will show) were preached by Mr. LOVE, but a few months before his imprisonment
and death: his gracious heart it seems, being to the last, much upon that
great work, of advancing the power of Godliness in the souls of his hearers;
and therefore, I hope will be the more acceptable, as being some of the last
and ripest fruit of his growing and improving Ministry. These are the Sermons
which he gave his consent should be published, and besides all these
considerations, they are the rather printed, because so long expected, and
earnestly desired by many, whose souls have cause to bless God for Mr. LOVE'S
faithful Ministry, to all eternity.

Here you will meet with antidotes against that cursed opinion, which under
pretense of advancing the Spirit, undervalueth both the Scripture and
Ordinances of Christ, fathering their most blasphemous, and Atheistical Tenets
upon the holy Spirit of truth, God blessed for ever. Here you will find what a
woeful thing it is, when Gods Spirit withdrawes his presence and influence from
the Ordinances; Oh that Professors may be hereby warned not to grieve the
Spirit, nor quench the Spirit, lest he withdraw from the soul, and so leave it
without life, grace, and comfort.

Here you may also learn, how precious and powerful the influence of the holy
Ghost is, when he is pleased by his presence to make Ordinances effectual;
Cant. 4.16.
let this therefore be your prayer, Awake O north-winde, and come thou south,
blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: let my beloved come
into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.

Here you will find comfortable directions to walk in the Spirit, and how to
follow the guidance of the holy Ghost, who is able to lead you into all truth.

Lastly, here you will see notably described that contrariety which is between
Flesh and Spirit. Every Christians heart (like Rebecca's womb) having two
contrary parties struggling in it; but our comfort is, The elder shall serve the
younger; corruption like the house of Saul, shall by degrees grow weaker; and
grace like that of David's, stronger and stronger. I will conclude with hearty
prayers to God for you both, that by the conscientious reading of this book,
you may gain much soul-advantage, and be built up in your most holy faith; and
live many happy days together, walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the holy Ghost. Act. 9.31.
This is the unfeigned desire of

Your affectionate Friend and servant in the Lord, William Tailor.
London, Jan. 25. 1653.
To THE Reader.
THe Reverend Author of this ensuing Treatise (our worthy good friend)
committed unto us the care of such his Works, as might be judged fit for
public use. And although our occasions have not allowed us leisure to peruse
the several pieces which have been already published (upon the perusal of some
of our Brethren) yet with humble thankfulness unto God, we heartily rejoice in
that acceptance with success, which they have found in the hearts of sober
savoury Christians. This Treatise (which was the matter of some of his last
Sermons) had more of the Authors heart and approbation (as he testified unto
two of us, not many days before his death) then any other of his Works. And
truly, the effects of this discourse (the happy issue of his spiritual
combat) were admirably evident upon his own heart, in the sparkling influences
of Gods holy Spirit, whereby he was extraordinarily elevated above all
sublunary comforts, or crosses; loves, or sorrows; hopes, or fears, when his
known death drew very nigh: for though he was a man very full of affections,
and of singular tenderness toward his dearly-beloved wife and children: yet
he had not only conquered such sinful distempers, as too frequently prevail
woefully amongst common Professors of Religion, but had also in such measure got
above natural exorbitances; that having by Faith and Prayer, put his nearest
Relations into the bosom of his God and father, he went to the Block without
any expression of perplexity. Oh that his experience might encourage both the
endeavors and hopes of other Christians to attain the like gracious frame of
heart, which would tend much to the credit of the Gospel; for this end we
commend thee in the use of this Book, (and all other holy helps) unto the
blessing of the Almighty, desiring thy prayers.

Thy Friends and Servants in Christ, EDM. CALAMY. SIM. ASH. JER. WHITAKER.

January 26. 1653.
ERRATA.
In the Christian Directory, in p. 56. l. 28. ^^ot out -- one grace hindered
and interrupted another, -- in p. 57 l. 12. after sinful, read, one grace doeh
not justle out another therefore.

SERMON. I. At Lawrence Jury, London, October 27. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, for that he also is flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years.
THis chapter contains in it two parts. 1. Gods determination to destroy the
world by a deluge. 2. Gods provision that he made in this general judgment to
save Noah and his family by preparing an Arc.


The text is under the first head, Gods determination to destroy the world by a
flood. Touching which judgment, the procuring cause is here laid down, When
men begun to increase in number, (by reason of Polygamy first practiced by
Lamech) they increased in sin, and therefore God will decrease the number of
the world, that he may decrease the sins of the world. The particular sin
here specified, why God would destroy the world, is laid down in the second
verse. where it is said, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that
they were fair, and they took them wives of all which they chose. By the
sons of God here spoken of, Job 1.7. Job 38.7.
cannot be meant the Angels, as Tertullian and some other of the Ancients
thought, (though it is true elsewhere they are called by this name.) Christ
speaking of Angels, says of them, Matthew. 25.30.
the Angels of God neither marry nor are given in marriage.

Quest. 1
Quest. But whom shall we understand by the Sons of God in this place?

Answ.
Answ. Good interpreters conceive that hereby was meant the posterity of godly
Seth, who because they had the true worship of God amongst them, are called the
sons of God, and these sons of God saw the daughters of men; that is, the
posterity of godly Seth, did join in marriage with the posterity of wicked
Cain; and so by these marriages, and mixtures between the wicked Cainites, and
those that professed to worship the true God, Religion began to decay, and
wickedness to abound in the world, for which God is resolved to destroy the
world.

In the whole verse you have three parts. 1. A general judgment and grievous
punishment threatened; And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive
with man. 2. The reason of this assigned; For he also is flesh. 3. A mitigation
and respiting of this punishment, Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years.


There are these difficulties in the text to be explained, as 1. What is meant
by this, My Spirit shall not always strive with man. 2. What is meant by the
reason assigned, for he also is flesh; one would think it should be a reason on
the contrary, to this asserted, that therefore God should indulge man; yet here
it is a reason of the punishment; though in other places it is a reason of a
mercy. 3. What is meant by this, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years.


Qu. What is meant by this, My Spirit shall not, etc.

Answ. That by Spirit, some understand the soul of man, and so the vulgar
Latin renders this phrase, understanding it of man's soul; and it is called my
Spirit, say they, because God did infuse the soul into man; and they would have
the sense to be my Spirit, i.e. the soul of man shall not always abide in man,
but he shall die. But our best interpreters do reject this interpretation. --
Not to trouble you with other opinions about this text, the current of the best
interpreters as Mercer, Musculus, Rivet, etc. go this way, -- My Spirit shall
not always strive with man. By Spirit is not meant man's spirit, but Gods
Spirit, the third person in the blessed Trinity; and when he says, his Spirit
shall not strive with man, it is to be meant in its operations and workings,
that it shall not attend the Ministry of Noah, who was a preacher of
righteousness, and the Patriarchs; as if he should say, I will now take away
my Spirit from my Ordinances, it shall not always strive with man. As if God
should have more at large expressed himself, I see that though my servant Noah
protest and preach against the increasing wickedness of the world, yet all is
but in vain, I am now weary of their rebellious obstinacy, and therefore I am
now come to a final resolution for their utter destruction, I will bear and
forbear them no longer, 1 Pet. 3.19,20.
My Spirit shall no longer strive, etc.

Quest. 2.
Quest. 2. What force is there in this reason, for he also is flesh? one would
think this should not be a reason of so grievous a judgment, God remembers we
are but flesh, and why should he be so severe?

Answ. For answer to this, we must know, that by flesh here spoken of, is not
to be understood, the natural substance of man's body, but corrupt nature. I
will withdraw my Spirit, why? because you are wholly given up to the lusts and
dictates of the flesh? you are fleshly and carnal, and given up to the
concupiscence of the flesh, and therefore my Spirit shall not strive with you.

Quest. 3.
3. Quest. What is the meaning of these words, yet his days shall be an hundred
and twenty years? what is to be understood by this?

Answ. 1. For answer hereto, it cannot be meant (as Tostatus and others) of the
age of man's life, as if man should now because of their wickedness have
shorter lives, because after the flood men did live longer then the term of an
hundred and twenty years; Sem lived 600 years, Arphaxad 425 years, and Serug
230. Abraham 175. Isaac 180. The meaning then is this, although I will remove
my Spirit from my Ordinances, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years, that is, it shall be an hundred and twenty years before the flood come
upon them.

But now there is an objection lies in this, how it should be an hundred and
twenty years before the flood should come, when these words were spoken, when
Noah was five hundred years old, and the flood came when he was six hundred
years old, therefore here is twenty years shorter then Gods promise?

This is an intricate knot, and interpreters are forced to take much pains to
untie it, and to vindicate the faithfulness of God herein, let God be true and
every man a lier. Jerome he gives this answer, says he, It is true, God did
promise an hundred and twenty years between the making of the promise and the
accomplishment; the wickedness of men grew so great, and did so provoke God,
that he did contract the promise to twenty years less; and thus Musculus also,
who farther says, God making promise reserves the condition in his own breast;
for as God may not bring a judgment threatened upon a people, upon their
speedy repentance, as in the case of the Ninevites: so neither is he bound to
give them a mercy promised, in case of wilful and obstinate and incorrigible
wickedness, as in the case of Elies family. I said (says God to Eli) that thy
house, and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever, But now the
Lord says, ^e it far from me, etc.

But the best and genuine answer given hereto, is this, that this promise was
made to Noah, not when he was five hundred years old, but when he was four
hundred and fourscore; for though it be said in the fifth chapter and the last
verse, that Noah was five hundred years old, yet that text does not say he was
so old when this promise was made. -- Thus Rivet, Mercer and others. There is
one difficulty in this answer; It may be objected that this promise was made
after Noah was said to be five hundred years old. 1 Samuel 2.30.


To which I answer, that in Scripture it is usual, in the relating of Histories
not to observe an exact order, Genesis 1.21.
so that some things may be placed before which may be done after, and some
things after which may be done before, as for instance you may read of the
woman's creation after the seventh day; Moses would not observe a direct order,
but did put those things after which were done before. -- And so likewise
another instance you have of a thing put before, done afterward. In the case
of Terah you read that he was two hundred and five years old, and he died,
Genesis 11.32.
and yet you find that Isaac's birth is not mentioned until some ten chapters
afterward, whereas Terah lived some thirty five years after the birth of
Isaac. I only mention this to show the consistency of this answer with other
places of Scripture; to which may be added what judicious Calvin has to solve
this doubt, that though it be said that Noah was six hundred years old, when he
was but five hundred and eighty, yet because he was going in the six hundredth
year, and so near it as twenty years, therefore the Holy Ghost says, Noah was
six hundred years, expressing his age by a whole number. Thus you have the
difficulties explained.

My Spirit shall not always strive with man, etc. It may be observed from the
whole that when God threatened the judgment of a flood, he threatened a worse
judgment before it; to note that Gods withdrawing his ordinances, or
withdrawing the efficacy of his Spirit from his ordinances, was a worse
punishment then any bodily punishment. I mention this in the prologue to the
point, that so when you hear me handle the grievousnesse of this judgment, you
may look upon it as a most sad and heavy one.

And yet before I raise the doctrine, I must distinguish to you about a double
withdrawing of Gods Spirit, when the Scripture says, My Spirit shall not
always strive with man, it includes two things. 1. My Spirit shall not always
strive in the Ministry of the word by effectual working. 2. My Spirit shall
not always strive by inward motions and checks upon the conscience.
I shall handle the point both ways. -- And the first point is this,

Doctr. 1.
That it is a very grievous and deplorable judgment for God to withhold or
withdraw the workings of his Spirit from the outward Ministry of the word.

I might note collaterally from the word strive, That the work of conversion it
is a hard work, it is not an easy work to convince a man: But I shall follow
the doctrine I have propounded, and in the opening thereof shall dispatch two
things. 1. Show you that it is a grievous judgment to have the Spirit
withdrawn, or withheld from the Ministry of the word. 2. The reasons why God
sends this judgment upon any part of the world.


1. To demonstrate the truth of the first, I shall lay down but this one
evidence. It appears to be so great a judgment, because when the Spirit is
withheld from the ordinances, there can be no efficacy in them to convert a
soul. A sword in a living man's hand may pierce and wound, but a painted sword
in a painted man's hand upon the wall can do nothing at all: so the word
preached without the Spirit of God can do no more then a sword in the hand of a
George on horseback; it may please the fancy and tickle the ear, but never
pierce the heart; it must be the Spirit of God which works upon the heart: Ye
are the epistle of Christ (^aies the Apostle) written not with ink, but with
the Spirit of the living God. 2 Cor. 3.3
And as the same Apostle speaks, My preaching was not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power. 1 Cor. 2.4.
It must be the mighty power of God which works upon the heart. The Ministry
of the word it is like that poole of Bethesda, John 5.4.
there was no native virtue in the water to heal; but the text says, when the
Angel did move the water, he that first stepped in was healed of whatsoever
disease he had. Ordinances they are like this poole; there is no native virtue
in bare preaching, and bare hearing; but it must be the Spirit of God which
must move upon these waters, otherwise they become not effectual: 2 Cor. 3.6.
The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life; which words are not to be
understood in Origens sense, the letter, that is the literal sense, and the
Spirit, that is, the allegorical sense; neither the meaning is, the letter,
that is, the Old Testament, and the Spirit, that is, the New Testament, as the
Antinomians say; but the meaning of the word, the letter, that is, the word of
God abstractively considered from the Spirit of God, that kills, it leaves a
man in a dead estate; but it is the Spirit which gives life, that is, the
Spirit backing the Ministry of the word, makes it effectual to give Spiritual
life. Thus it appears to be a grievous judgment when the Spirit is withheld
from the Ordinances of God, because without the Spirit there can be no benefit
at all by Ordinances.

2. The next thing is to show, for what reason it is that God sends this
grievous judgment upon any people.

For answer whereto I shall say down some reasons in the general, and then some
in particular.

1 In the general, the reason, why God withholds or withdrawes the operation
and working of his Spirit in his Ordinances, Res delicatula est spiritus Dei;
ita nos tractat, sicut tra^tatur.
it is from that injury or offense that men have done to the Spirit of God; if
men grieve the Spirit, and quench its motions, it is just with God to withhold
its workings and operations. The Scripture mentions a six-fold wrong done unto
the Spirit of God, for one, or all of which the Lord may withdraw his Spirit.

1. There is a quenching of the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19
Quench not the Spirit. By quenching the Spirit is meant any act of omission or
slighting of the Spirits motions in our hearts; take heed therefore of omitting
good duties, or neglecting its motions; for how know you but that the Lord may
withdraw his Spirit from you? The wind may cease to blow, if when it blows,
we do not get our sails ready.

2. Another injury which is of a higher nature, is grieving of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 4.30
And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Then do you grieve the Spirit, when you shall do any sinful act,
for which the Spirit checks you, and yet you will run upon the committing of
it, when you shall hearken rather to the motions of sin then the motions of
the Spirit, to Satanical delusions rather then the Spirits motions; this
grieves the Spirit exceedingly, as it will grieve a friend when we leave his
counsel, and follow rather the counsel of an enemy.

3. Another injury done against the Spirit, is vexing the Spirit, They
rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit. And this is a higher degree; Esaias 36.10.
for then may a man be said to vex the Spirit, when he quenches the Spirit, and
grieves the Spirit, and does so by many reiterated acts, hereby is the Spirit
grieved. A man is grieved when his friend does him one discourtisie; but when
he shall persist in the doing of more, this raises up vexation in him: Even so
is it with the Spirit of God, when we slight its motions, and notwithstanding
its warnings, will yet venture upon the committing of sin, we not only grieve
but also vex the Spirit; Isa. 63.4.
and so says the Prophet, They rebelled, and vexed his Spirit.

4. Another Scripture expression of wrong done to the Spirit, is resisting of
the Spirit, Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; Acts 7.51.
and this is a higher degree then any of the former; for resisting of the
Spirit, is when a man knows such and such motions are from the Spirit, and yet
notwithstanding will stand out obstinately against its persuasions and motions.

5. Another expression in Scripture, is Acts 5.7.
a tempting of the Spirit; How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the
Spirit of the Lord? Calvin explaines this place, and says, that their tempting
of the Spirit was this, Ananias and Sapphira having sold a possession, brought
a part of the price thereof and laid it at the Apostles feet, and kept back the
rest, and they would carry it so secretly, that they would try whether the Holy
Ghost was an omniscient God, able to punish that secret sin. Now this was a
higher kind of wickedness, and a most desperate pitch of Atheism, to try the
omnisciency of the Spirit of God.

6. And lastly, another injury the Scripture expresses, Heb. 10.29.
is a doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, and this is the very top of all,
the highest injury that a devil in hell, or a man on earth can do to the
Spirit. This is the sin against the holy Ghost, Which shall never be
forgiven. Matthew. 12.31.
Now what is this despite? it cannot be to neglect good motions, for godly men
may be, and are overtaken with those neglects; the not hearkening to a friends
motion, is not a doing of despite to him. Therefore there cannot be a despite
done to the Spirit of God, but there must be these ingredients in it; as 1 A
committing of sin, not only out of an unavoidable infirmity, but out of
wilfulness; so if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Heb. 2.6.
2. It is a sin not unwittingly, but knowingly committed. 3. It is a sin
not only wilfully and knowingly committed, for regenerate men do sin partly
with the will, but that which is the very characteristical difference is this,
that it is a sin committed out of malice and hatred to the Spirit of God; and
this Divines apply to the Pharisees, who knew and were convinced by the
Miracles which Christ wrought, that he was the Son of God, and yet though they
knew and were persuaded of this, yet out of malice against the Deity of Christ
they would put him to death; so that to sum up all together, this is the
general reason why God will not suffer his Spirit to strive with men, because
of those injuries which they do unto the Spirit of God. The particular Reasons
may be these.


1. Despising of the Ordinance of the Ministry. I will not say the persons of
the Ministers, though that is an evil which God will punish; but certainly a
contempt of the Ministry, of the Ordinance of Preaching, it may provoke God to
withdraw the operations of his Spirit; if you despise prophesying, you also
quench the Spirit, and then the Spirit will not have those operations upon you
which otherwise it would. 1 These. 5.19.
God will not follow the Word with efficacy to them who either contemn or deny
the Ministry thereof.

2. Another reason may be, because men do too much depend upon the hearing of
the Word preached. Men come to hear the Word preached in the strength of their
own spirits, and therefore God will not give them the workings of his Spirit.
When men shall depend upon Ordinances, it is just with God to deny the benefit
of them; 1 Samuel 4.2,3.
as the Israelites having received an overthrow by the Philistines. Wherein
they lost about four thousand men, looked upon this as the reason, because they
had not the Ark of God among them; but when they had the Arc with them, it is
said the second day there fell of the Israelites thirty thousand men. Thus did
God punish their sinful dependence on the outward badge of his presence, and
therefore they had less success when they had the Arc, then when they were
without it; God may deny the operations of his Spirit in his Ordinances,
because men do sinfully depend upon them, and not look to the God of the
Ordinances for the blessing of his Spirit. We must look to Ordinances as the
means, but to the Spirit of God as the Author of grace; the Ordinances cannot
without the Spirit do us good, and the Spirit without the Ordinances ordinarily
will not. Therefore we must neither refuse Ordinances, nor rest in them, lest
Gods Spirit depart.

3. God may withhold his Spirit from the Word, because men withhold preparation
from the Word they hear; With what measure you mete, it shall be measured to
you again, Mark. 4.24.
It is spoken of hearing of the Word; as you measure to God in an holy
endeavor to prepare for hearing, God by his Spirit will proportion to you a
blessing in hearing.

4. General unfruitfulnesse under fruitful Ordinances, that may be another
cause. When men sit under the droppings of Heaven, as it were, and are yet
barren, this may provoke God to do as he did with his Vineyard, to take away
the hedge, and let the beasts of the field destroy it, and that no rain fall on
it.

5. when men increase in sin, Isa. 5.3.
who attend on the Ministry of the Word; and thus it was with the old world,
who enjoyed the Ministry of Noah, Methusalah, and other holy men, and yet
their wickedness grew exceeding great, which did greatly provoke God, and
caused him to withdraw his Spirit that it should not any longer strive with
them.

SERMON. II. At Lawrence Jury, London. November. 3. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, etc.
HAving opened and explained these words, and showed how that it is a grievous
judgment for God to withhold or withdraw the workings and operations of his
Spirit from the Ministry of the Word, and likewise laid down the reasons
hereof; I come now to make the application thereof which shall carry a double
reference. 1. To those who find the strivings and workings of the Spirit in
the ministry of the Word. 2. To those who have the Spirit withheld from the
ministry which they attend upon.




as in John Baptists hearers, they rejoiced in him for a season; pangs of fear,
as in Felix; fits of sorrow, as in Esau and Ahab. Moral persuasions are very
like unto the Spirits workings; and that you may not take the one for the
other, I shall lay down these three distinctions.

1. Moral persuasions do reach but to the outward man, but the Spirits
operations to the inward man; they are such which reach the heart, and the
inward part; Thou desire truth (says David) in the inward parts; and in the
hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom. Psalm. 51.6.


2. Moral persuasions they do only restrain the acts of sin, but the Spirits
working debilitates the habits of sin; and herein is the force and power of
the Spirits workings seen, in that it changes the habit, and mortifies the
inclination to that which is evil.

3. Moral persuasions they only make a man forbear sin rather for fear of
punishment, then out of love to holiness, or hatred of sin with respect to
God; whereas the operations of the Spirit they are upon the heart, changing it,
and making it in love with holiness, causing us to hate sin more then fear
the punishment of it, viz. because of its contrariety to Gods goodness,
holiness and authority.

2 Cor. 3.3.
nor glory to your selves, but to God only. Ye are our Epistle written, (says
the Apostle) not with pen and ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; he
compares the people to paper, the Ministry to ink, the Minister to the pen,
but it must be the Spirit of God which must write with it, 2 Cor. 10.4.
through the working of the Spirit the Ministry becomes effectual. The
weapons of our warfare are mighty through God, to pull down strong holds; he
does not say, we are mighty, but the Gospel ^s mighty; not in it self, but it
is mighty through the operations of the Spirit of God. And so also the Apostle
(says he) I labored more abundantly then they ai, yet not I, but the grace of
God with me. 1 Cor. 15.10.
Ministers must say with Peter, Acts 3.12. Why look you so earnestly on us, as
if by our own power and holiness we had made this man walk? verse. 16. No, --
But the name of Jesus Christ has made this man strong. Ascribe not therefore
praise to the Minister, nor to your selves; you have not been your own
converters, you gave not your selves your first being in nature, much less
your being in grace; it is not you, but the grace of God. Thy pound (says that
servant in the Parable) has gained ten pounds, and thy pound has gained five
pounds; Luk 19.16,18
not my pains, but thy pound; So say you to God in all that good you have
received by Ordinances, thy Spirit has been the worker and effecter of it,
Psalm. 115.1.
and unto thee be given all the glory; Not unto us, but unto thy Name be the
glory.



1. More clearly, In the latter days the Spirit speaks expressly, and holy men
of God wrote, as they were directed by the Spirit of God; 1 Timothy 4.1. (...).
the nearer it was to Christ's coming in the flesh, the clearer were things of
the Covenant of grace known; and so the Evangelist Saint Luke writing to
Theophilus, says (Most excellent Theophilus) the things which we write, are
most surely believed among us; Luke 1.1.
things were hardly believed before, because they were darkly delivered; and
therefore you read, that in other ages the Ministry of Christ was not made
known to the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto us by his Spirit; Ephesians.
3.5.
it was a Mystery hid from the foundation of the world, that is, not totally
hid in comparison of the now revealing it, but there was not so clear a
discovery made thereof by the Spirit; and here I would have you to observe,
that under the Old Testament, the Spirit did reveal things gradually, now a
little and then a little: and did keep the full manifestation of the glory of
Christ until he came in the flesh; (...) Heb. 1.1.
-- As first in Adams time it was only known unto the world, that the Savior
of mankind should be born of a woman. And then in Abraham's time it was farther
revealed, that Christ which should save the world, should come out of Abraham's
loins; but then all this while, Genesis 12.3.
though it were known that he should be of the seed of a woman, and of the seed
of Abraham also; Yet thirdly, it was not revealed of what tribe he should be,
that was revealed in Jacobs time, viz. of that tribe of Judah; Genesis 49.10.
-- but yet in all this time it was not mentioned how he should be borne, and
therefore in Isaiahs time it was said, A Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth
a Son; but where he should be borne, Isa. 7.14.
that was not revealed until Micahs time; where it is said, Micah. 5.2.
But thou Bethlem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah;
yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel,
whose goings out have been from of old, from everlasting; nor the time, till
Daniel had it by revelation. Dan. 9.24.


Thus you see, and thus true it is what the Apostle tells you, that at sundry
times, and in diverse manners the Lord has revealed himself to the sons of
men; Heb. 1.1.
so that herein what cause have we to bless God that we are not borne in
ancient days, but in those wherein the Spirit of God does reveal plainly and
clearly the Mysteries of Religion.

2. As the Spirit in these days of the Gospel does make known things more
plainly and clearly: So also more efficaciously the Spirit operates with more
efficacy upon men's affections; and therefore in the days of John the Baptist
it is said, Matthew. 11.12.
that the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by
force; that is, the Spirit by its effectual working did make men more eager and
vehement for heaven then they were before under the Law. There shall be a more
glorious manifestation of the Spirit in its operations; and hence you read of
that promise in the Prophet Isaiah concerning the abundance of Gospel Grace,
that the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days. Isa. 30.26.
In Gospel Times there is a full revelation of the Spirit, and therefore you
read that when Ezekiel described the holy City in his Prophecy, and Saint John
the New Jerusalem in his Revelations; John describes his City far more large
then Ezekiel did his, to note (say Interpreters) that God reveals more by his
Spirit now then he did in former time.

Isaiah, and the Spirt observing him how he read, and could not understand,
bids Philip go near, and join himself to his Chariot, and expound to him what
he read; Acts 8.29.
the Spirit would not do it immediately himself, but bids Philip go.
Interpreters observe hence, what a dignity the Spirit of God puts on the
Ministry of the Word; that in those times when Visions and Revelations were in
use, yet God established the Ministry.

Another instance you have of Paul at his conversion, Act. 9.4. etc.
when he saw that Vision, and heard that voice, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? and crying out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Now Christ would
not tell Paul immediately, but says he, Go to Damascus, and thertehou shall
meet with Ananias, and he will tell thee what thou shall do. Thus Christ he
would not immediately himself teach Paul, but sends him to Ananias, that he
might set^ greater dignity upon the Gospel-Ministery. And therefore they that
will expect the Spirit, must attend upon the Ordinances; as those that would be
healed, must step into the Poole when the Angel moved.

Another example you have of Cornelius, when he saw the Angel, and was sore
afraid, and said, What is it Lord? The Lord he bids him send for Peter, and he
should show him what he ought to do. Thus does the Lord dignifie the Ministry
of the Gospel.

I mention this particular the rather, to show the vanity of Enthusiasme, that
would abolish the Ministry, and cry up the Spirits immediate teaching; but
here we see the great dignity which the Spirit sets on the Ministry of poor
weak and frail man, in that he will not teack men immediately, but sends them
to the Ministry of the Gospel.

To the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according, to the Word, it
is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8.20.
I mention this Position, to condemn those vain impulses of Spirit, which men
in our days pretend to; but let such remember, that to plead an impulse of
Spirit contrary to the Word of God, it is not from God, but an instigation from
the Devil. And yet many have forsaken the bright Lamp of Gods Word to follow
the ignis fatuus of their own fancy.

hardened and perverted; but you who have found the Spirit backing the Word in
the Ministry thereof, bless you God that has put such rich treasure in
earthen vessels; that what the Apostle said to the Corinthians is made good to
you, 1 Cor. 2.4,5.
Our Ministry (says he) came not to you with enticing words of man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; bless you God that has put
forth such a power in the Ministry of the Word for the good of your souls.
This is the first use to to those who have found the Ministry of the Word
accompanied with the efficacy of the Spirit.



1. That Gods Spirit is a free agent, and is not to be tied to an outward
Ministry, but to be left at liberty to work how, when, and in what manner he
pleases. The wind blows where it lists, even so is every man which is born
of the Spirit. John 3.8.
By the wind is meant the Spirit. There is a Sovereignty and free agency in the
Spirit of God to work when he pleases, or to withhold working from whom he
pleases; And therefore the Spirit of God is called a free Spirit, Psalm 51.12.
Uphold me with thy free Spirit; and James 1.18 Of his own will begat he us with
the word of truth.

2. Consider that God does not withhold his Spirit from the outward Ministry,
merely as an act of his Sovereignty, but as an act of his Justice, because of
your sins whereby you have provoked him. You provoke him to withhold the
efficacy of his Spirit from his Ordinances by your sins, and therefore are you
hardened, and receive not benefit by them; you do some of those injuries to the
Spirit, as quenching, grieving, resisting, vexing, tempting and despising the
Spirit (which I mentioned before;) therefore do not think hardly of God, but
judge your selves. Sin was the cause which made the Lord withdraw his Spirit,
that it should not strive with the men of the old world; it was their
disobedience, as you find the Apostle Peter speaking, Christ by his Spirit
went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometimes were disobedient,
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah; 1 Pet 3.19.20.
their disobedience made God withdraw the efficacy of his Spirit; if therefore
the Spirit do not work on you, think not hardly on God, but thank your selves,
he is provoked unto it. Thus God departed from the Israelites, because of their
sinful provocations, Psalm 81.11,12. -- But my people would not hearken to my
voice, and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up unto their own hearts
lusts, and they walked in their own ways. The Spirit in Scripture is compared
to a Dove; now a Dove will always keep in the house where it is bred, unless
the Dove-house be nastily kept. The Spirit of God in this may fitly be
resembled by a Dove; keep your hearts clean, and the Spirit will abide with
you; keep them nasty; and the Spirit will soon leave you; sin is the cause why
the Spirit withdraws it self from the Ordinances, and why men are left unto
themselves, and God does it as an act of his justice, punishing of sin.

3. If God do withhold his Spirit from the Ministry of the Word, the fault is
rather to be imputed to thy self, then unto the Word. Many like the woman in
Seneca, complain the room is dark, when they themselves are blind, and the
place wants no light, but they want eyes: Or to him that preaches the Word,
usually if men do not profit by the hearing of the word, the blame is cast upon
the Minister; and truly we Ministers have our faults as well as others, if we
preach not plainly, methodically, and duly there is a fault in us; but yet I
say, you are rather to blame your selves, then either the Word, or the Minister
thereof: If the seed grow not, the fault is neither in the hand of the
husbandman, nor in the influence of the heavens, but in the badnesse of the
soil. That you may know where the fault lies; consider

1. If a Minister preaches plainly and impartially, and yet thou gettest no
good by him, the fault is thy own, not his. It was the Herodians fault, not
Christ's, that those persons profited not by Christ's preaching, for they
themselves give this testimony of Christ, Matthew. 22.16. Master, we know that
thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth.

2. If other men get good by his Ministry, and not thou, the fault is thine,
not his; If at a feast others are fed, and thou famisht, the fault is in thy
stomach, not meat.

3. In case you have formerly got good by a Minister, but now you get none,
formerly your affections were stirred up, your desires were increased, your
love inflamed, but now no such effect, the fault is thine own; It was the fault
of the hearers of John Baptist, the fault was not in John's Doctrine, that they
rejoiced only for a season; this also was the fault of the Galatians that they
profited not by Paul's Ministry as before, Gal. 4.16. Gal. 4.16.
This comes not from the seed it self, but from the badnesse of the ground
into which it is cast. If thou profitest not by the Word thou hear, thou art
to blame thine own naughty heart, not the Word, or the dispenser thereof.

4. Though there is much dignity and excellency to be ascribed to the Word of
God nakedly considered, yet there is no efficacy in it to convert a soul
without the Spirits' concurrence; As it was in the Pool of Bethesda, not the
water, nor stepping into it healed, but the Angels moving therein, John 5.4. So
also, not the Word alone, nor hearing of it, 2 Cor. 3.6.
but the Spirit heals; The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life, (says
the Apostle) that is, the Word without the Spirit, it is only the Spirit which
can give life: The Spirit without the Word will not ordinarily convert, and the
Word without the Spirit cannot. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace;
Isa. 57.19.
by the fruit of the lips the Prophet understands a Gospel-Ministery, but says
God I must not create peace by the fruit of the lips. it is the working of the
Spirit with the Word, which makes the Word to become effectual; and therefore
the Gospel is called the Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8,9.

5. It is a worse judgment to have the Spirit withheld from the Word, then to
be without the Word; and the reason is this, because the Spirit can convert a
man without the Word, but the Word can never convert a man without the Spirit;
and therefore it is a worse judgment for thee to hear Sermons every day, and
to have the Spirits concurrent efficacy withheld from those Sermons, then if
thou should never learn a Sermon in all thy lifetime; therefore pray unto
God that his own Spirit may accompany his own Word and Ordinances to make them
effectual for the good of thy soul.

6. The Spirit of God may be for a time withheld from Gods own people, that it
shall not attend an outward Ministry, and this is a very sad judgment; it may
be withheld from Gods elect in a converting way. As the man lay 38. years at
the poole of Bethesda before he was healed; so an elect vessel of God may lie
twenty, thirty, or forty years in a state of unregeneracy before he is
converted. Nay, after conversion the Spirit of God may be withheld from the
Ministry of the Word, which Gods own people attend upon, and that in these two
ways.

1. In its Comforting work, and thus it was with David, Lord, says he, take
not thy holy Spirit from me; Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and
stablish me with thy free Spirit; Psalm. 51.11.12.
thus was the Spirit withdrawn from David in its comforting work. I do not tell
you the graces of Gods children can be taken away, but the comfort of their
graces, and of the Spirit of God may be taken away from them.

2. God may withhold his Spirit in its quickening work, thou may come to an
Ordinance with a hard heart, and it may not soften thee; though the presence of
God is never utterly taken away from a godly man, yet the influences and
quickenings of Gods Spirit may be withdrawn; the Spirit may be withdrawn in a
quickening way, so as in grace thou may decay, and in duty thou may grow
cold and dull, but yet the presence of God shall never be taken away from a
godly man. There is the same Sun in the firmament in winter as in summer, but
not the warm working and quickening influence.

7. And lastly, The Spirit of God may be given to men waiting on a public
Ministry in its common workings, and yet it may be withheld from them in its
saving and effectual operations; and thus it was with the Corinthians, many of
them had the Spirit to attend Paul's Ministry in the common workings of it, but
yet not in its saving effects, and therefore says Paul, Though you come
behind in no gifts, yet I must speak unto you as carnal; look to your selves
therefore, the Spirit in its common workings may attend the Ministry to fill
you with notions, yet it may be withheld in regard of its saving operations.

SERMON. III. At Lawrence Jury, London, November. 3. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, etc.
HAving showed that it is a grievous judgment to have the Spirit withheld from
the Ministry of the Word, and laid down several Cautions and Positions
concerning this judgment. I come now to answer an objection.





1. And first, we have cause to fear that in part the Spirit is withdrawn from
the Ministry of the Word amongst us, because there are fewer which are
converted by the Ministry of the Word now, then there were in former times;
now the Spirit ceases to back the Ministry of the Word with numerous numbers
of Converts, it is an argument that the Spirit is in part withdrawn. When the
Disciples did first preach the Gospel, how did Satan fall down like lightening
before the Word; there were three thousand converted in one day by Peter's
Sermon; and how may we preach three thousand times, and yet not convert one?
Acts 2.41.
Multitudes were brought in and converted in the morning of the Gospel,
according to that Gospel-promise, Psalm. 110.3.
From the womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth; that is,
multitudes of people should be converted upon the first preaching of the
Gospel, which should overspread the earth, even as the morning dew; but in the
age wherein God has cast us, the number of converts are greatly lessend, and
not only lessened to what they were in former time, but to what they have been
in our time; what numbers of the younger sort of people did come in upon the
preaching of the Word within these few years? but now how is the work of
conversion at a great stand? heretofore Ministers fished as with a net, many
were brought in; but now we fish as it were with an angle, now one comes in,
and then another; this may be one probable demonstration, that in part the
Spirit of God is withdrawn from the Ministry of the Word.

2. Another conjecture is this; when men that live under the Ministry of the
Word grow worse and worse, and not better; for men to remain many years under
the Ministry of the Word, and yet to be more blind and more blockish, and
more perversel, and more profane, this argues that certainly the Spirit of God
is withheld from such, and that their destruction is nigh; the ground which
has the rain often falling upon it, and yet is unfruitful, Heb. 6.7.8.
is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned (as the Apostle speaks.) The
Spirit being withheld, the rain of the Gospel is a curse to them, and the end
of such shall be burning.

3. You may fear the Spirit is withdrawn from the Ministry of the Word,
because there are more perverted by Error, then converted by the Truth; for
these last years especially, since erroneous men have had liberty and
countenance. What multitudes have been perverted and led away by the Errors
of ungodly men? this is an argument of a judicial hardness upon the Land. How
are we fallen into those times of which the Apostle Peter speaks, wherein shall
be false teachers, and such who shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, and
many shall follow their pernicious ways. 2 Pet. 2.1,2.
How many in these our days have been perverted, following the pernicious
ways of false teachers; which surely is an argument of the Spirits suspension
from the Ministry.

Mark 7.13.
that he taught the people with authority, and not as did the Scribes; and why
not as did the Scribes? you have the reason given by Christ in the Evangelist
Saint Mark; says he, You make the Word of God of none effect through your
traditions which ye have delivered. It was of no force upon the consciences of
their followers; their erroneous traditions made the Word of God of none
effect, even as those erroneous opinions in our days; how do they eclipse the
glory and splendour of the Word of God, and hinder the Spirits working? Is not
this the language of many. How shall we believe Ministers? if we go to one
Congregation, we shall hear one thing preached; if we go to another, 2 Cor.
4.2. (...). 2 Cor. 4.17. (...).
we shall hear the same thing contradicted. How does ^his stagger people, and
greatly hinder the working of the Spirit upon them? The Apostle Paul when he
tells you of the force of his Ministry, says he, we do not handle the Word of
God deceitfully; that is, we do not mix, nor adulterate the Word, as Vintners
do their wine; but says he, by manifestation of the truth commend our selves
to every man's conscience in the sight of God; the word in their mouths it was
truly and powerfully preached, it reached even the consciences of men.

Paul to the Thessalonians, says, Our Gospel came not unto you in word only,
but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know
what manner of men we were among you for your sakes; 1 These. 1.5.
as if he should say, you know our Office and Calling, and our manner of
living, you believe it, and therefore the Gospel comes to you, not in word but
in power, and in the holy Ghost. It is observable of John the Baptist, that the
reason why he wrought so much on the people, insomuch that all Judah, and the
Regions round about came out unto him; the reason was this, Matthew. 14.5.
because they did all hold John for a Prophet, the people did believe his
Office; They all held that the Baptism of John was of Heaven, and not of man;
and therefore for men to cry down the Office of the Ministry, Matt. 21.26,25.
and to deny it, this may render it ineffectual, and may provoke God to
withhold his Spirit from accompanying of it.

Word in their mouths for the good of people. Thus you see clearly from that of
the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 23.21.
where the Lord says, he sent not those Prophets, yet they ran, he spoke not
to them, yet they prophesied; but what good shall they do to the people to whom
they prophesied? you find in the 32. verse, Verse. 32.
therefore they shall not profit this people at all says the Lord; such shall
be the effect of their preaching who run upon the Office without a Call.

as sickness upon a man's body, the plague, famine, or such like, they concur
with the Word, and set the Word preached home upon the hearts of people; but
the sword it is a judgment which makes men savage and brutish one toward
another, Inter arma silent leges Dei hominumque.
whereas in other judgments, men will look at Gods hand in them: before these
wars how many Converts were brought in, since the sword came among us, how
has it made neighbut bour cruel to neighbor; that amiablenesse and
sweetness, for which the English Nation had a commendation? how is it now
turned into barbarousnesse? Thus I have done with the first particular, wherein
I have showed you this great spiritual judgment when the Spirit is withdrawn
from the public Ministry, and likewise the demonstrations and causes of such
a jugement.

I now come to the second part to show you the woefulness of that judgment,
when the Spirit is withheld from men in its inward motions upon the conscience
in their ordinary walkings; in the handling whereof I shall proceeed after this
method.

The Spirit of God may be withheld from men in its inward motions upon the
conscience two ways. 1. In regard of sin. 2. In regard of duty.


1. In regard of sin, the Spirit may be withheld two ways. 1. Before the
commission thereof, that it shall not check nor dissuade thee from it. 2. After
the commission of sin, that it shall not rebuke and convince for it.


1. I shall show you how it appears to be a misery to have the Spirit withheld
from you both before and after the commission of sin.

2. Why, or for what reason it is that the Spirit of God is withheld both these
ways.

3. How far a child of God may be thus left of the Spirit.

First, Now to make it appear that it is a grievous judgment to have the Spirit
withheld from a man before the commission of sin, it may be thus Demonstrated.

1. Because if the Spirit do not dissuade thee, thou will be ready and apt to
yield to any sin thou art tempted unto. Men under the temptations of sin,
without the contrary disswasions of Gods Spirit, are like a City whose walls
are broken down, and so are liable to every incursion of an enemy; Prove. 4.23.
the disswasions of the Spirit they are as fortresses to preserve the strong
hold of man's heart, they fence and keep the heart; when the Devil by his
temptations persuades to sin, the Spirit by his motions graciously disswades
from it, Oh do not break Gods Law, do not wound and hurt thine own conscience;
by these disswasions there is a curb laid upon the heart: but when these are
away, how venturous will a man be to do evil? It is said of Paul and Timothy,
that they assayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffere^ them not; Acts
6.7.
so may it be said of many a man in respect of sin, he has through the
corruption of his heart assayed to commit such and such a sin, but the Spirit
has not suffered him. As a godly man he cannot do all the good he would,
because of the flesh; so sometimes he shall not do all the evil he would,
because of the Spirit. When the wind blows with a fresh gale, the vessel may
sail against the stream, which otherwise was to be carried down against the
stream; so is it with the gales of the Spirit, they help a man to overcome the
stream both of temptation and corruption too; but when the Spirit is
withdrawn, then how venturous will a man be to commit sin?

If thou art left of the Spirit, thou will not only be apt and ready to yield
unto sinful temptations, but thou will suddenly and eagerly commit sin. We
read of that young man being seduced by the flattering and fair speech of a
Harlot, that straight way he followed her. Prove. 7.22.
When the temptation is once given, and the Spirit does not dissuade, how
suddenly will a man be surprised? As Gunpowder to fire; so is temptation to a
corrupt heart, if the disswasions of Gods Spirit do not fence and keep it.

But this is not all; a man will not only be apt to fall, and fall suddenly,
but here is a farther mischief, thou will commit a sin eagerly, thou will be
mad upon thy lust, thou will burn in the sin, thou will be poisoned with the
evil; and this the holy Ghost hints to us, speaking of the Gentiles who were
without the Spirit of God; says he, They were past feeling; that is, Ephesians.
4.19.
they had no motions of Gods Spirit, they were without the operations of the
quickening Spirit; but then what follows? says he, They have given themselves
over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greedines; (...).
that is, they sin, and think they can never sin enough. As a covetous man
that is greedy of gain, thinks he can never have enough; so these think they
shall never have their fill of their lusts. -- Observe a fivefold gradation in
this sin.

1. They were past feeling, now what follows this, it is not said they were
carried away inconsiderately to sin, but they gave themselves to sin; when
the Spirit is in a man, and it does dissuade him from sin, he is never
carried to it, but he goes in a hurry, he is carried with reluctance, but let
the Spirits motions once be withdrawn, and then he shall give himself to the
Devil.

2. When the Spirit is withdrawn, they not only give themselves, but they give
themselves over to lasciviousness; that is, they give themselves not
partially, but totally unto the ways of sin.

3. It is said they give themselves, and this was worse then Ahabs fact, 1
King. 21.25.
for he sold himself to work wickedness; now for a man to sell himself to the
Devil, it is a great evil; but when a man shall give himself, and give
himself over, this is a far greater wickedness.

4. Here was not only a giving themselves over to sin in thought, but the text
says, they gave themselves over to work uncleanness, they contented not
themselves with contemplative wickedness, but they were workers of iniquity,
such as made a trade of sin.

5. It is said they gave themselves over to all uncleanness, not only to some
sins, but to all sins, and that with greediness; which is to my purpose,
Whither will that man run whom the evil spirit drives? if the Spirit of God
does not come in with contrary motions to the Devils motions, with what a
vehement eagerness will a poor man damn his own soul, such a man will never
stay till he comes to Hell, if the Spirit of God do not stop him in his
careere, and say to him, this is the way, walk in it; but when the Spirit
withdrawes, every man turns to his course as the horse into the battle, Jer.
8.6. -- and how violently will a horse run into the battle that is not
restrained with bit and bridle -- Psalm 32.9. so is the man that has neither
checks of conscience, nor the disswasions of the Spirit.

Thirdly, A man being left of the Spirit of God when he is tempted unto sin,
will not only fall into it aptly, suddenly and eagerly, but also with
complacency, and this is worst of all; so we read of those that received not
the truth in the love of it, that they took pleasure in unrighteousness; 2
These. 2 12.
they not only acted sin, but acted it with delight.

Thus I have cleared the first particular, that it is a grievous judgment to
have the Spirit withheld before the commission of sin.



1. Because otherwise thou will never be convinced of the evil thou have done,
John 16.8.
it is the Spirit which convinces the world of sin; without the Spirits
conviction there is no conviction.

2. Thou can never repent of sin if the Spirit do not after its commission
rebuke and convince thee, for the Spirits conviction precedes repentance,
therefore says the Prophet, no man repents him of his wickedness, saying,
what have I done; Jer. 8.6.
a man must be convinced that what he has done is evil, before he repents of
that evil. We have a proverb amongst us, that what the eye sees not, the heart
grieves not for, so if the eye of the soul sees not sin, the heart will never
be troubled for sin.

3. Thou can never have thy nature sanctified from the filth of sin, unless
the Spirit work on thee after thy falling into sin; sanctification it is by the
Spirit of God: And therefore the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, speaking of
wicked and unregenerate men, says, 1 Cor. 6.11,
such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Ephesians.
2.22.
So believers they are said to be an habitation of God through the Spirit.
Whence you may observe the different works of the Trinity in the heart of a
believer. God the Father he chooses this house, God the Son he buys it, and
God the holy Ghost he cleanses and furnishes this house, else it would be a
nasty and dark dungeon; thou can never have thy Spirit to be a house for God
to dwell in, unless the Spirit of God sweeps thee with the bosom of
sanctifying grace.

4. Thou can never subdue the power of sin without the Spirit. Romans 8.13.
Therefore says the Apostle, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if
ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. It is
by the Spirit that we mortify sin; thus you see what a misery it is to want
the Spirit in its disswasions and convictions both before and after the
commission of sin.





1. Because in times past you have refused to hearken to the frequent motions
and persuasions of Gods Spirit; the Spirit of God has told you that if you
walk in such wicked ways, the end of them will be death; how often has it
suggested unto you, that if you go on in such and such courses, you will be
undone for ever? and yet you have gone on in sin, and would not hearken unto
the Spirit; thus God complains of his people by the Psalmist, Psalm. 81.11,12
My people would not hearken and my voice, and Israel would have none of me; so
I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own
counsels; as if he should say, they would not hearken unto me, and therefore my
Spirit shall dissuade them no more. I will leave them to themselves, and let
them take their own course.

2. Because it may be you have fastened, and fathered sinful affections that
arise from the flesh, upon the Spirits motions, and this is such an injury to
the Spirit that he will not bear, as when men shall say their wrath kindled
from hell, is the zeal of the Spirit coming down from Heaven; that their
erroneous opinions are the Spirits teachings, when he is the Spirit of truth;
and Satanical delusions, divine inspirations. And this is an indignity not
inferior, then if some subject should lay his bastard at his Princes gate; and
this some think is understood by the vexing of the Spirit mentioned by the
Prophet Isaiah; Isa. 63.10.
this may be another cause why the Lord may withhold his Spirit.

3. Because men do more easily listen to the suggestions of the evil Spirit,
then to the motions of the good Spirit; it makes your friend deny to come to
your house when you shall give entertainment to his enemy, when the Devil
shall come and easily prevail with you, when you shall either sin upon no
temptation, or upon a small temptation; this is a high provocation to Gods
Spirit, and this is a reason why there is so severe a judgment annexed to the
third Commandment; that God will not hold them guiltless that take his name in
vain, because there is less temptation to the sin of swearing then to any
other sin in the world. Other sins they are more consonant to flesh and
blood, but swearing of all sins, men have the least temptation to it; The
swearer serves the Devil gratis, and has neither profit nor pleasure by his
sin, and therefore God annexes so severe a punishment. When thou shall run
unto sin upon an easy t^mptation, and wilt not hearken to Gods Spirit upon
an earnest motion, this provokes the Lord to withhold the strivings of his
Spirit from thee.

4. Because in former time thou have plotted and deliberated how to commit
sin, therefore the Spirit will withdraw from thee for time to come. There are
many that do commit sin with deliberation, premeditation, and consultation;
and that man which commits a sin deliberately and contrivedly, he does
greatly provoke the Spirit of God. Pro. v 16.30.
It is said of a wicked man that he shuts his eyes to devise mischief;
shutting of the eye is a studying, plotting and deliberating posture. As it is
with a friend, if you shall give him a blow at peradventure, though he may be
angry at first, yet when he shall understand that it was against your will, he
will be quickly pacified, but if he sees that you plot and contrive his death,
this makes him that he will never come into your company more: Thus it is with
the Spirit of God, when he sees thee fall into sin inconsiderately and
unadvisedly, he will not withdraw from thee for this; but when the Spirit shall
see that we way-lay him, and do deliberate and contrive how to commit sin, this
provokes him, if not for ever, yet for a long departure. Such deliberate acts
of the soul they are more directly against God; 1 King. 15.5.
and to this purpose is observable what you read concerning David, that he did
that which was right in the eyes of the Lord all the days of his life, save
only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. Now why does not the text say rather,
that he was perfect, or did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, save
only in the matter of Bathsheba, for that was the foulest sin? There is this
reason given hereof, why the Spirit of God should say that he was a perfect
man, save only in the matter of Vriah, rather then in that of Bathsheba;
because his sin in the matter of Bathsheba, it was done rashly and
inconsiderately, he was suddenly surprised with a temptation; but the matter of
Vriah, 2 Samuel chapter 11.
it was done more deliberately, plottingly and contrivedly; for first, he sends
for him home from the wars, that so he might cloak his foul fact, then he
makes him drunk, and after he makes him carry the contrivance of his own death
in a letter to Joab; so that it was a sin so deliberately acted, that the
Spirit of God put a brand upon him for it; take heed therefore of deliberate
acts of sin. I censure none, every one of you must stand or fall to your own
Master; but this I say, that it is a sin which gives an especial provocation
to the Spirit of God. It is the saying of a Modern Divine, and a true one; That
a deliberate will to sin without the act, is more sinful then the act of
sin without a deliberate will; and thus in the case of Peter, that man does
worse who purposes to deny Christ, though he never does it, then Peter that did
actually deny Christ, and never intended it; therefore look to your purposes
and deliberations; if you sin deliberately, it is the next step to the sin
of those against whom the Prophet prays, Lord, be not merciful to those that
sin maliciously.

5. The Spirit of God will withdraw from a man when men prostitute the holy
Spirit to base lusts, as all hypocrites do who do talk of the Spirit only to
commit sin, and enjoy their lusts more securely. Thus Simon Magus he desired
the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, that he might seem some body, and
enrich himself; this was but (...), as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.5. a cloak
for his covetousness. Many grieve and provoke the Spirit to depart, when they
themselves do not serve God, but rather serve themselves on God.

SERMON. IV. At Lawrence Jury, London, November. 10. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, etc.
I Proceed now to answer another Quere, or case of Conscience very useful
which is this --



First, I shall show you how far the Spirit of God may be withheld before, --
and then secondly, after the commission of sin.

The Spirit of God in a fivefold, respect may be said to be withdrawn from a
godly man before the commission of sin.

1. That it shall not enlighten thee to make thee know it is a sin thou art
tempted unto; and thus we read of the Patriarchs that married diverse wives. The
Spirit of God in that dark age of the world, the Patriarchs was so withheld,
that it did not enlighten them, no not till their dying day, that we read of,
that Poligamy was a sin, and therefore they lived and died in it.

2. Though thou may be enlightened to know that it is a sin thou art
tempted unto, yet thou may be so left of the Spirit, that through the
impetuousnesse of thy lust, and the violence of the temp^tion, thou may be
carried to commit that sin; and thus we find plainin the case of David; David
he could not but know that Adultery was a sin, and yet being left of the Spirit
of God, the strength of his lust, and the violence of his temptation was such,
that he was carried to commit it.

3. A godly man may be so far left by the Spirit, that when he is tempted to
a sin, he may rather consult with flesh and blood then with the Spirit of
God, whether he should commit the sin, yea or no: And thus a godly man, when
life, liberty and estate lie at stake, does often consult his own safety rather
then inward peace; and this is very much, 2. Sam. 11.
and yet thus it was with David in the matter of Vriah.

4. Godly men may be so left, that they may contrive and deliberate how to
commit a sin before they commit it. Divines do usually give it as a
difference between godly and wicked men, that the one sins deliberately, the
other not; yet there are instances in Scripture that show that godly men may
contrive and deliberate how to commit a sin; now this as Divines show, is at
the threshold of hell, there is but a little between them and damnation; and
thus David, it is true, the sin of adultery, it was not so deliberate as the
murder of Vriah, for there David did contrive the means whereby he should be
killed, and the time when, with the manner how, and the instrument by whom, now
this was a very deliberate act of sin, yet thus far may agodly man be left,
therefore what cause have they to bless and magnify the free grace of God,
that come so near hell, and yet never come there; you may have your garments
smell of hellfire, yet you may never come into burning. Deliberate acts of
sin tend unto that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, which is of
malice, therefore take heed of such sins.

5. The Spirit of God may so leave thee though a godly man, that thou may
fall into those sins that are contrary to those graces, wherein thou art most
eminent; For a man that is chaste to keep from those sins which are not so
contrary to his native disposition, is not so much; but for a chaste man to be
so left of God, as to fall into adultery, and for a meek man to fall into
passion, this is a great evil. I shall lay down several instances hereof, of
godly men that have been thus left by the Spirit of God. -- Abraham, you find
him in Scripture recorded to be the father of the faithful; Romans 4.
what a large encomium does the Apostle make of Abraham's faith? and God did so
leave him, that he fell into unbelief and distrust of God, Genesis 12.11,12.
by denying his own wife, which was most contrary to that grace wherein he was
so eminent.

You find also of Noah, that in the Scripture he is commended for a very sober
man, and that when all the world were eating and drinking, marrying, and giving
in marriage, it was a very drunken excessive and luxurious age; and Noah he was
commended by God for his sobriety; Genesis 9.21.
but yet through drunkenness was the sin most contrary to that excellent
grace of sobriety he was so eminent in, yet was he overtaken therewith.

Likewise Lot, he is commended by the holy Ghost for disliking the filthy
conversation of the Sodomites, and it is strange that Lot himself should be
overtaken with the sin of uncleanness, and that he should fall into the
abominable sin of Incest; for so you find it related of him, Genesis 19.33,35.
he lay with his two daughters.

So also Moses, the Scripture tells you of him, that he was the meekest man
upon the earth. Number. 12.3.
Now of all sins you would least suspect that he should fall into passion;
but yet you find Moses his meekness, turned into passionatenesse, insomuch
that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. Number. 11.15.
and thus speaks unto God, If thou deal thus with me, kill me I pray thee out
of hand.

David, the book of Psalms tells you how eminent he was for patience, 2 Samuel
16.10.
how quietly he bore Gods afflicting hand; how patient was he when Shimei did
so curse and revile him? And yet meeting but with a churlish carriage from
Nabal, his Spirit was all in a rage, insomuch that he went with a purposed
revenge to kill Nabal and all his family. 1 Samuel 25.13.


Job, you know the Scripture tells of him, that he was the most eminently and
exemplarily patient, would you think that ever he should fall into impatiency?
why yes, he falls into that sin which was most contrary to that grace wherein
he was most eminent; how does he curse the day of his birth, Job. 3.3.
Let the day perish (says he) wherein I was borne, and the night in which it
was said, There is a man-child conceived? and so he prays earnestly for the
day of his death, Job. 6.8,9.
Oh (says he) that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for! even that it would please God to destroy me, that he
would let loose his hand and cut me off. Here you see the impatiency of Jobs
spirit; this I mention to you, to let you see what a poor thing man is if Gods
Spirit leave him, that he shall not only fall into those sins which are
pleasing unto nature, but into those sins which are most contrary to his
nature; thus you see how far the Spirit may leave a man before the commission
of sin.





Jonah, he sinned in not obeying Gods commandment of going to Nineveh, and when
God spared Nineveh, Jonah was very angry, and when God comes to reason with
him, asking him whether he did well to be angry, why yes, says he, I do well
to be angry, even unto death. Jonah 4.9.
Here was a good man in a pettish mood, and to Gods face would justify his own
passion. So Israel under the name of Ephraim, they would justify their own
wickedness. Ephraim is a Merchant (says the Prophet,) Hosea 12.7,8.
the balances of deceit are in his hand, he loves to oppress; But what said
Ephraim: yet (says he) I am become rich, I have found me out substance, in all
my labors they shall find no iniquity in me that were sin; and yet God
charges them with the balances of deceit.

David, he commits adultery with Bathsheba, and till the child was borne, and
Nathan the Prophet came to him, we never read that he was troubled for his
sin; the Spirit did not work remorse of conscience in him, which must be nine
months after the manner of women. Nay, we read of Joseph's brethren, that they
cast him into a pit, and sold him unto the Ishmaelites, and though they dealt
thus unnaturally with their brother, yet the Scripture tells us that it was
about one and twenty years before they were troubled for this sin; when they
were in prison in Egypt, then they said one to another, Verily we are guilty of
our brothers blood, and therefore is this evil come upon us. Genesis 42 21.


David, after he had fallen into adultery, he does not put his conscience on
work to repent of this sin, but puts his wits on work how to cover this
sin, and for that end sends for Vriah home to lie with his wife, to cover his
own sinful fact; and makes him drunk, and when he could not bring that to
pass, then he contrives his death, and makes him the messenger of death to
himself. So Peter a good man, and yet Peter committed many sins to excuse one
sin; nay, he committed many sins, sooner then he did repent of one sin,
when he denied Christ. First, he denies him; Then he denies him with an oath;
And thirdly, he denies him with a curse; whether he cursed Christ, or himself,
or both, it is not certain. Thus committed he many sins to excuse one. This
is a far degree, and yet thus far may a godly man go.

Genesis 12.13. Genesis 20.2.
We have many Scripture-instances hereof. Abraham, he fell twice into the sin
of lying, in denying his own wife; so Joseph, Genesis 42.15,16 1 Kings 11.9.
he fell twice into the sin of swearing. Solomon, he sinned against the Lord
after he had twice appeared to him. And so the children of Israel, Number. 14.22.
they fell into the sin of murmuring against God ten times together, one
after aanother. 1 Kings 22.49 2 Chronicles. 18.2
Thus Jehosaphat sinned in sinful compliance with wicked men twice, as may be
gathered. I do not mention this to boulster any man in a ventrous way of
sinning, but only for the ease of afflicted consciences; the Spirit may leave
thee thus far, both before and after the commission of sin.

Before I come to handle the witholdings of the Spirit in reference to that
which is good, I shall give you the use of the former points. If the Spirit of
God do leave you thus far, then I infer

Ephra^m. He is given to Idols, let him alone? Hosea 4.17.
why is it that Gods Spirit leaves thee? some affront or other thou have done
to the Spirit; either thou have quenched the Spirits motions, or grieved the
Spirit, or vexed the Spirit, or resisted the Spirit in its operations, and
therefore thou shall hear no more of the disswasions of the Spirit in thy heart.

should restore men fallen with the spirit of meekness, considering your
selves, lest you also be tempted. Gal. 6. i.
Tu hodie, Ego cras. Aug.
Do thou see another man sin? do not judge him; consider thy self, if the
Devil should tempt thee to a worse sin, and the Spirit withdraw from thee,
thou would sin worse then that man has sinned.

This is the Way, walk in it; and by this means you are renced from many
temptations, and freed from many evils. should a tempting Devil and thy
corrupt heart meet, and Gods Spirit but withdraw, into what evil would thou
run? Even such a man in such a case would rush on in evil, as the horse
rushes on into the battle, if the Spirit should not restrain him from sin.

Secondly, bless God for other men, that by the common restraining power of
the Spirit he lays a check and control upon the spirits of men; were it not
for this, there would be no living in the world; Homo hominis Lupus.
how would humane socies be destroyed? every man would be savage and cruel
each to other; we should kill and murder every man that angered us; deceive
every man that dealt with us; tell a lie to every man that speaks to us; we
should commit all sin. There is great wickedness done in this last and worst
age of the world, but there would be more evil done, did not the Spirit lay
curb^ and restraints upon men's consciences,

with you before the commission of sin, that it may the more strive with you by
convincing you after you have fallen into it. It may be you have sinned
ignorantly, aptly, eagerly or deliberately; the more the Spirit has bin
withheld from thee before the commission of sin, pray to have it strive the
more with thee afterward, and that in these three ways.

1. By working in thee a more clear conviction of sin, to show thee not sin
in the lump, but thy particular sin, clothed with all its heinous and
agravating circumstances; to convince thee savingly, that there may be (as it
were) some compensation made of the Spirits being before whithheld from thee.

2. In a more deep humiliation, the more the Spirit has been withheld from you
before the commission of sin, desire that the more the Spirit may cast thee
down after its commission. This was typed out under the Law; that man which did
but touch an unclean thing, was to be unclean till evening; but if a man had
carried an unclean thing about him, then he was to cast off all his clothes: So
if you have but touched a sin, you are to be humbled; but if you have fallen
into a sin which the Spirit has not convinced you of, then you are to labor
for a greater measure of conviction and humiliation afterward.

3. Learn that the Spirit may work in thee a more dear affection to Jesus
Christ. It is observed of Peter, the Spirit did more leave him to fall into
sin then he did all the other Apostles, except Judas; Now, when Christ comes
to ask Peter whether he loved himor not? says he, Simon Peter, do thou
love me more then these? He does not say only do thou love me, Peter, but
love thou me more then these? as if he should say, Peter, thou have sinned
against me more then all the other Apostles have, and therefore thou should
love me more then they. So Mary Magdalene, she was a great sinner, having seven
Devils cast out of her; but what is said of her? Luke 7.47.
Her sins which are many, are forgiven her, for she loved much; that is, the
less love she had to Jesus Christ before the commission of sin, the more she
had afterward, Many sins were forgiven her, and therefore she loved much;
therefore in that place must not be understood as if her love was a cause of
her being forgiven, but a demonstration and an evidence of it.

SERMON. V. At Lawrence Jury. London. November. 17. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, etc.
I Proceed now to handle to you the withholdings of the Spirit in reference to
good, that it shall not stir up holy motions in the heart unto duty. But
before I come particularly to speak of this, I shall lay down a fourfold
distinction about the Spirits motions to good.

1. There are exciting acts of the Spirit in stirring up holy affections in the
heart, in blowing up those coals of affection and grace within them; John
14.26.
and this is that which was promised by Christ, that the holy Ghost shall bring
all things to rememberance.

2. There is an assisting act of the Spirit; Romans 8.26. (...).
the Spirit in Scripture is said to help our infirmities. You read not only
of an intercession of the Spirit in a way of acceptance, but of an intercession
of the Spirit by way of assistance. As in a tree, though there be a seminal
virtue in the tree, yet without the helping influence of heaven it bears no
fruit: So the Spirit of God helps us to work, Col. 1.18.
Psalm. 12.13. and Ephesians. 1.19.

3. There is a corroborating act of the Spirit; not only bare assistance, but
strength and increase of grace by the Spirit of God to the souls of men; and
therefore you read of the supplies of the Spirit, Phil. 1.19. (...).
farther degrees and measures of the Spirit.

4. There is a comforting and a testifying act of the Spirit, when the Spirit
of God shall back the testimony of thy conscience, to evidence the sincerity of
thy heart; and thus you read of Paul, that his conscience did bear him
witness in the holy Ghost; the Spirit of God did witness with his spirit the
truth and sincerity of his heart. Romans 9.1. 2 Cor. 1.12.
-- Now though I might handle all these particulars, and show what a grievous
judgment it is to have the Spirit withheld in these regards: Yet I shall only
speak of the Spirit, and show what a sad judgment it is to have the Spirit
withheld in its exciting acts, that it shall not stir up holy motions in the
heart to good; in the handling of which I shall proceed after this method. 1.
Show you, wherein it appears to be a judgment to have the Spirit withheld in
regard of holy motions to good. 2. When the Spirit does vouchsafe such motions;
how you may know them, and difference them from those motions to good which the
Devil may stir a man up unto.


1. That man from whom the Spirit is withheld in its motions unto good, there
are these three miseries which will attend him.

1. There will be a vacuity or emptiness of holy thoughts in thy heart. The
Spirit of God is like unto the spring in the Clock, if that lie still, all lies
still; so if the Spirit of God lies still within thee, Phil. 2.13.
all thy affections which are the motions of thy soul, they cannot stir. It
is God which works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. If the
Spirit of God be withheld, there cannot be so much as a will in thee to that
which is truly good. Man's heart it is like that house in the Parable, Matthew.
12.44.
(when the Spirit is withheld from him) when the Devil came to possess it, it
is said that he found it empty, swept and garnished; empty, that is, void of
any holy thoughts, and gracious motions; and garnished, that is, not with the
graces of Gods Spirit, but with the Devils furniture; and if you will see what
that furniture is, read Matthew. 15.19,20. There will be an emptiness in thy
heart of good motions, when God withdrawes his Spirit.

2. Thy heart will he filled and pestered with evil motions from the Devil.
Man's heart it cannot lie long idle or empty; if it be not filled with the
Spirits motions, it will be by the Devils instigations. The heart if it be not
Christ's garden, it will be the Devils Seminary; if not Christ's storehouse, it
will be the Devils workhouse; if it be not the Temple of the holy Ghost, it
will be the Devils Chapel. Now this is that which makes the misery the greater
when evil motions do pester and fill the heart; the Sripture expresses it by
the Devils filling of the heart. If the gales of the holy Spirit do not fill
the sails of thy heart to set thee forward to heaven, then the instigation and
provocations of Satan will help to drive thee forward to hell; Ephesians. 5.18. 1
John 4.13.
and it is worth your noting, as the Scripture speaks of the indwelling of the
Spirit, that is, by its motions in the hearts of the godly; as we say the Sun
is in the house, when only the beams thereof are there: So when evil motions
shall fill our hearts, the Scripture expresses this by the Devils being there;
thus the Apostle to Ananians, Why has Satan filled thy heart? Acts 5.3.
it is not to be understood of a bodily possession, but the meaning is that the
Devil put that covetous motion into his heart; the Devil was in that motion
which was in his heart; and therefore men are to look upon evil motions, as
having the Devil in them. When Judas had a motion to betray Christ, it is said,
Luke 22.3.
Then entered Satan into him; the Devil entered with that motion, for
immediately he went out and communed with the high Priests, and came to an
agreement with them about the betraying of Christ, and they must needs go whom
the Devil drives, as we say in the Proverb. What a misery then is this? when
the Spirit of God is withheld in its gracious motions, then will the Devil
possess thy heart by evil motions.

3. If the Spirit withdraw in its exciting acts, it will also be withheld in
its assisting acts, this is a farther misery; if it never move you to act
grace, it will never assist you therein. It is true, that sometimes there may
be motions to good in the heart which may not be backed with assistance. The
resolutions that many take to become reformed, are the common workings of the
Spirit, which many times are never brought into act by any farther assistance
of the Spirit; as sometimes convictions are without conversion. But this is
certain, that where the Spirit moves not to good, it will not assist in the
doing thereof; water can rise no higher then the spring from whence it flows;
if thy motions are natural, there will be no more assistance then what comes
from nature.

Now we may know the misery of the Spirits withdrawing his exciting and
assisting power by the particulars following, viz. 1. Upon this withdrawing the
soul is not so voluntarily put upon doing good, nor does it set upon holy
duties with so much liking delight and complacency, but rather does them in a
compulsory way, and we come to them as a Bear to the stake, or as a child sent
to school.

2. Nor with so much frequency; once seven times a day with David, or three
times a day with Daniel; now not seven times in a month, nor thrice aweek.

3. Nor with so much fervency, nor with such warm working affections, as
formerly; but men are lazy, lukewarm, listlesse, and livelesse in all holy
exercises.

4. Nor is there such consistency of holy motions, but they are gliding,
transient and fleeting; not fixed, and abiding upon the heart.

But how may a man know the difference between the Spirits exciting to good,
and the Devils motions in the heart to do good? -- This is a practical and
useful case, because it is possible, yea common, that the Devil will move men
to do good; the Devil in this case does sometimes appear as an Angel of light;
therefore to answer the Question, I shall lay down several particulars.

Saul when the Philistims were coming down against him, and says he; I have
not made supplication to the Lord, I forced my self therefore, and offered a
burnt-offering. 1 Samuel 13.12,13.
The matter of the thing he did was good, to offer a sacrifice, and make
supplication; but it was not Saul's office and place to do so, and therefore
though the matter was good, yet the motion thereunto came from the devil; and
hereupon you find how much the Lord was disp^eased with him for the doing of
it, and Samuel reproved him for it, ver. 13. and said, Thou have done
foolishly, and have not kept the Commandment of the Lord. So you read of
Vzziah, he would not intermit the worship of God, and therefore he himself
would burn incense; 2 Chronicles. 26.18
but for his fact you find that he was smitten with a Leprosy. To offer
sacrifice, it was a good thing, but it was not good in Vzziah who had no call
so to do. And as it is thus in Divine, so also in Political affairs; as for a
private man to do the work of a Magistrate; it being out of his place and
calling, it is from the devil, not from God. Absalom undertakes to show justice
to the people, but what this? he was but an usurper of the royal office; and as
he had no right to the regal power, neither had he any call to administer
pulick justice. For private men upon a pretense of being gifted, to take upon
them the public Ministry, it cannot be from the Spirit of God; for the Spirit
keeps men within their bounds: therefore says the Apostle, Let every man
wherein he is called, abide therein with God. 1 Cor. 7.20,24.
The Spirit it puts men upon the doing of good in their place and calling, but
the devil does not. As fire in the Chimney, it is good, and is put there by
your sevants; but fire put in the roof or rafters of your house, that is done
by an enemy. Motions to good in your place and calling, they come from the
Spirit of God, but motions to good out of your calling are suggested by the
devil.

2. The devil he may move you to good, but then it may be it is, that he may
hinder you in the doing of a greater good. It is very observable, when our
Savior began to show his Disciples, Mat. 16.21,22,23.
how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, the
chief Priests, and the Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third
day: That Peter took him and began to rebuke him saying, Be it far from thee
Lord, this shall not be unto thee. Now this came from the devil, that he might
hinder the work of man's salvation; and therefore says Christ, Get thee behind
me, Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that
be of God, but those that be of men. There is much of Gods mind in these
words. Indeed the Papists who pretend a fu cession from Peter, they would
excuse Peter in this motion, and would make it a divine motion: But Protestants
do generally concur in this, that Peter's motion was naturally good, he showed
in it a natural love to Christ, but yet the devil was in it too, and therefore
Christ calls him Satan, Get thee behind me, Satan; and then, Thou art an
offense to me in that thou should make such a motion, to hinder me from
going on to work out and accomplish the salvation of my people; and then it
could not be from the Spirit; for, says he, Thou savourest not the things that
be of God, but those that are of man. At the first view you would deem this a
very loving motion, but the devil had a finger in it, he will move you to do
good, so it may hinder you in the performance of a greater good. But the Spirit
of God will so move you to the doing of one good thing, that it shall not
justle out the performance of another.

3. The devil when he moves men to do good, it is to make them do it
unseasonably, on p^rpose that one duty may justle out another; as suppose thou
would pray, and happily the devil he cannot distract thee by sinful
thoughts, yet he will labor to do it by good thoughts unseasonably remembered,
as if thou art praying to have thy thoughts then taken up with what Sermons
thou have heard, and of what parts of the Bible thou have read, this though in
it self it is good, yet it comes from the devil; and therefore those that now
come to our assemblies, and will presently fall upon private prayer in the time
of public worship, though the duty in it self is good, yet it is unseasonably
done and comes not from the holy Spirit, the God of order. There are several
instances hereof. That man which came to Christ and desired him to divide the
inheritance between him and his brother; Luke 12.13.
the motion though it was good, yet it was unseasonably made, because it was
when Christ was preaching; and therefore though good, yet it came from the
devil that he might hinder a greater good. And thus those people, When will the
new Moon be over, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set
forth wheat? Amos 8.5.
It was no evil thing to sell wheat, but the motion was unseasonable, because
it was upon the Sabbath day. Good motions in season they are a blessing, Deuteronomy.
28.12.
even as rain in a dry season is a comfort; but rain in harvest is not so.
Good motions coming into a man's mind unseasonably, as when a man is praying,
then to think of what he has heard in a Sermon; and when a man is hearing,
then to think of praying, these come from the evil, not the good Spirit; as a
Printer though his paper be good, and his letter fair, yet if he misplace his
letter, and put one letter for another he will make nonsense: Even so are good
thoughts out of season.

4. When a man is moved so to do good, that the performance of it is a
prejudice to bodily health; this comes not from Gods holy Spirit, but from the
evil spirit. And herein young converts are very injudicious, at first they have
strong affections, and they think they must read so many Chapters, pray so many
hours, and hear so many Sermons, otherwise their consciences check them, and
they think that all this comes from God, whereas rather they are put upon it by
the impulses of their own spirit. If thou art strongly moved to a duty, and so
moved to it that either the continuance or frequency in it does impair the
strength of nature, this is not commanded by God; for God had rather have mercy
then sacrifice in such a case, God is not rigorous and cruel in commanding of
duty. The Jews learnt of God to sacrifice; their beasts but they learnt of the
devil to sacrifice their children. God requires not that you should fast so
often, and do duty so long, as to weaken health and strength; he has made no
duty for the soul to be prejudicial to the body. God will have mercy, and not
sacrifice. Hosea 6.6. God deals with young converts as Jacob did with the
children and flocks, he will not out-drive them. Indeed it is the devils
Religion to put men upon such services as are cruel to their own bodies, and
thus the worshippers of Baal they cut themselves, till the blood gushed out
upon them; 1 Kin. 18.28.
they were cruel to their own bodies, whereas the Lord never commanded any such
thing at their hands. -- I mention not this, that it may be a plea for any one
to pamper their bodies, or that they should be negligent in the service of God;
but for the sake of young converts, who think they can never do enough in duty,
who do more then ever God required at their hands.

5. Motions from the devil to good, they are usually when they may hinder, and
cause a man to neglect his outward and necessary calling; this young converts
are greatly faulty in; their endeavors are such, and their prosecutions so
earnest to live holily, that they live idly. God did never so order Religion
that it should be a disadvantage to our particular callings in the world. He is
a good Christian that knows how to pray, and hear, and how to labor in his
calling too. I know that secular affairs and employments, they rob the soul
of much time in that duty it ows to God. I plead not at all for this, but this
is that which I would press: I would neither have your particular callings rob
time from your general callings and duties as Christians, nor your general
callings rob time from your particular callings as men, who are to live here in
the world. This was a corruption grown upon the first plantation of the Church;
the Apostle tells you of some, who walked disorderly, and did not work at all.
2 These. 3.11.
Some imagine that under this pretense they would not follow a calling, because
they would wholly devote themselves to the service of God; of these the Apostle
speaks, and such are they who lead a Monasterial life, under a pretense to be
more at leisure to serve God, when indeed they but put their candle under a
bushel, and hide their talent in a napkin. This comes from the Devil, and not
from God; for God never ordained that his service should make you negligent in
your outward callings; but has commanded that with quietness you work, and eat
your own bread. 2 These. 3.12. 1 Timothy 5.8.
I speak not this to make men worldly, and that they should glut themselves
with worldly business. It is the fault of many, that they grasp too much
worldly business, and are to their souls worse then Egyptian taskmasters; but
let not men rob time from God, and give it to the world; but I speak this for
the sake of young converts, who will be every day fasting, and every day
hearing, and in the mean time neglect their outward and necessary callings in
the world.

6. Motions to good come from the Devil, in case our motions of duty to God
make us neglect our duty to man. A notable text you have for this out of the
Evangelist Matthew; the Scribes and Pharisees had taught this Doctrine, that if
any man had been free and liberal in giving toward pious uses, he should be
free from those duties which he owed to his father and mother, therefore say
they, Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, It is (...) gift, by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and honor not his father or his
mother, he shall be free. Mat. 15.5,6.
This the Scripture condemns for hypocrisy, when men out of a pretense of
duty to God, shall neglect their duty to men, and therefore it comes from the
Devil. The Spirit of God when it moves men to duty, it moves them with an equal
motion, as well duties to man, Mich. 6.7.
as duties to God, duties of the second, as well as of the first table; unto
duties of charity and equity, as well as of pity toward God, if a man be never
so pious toward God, and yet is neglective of his duty to man, this man is not
led by the Spirit of God, for that leads a man to one duty as well as the
other. A boat that is made only by one oar on one side, will not go right, no
more will a man go right to Heaven that is partial in his obedience.

7. When the Devil moves you to do good, he so moves you to be eager in the
doing of it, Gal. 5.4. compared with Verse 8.
that you may depend on the good you do. To this purpose says the Apostle
Paul, Whosoever of you are justified by works, ye are fallen from grace;
whosoever shall depend upon the works he does for justification, is not led
thereunto by the Spirit of God; and therefore it follows (says he) This
persuasion comes not of him that calls you, it comes not from God; for the
Spirit of God it quells and keeps down the thought of merit. In former times
(though I could not contemn works of mercy, but wish there were more of them
in this iron age of the world, when most men are guilty of hard-hearted
uncharitableness.) What was the reason that men Popishly affected have left
such monuments of their liberality behind them, doing many notable works of
mercy. but only hope of merit by them? a work of mercy it is good in it self,
but to be moved to it upon a hope of merit, this comes from the Devil, not from
God.

8. When the Devil shall put thee upon the doing of good at that time, which is
not thy own time. As suppose the life of any near in relation unto the is in
danger, and thou out of love to the Word of God, wilt go and hear it, and
neglect thy sick friend; in this case the Lord would have thee rather show
mercy then sacrifice; every thing is most beautiful in its season. Again, for
servants when they are about their Masters business, when the welfare of thy
Master lies upon thy diligence, and thou shall then have a motion to pray, or a
motion to hear, and so fall upon the exercise of Religious duties, so as to
neglect thy Masters business; this is a sin, and comes from the Devil. And the
reason is this, because God looks upon servants, their persons and their time,
as none of their own, and thou shall at such time please God more in the doing
of thy Masters business then if thou were on thyknees at thy prayers. -- Now I
do not mention this to make men severe toward their servants, as to allow them
more time for God and their souls; nor to quench any good motions which shall
be in them to good, as many wretched and worldly Masters do to their godly
servants; but this is that I could advise them, that they should not take time
for holy duties from their necessary business, whereby their Masters may be
prejudiced, but rather from their sleep, and those vacant hours which are
allowed them.

9. when you shall be moved to do a good thing which is above your growth, ann
too high, and too hard for you, this motion comes not from the Spirit of God.
When women and young men, whose educations do not require it, shall dive into
questions, and dark controversies in Religion, God requires not this at their
hands, but rather that they should study and follow plain sundamental points.
Christ he would not put his young disciples upon duties above their strength
and growth, Mat. 9.16,17
and young and weak Christians they should not put themselves upon the doing of
those things which are too hard for them, and which God never commanded them;
you have an excellent rule for this in Psalm. 131.1. Lord, my heart is not
hau^hty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters,
nor in things that are too high for me.

10. The Devil will put men upon the doing of that which is good, that so he
may the sooner tire and weary them out in the ways of Religion; and this is a
great policy of the Devil, and hereupon the Devil will make a young convert at
first conversion pray more in one day then in a month of after-time; and
though there is much of God in these young affections, yet there is much sin
mingled with them too. -- The devil has a twofold end to make young converts
do good. -- First, either to make them the sooner weary of Religion; or else
secondly, to make wicked men think the more hardly of Religion. -- I do not
mention this to quench and stifle good motions in any, I know where there is
one man over-does, there are ten thousand which do too little. But we must take
heed lest like the Church of Corinth, we be not too severe; for as they by too
much austerity had like to have swallowed up the penitent excommunicate person
with too much grief: so the rigorous and overmuch strictness will discourage
them from the ways of Christ.

11. Motions to good come from the Devil, in case thou art moved to those
things which are subservien and introductory to duty rather then to the duties
of Religion themselves. This is a great subtilty of the Devil, if he can keep
men in the porch, they shall never come into the Temple. As consideration it is
apreparatory duty to prayer, meditation to hearing, and examination to the duty
of receiving the Lords Supper; now if the Devil can keep thee so long in these
preparitory duties, that thou can take no time for the maine duties
themselves, herein the Devil has his end. Christians are oftentimes very
inconsiderate in this case; others there are who by the subtilty of the Devil
in their preparations, rob themselves of much time which they ought to employ
in the maine duties themselves; but the Spirit of God does so gird up the loins
of our mind, 1 Per. 1.13.
that it makes us succinct in the dispatch of his duties.

12. Motions to good come from the Devil, in case thou art moved to it, that so
it may be a cloak to thee to do wickedly with the less suspicion, and with the
more boldness. Thus it was with Absalom, it was a good thing in him that he
would do justice to all the people, and when they came for justice to his
father, he would speak friendly to them and kiss them; 2 Samuel 15.3,4.
but all this was merely in a pretense, that so they might not entertain the
suspicion of his usurping his fathers Kingdom. And so also the Scribes and
Pharisees, they devoured widows houses, and for a pretense made long prayers.
Mat. 23.14.
It was good to make long prayers, but to do it for so wicked an end was most
abominable. So that if a man's motions to good be for this end, that he may sin
with more freedom and less suspicion, they come from the Devil, not from God.
The Devil cares not how good you seem, so you may but be really evil and sinful.

Balaam, O that I might die the death of the righteous, and yet he was one who
loved the wages of unrighteousness. 2 Pet. 2.15.
Though I would not discourage good motions; yet I say, such you may have, and
they may come rather from the Devil then the Spirit of God; therefore survey
your ways and your motions to good, and see whether they come from the
strivings of the Spirit of God in you, or from the excitations of the evil
Spirit which is against you.

SERMON. VI. At Lawrence Jury, London, November. 24. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, etc.


I shall say down four reasons as the cause of this judgment.

Res delicatula est Spiritus Dei, and it a nos tractat sicut tractatur.
Tertullian. Psalm. 81.11,12
The Spirit of God is a delicate thing, it must not be injured, no^ abused, if
it be, it will deal with us as we deal with him. Your act is a sinful act, and
Gods act is in a way of justice; Because Israel would not hear, therefore God
gave them up to their hearts lusts. Thus it was with the Spouse in the
Cantieles; Cant. 5.2,3,6.
Christ he came knocking at the door, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love,
my dove, my undefiled; for my head is filled with dew, and my looks with the
drops of the nigh. But, says she, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it
on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Thus she puts off Christ,
and hereupon Christ withdrawes himself, and then she seeks him in bitterness,
but cannot find him. I opened (says she) to my beloved, but he had withdrawn
himself, and was gone; my soul failed when he spoke; I sought him, but I could
not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer. Because we refuse
Christ, and quench the motions of his blessed Spirit, therefore he in an act of
his justice departs from us.

There are three sorts of spiritual desertions. 1. Cautional, for preventing of
sin; so was Paul buffeted by Satan, lest he should be exalted above measure. 2
Cor. 12.7.
2. Probational, for trial and exercise of grace; and thus it was with holy
Job. 3. Penal and castigatory, for chastisement of spiritual sloth; and so in
the example of the Spouse before mentioned.


2. Because men are more ready to entertain evil motions to sin, then the
Spirits motions to good. This is another reason. When a friend shall see that
an old acquaintance will rather hearken to the solicitations of an enemy then
himself, this will provoke him to break off intimacy with him; thus the Spirit
of God which has been thy old friend, and thy best friend, when he shall see
thee hearken to the suggestions of the evil spirit, rather then to his motions,
this provokes him to a departure. I may accommodate the History of Rehoboam to
this purpose. -- When the grave and sage Ancients of the children of Israel saw
that that inconsiderate King had forsaken their advice, and did adhere to the
raw and rash advice of a company of greenheaded young men; they left him, and
ten parts of twelve fell from him: even so does the holy Spirit leave them that
do slight his motions and saving counsels.

3. Because men have abused the motions and workings of the Spirit to base and
sinful ends; as for popular applause, vain glory, secret advantage, for a
cloak to hide some secret lust; when the Spirit of God in its workings is made
so ill an use of, as to be made an excuse for a man's lusts, this provokes the
Spirit of God to leave a man to prostitute spiritual gifts to base employments!
What is this but for a man to light his Lantern at the Lamp of the Sanctuary,
that he may see to steal by it? And this was the sin of Simon Magus, Acts 8.19.
he would feign with money have bought the gift of the Spirit, that so he might
have prostituted it to an ill use. This is a high provocation to the Spirit of
God.

4. Because men have fathered, and fastened those sinful affections, which
proceed from the flesh, upon the Spirit; when men shall account their own wrath
kindled from hell, to be the zeal of the Spirit coming from heaven; Satan's
delusions the Spirits motions; licentious living, a Christians Spiritual
liberty; erroneous opinions, the Spirits teaching; when men shall entitle a
presumptuous peace the Spirits testimony, this is as if an adulterous beggar
should lay his brat at the Kings door, this is such a high provocation that the
Spirit of God cannot but withdraw from such.

I now come to lay down the Symptom's or signs of the Spirits withdrawings;
and when I mention a withdrawing of the Spirit, I do not mean a total, but a
gradual withdrawing; and there are ten symptoms I shall lay down, any of
which if you sinde, you may be able to pass a righteous sentence upon your
selves.

1. If the Spirit be withdrawn, thou set not upon the doing of good so
voluntarily as thou have done in former time. Thy soul in former time did run
swiftly and freely in away of goodness, but now the wheels of the chariot of thy
soul are taken oaff, nd thou drivest on heavily; it is not the Chariot of
Amminadab. Cant. 6.12.
It is a description of Gods people in Gospel Times that they shall be a
willing people, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm.
110.3. (...) Pepulus devotionum sive devotus, populus spontaneitatum sive
spontan^us.
a people of willingnesses, as it is in the original; but a man from whom the
Spirit of God is withdrawn, he is carried to do good, not so much out of
content, as by a compulsory act: he comes to duty as a Bear to the stake, or a
child goes to school, which does nothing but what is commanded, with much
regreet, and much backwardness, with little willingness; he is rather drawn
then led to duty, Nilnisi jussus agit. Ovid.
constrained to do good out of a dreadful awe of hell, and some hope of heaven,
or to still the clamouring of a craving natural conscience; when the Spirit is
with drawn thou come not to duty so willingly as in former time.

2. Neither so preparedly as thon wast wont to do. In former time you could do
as Abraham did, leave his cattle and his servants in the valley, Genesis 22.5.
shake off clogges which might hinder and divert you; when you prayed, you
would use consideration; when you heard, preparation; and when you received the
Sacrament, examination: but now the Spirit of God being withdrawn, thou layest
aside those preparitory duties, which are so helpful to us in those duties
wherein we have communion with God. The soul was wont to trim her self as a
bride when she went into the King to enjoy communion with the great God, but
now is grown careless in this preparation, it is a sign the Spirit is
withdrawn.

3. Thou have not so much complacency of heart in holy duties as formerly.
Those duties which heretofore have been done as a delight, are now as a task;
formerly they were as sweet as honey to thy taste, but now thou find no more
relish in them then in the white of an egg; time was when thou could say
with the Psalmist, I was glad when they said, Come and let us go up unto the
house of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1.
and thy esteem of the worship of God such, that thou could say with David,
That one day in the house of the Lord was better then a thousand elsewhere:
Psalm. 84.10.
But alas, where is this delight now? now duty is as a burden, not as a
preasure.

4. It is an argument of a gradual withdrawing of the Spirit, This grieves the
Spirit when we stifle and quench its most holy motions unto holy duties.
when thou do not do duty so frequently as formerly. Heretofore thou could
pray seven times a day with David, or three times a day with Daniel; but now
not three times a week: how are the frequency of thy ^uties abated? to such I
would say, Consider 1. Thou have not fewer enemies now then formerly, and
therefore why should thou be less in duty? the watchfulness of the enemy
is an taged by our sloth and security. 2. Neither have you less temptations
then you had, and therefore why should you not be frequent in prayer to be
delivered out of them? Watch and pray, that you fall not into temptation, said
our Savior, Mat. 26.41. 3. Neither fewer sins then formerly, it may be more;
and therefore why should thou be less in prayer for pardon. He that does
often offend, he had need often to ask forgiveness. 4. You have not less need
of grace then formerly, it may be more; and therefore why art thon less in
duty to God for supply of grace? If thou art less frequent in holy duties then
formerly, it is an argument that the Spirit is gradually withdrawn from thee.


5. If thou have not that fervency in holy duties as formerly, it is a shrewd
sign that thou art very much decayed in grace. Revel. 2.4.
This is made a note of the decay of the Church of Ephesus, Nevertheless I
have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love. He does not
say, thou have lost, but thou have left thy first love; grace may be left, but
not lost: that first affection which thou had in the ways of God, thou have
left that, thou art decayed in these affections. Hierom chides the slothful in
prayer, What, said he, do you think that Jonas prayed so in the sea, or Daniel
amongst the lions, or the Thief on the Cross, as you do? Siccine put as Jonam
in profundo, Danielem inter leones, siccine latronem in cruce or ass putas?
Hieron.
Many men they are so left of the Spirit, that they are come into that state
which Austine complains of in his time: Plurimi novitate conversionis
ferventer orant, posted srigide, postea languide, postea negligenter. Aug.
Many men at the beginning of their conversion they will pray feelingly, bu^ in
tract of time they will pray coldly, negligently, and languidly; they lose
those affection^ which once they had. They had need stir up the fire that lies
hid in the ashes. Ferventior esse solet qui rem primum aggreditur. 2 Timothy 1.16.
(...).


6. It is an argument of the Spirits withdrawing, when a man performs duty
less composedly then formerly. Distractions break in, and wandering thoughts go
out; holy motions they are declining and transient, when they have not such a
fixed abiding on the heart as formerly; this is a sign of a gradual departure
of the Spirit. For where the Spirit of God is, there it does establish and fix
the heart in holy duties, and therefore David prays, Establish me by thy free
Spirit; but when there is much unconstancy, and inconsistency in the heart, it
is a sign that the Spirit in part, departed from that soul.

7. If thou art under the use of duty not so fruitful as in former time. Duties
formerly took an impression on thy heart, as a signet on soft wax; but now they
make no more impression then a seal upon a marble; formerly the ordinances came
upon thy soul as rain upon the valleys, now they are as water poured out upon
a wrock. Many men they lie under ordinances without profit, and like unto the
Cypress-tree, of which it is said, that it is a tree that is very good for sent
and for sight, but yet unfruitful. Many Christians are like unto this tree,
they grow in Gods garden, and they are good in the sight of others; but yet
they bring not forth fruit. If thou art not a fruitful tree in the garden of
grace, it is an argument, that the Spirit of grace is withheld from thee.

8. It is an argument of a gradual departure of the Spirit, when thou
continuest in the use of duty, not so spiritual as in former time. This appears
in two regards. 1. When there is less grace exercised. 2. When there are more
sins committed in the performance of duty.


1. When there is less grace exercised in duty; as if there be less
affection, less zeal, less delight, less love, less joy, and less heavenly
mindedness then there was found in thee in years past, it is an argument of a
gradual departure of the Spirit.

2. If thou committest more sins in the doing of duty; as if there be more
spiritual pride, more carnal dependence, more selfe-ends, more wandering
thoughts, more irreverence of God, more hardness of heart, and weariness of
spirit in holy exercises, this shows the abundance of sin in thee, and is an
argument of the Spirits withdrawing. I appeal to your own consciences, judge
your selves, whether some, or all of these symptoms may not be found in you,
and whether this in particular that thou do duty less spiritually then
formerly? thou have more sins, and less grace exercised in it. I may
illustrate this by a Simile. You never see a crow pitch upon a living man, but
if the man be dead, and lie in a ditch, then how will every bird of prey fasten
on him? You never see worms creep upon a living man, but let him be once dead,
and his soul once departed, how soon will worms and vermin devour his
carcass? I only accomodate this Simile to this end: That what the soul is to
the body, that is the Spirit of God to the soul; while the soul is with the
body, a crow, or a bird of prey will not fasten on it; whilst the Spirit of
God quickens thee, vermine-lusts will not seize upon thee; but if once the
Spirit of God which is the life of thy soul be withdrawn, then what swarms of
vermine-lusts will fasten on thy heart in all the dnties thou performest to
God? what a cage of unclean birds, what a receptacle of devils will thy heart
be, if the Spirit of God be but once withdrawn from thee?

9. Thou may know if the Spirit be withdrawn by this; if thou set not
upon duty so carefully and diligently as thou have done in former time, thou
do with more negligence set upon the performance of duties, rush hand over
head (as we say) upon it. -- When the Spirit of God is withdrawn from a soul,
it wi^ grow careless in holy duties, in two respects. 1. thou will be careless
of the manner how thou do it, and never take care how to make thy Spirit meet
for its performance. -- And then secondly, thou will never take care for the
end of duty, that thy soul may be bettered by it, and thou made more meet for
the enjoyment of God.

10. If the Spirit be withdrawn thou may know it by this, that thou
continuest not in the use of duty, so practically, and influencially, as in
former time; the meaning of this is in such a case. Good duties done have not
such an influence to the bettering of our conversation. God never ordained
duties for themselves, that you might rest in them, but for other ends, Gal.
5.25.
in order to your lives and conversations, therefore says the Apostle, If we
live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Those duties wherein the
Spirit assists us should have an influence upon our lives; thou therefore which
art constant in holy duties, and those duties have no influence upon thy heart,
thou art a great hearer, but not a godly liver, a great professor, but thy
practice does not hold-level with thy profession, this is an argument that thy
duties do not carry a saving influence unto thy life; thou can pray well, but
thou do not live well; thou art a good man upon thy knee, but a bad man in
thy trade, this is an argument that the Spirit of God is withdrawn from thee.
Now look over your hearts and examine them in all these particulars, and see
whether the Spirit of God be not departed from thee, yea or no? -- I now come
to the Application hereof.



1. Consider, that though the quickenings of the Spirit may be withdrawn from a
godly man, yet the presence of the Spirit can never be withdrawn; and
therefore, oh believer, lie not down in despair, and despondence. The Spirit
to thee is but as the Sun under a cloud, it is in the firmament still: so is
the Spirit in thy heart, and though it be under a cloud as to the influence of
it, yet it is constantly with thee as to its presence. A Believer may have the
truth and being of grace in him, though not the comfort of it.

2. Consider then, Oh child of God, who say that these symptoms discover
the departure of the Spirit from thee. Why, remember that God did never
continue the Spirit in its motions and workings always alike in any godly man.
It is with thy soul in this case as with natural things: in the water of the
sea there is an Ebbing and Flowing: in the seasons of the year there is the
Winter, as well as the Summer; and the Autum, as well as the Spring: as it is
thus with the times and seasons in natural things, so also is it in Spiritual
things; the Spirit of God was never continued to all men alike, but there are
Ebbings and Flowings of it. As it is in the Air, so it is in the heart,
sometimes it is clear, and sometimes cloudy. The Sun in the firmament, it is
always there, yet it does not always give the same warmth and heat and
influence upon the earth. What is true of the Sun in this respect, is also of
the Spirit of God in the hearts of his; it has not always the same influence
upon the heart. The time may be that thou may be in thy winter, wherein thy
graces may not have a verdure, and greenness, and yet still the Spirit is in
thee, and will in the springtime cause thee to flourish. The tree may have
life in the root, when during the Winter-season it may have neither leaves, nor
blosoms, nor fruit. A child of God may have his life hid in Christ, the root
of all spiritual life, though it may be winter-season sometimes with him both
in respect of the growth, exercise and comfort of grace.

3. Jesus Christ is not only a faithful but a merciful High Priest. Heb. 2.17.
Remember that Jesus Christ does know that thou can not all thy lifetime
perform du^ without infirmity, and therefore he had his perfect
righteousness, to cover thy imperfect duties; and this should greatly
establish the hearts of poor Christians. It is a good note which one has upon
Cant. 3.6. It is said there, Cant. 3.6.
Who is this that comes out of the wilderness, like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh, and frankincense? By him who came out of the wilderness
is not meant Christ, but the spouse of Christ. Now here observe two things, she
comes out of the wilderness. -- That the Church may be an afflicted Church,
though a Religious Church. It alludes to the great trials by which God
exercised his people with when he led them through the wilderness of Canaan.
And then she is said to come out of the Wilderness like a Pillar of smoke: Now
what is meant by that? A Divine gives this sense of it: Gods people they may
have smoky duties, blackt with many foul infirmities; they may be Pillars of
smoke: thy duties may be much sooted; but now what is thy comfort? though it be
said the Spouse came out like a Pillar of smoke, yet she was perfumed with
myrrh and frankincense; that is, she had the righteousness of Jesus Christ to
perfume her duties; he perfumes my duties with the myrrh of his own
righteousness. And when the prayers of the Saints which are compared to
incense, Psalm. 142.2. are offered by Christ, they go up to heaven as a most
sweet and acceptable sacrifice, far more acceptable and welcome then the costly
evaporations of the most precious Arabian gummes. Oh then let this bear up thy
heart; thou art black by reason of thy infirmities, yet there is a perfume
which can sweeten all thy duties. Hence it is said, That the Angel came and
stood at the Altar having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all the Saints upon the
golden Altar which was before the throne. Rev. 8.3,4.
This does not make for the Popish opinion, as if we should use the Mediation
of Angels; but by the Angel here is not meant a created Angel of the Lord, but
the Angel of the Covenant who is the Lord; and what was his office? he had much
incense, and this much incense he offered with the prayers of the Saints, all
the people of God they share in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, to cover
their imperfect duties. And then it is said, that the smoke of the inoense
which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the
Angels hand; that is, the righteousness of Jesus Christ is sented with the
prayers of the Saints unto the Lord, whereby they are accepted.

4. And lastly, this may be your comfort, though thou can not perform duty
without infirmity, yet thou do perform duty without known hypocrisy;
though thou do offend in the manner of performance, yet thou would not be
false in the end or principle of thy doing: the sincerity of thy heart herein
may be thy comfort, and from such, though the Spirit may withdraw for a while,
yet 'twill not be long before it return again; who though to humble thee, he
may for a while withdraw in anger, yet he will return again; In a little
moment have I hid my face and forsaken thee, but I will gather thee with
everlasting mercy. Isa. 54 7.


SERMON. VII. At Lawrence Jury, London, November. 24. 1650.
GENESIS 6. verse 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, etc.
I Proceed Now to some farther use and Application of this point, which I shall
do by laying down some particular inferences, directions or positions,
concerning the withdrawings of Gods Spirit.



1. If you consider the weakness and disability of our natures to holy
motions, as well as to holy actions. Phil. 2.13. (...). Vt acti agentes, ut
moti moventes. 2 Cor. 3.5.
A man is not only weak to act good, but is weak to any holy motion, therefore
says the Apostle, It is the Lord which works in us both to Will and to do; the
very desire of the soul after good, it is a thing above nature, it comes from
God, and therefore the same Apostle, (says he) We are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. The
inferior orbs move as they are acted, and moved by the superior. A Mole can as
easily move the earth from its center, or a sparrow drink up the waters of the
Ocean out of their channels, as thou of thy self have any good motion, or
ability to act good; all your assistance comes from the Spirit of God, and
therefore says Saint Paul, If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of
the flesh. Romans 8.13.
Thou art weak in thy self, therefore that should make thee see thy need of the
Spirit.

2. Consider, not only the weakness, but the backwardness that is in us unto
that which is good. And therefore the Scripture mentions not only a grieving
and quenching, but also a resisting of the Spirit, Acts 7.51. And therefore
those phrases of Scripture, John 6.44.
Draw me, and I will run after thee; And None can come unto me except the
Father which has sent me, draw him; they denote not only a weakness, but an
unwillingnesse in us to come, and a backwardness also in our hearts to yield
subjection to a law of holiness. Psalm. 110.3.
Till God by his Spirit make us a willing people in the day of his power.

3. Be convinced of the great need you stand in of the Spirit, from those
strong resistances that are in your natures to holy motions. Though grace be of
an active nature, yet because there is an indisposition in the subject,
therefore grace must be put on by the Spirit. Fire (you know) it is of an
active nature, apt to burn; but let fire be put to green or wet wood, the
greenesse of the wood resists the prevalency of the flame: thus it is with
grace in our natures, it is like fire in green wood, there must be much blowing
before it will burn; therefore the Apostle uses these words to Timothy, 2 Timothy
1.6.
says he, Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee, Blow up the coals.
There is much resistance in our hearts against the Spirit of God.

4. You have great need of the Spirits motions, if you consider the abundance
of evil motions which will break in upon thy heart, if the Spirit in its
motions be withdrawn What a receptacle for the devil and lusts will thy heart
be, if the Spirit absent himself. As smoke comes out of a chimney, so will
corruption come out of thy heart. As sparks out of a blown fire, so will evil
motions come into thy heart when corruption is blown with temptation. Thou art
unwilling and backward to good, it must be the Spirit which must stir thee up.
To this purpose you have a passage in the Prophet Isaiah, He wakeneth me
morning by morning, Isa. 50.4.
says he; thou have need to be awakened, and excited by the Spirit of God day
by day, because of thy daily indisposition. From hence see the need thou have
of the Spirit of God.



1. It is recorded in Scripture as a great misery, if but the common workings
and gifts of Gods Spirit be withdrawn; 1 Samuel 28.
and therefore you read what a lamentable complaint Saul made because the
Spirit was departed from him, which was but in its common gifts. And so also of
Sampson, it is said he wist not that the Spirit was departed from him, that is,
the Spirit of fortitude; Judge. 16.20.
and is this a lamentation when the Spirit in its common gifts shall be
withdrawn? and shall it not be looked upon as a sad misery, when the Spirit in
its saving, comforting and sanctifying operation shall be withheld?

2. Be convinced hereof, because whilst the Spirit is withdrawn thou art under
a constant loss.

I may exemplify it by this comparison: Suppose a great Merchant that had a
ship at sea, richly laden, and this ship should be near the harbor, but being
becalmed or having cross winds, it should not be able to come to its haven.
Now all the while the ship is out, the Merchant is at a daily loss. Make it
your case in a spiritual sense, this ship is thy soul, the lading is grace, and
the haven is heaven, the gales of wind, are the motions of the Spirit, cross
gales that arise, are temptations; now if the motions of the Spirit help thee
not, thou will not be able to come to the haven: from hence see your misery
without the motions of Gods Spirit.

3. Be convinced of thy misery, because if good motions do not possess thy
heart, multitudes of evil motions will; if the house of thy heart be empty of
good motions, the devil will enter by evil motions, and dwell there. Mat.
12.44,45.
Either thy heart is an habitation for the Spirit of God, or else it is a
receptacle for the evil spirit with all its sinful motions. The soul is a
restless active thing, and when the good Spirit does not act it, the evil
spirit will; the devil will slip no opportunity that may advantage, he will
not let any house long stand empty.

gunpowder to fire, if a spark of temptation fall upon us, how soon are we all
on a fire? but to good motions out hearts are as green wood to the fire, what
opposition is there in us, and backwardness to entertain them? Evil thoughts
in the soul are natural, but good thoughts are supernatural. Man's heart by,
nature is a slaughterhouse to holy motions; many good motions have thou
stifled and strangled in thy heart; but that nature which is a slaughterhouse
to good motions, it is a storehouse to wicked motions. An evil man out of the
evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is evil, Luke 6 45.
(says our Savior) what a natural receptivenesse is there in thy heart, for
the intertaining of that which is evil?

Ephesians. 4.30. is more unkindnesse then to resist the Spirit; a man is more
troubled for the unkindnesse of a friend, then for all the hatred and
opposition of his enemy. Surely something is the matter, have thou not kept thy
conscience nasty? it is nastinesse in the dove-house, that causes the dove to
leave the house. Is there not an indulgence of some allowed provoking sin
that the Spirit of God sees in thee? have thou not quenched the Spirits
motions? have thou not grieved the Spirit; vexed, resisted, or tempted the
Spirit. Search out the cause, and when thou have found it, then bewail it, and
cry, Woe is me! the Spirit would have taken up his residence in my heart, and I
would not give him entertainment. And so whom I have begged with tears and
enjoyed with comfort, I have lost through the folly of my sinful doings. If
thou have not yet found out the cause, I would have thee to consult with thy
own conscience, which is Gods officer in thee, and it will give thee a true
account if thou will hearken to it; ask it these three question: Have not I
fallen from my first love as the Ephesians did? Revel. 2.4,5. Have I not
stifled checks of conscience, and the Spirits motions? Have I not prostituted
the Spirits motions to servile and base employments, as Simon Magus, for
secular advantage and worldly interest? have thou not addicted thy self to
contrary motions? have thou not been more ready to hearken to the solicitations
of the evil spirit, then to the incitations of the good Spirit? Ask thy
conscience; it may be it will give in this answer. Has not the Spirit departed
because of thy pride and idleness and self-conceitednesse? by such like
proposals as these to conscience, thou may come to know the cause wherefore
the Spirit is withdrawn from thee.



1. It is true that God does usually withdraw the motions of his Spirit because
of sin, and therefore says the Prophet Isaiah, Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God; Isai. 59.2.
and so also the Prophet Micah, They shall cry unto the Lord, but he will not
hear them, he will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have
behaved themselve ill in their doings. Micah 3.4.
Usually sin is the cause for which the Spirit of God withdraws.

2. This is most true, that if there were not sin in us, Gods Spirit should
never be withdrawn from us; we should be incapable of desertion of the Spirit,
were it not for sin in general; and therefore though sin in general be the
causa sine qua non, yet it is not always the cause immediate for which the
Spirit withdraws.

3. Though there be sin in us, as a cause to us why Gods Spirit departs, yet
God does not always make sin a cause to himself, but it is for some other
higher ends. Divines that handle this subject touching the desertion of the
soul, and the withdrawings of Gods Spirit, they distinguish a threefold
desertion, upon a threefold cause, and we have touched upon that already.

1. There may be a desertion which is cautional, not for sin, 2 Cor. 12.7.
but to prevent sin; And thus it was with Paul, There was given to him a thorn
in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted
above measure. And so Peter when he fell in denying Christ, his desertion was
cautional, Matthew. 26.70.
that he might not depend upon his own strength (as he had most foolishly done)
for after-time.

2. There may be a desertion which is probational, that is, to try some grace
which God would have exercised; and thus Job he was not afflicted for sin,
but God did thereby prove him and try him in his faith and patience.

3. There is a desertion which is penal, and that is for sin, when God leaves
a man to himself; and thus it was with the Spouse, Cant. 5.3,4,5,6.
because she hearkened not, and opened not to Christ, therefore he withdrew
himself. -- Art thou therefore deserted by the Spirit of God? why, remember
that desertions are not always penal (though I confess they are most often
so; and it is most suitable to that humble and penitent frame of heart, that
should be in a deserted soul to judge himself smitten and forsaken of God for
his sin:) but sometimes they are cautional, and sometimes probational.

misery in the Spirits absence. It is the fault of many Christians, they rest
contented in fruitless, and doleful complaints of their loss, but do not put
forth industrious endeavors to recover what they have lost. It was not enough
for Joshua to lie upon his face at the defeat at Ai, Joshua 7.10.11. -- but he
must stand upon his feet and find out the cause, and endeavor to make up the
breach. There are some professors who by whining and complaining think to
excuse their idleness and spiritual sloth. -- Thou have lost the Spirit; do
not so much pore upon thy loss, as to think what thou must do to recover the
Spirit again. -- Which that thou may do, follow these directions.

1. Cleanse thy conscience from the allowance of any known sin, make thy
heart clean and so fit for Christ, and his Spirit will come unto thee; let thy
heart be like that room Christ came to eat the Passover in, Luke 22.12.
an upper room, a furnished room, and a swept room; let thy heart be
prepared and swept with the besome of sanctified grace, from the allowance of
sin, and this will be a means for thee to recover the Spirit again.

2. Go unto God by prayer, which is the universal remedy for all spiritual
distempers. Is any among you afflicted, let him pray, says the Apostle James.
James 5.13.
Let the affliction be what it will, prayer will be a means to deliver thee.
Prayer is enjoined by God as a means to receive the Spirit of God, Luke 11.13.
And it will speed, because it is Gods ordinance.

3. Do not only pray, but bewail thy condition in prayer; Spread thy
complaints before the Lord, and say, Lord, how is my heart a cage of unclean
birds? a receptacle for sin, and the devil? This is the best that my heart is
now fit for. I who once had my graces fresh and flo^ishing, how are they now
like the withered grass on the house-toppe? that once had the embraces of an
everlasting arm, but now am I forsaken of the Spirit. I was once like a field
whom God had blessed, and like unto the Cedars of Lebanon, casting forth my
roots and pleasant branches: But now I am as a tree of the forest which brings
forth nothing; I once was as a fruitful vine in the vineyard of Christ, but now
am like unto the mountains of Gilboa upon whom neither the rain nor the dew
falls; thus bewail thy self in the presence of the Lord, and it may be when he
sees thee with tears in thy eyes, and thy petitions in thy hand, he may return
unto thee. Though he has forsaken thee, yet he will not forget thee; though he
has cast thee down, yet he will not cast thee off for ever, (He will not cast
away his people) if thou forsakest not him; labor therefore by prayers and
tears to recover thy fall.



Corinth. 1 Cor. 1.7
The Apostle tells them, They came behind in no gifts, 1. Cor. 3.1.
and yet as to grace he tells you they were carnal, and walked as men.

may be really withdrawn from a man, when he in his own apprehensions thinks he
fully enjoys them. It may be with a man in this case as with Sampson, it was
told him that the Philistines were upon him, Judges 16.20.
and he aworke out of sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before,
and shake my self, and he wist not that the Lord was departed from him. He knew
not that his strength was gone. Thus you may be left of the Spirit, and you may
not know it; and the reason is, partly because the departures of the Spirit are
gradual; (You cannot discern a man's growth, because he grows by little and
little. As it is with our natural growth, so is it also with our spiritual
decays;) and partly because the heart is very deceitful and careless and
negligent to search and try how it is with the soul. And therefore let this lie
upon your thoughts, you may have the Spirit in its motions withdrawn from you,
when yet in your apprehensions you may be persuaded that you possess them.

Application of the Doctrine by way of consolation.
I shall conclude this point with a few words of comfort, lest peradventure
there may be some which may be troubled and perplexed about what I have
delivered concerning the withdrawings of Gods Spirit.



It is with a soul in this case, as it is with the herbs and trees in winter;
the whole sap is not gone, but retired into the root.
Let this be thy comfort that the departures of the Spirit they are temporary,
not eternal; the Spirit is only gone for a season, Isaiah 54.8. In a little
wrath I hid my face from th^e, for a moment. It is but in a little wrath, and
for a little while. That which Christ said of his person to his Disciples, I
will go away, but I will come again, the same may be said of the Spirit; though
he may be withdrawn, yet after a while he will return again.

Genesis 44.2.
Thou may have as Benjamin, a golden cup in thy sacks mouth, a pledge of
Joseph's love, and thou may not know it. Out of thy belly may flow a
fountain of living water, and yet thou may not know it; even as Hagar, when
she was ready to die for thirst, had a well of water by her, and yet knew it
not; therefore it may be it is but a sensible, not a real withdrawing. It is
with the soul in respect of the Spirit of Christ, as it was with Mary Magdalen,
who when she was speaking with Christ, knew it not, but asked Christ whither
they had carried him John? 20.15.



SERMON. VIII At Lawrence Jury, London. December. 1. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh.
HAving lately treated of the misery of those, from whom the motions of Gods
Spirit were withdrawn: I am now to treat of the happiness of others, who walk
after the motions and guidance of the Spirit, which I shall do out of these
words, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. --
Which words are an Apostical direction, or caution, being entire in themselves,
and therefore I shall handle them without reference to what goes before, or
what follows after. The method I observe shall be this.

First, I shall explain the words. -- Secondly, divide them; then deduce some
observations; and lastly, make application of all.

1. In the explanatory part there are four things to be unfolded. 1. What is
here to be meant by the Spirit? 2. What is meant by walking in the Spirit? 3.
What by not fulfilling the lusts of the flesh? 4. How can it be said that men
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh?




God is a Spirit, John 4.24. i. e. a spiritual Essence. 2 Cor. 3.17.

John 5.6.

Luke 1.15.



Gal. 3.2. Verse 25. Gal. 5.18.
there is mention made in Gal. 3.2. of receiving the Spirit. -- Secondly, of
living in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. -- Thirdly, of being led by the Spirit, Gal.
5.18. -- And fourthly, of walking in the Spirit, and that in the words of my
text. -- Now by receiving and living in the Spirit, is set out to us the first
implantation or work of Gods Spirit on us in our regeneration. -- And by the
other two phrases of being led by the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit, these
two are one and the same, and set out to us the progressive work of the Spirit
upon the soul in the work of sanctification; so that he that would walk in the
Spirit, must follow the motions and instructions of it. Therefore if you would
walk in the Spirit, you must not follow the impulses of your own spirits.
Quicquid somniant Fanatici volunt esse Spiritum sanctum. Melanchton.
they follow the instinct of their own spirits. Of such Melanchton speaks, that
they think their own dreams as Canonical as Gods Word; and thereby are so far
from abolishing the lusts of the flesh, that they gratify the lusts of the
flesh. The genuine sense therefore of these words of walking in the Spirit, is
to walk after the Spirit, and so it is an expression of the same importance
with those words in Romans 8.1. Romans 8.1.
There is therefore no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. That is, if we follow the motions
and instructions of Gods Spirit, then may we be said to walk in it.

Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. -- of the Spirit in his practice,
he finds in himself the workings of corrupt nature; whilst you have this
natural body, you will have these lusts of the flesh in you. But, says the
Apostle, Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. -- Now by the lusts of
the flesh, you must not understand it in a limited sense, of the sin of
incontinency, or uncleanness, which elsewhere is truly called the lust of the
flesh, -- but you are to take it in a comprehensive sense, for all those
corrupt and irregular inclinations to sin, which are in the nature of man. --
Now when the Apostle says, you shall not fulfill these lusts, his meaning is,
not that you shall not sin, but that you shall not act sin with such a
strong and full consent of the will, nor with such deliberation, as
unregenerate men, who want the Spirit of God.





1. Though it be true that a man walking in the Spirit shall have the lusts of
the flesh, yet it is as true that a godly man so walking shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh; and the reason is this, -- There is a difference between
the acting, and between the fulfilling of the lusts of the flesh; a godly man
when he sins, he acts the lusts of the flesh, yet he does not fulfill it,
because when he sins he does not sin with such a full consent, nor with
such a deliberate and complete act of the will, as wicked men do. Sin carries
wicked men with more force and violence, and with a more deliberate act of the
will: so some Interpreters resolve this difficulty.

2. Others answer it thus: Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh, that is (say they) eatenus, whilst you embrace the Spirits
motions, Musculus in locum.
sins motions shall not prevail, so far as you hearken to the Spirits good
motions, you shall not be overcome with the sinful motions of your own corrupt
nature, or of the devil. -- You shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; so it
is in the original, and so it is translated in the singular number, from whence
Critics show that in that one sin of nature there are many sins contained,
all the sins in the world being in the womb of original sin.

In the whole verse you have three parts. 1. A duty enjoined Walk in the
Spirit. 2. A benefit annexed, You shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh 3.
The certainty of having this benefit, This I say, etc.


There are two observations I shall note from the words.





In the opening of the first Doctrine there are several queries I shall
dispatch.



Isaiah; Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying, This is the way,
walk in it, when ye turn up to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.
Isa. 30.21.
As the star was to the Shepherds, Mat. 2.9.
or as the fiery Pillar to the Israelites in their passage through the
Wilderness: So is the Spirit to Believers to guide them in the way which is
everlasting. Therefore if thou walk not after its motions and guidance, thou
do as much as in thee lies to put the Spirit out of office.

of Gods Spirit, because the devil he will be suggesting evil motions to thee,
he goes up and down compassing the earth, not to do good, but evil, Job 1.7. 1
Pet. 5.8.
He walks about seeking whom he may devour. -- And not only the devil but
thine own spirit is a false spirit, prompting and provoking thee to sin, that
as the furnace casts out sparks, and the Chimney smoke: so does thy spirit
sinful motions; therefore what causehast thou to follow the motions of the
Spirit of God. There are also many erroneous men, Many false Prophets are gone
out into the world, 1 John 4.1. Many seducing spirits, and corrupt teachers are
gone out into the world; Believe not every spirit, says Saint John, for many
false Prophets are gone out into the world; such which pretend they have the
Spirit, and are teachers of truth, but indeed are broachers of error. A
tempting devil without us, an evil heart of unbelief within us, and seducing
teachers abroad in the world, how should they make us to prize and to follow
the motions and guidance of Gods Spirit.

Thessalonians, Be not so soon shaken in mind, neither by Spirit, nor by
Word, nor by letter, as from us, that the day of Christ is at hand. 2 These. 2.2.
Now if you ask, what is meant here by the words, Be not shaken in mind by any
false spirit? Learned Interpreters answer, Sclater in Loc.
by Spirit, that is, by revelations, instincts and inspirirations that are
pretended to come from the Spirit of Christ. It was a wicked blasphemy in that
wretched Impostor Mahomet, to give out that those dead fits that came upon him
by his falling sickness, were raptures from the Spirit of God, and that the
Dove which he had taught to come and feed at his ear, was the holy Ghost,
which did from God reveal unto him the Laws which are set down in the Alchoran,
by which the pure Mahometans are deluded to this day. And therefore seeing the
devil has helped men in these days to such artificial dresses for their wicked
errors, and the devil himself seems so like an Angel of light; we have the
more need to walk after the guidance of the Spirit.

walk after the motions of the Spirit, is, because that in so doing you shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; and this is the reason laid down in the
text, which because it will come pertinently to be handled in the second
Doctrine, I therefore wholly wave the handling of it here.





1. The Spirit when it moves a man to good, it does not only excite him to it,
but does also assist him in the doing of it. Romans 8.26. 2 Timothy 1.7.
Therefore the Spirit is said to help our infirmities, making intercession for
us with groans which cannot be uttered. The Spirit of God it is a Spirit of
power to enable us in good duties; as it excites, so also it assists in what it
moves to. -- But though natural motions from conscience may put a man upon the
doing of a good thing, -- Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor.
yet it cannot give any power for its performance; it leaves thee like Ovids
Medea, that saw good, yet would not do it. Natural motions to the soul are as
Pharaoh to the Israelites, who moved them to make brick, but gave them no
materials. Natural conscience moves to duty, but conveighs no power to do it
withal; therefore you read that the law is weak through the flesh; Romans 8 3.
weak as to justification thereby, there being no power in man to fulfill it.

2. -- Virtutis amore, non formidine poenae. 2 Timothy 1.7.
The Spirit it moves a man to do good more out of the loveliness and beauty
that is in holiness, then out of fear of hells torments. Hence we read that
God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound
mind; we do not do things merely out of fear of hell, but out of love to God
and holiness. So the Apostle Paul (says he) As many as are led by the Spirit
are the Sons of God; for ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to
fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father. Romans 8.14,15 Ducuur a spiritu, non trah^tur.
The Spirit of God makes a man do a thing, as a child, out of love to his
father, and not out of fear; this is the effect of the Spirit of God. But now
the motions of natural conscience to good, are not out of any excellency a man
sees in the good he does, but merely out of fear of punishment; he sees
damnation if he does otherwise.

3. The Spirit of God moves a man to do good in things not only good for the
matter, but to make conscience of the end why he does such a thing, that he be
sound in his aim; and therefore says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 17.
We have received the Spirit of a sound mind; that is, the Spirit it puts a
man not only upon the doing of a good duty, but makes him have a sincere end in
the doing thereof: But the natural conscience it rests in the duty, in case it
be done, though done never so corruptly. Prove. 7.14.
As the harlot Solomon speaks of, who had sacrificed and paid her vows, though
her end was most abominable and base, viz. that she might the more
uncontrolable play the harlot; she first plays the hypocrite, and then the
harlot.

4. The Spirit of God moving men to do good, it regulates them in the manner of
doing good; the duty it must be done with affection, with love, with faith,
fervency and composedness of mind; but natural conscience moving a man to
duty, takes no farther care, so it be done, not how it be done; it may move to
prayer, and to hearing, but never moves to take heed how these duties are done.

5. The Spirit of God moves a man so powerfully that it carries him to do good
notwithstanding difficulty and danger, and neither shall hinder him in its
performance. The Spirits motions are like unto new wine in a barrel, that
wanting vent is ready to burst; holy motions will break forth into holy
actions. Wicked men are sick till they act their wickedness, and cannot be
satisfied till they have done sinfully: But those who have natural motions to
good they go no farther, but rest in them, and never bring forth good
accomplishments. Balaam he had a good motion, Number. 23.10.
oh (says he) that I might die the death of the righteous, and that my latter
end might be like unto his. What a heavenly ejaculation was here! it was a very
good wish, but yet it was a lazy one; he wished to die the death of the
righteous, but yet would not live the life of the righteous; he would not
practice what he prayed for. Natural motions in men freeze between their lips,
they only de^re, but never break out into the acting of duty. Difficulties do
discourage natural men from following their good resolutions with constant
practice; and the sluggard will not plow, because of the cold, Prove. 20.4.



1. That the motions of Gods Spirit are always agreeable to a written word;
the words prescript and the Spirits motions are correspondent the one to the
other. You have both joined together by Solomon, I will pour out my Spirit
upon you, I will make known my words unto you. Prove. 1.23.
So the Prophet Isaiah, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, etc. Isa. 59.21.
The motions of the Spirit of God, they are always suitable to the Word of
God. To the law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to them, it
is because there is no light in them; Isa. 8.20.
and therefore all that are contrary they are the delusions of the evil spirit.

2. The motions of Gods Spirit in men, are not now to foretell future events,
but they are holy motions pressing to duty: Therefore the Papists who boast of
a prophetical Spirit, and of foretelling things to come; and your starre-gazers
and soothsayers, who pretend to tell future contingent events, telling you,
this party shall prevail this month, and that party another month, these are
diabolical delusions, and not from the Spirit of God; who since the Canon of
the Scripture has been established, refers us to the Word as a rule of our
obedience.

3. The Spirits motions, where ever they are, they stir up grace and keep
under sin; they stir up grace, and therefore we read of the assisting,
exciting and supplying work of the Spirit; those motions which stir up sin,
and cherish corruption, are diabolical. Romans 8.13
Therefore says the Apostle Paul, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die;
but if (...) through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live. Motions from the Spirit of God, they are holy motions, exciting grace,
and depressing sin. Micah 2.11.
And therefore it is said, if a man walk in the Spirit and do lie, that is, if
a man will pretend a message from the Spirit of God, and yet Prophecy of wine
and strong drink; that is, by his Doctrine encourage drunkenness or any sin,
that man lies, he comes not from the holy Spirit, but from the devil.

SERMON IX. At Lawrence Jury, London, December. 8. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh.
A third Querie. I Proceed now to a third thing to be enquired into, and that
is, How we may know the difference between those common motions of the Spirit
in the wicked, and the saving motions of the Spirit in the regenerate?

Heb. 6.4.
because the Scripture says, that wicked men may be partakers of the holy
Ghost; and therefore to answer the question, you must know that there is a
twofold difference between the wicked and the godly their partaking of the
Spirit. 1. About the measure. 2. About the manner.


1. In the measure; though a Reprobate partakes of the motions of the Spirit,
yet he has not such a measure of the Spirit as a regenerate man has. Forbes
in that practical Tract of his concerning this doubt, gives you this
exemplification. Summis tuntam labris pitissare.
Wicked men (says he) partake of the Spirit, as Coocks do of the meat; they
dress, they taste of as much as will relish their palates, but do not take so
much as to make a meal of, which may refresh nature and strengthen it: But the
regenerate are as the invited guests, and they not only taste the meat
prepared, but also make a meal thereof. Wicked men they have but a taste, and
therefore says the Apostle of them, They have tasted of the heavenly gift.
Heb. 6.3.
They are just like unto men going by an Apothecaries shop, who may smell the
sweet sents of his pots, but only the sick patient gets benefit by his
cordials: Thus it is with the wicked, God he may and does give them tastes of
his Spirit, but they have not so much as will do their souls good. It is only
the godly who have saving participations of grace. As there were many of the
Israelites who had a taste of the fruit of the land of Canaan, who yet never
came to heaven; so some may taste of the heavenly gift, who shall never come to
heaven.

2. They differ, as in the measure of their receiving the Spirit, so also in
the manner.

1. Motions of the Spirit in the reprobate they are transient, and gliding, not
lasting motions; they pass like a shadow. And therefore says the Lord by the
Prophet Hosea, speaking of Ephraim, Your goodness is as a morning cloud, and
as the early dew it passes away. Hosea 6.4.
As the rising Sun dissipates the clouds, and dries up the dew; so do the
motions of the Spirit in Reprobates soon vanish and pass away. But the motions
of the Spirit in the godly, they are like an old inhabitant, they dwell with
him; and therefore says our Savior, If my words abide in you, ye shall ask
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. John 15.7.
The words of Christ are transient, and as sojourners in the wicked, but
abiding in the godly; they stay with a godly man all his lifetime; he is one
that has always a conscience void of offense, Acts 24.16. My soul breaks
for the longing it has to thy judgments at all times, Psalm. 119.20. Psalm.
27.4.
says David; And that I might dwell in the house of the Lord all my days,
Psalm. 23.6. The motions of Gods Spirit in the godly, they are not by fits and
starts, but they are abiding and lasting motions.

2. They are rare and seldom, not ordinary and usual; as they stay but a
while, so they come but seldom, now and then upon some extraordinary
emergencies. It is in this case with the Reprobate, in regard of good motions.
As it is with a man in a lottery, to one prize he may draw a hundred blankes:
so wicked men they have a hundred Satanical motions to evil, for one motion of
Gods Spirit to good, they are as rare and seldom, as it is to see a Swallow in
Winter. While a wicked man is thinking evil thoughts, he is in his own element,
and he as familiarly does that as breath; but good thoughts are but as
strangers in his heart.

3. The Spirits motions in wicked men, they are constrained, not voluntary;
they are not in them as water which proceeds from a fountain, but as water
coming from a still, forced by reason of the fire underneath it. -- The Spirits
motions in wicked men they are constrained upon a double ground. -- First,
either from natural conscience, which tells them they must not be such devils
incarnate, as never have any good motions. Balaam he had a desire to curse the
people of Israel, yet natural conscience prevaised with him to the contrary;
Numb. 23.12.
and says he, Must I not take heed to speak that which the Lord has put into
my mouth? -- Or secondly, this may proceed from the sense of outward
judgments, this may occasion the entertainment of good thoughts. When their
fear comes as desolation, and destructions as a whirlewinde, then shall they
call upon me. Prove. 1.27.28.
It must be a whirlewinde of fear which drives them to call upon the name of
the Lord, agreeable to that of the Prophet Hosea, In their affliction they will
seek me early. Hose 5.15.
When the Israelites were afraid of the thunder and the lightening, They said
unto Moses, Speak unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and
we will do it, Deuteronomy. 5.26,27.

4. Motions of the Spirit in the Reprobate, they are casual and accidental, not
studied, and considered; such which fall in by the by without preparation, or
meditation; motions which tumble in they know not how. The wicked man he
consulteth evil thoughts, therefore (says the wise man) He shuts his eyes
to devise froward things. Prove. 16.30.
Shutting of the eyes it is a posture which argues intentions of mind; thus
wicked men they contrive how to bring about a mischievous device, and are
students in sin; and to this purpose says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4.5.
(...).
that God will make manifest the counsels of the heart. Deliberate thoughts
about sin they are called the councels or consultations of the heart, and
these will God lay open. The wicked are said to plot against the just, but they
never study to have good thoughts; when they come they fall in accidentally,
and pass away without consideration.

5. Good motions in wicked men they are partial not universal, as moving them
not to good at all times, so neither to all good. They may have motions to move
them to the doing of outward good things, such whereby their names may become
to be spoken of with applause, but not to the doing of all good; their motions
to good put them not upon the mortifying of strong lusts, and keeping under
sin; whereas the Spirits motions to good in the godly they are universal, to
one good thing as well as another. Heb. 13.18.
We trust (says the Apostle Paul) that we have a good conscience in all things
willing to live honestly: Acts 24.16.
and as the same Apostle in another place, Vniversalitas objecti and subjecti.
Herein do I exercise my self to have always a good conscience void of
offense, toward God, and toward men. There is a universality in the motions of
Gods Spirit upon the hearts of the godly. The whole heart being moved unto all
good, and that always.

6. Motions of the Spirit in the wicked, they are fruitless motions, which
have no influence upon their lives. One says, that the heart of a fool is like
unto a cartwheel, and his thoughts like a roving a xletree, as a cartwheel it
goes round and round all the day, 2 Cor. 1.17 Isa. 51.1. Daniel 1.8
yet still abides where it used to be: so wicked men it may be sometimes they
have good thoughts, and good motions, but yet these have not an influence upon
his life, his motions to good are fruitless motions. But motions to good in
the godly are joined with practice, and holy purposes joined with prayer, Psalm.
119.2.

7. The motions of Gods Spirit in Reprobates, they are for good things done in
public, not in private; thou will do good, that thy name may be cried up. The
wind of vain glory may blow the sail of thy heart, and fill it with good
motions.

The use I shall make of this point shall be twofold. -- First of humiliation.
Use of humiliation.
Secondly, by way of instruction, to draw out some practical inferences from
the point. If it be the duty of Gods people to walk after the guidance and
motions of the Spirit of God; then,

Joh. 3.8.
The wind it blows where it lists; but who takes notice of the wind? How
often do men walk in the streets, and yet observe not which way the wind
blows? as it is with the wind, so is it with the Spirit, the Spirit comes
with many a sweet gale, and yet we do not observe it. That as Job said of the
Lord, He passed by, and he saw him not, Job 9.11
so may we say of the Spirit of God, It was nigh me, and I perceived it not.
Thus our Savior speaks of the world, that they cannot receive the Spirit of
truth; Because they neither see him, nor know him. The meaning is not, John
14.17.
as if they could see the Spirit with a bodily eye, for the Spirit is not a
bodily substance, but they neither see him nor know him, that is, they see not
his motions, neither have any experimental knowledge of the Spirits workings.
Natural men are unacquainted with their own Spirits, and much more with the
motions of Gods Spirit. We cannot see the Sun but by its own light, nor
observe the Spirit without the Spirit. There are many in the world like unto
that Ruler of the feast, when Christ turned the water into wine, Joh. 2.9.
it is said He knew not whence it was. I may allude to this Scripture thus;
there are many men whose water the Spirit would turn unto wine, that is, their
corrupt motions into holy and gracious motions, yet they do not know it,
neither will they see it.

2. If you are not guilty of inobservancy of the Spirits motions, yet be
humbled for the infirmity of the flesh, that you cannot always embrace the
Spirits motions when you know them. You read in Joh. 14. where Christ speaks
concerning the sending of the Spirit, That the world cannot receive him. He
does not say, John 14.17.
the world does not receive him; but the world cannot receive him, to note a
debility in the flesh, that men cannot entertain holy motions. Rolloc on this
place compares the heart of natural men unto wet wood, 1 Cor. 2.14.
which is not so easily set one fire. The natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are Spirit^ally discerned. -- And the carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
Romans 8.7.
There is not only a mere suspension of the act, but a disability in the soul;
this is our infirmity that we cannot embrace the Spirits motions in the flesh,
though we know them.

3. Be humbled, though knowing them, yet because you cannot bring these motions
into holy practice; there are many men who entertain the Spirits motions, but
alas they act not these gracious motions. The Spirit moves to pray better, to
hear better, to live more holily, and yet still they remain as they were, and
though sometimes they may resolve to live better, yet how soon are these
resolutions forgotten; such may complain with Job in this case, Job 17.11.
My purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart. Doubtless these
were good thoughts, as if he should have said, I have purposed to live thus and
thus, if God had kept me in prosperity, but now they are broken off, and I am
disappointed in my own thoughts; many of us may take up this complaint, that
our purposes are disappointed, many a good motions has the Spirit^ stirred up
in thy heart, and yet thou could not bring that holy motion into action. But
it will become every child of God to say and hold to purpose and practice, and
with David to say, I will confess my sin, and so to confess then, Psalm
32.2,3.

4. Be humbled for that receptivenesse that is in our natures to embrace all
sinful motions. How unlike are we unto our Savior; John 14.30.
the Tempter came unto him, but found nothing in him, he found no matter for
his temptation to fasten upon; but the Tempter comes to thee, and he finds
something in thee, he finds in thee a receptive nature to close with the
temptation he suggests unto thee. Christ's nature it was like unto a
Crystalglasse filled with pure water, the devil shook the glass, but it was
still clear; but when the devil comes to us he finds us as a puddle of water,
and he does but take into this puddle, and how does the mudde appear? A
dunghill may have herbs and flowers grow upon it, but if you rake, and dig
into it, how quickly will the stench thereof take away the sweetness of the
flowers? though our natures seem not to be so bad as they are, yet if the devil
do but rake into them, then will it appear what we are. The heart of man may be
compared to a tinder-box, the corruption of nature to the tinder in this box;
now let but the devil strike flint and steel together, that is, suite a
temptation to our corruption, and how soon are we set on fire? Christ's nature
it was like Iron, it would not take with the sparks, but the devil he tempts,
us and our natures are like tinder to the temptation; What cause have we
therefore to be humbled and greatly to be abased in the rememberance of the
receptivenesse of our natures to take in the devils suggestions.

5. Be humbled for that antipathy that is in our natures against the Spirits
motions. Our natures in innocence they were like the rivers of Egypt, before
they were turned into blood, they were then the proper element for fish to live
in; but being once turned into blood all the fish die. In innocence thy nature
it was the proper element for the motions of the Spirit of God to be in; but
when thy nature was turned into blood by degeneration, then the Spirits motions
depart. The words following my Text set out the contrariety of our natures,
Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, by Spirit is not meant the regenerate
part, but the motions of Gods Spirit; corrupt nature wars against Gods Spirit
in its motions and workings. -- There are three expressions in Scripture which
set out the enmity of man's nature against the Spirit of God; As Isa. 63.10.
Acts 7.51. Heb. 10.29.
1. A vexing of the Spirit. 2. A resisting of the Spirit. -- And 3. A doing
despite to the spirit of grace.
Now all these expressiotions, they denote the very height of enmity, and that
the nature of man it carries a deadly enmity to the Spirits motions.



John 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists; that is, the Spirits motions are imparted
to whom God pleases. The Spirit of God it is called a free Spirit; Psalm. 51.12.
it is a holy Spirit, if you regard the effects of it; but a free Spirit, if
you regard the grounds of its working. And therefore the Apostle James (says
he) Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth. James 1.18.
The Spirit of God it is a free agent.



Verse 19. and 22. following my Text where it is said, that the works of the
flesh are manifest, Gal. 5.19,22
and there he lays down a catalogue of them. But when he comes to speak of the
works of the Spirit, he does not give them that name, but calls them the fruits
of the Spirit; to let us know that men do more walk after the flesh, then
after the Spirit. The ways of most men are rather to follow manifestly the
guidance of the flesh then of the Spirit. Ephesians. 2.2
And so the Apostle speaks of men, Who walk after the course of this world, and
according to the Spirit which works in the children of disobedience; not
according to the motions and suggestions of the holy Spirit of God.

The works of the flesh are manifest, but the fruits of the Spirit are, etc.
Gal. 5.19,22.
-- To let you know, that there is no fruit nor profit in sin, and therefore
says the Apostle elsewhere, Romans 6.21.
What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the
end of those things is death. Sin brings forth no fruit but sorrow and shame;
sin it is a work of the flesh, it is the devils drudgery; sin is a work,
and it is a work of the flesh, and there is no profit in it; but there is fruit
in the Spirit, to let you know that if you embrace the Spirits motions, there
will fruit and profit redound unto you thereby. He that sows to his flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting. Gal. 6.8.
There is no profit in following the flesh, but much in following the Spirit.
Luther has a good gloss upon that of Paul, Let us cast off the work of
darkness, and put on the armor of light. Romans 13.12.
Sin is called a work of darkness, and if you regard the antithesis; grace
should be called the work of light, but it is not called so; it is called the
armor of light; not the garment, but the armor of light; now why is the
opposition carried on so unevenly? it is (says Luther) for this reason; sin
is called a work of darkness, not armor, to note that there is no force in it
against the wrath of God; but grace it is called the ^rmour of light, that as
armor is for ornament and defense; so grace it is that which beautifies the
soul, and keeps you from the wrath which is to come. I shall conclude this
particular with that of the Apostle Paul, to be carnally minded is death, but
to be spiritually minded is life and peace, there is peace in this world, and
eternal life in the world to come, much profit to a man which walks after the
Spirits guidance here, but everlasting life and happiness hereafter.

SERMON. X. At Lawrence Jury, London, December. 8. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh.
I Come now to the particular directions, touching the motions of the Spirit of
God.

Daniel 1.8.
That of Daniel is for our imitation, He purposed in his heart that he would
not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat, nor with the wine which
he drank, therefore he requested of the Prince of the Eunuchs, that he might
not defile himself. He did not rest in the bare motion, and purpose, but he
made it his request, he joined endeavor to his resolution: but as for us, how
may we (as I before told you) take up the complaint of Job, Our purposes are
broken off, even the thoughts of our hearts: Job 17.11
Holy motions they should be followed with holy resolutions, and accomplished
with holy performances.

2. When the Lord vouchsafes you the motions of his Spirit, you must not
conceive that you have the Essence, or the Person of the Spirit; this is the
error of the Familists, and no less then blasphemy, for want of a distinction
between the motions of the Spirit and the Person of the Spirit; their opinion
is this, that there is in a Believer not only the graces of the Spirit, but the
Person of the Spirit; but this is nothing else but to make humanity the Deity.
For the clearing hereof let me exemplify it by a comparison. The Sun that is
in the firmament, we use to say that it is in such a house, or such a window;
but when we say so, we do not mean that the body of the Sun is there, but
only that the light, heat, or influence of the Sun is there: So though the
Scripture tells us that the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3 16. Spiritus Dei habitatin
nobis, quia, regit, gabernat and sa^ctificat. Paraeus.
or Spirit dwells in us; the meaning is not, as if the Person of the holy Ghost
were in us, but only the motions and graces of the Spirit are there. And
therefore in both those expressions, You are the Temple of the holy Ghost, and,
The holy Ghost dwells in you, there is (says Paraeus) a Metaphor.

3. Take heed that you mistake not the Spirits motions for Satanical illusions.
I gave you the characters before, how you might know the Spirits motions from
the devils delusions: I shall only hint this to you, which is an infallible
rule, That all motions that are not consonant to a written Word, they are from
the devil, not from God. Prove. 1.23. Isa. 59.21.
I gave you two Texts of Scripture, wherein the Spirit and the Word were joined
together; therefore see that all your motions be according to a written Word.

John says, Believe not every Spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.1. 2 These. 2.2.
that is, every corrupt teacher, but try the Spirits whether they are of God,
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. They are called
Spirits, because they pretend with such confidence to have the Spirit. -- Now
that you may know such men, I shall discuss this Question.

Quest.
How you may know men who pretend to have the Spirit, when indeed they have
not?

1 Cor. 7.40.
they are always humble; thus it was with Paul, I give my judgment, (says
he) and I think I have the Spirit of God: Paul he knew he had the Spirit, yet
would he speak in humility, not boastingly and insultingly as many did. And so
at another time, says he, 2 Cor. 12.2,3,4
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body I cannot
tell, or whether out of the body I cannot tell, God knows: such a man caught
up into the third heaven, and heard words which it is not lawful for man to
utter. -- Now who was this man? it was none but himself; it was his modesty
that made him speak in a third Person; therefore those who boast of the Spirit,
and are vain glorious, it is an argument that indeed they have not the Spirit
of Christ, which is a Spirit of meekness and of humility.

Acts 8.
A famous instance you have hereof (as I noted before) in the Ethiopian Eunuch;
who being reading in his Chariot the Prophecy of Esaias, the Spirit would not
interpret to him the meaning hereof, Acts 9.6.
but bids. Philip go and expound it. -- So Paul when Christ revealed himself to
him, he would not teach him himself, but bids him go to Damascus, and there it
should be told him what he should do. -- The like example we have in Cornelius;
Acts 10.5,6.
the Spirit would not teach him immeditely, but bids him send for Peter, and he
should tell him what he ought to do. -- By these examples we see how the Lord
has honored the Ministry of the Word. And therefore those who cry up the
Spirit, so as to cry down the Ministry, as expecting to have the immediate
teaching of the Spirit; doubtless they have not the Spirit of God.

Saul in the shape of Samuel, 1 Samuel 28.^9
and says he, To morrow shall thou, and thy sons be with me, the Lord also
shall deliver the Host of Israel into the hands of the Philistines. Now how
came the devil to the knowledge of this? but by a special Revelation from God,
the Lord permitting it for the delusion of wicked Saul. Or else the devil may
know future events by that great knowledge which he has in
Scripture-Prophecies; those Prophecies which are dark to us the devil may know
them: and therefore we read in History, that the devil has told the events of
Wars. Thus the devil in the Delphick oracle told Alexander, that both the
Caldean, and Grecian Monarchies should be under his government, the devil told
him so. So that if men shall take upon them peremptorily to tell future
contingent events; I may confidently say, it comes from the devil, not from God.



1. Be much in holy discourse with good company; conversing with those who have
the Spirit about spiritual things, is a likely advantage for thee to gain the
Spirits motions. What Christ did whilst he was upon earth, that will he yet do
by his holy Spirit. You read when the two Disciples were going to Emmaus, Luke
24.15.
communing and reasoning together, that Jesus drew near and went with them;
Christ will draw near to those by the motions of his spirit, who are
discoursing about holy things.

2. Give due attendance to the ordinances of God; they are that poole which the
Angel at certain times will move. It is a Text worthy of observation, which you
read of in the Prophet Isaiah, where the Lord says, Isa. 30.20,21
That thy Teachers shall not be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes
shall see thy Teachers, and thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee, saying,
This is the way, walk ye in it. Mark the connection; you shall see your
Teachers, and in seeing them shall hear a voice, that is, of the Spirit. The
ordinances are they which convey the Spirit in its motions to us: and to this
purpose I may accomodate that of the Prophet Zachariah, Zech. 4.12
where it is said, that the two Olive-branches did empty themselves of the
golden oil, by the two golden pipes, and so it ran into the Candlestick.
This Candlestick is the Church, the oil is the motions of Gods Spirit, and
these motions they run through ordinances; they are those golden pipes which
convey the Spirits motions into your hearts. It is with the motions of the
Spirit and holy ordinances, as it is with the blood and Spirit, and the veins
and Arteries; for as these convey the blood and spirit to each part: so also
ordinances convey the graces and comforts of the Spirit to each believing
member of Christ. Wait upon the Preaching of the Word, and then wait also
upon prayer; that will be a means whereby you shall obtain the Spirit. Christ
he makes this an encouragement to prayer. Luke 11.13.
If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts to you children; how much
more (says he) shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that
ask him? Go therefore to God in prayer, and that will be a means to bring the
Spirit into thy heart.

3. Be much alone in holy meditation. Christ could tell you that he was alone,
and yet (says he) I am not alone, because the Father is with me; So you, if
you are alone in meditation, yet you will not be alone, because the Spirit will
be with you in its holy motions. That as Isaac when he went forth to meditate,
Genesis 24.63,64
it is said that then he saw Rebeccah, that mercy he so long prayed for: so may
I say to thee, be much in meditation and the Spirit which thou have prayed for
shall be given in unto thee. 1 Kings 19.12.
As Eliah when he was in the mountain, he perceived that the Lord was in the
still voice; so will the soul at last perceive, that though the holy Spirit is
not in the strong wind of boisterous passions, yet he will be in the still
voice of holy meditation.

Romans 8.13,14,15. is the ground of that comfort.

thousand good motions in thy mind, which may merely come from moral
persuasion. Mere nature may make a Reprobate go far; how do you read of
flashes of joy in Herod? he heard John Baptist gladly; of pangs of fear, and
horror in Felix? and fits of sorrow and grief in Judas? yet all these came
from the force of moral persuasion, and were not saving workings of the Spirit.

That you may not be mistaken about moral persuasion: I shall give you four
differences between it and the Spirits working.

1. Moral persuasion it may move a man to do good, but it never changes the
affections. And therefore you read of those, 2 These. 2.10.
That did not receive the truth in the love of it. Which intimates that men may
receive the truth in the motion of it, and yet not in the love of it. Ephesians.
4.15. (...).
And hence are those expressions Of speaking the truth in love, or doing the
truth in love; whatsoever you do you must do it in love. Now moral persuasion
may move you to do a good act, but it never draws out your affections in love
to the things you do.

2. Moral persuasion presses men to do good, but it gives them no power to do
the thing it persuades to. Moral persuasion may give a man an eye, to see what
is to be done; but the Spirit it gives not only an eye, Romans 3.26.
but a hand also, and helps us in the doing of that good whereunto it persuades.

3. Moral persuasion moves men to do good more out of hope of reward, or fear
of punishment then of love to grace, or holiness; it looks more at what God
gives, then what he requires; and has more respect to the reward of grace,
then to grace it self.

4. Moral persuasions they are partial persuasions; they move a man to some
kinds of good, but not to all good; to good that may be easily done, but not
to difficult duties; to outward, but not to inward good: but the Spirits
motions they are universal; there is no good act, but the Spirit it moves a man
to.

It shall come to pass in the last days, Acts 2.17.
(says God) that I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh. The Spirit it
reveals things now more clearly, and more abundantly. In the last days the
Spirit speaks expressly; before they saw things darkly; but now we see face to
face, that is, more plainly; there shall be a more full revelation of the
Spirit, Isaiah 30.26.
When the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven days. Ephesians. 3 5.
And hence is that promise, that knowledge shall fill the earth as water
fills the sea. In other ages the Mystery of Christ was not made known unto
the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto us by the Spirit. Bless God then;
this is a general comfort that more of the Spirit was reserved under the New
Testament, then was dispensed under the Old.

In particular, there are six comforts which I shall lay down for such who walk
after the guidance and motions of Gods Spirit.

1. The Spirit of God will be a sure guide to you, to discover to you, John
16.13.
and to lead you in all truth; so says our Savior, He will guide you into all
truth, that is, into all truth necessary to salvation. A like place you have in
the same Evangelist, John 14.26.
where it is said, that the Spirit shall teach you all things; that is, all
things needful for an elect man to know that he may be saved. The Spirit of God
reveals the Mysteries of salvation to his people, 1 Cor. 2.9,10.
and therefore you read, that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them which
love him: but God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, The Spirit it makes
known to us Gospel Truths, and reveals Gospel-Mysteries; 1 Cor. 2.15.
The spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man; he
has the Spirit of God inabling him to discern of Doctrines whether they be
true or false; and says the Apostle, he himself is judged of no man; that is,
he is so assured of the truth of his Doctrine, Hildersam on Psalm 51. page 774.
that other men cannot pervert him.

2. The Spirit will not be only a guide to lead you, but a seal to assure you
of your Adoption. Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the Spirit of God, (that is, which walk after its
motions, and guidance) they are the Sons of God. And because ye are sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba,
Father; Gal. 4.6
that is, giving you a farther assurance, and Seal of your Sonneship, that you
may with more boldness pour out your hearts into the bosom of your Father.

3. The Spirit will be an evidence unto thee of thy union with Jesus Christ. So
says the Apostle, Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he
has given to us. And hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit. 1 John 3.24.
Chap. 4 13
Get therefore the Spirit into thy heart, and follow its motions and guidance,
and hereby will thou be assured of thy union with Christ.

4. Walk in the Spirit, and it will be a sure pledge to thee, that thou art
exempted from damnation and brought into a state of salvation. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. It will be an evidence to you that you are
past damnation.

5. That you are free from the curse and power of the law. If ye be led of the
Spirit, ye are not under the law. Gal. 5.18
Liberati sumas per Christum a damnatione, non a directione legis.
You must not understand it as if you were not under the moral law as a rule of
life, but only that you are freed from the curse of it, so you are not under it.

6. And lastly, if ye have the Spirit of God, and walk after its guidance, here
will be your comfort, that ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. And
this brings me to the second Doctrine, to wit, That walking after the Spirit is
an especial help to Believers, that they shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; though they may act the lusts of the flesh, and commit those sins
which the devil, and their own hearts may move them to, yet they shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. -- But more of this in the following Sermons.

SERMON. XI. At Lawrence Jury, London, December. 15. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 16. And ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. --
I Have hitherto treated on the duty, Walk in the Spirit; And am now to treat
of the benefit annexed to this duty, -- And ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh. --

In the handling of which, I shall first explain it, and then give you the
Doctrine.

There are two things to be opened. First, what is meant by the lusts of the
flesh? -- Secondly, what is meant by fulfilling these lusts?

What is meant by this phrase the lusts of the flesh?



2. Neither is it to be confined to the sin of incontinency, but to be taken
more comprehensively, for the sinfulness of our corrupt nature, the lusts and
motions whereof you must not fulfill.

3. These motions and lusts of corrupt nature must be considered two ways. --
First, either as a power. Or secondly, as an act.

1. As a power, and so they nore that radical indisposition that is in man's
nature to good, and its proneness to evil. Or --

2. As an act, and so it notes those sinful motions to sin that come from
corrupt nature, and so I take the meaning of this place; 1 Pet. 2.11.
You shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, that is, walk according to the
dictates and motions of the Spirit, and you shall not act those sinful motions
which arise from corrupt nature.

But then a farther question is, what is meant by not fulfilling these lusts of
the flesh?



Before I come to handle the Doctrine, I shall premise these particulars.

1. This benefit here annexed may be understood, either preceptively, or
promissively; either as a precept what you should do, or as a promise what you
shall do. And the Translators of the Bible it seems were at a stand, how to
render these words (...). Beza renders them ne perficite preceptively, fulfill
not; the vulgar; ne perficietis, you shall not fulfill. -- Which our
translatours followed, but as you may perceive, put also the other rendering
and reading in the Margin. But it is not material which way you take it.

2. This promise, (for so it seems to be taken) it is not to be taken
absolutely, but conditionally; my meaning is this, God does not promise this
absolutely, but upon this condition, If you walk in the Spirit, on this
condition, you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

3. It is not said, you shall not have the lusts of the flesh; for what man is
there which has them no^? but you shall not fulfill them.

4. (...)
We read in our translation the lusts of the flesh; but it is in the Greek, The
lust of the flesh, in the singular number. -- Now what may be the reason that
though the Word be in the singular number, yet it is read in the plural? For
this reason, because the sin of nature, though it be but one Mass of sin,
yet it has many sinsin the womb of it; and there may be this use made of the
translation. That though the sin of nature be but one, yet seminally there
are all the sins in the world contained in it.

5. Touching the benefit annexed, there is no cause of doubting to be left in
your minds, that this benefit shall not be yours, if you perform the
condition. Do you walk in the Spirit, and God will keep you that you shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh; and this I draw from the Apostles Assertion, in
these words; This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. This I say, as if the Apostle should say, This is that
which I have to speak unto you in the name of the Lord, that if you walk in the
Spirit, you shall not fulfill, etc.

Now having premised these particulars, the Doctrine is this. --

That Walking after the guidance, or motions of the Spirit, is an especial
means to keep men that they shall not yield to the lusts of the flesh with so
strong and full a bent of the will, as wicked and ungodly men, when they sin
against God.

This is a very fruitful point, the promise is not to be taken absolutely, you
shall not fulfill them at all; but comparatively, you shall not sin as wicked
men do; you may sin, but you shall not regard iniquity in your heart, as the
phrase is, Psalm. 66.18. you shall not commit sin, (...), 1 John 3.9. as wicked
men do, who make a trade of sin.

In the handling of this point I shall only dispatch this one thing, to show
you how the wicked do sin, and fulfill the lusts of the flesh, that all godly
men which walk after the guidance of the Spirit, shall not so sin.

1. They who walk after the Spirit, they shall not sin so wilfully, Heb. 10 26.
nor so voluntarily as wicked men do. If we sin wilfully after we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Godly
men they do not sin with so strong a bent of will, as wicked men do; sin they
do, and they sin with their wills too, but there is much resistenice in the will
against the will; it is not a full consent of the will, nor a full bent and
tendencie of the heart: and therefore says the Apostle Paul, The evil that I
would not, that I do. Romans 7.19.
Paul he tells you he did evil, but he tells you also that he did not will the
evil he did. A godly man he sometimes yields to sin, as to an usurping Tyrant,
but never as to his natural Lord. Wicked men they will the evil they do, but
godly men will the good they do not. Wicked men they sin with all their will,
because there is no part of their will regenerated; Psalm. 50.19. Impii
delectontar impi^tate, and bell^m in^cunt perspect^e veritati, uti sccit Saul,
Abab, Julianus Apestata, Arrius, and alii quorum exceranda est memoria. Beza.
Romans 7.14. 1 King. 21,25.
and therefore says the Psalmist, speaking of a wicked man, Thou give thy
self to speak evil. It is remarkable that variation of expression concerning
Ahab and Paul. Ahab, it is said of him, that he sold himself to work
wickedness; but of Paul it is said, that he was sold under sin. They were both
sold, but there is this difference. Ahab he sold himself; but Paul was sold, he
did not sell himself. Ahabs act was a voluntary act, he sold himself; but Paul
was sold under sin, it was not voluntary, but against his will.

2. Those who walk after the Spirit, they do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh
so impudently as wicked men do. Wicked men they commit wickedness before the
Sun, and are not ashamed; therefore says the Lord by his Prophet, Jer 6.15.
Chap. 8.12.
Were they ashamed, when they had c^mmitted abominations? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush. Thou have a whores forehead (says the
same Prophet) thou refusedst to be ashamed. Jer. 3.3.
The wicked they have cast off shame, and therefore says the Prophet
Zephaniah, The unjust knows no shams; Zeph. 3.5.
they will not be ashamed when they have done wickedly: as that whore she
finds a young man, Pro 7.13,14.
and she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, I
have peace offerings with me, this day have I paid my vows. Thus wicked men
they sin impudently, and are not ashamed when they have committed abomination;
but the godly they do not so sin. Romans 6.21.
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? (says the
Apostle.) And Ezra, Oh God, our iniquities are increased, I blush and am
ashamed to look up. Ezra 9.6.
The godly they do not sin so impudently as wicked men do.

3. Neither so boastingly as wicked men, ungodly men they boast in their
ungodly deeds; and therefore says the Psalmist to Doeg, Why boastest thou thy
self in mischief, oh mighty man? Psalm. 52 1.
It seems Doeg did not only kill those innocent Priests, but boasted of his
villainy and wickedness. Hence it is said, Phil. 3.18,19.
that the Apostle Paul wept over some that were enemies to the cross of
Christ, whose glory was in their shame, that is, in their sin. A regenerate man
may act sin, and hide sin; nay, he may extenuate sin, he may mince the matter,
and put off, and excuse it all he can; but we never read of a regenerate man
which did boast in his sin. A godly man may go near, Jer. 11.15.
ever to the suburbs of hell, by his sin; but he never glories in shame, nor
boasts of his sin.

4. Godly men they sin not so rejoycingly as wicked men do. The Prophet
Jeremiah tells you of some, Prove. 10.23.
that when they did evil, they rejoiced. It is a sport to a fool to do
mischief, as the wise man tells you. Chap. 2 14.
By Solomon's fool is meant a wicked man, and such are they, who rejoice to do
evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked. Ungodliness, it is a
wicked man's sport, he makes a jest of sin, Prove. 10.23.
but a man of understanding has wisdom, that is, he has more wisdom then to
make a sport of sin, he knows that they shall be damned, that have pleasure in
unrighteousness; and therefore he dares not sin rejoycingly as other men do;
he has wisdom rather to mourn for it, as David, I will declare mine iniquity,
I will be sorry for my sin. Psalm. 38.18.


5. Godly men they sin not so plottingly, and contrivingly, as unregenerate
men. It is true, godly men they may yield to the lusts of the flesh, and act
sin, but they are not so cunning to contrive it. 1 John 3.8. (...) differt ab
(...). Beza in loc. Jer. 4.22. Ezekiel. 21.31. I sal. 119.69. (...) concinnarunt,
a (...) conjunxit, metaphora a Fabris. Psalm. 50.19.
He that commits sin, is of the Devil. It is not said, He that sins, but he
that commits sin, that is, he that makes sin. The word is taken from
Artificers, that are skillful and cunning about their work. Godly men are
bunglers about sin, but wicked men they do it artificially. Hence it is said,
that they are wise to do evil; And skillful to destroy. David he tells you, The
proud have forged a lie against me. It is bad to tell a lie, but worse to forge
a lie. It is an expression drawn from Smiths, that when they would bring a
piece of iron into any curious frame, they bring it to the forge. Wicked men,
they are as skillful in the way of sin, as if they were bound aprentice to it.
Therefore we read of them, that their tongues are said to frame deceit. It is
said, that Christ at last day will put away those who are workers of iniquity;
all are actours of iniquity, but all do not work iniquity, that is, they do not
make a trade of sin, neither are cunning in the cursed craft of sin.

6. Godly men, they sin not so deliberately as wicked men do. A godly man (it
is true) may be carried to sin through the violence of temptation, and through
the treacherousnesse of his own spirit; but he does not deliberate sin, pause,
and consider with himself how he may commit it: Micah 2.1.
Woe be to them that devise iniquity and work evil upon their beds: and when the
morning is light they practice it. Wicked men are said to shut their eyes to
devise froward things. Prove. 16.30.
Which is a posture which argues the intentnes of the mind, because by opening
of the eyes many objects are administered, whereby the mind is distracted.
Thus wicked men, they plot, contrive, and deliberate, how they may commit sin:
wicked men are students in sin. But remember that at the day of judgment, God
will not only call thee to an account for thy actions, but for thy
deliberations, (...), Heb. 4.12.
and the debates of thy mind, how thou might commit such a sin, though it
were never acted by thee: 1 Cor. 4.5.
then will God make manifest the counsels of the heart: all those deliberate
thoughts and purposes that were in your mind to sin these will God make
manifest, and judge you even for the counsels of the heart. Psalm. 36.4.
The Psalmist tells you, that a wicked man, he devises mischief upon his bed,
he sets himself in a way that is not good. He devises mischief, there is
his deliberation, and sets himself in a way that is not good, that is a further
expression of it. A godly man may be turned aside by the Devil and his own
heart, Gal. 6.1. (...), si praeoccupatus sit a carne and Satana, and in cantus
incidit in insidias. Beza.
but the wicked they set themselves in a way of sin. A godly man may be
overtaken with sin, as the Apostle tells you, which intimates that he is going
from it; but a wicked man, he goes not from sin, but sets himself in a way
which is not good. It is true I must confess, as Divines upon this case, that
in a sense there may be deliberation in a godly man to sin, yet there is great
difference between the godly and the wicked herein. There is difference betwixt
the deliberating about the act of sin, and between a deliberation to find out
an occasion how to commit sin. A godly man he may be deliberate about the act,
he may roll the Sun in his fancy; but a godly man does not deliberate how to
find an occasion whereby he may be wicked. There was a deliberation in David,
when he committed adultery, but he did not deliberate about the occasion to
find it out; he did not go to his housetop, thinking with himself that there
he should see a woman to lust after; but when he was there, the Devil presented
him with an occasion, and when the occasion was found out, then he did not
deliberate how to commit that foul sin. The like may be said about his
deliberation in the death of Vriah, for though he did it deliberately, yet the
violence of the temptation that then was upon him, pressed him thereunto. But
now wicked men they deliberate how they may find occasions to sin, they are
Devils to themselves, plotting how they may do mischief, they tempt the Devils
to tempt them.

7. Godly men, they do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh so eagerly, and
intently as wicked men do, who are eagerly set upon their lusts. The adulterous
thoughts of the wicked are compared to the neighing of a well-fed horse, which
is a very strong desire, Jer. 5.8.
and to the fury of a horse rushing into the battle; Chap. 8.6.
wicked men are as eager in the pursuit of their lusts, as ever a horse was to
rush into the battle. Exodus 32.22
You read in Exodus 32. that the people were set on mischief, which intimated
their eagerness to do wickedly. How eager was Amnon to satisfy his lust?
insomuch that he was sick: And how sick was Ahab for Naboths vineyard? they
were so intently bent upon their lusts. But good men though they sin, yet
they do not sin so eagerly, and therefore the Apostle he makes this a
difference between godly and wicked men, the wicked they commit all iniquity,
Ephesians. 4.19. (...) Ezekiel 11.21
and all iniquity with greediness. It is said of the wicked that their heart
walks after their detestable things.

8. Godly men they do not sin so resolvedly as wicked men do; wicked men are so
resolved upon their lusts that there is no taking of them off. When God bids
the people leave their Idolatry, they say, No, we have loved strangers, and
after them we will go; Jer. 2.25.
as if they should say, we have done evil, and we will do evil still; Thus at
another time when they had burned incense to the Queen of heaven, and the Lord
had commanded them to leave their Idolatry, Jer. 44.16.
and threatened to punish them, yet say they, As for the word which thou have
spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: They were
resolved to follow their wickedness. A wicked man is so set upon his sin,
Prove. 4.16.
that it takes away his sleep, He sleeps not unless he has done some
mischief, and his sleep is taken away, unless he cause some to fall; but godly
men they do not sin so resolvedly. It is true, a godly man may have a purpose
to act a sin, though he may know it to be a sin, but a little good counsel
will take him off. That of David is very remarkable, how resolved was he to
kill Nabal and all his family; and what a bloody resolution was it? nay he had
bound himself under an oath, and was going up to execute his bloody resolution,
but at last Abigail meets him, and by her good counsel how soon was he brought
off from his resolution? And blessed be the Lord God of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.32,33.
(says he) which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and
blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood. Godly
men they are not so resolved upon wickedness; a little good advice will bring
them off, and they will bless God for such preventing counsel, and you for
giving it them.

9. They do not sin so contentedly as wicked men. Wicked men they sin
contentedly because they are in their proper element, when they are sinning.
Nil gravitat in suo centro.
Now Philosophers say of the elements; that the earth is not heavy in its
proper place. Wicked men they are as swine in the mire, it pleases them to be
there; but for a sheep to be in the mire, how does it trouble it? it is their
delight to be in the green Pastures. Wicked men they not only walk, and stand,
but sit down in sin, Psalm. 1.1.
which argues their contentedness therein. But it is not so with the godly,
there is that difference between sin in a good man and in a wicked man, as
there is between poison being in a man and a toade; poison in the toade,
contents it, because it is natural; but poison in a man how does it offend him?
thus it is between sin in the godly and the wicked: Sin in the wicked it
contents him, because it is natural to him; but sin in the godly it is like
poison in a man's body, it tortures, and torments him.

10. A godly man he does not sin so customarily as wicked men do. A wicked
man he makes it his custom to sin, it is his way wherein he walks, and
therefore says David, Search me, O God, and know my heart, and my thoughts:
And see if there be any wicked way in me: Psalm. 139.23,24.
There may be a work of wickedness in a godly man, but there is not a way of
wickedness in him. The wicked are accustomed to a way of wickedness, and as
the Prophet speaks, If the Leopard can cleanse his spots, or the blackmore his
skin, then may they also who are accustomed to do evil. Sin in a wicked man
it is like water in a river, you saw it there yesterday, and you may see it to
day, always it is there; when they are in a way of sin, they are in their
proper course; but sin in a godly man, it is like the water of a land-flood,
you see it to day, but to morrow it is gone; sin it is not a customary thing to
them.

11. They who walk after the Spirit, they yield not to sin so indulgently as
wicked men; the Prophet he brands wicked men with this, Psalm. 58.2.
that in heart they work wickedness, they sin with their hearts; and in
another place he says, Psalm. 5.9.
Their inward part is very wickedness, that is, their sin it comes from
their hearts. Hence also they are described to be such, Jer. 11.21.
Whose heart walks after detestable things, they sin affectionately; but a
good man's heart it is not so taken up with sin. The wicked are said to hide
sin under their tongues as a sweet morsel, but the godly though they may have
sin in their mouths, yet it is there as a bitter morsel, it is unpleasant to
them. A wicked man is as indulgent to his sin, though he know it will be his
ruin, as David was to Absalom, and he deals gently with it; but it is otherwise
with the godly, for though he be overtaken with a sin, yet he takes revenge
of it; 2 Cor. 7.11. Romans 7.21,22.
and therefore says Paul, I find a law that when I would do good, evil is
present with me. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man. My
inward man is changed, Verse. 25.
and therefore says be, With the mind I my self serve the law of God, but
with the flesh the law of sin: Godly men they do not delight in a course of
sin.

12. And lastly, they do not sin so maliciously as wicked men: The Psalmist
has a prophetical prayer against such, Lord, (says he) be not merciful to
them that sin of malicious wickedness; good men who walk after the Spirit,
they never sin so as to despite the Spirit of grace; they sin
inconsiderately, but they never sin maliciously. Now sum up all these
particulars, and you will see the text is true, that if ye walk in the Spirit,
ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, that is, you shall not sin after
that manner, and after that rate as wicked men sin.



1 John 3.9. Non homines, sed monstra Hominum sunt Pelagiani, Cathari,
Caelestiani, Donatistae, A nabaptistae, Libertini, qui ex hoc loco perfectionem
illam somniant, a qua absunt ipsi emnium hon inum longissimi. Beza. Chap. 2.1.
Job 1.22. Job. 5.24.
and the Scripture speaks of a godly man in this regard, as if he had no sin
at all. Whosoever is borne of God (says the Apostle) does not commit sin,
for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God.
It is not to be taken absolutely, as if we had no sin, but comparatively, he
cannot sin so as wicked men. These things write I unto you, that ye sin
not, says the Apostle. And as it is said of Job, that in all this he sinned
not. These expressions are not to be taken absolutely, but comparatively; not
that godly men sin not at all, but that they sin not after that man^er
wicked men do. Thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin, says Job.
What an honor then is this put upon the godly, that because they sin not as
the wicked, therefore the Scripture makes mention of them, as if they did not
sin at all.

But farther, see the misery of the wicked; what a case are they in, who have
not the Spirit of God to lay a control upon their sinful natures? what
servants to sin are they? what vassals to their own lusts? when the devil
tempts from without, and their own lusts from within, they have no Spirit of
God to withhold them. Wicked men, they sin so as no godly men can; and
therefore, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
They have corrupted themselves, and their spot is not the spot of my children.
It is true, I confess, there may be a spice of those particulars I mentioned,
in thy practice; there may be something of the will in sin, some delectation,
some deliberation; yet do not be discouraged if thy heart yield not fully, if
there be not such a strong bent of will to sin as is found in wicked men.

SERMON. XII. At Lawrence Jury, London. December. 15. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
HAving treated in several Sermons upon the Verse foregoing, concerning walking
in the Spirit; I come now to handle this Verse, which contains in it the
combat between the flesh and the Spirit.

I shall only open the first clause of the Text at this time, and dispatch the
other in order.

The first onset given in this spiritual combat, is by the flesh, The flesh
lusts against the Spirit; to open which, two things must be unfolded. flesh? 2.
What is meant by the Spirit? and then what by the lusting of the flesh against
the Spirit?


flesh is to be understood, the corruption of man's nature by original sin;
which corruption may be understood, either as an hab^t, or as an act: If you
consider the flesh as an habit, then it notes that primitive, radical, and
original indisposition in man's nature to good. -- But if it be taken as an act,
then it notes our corrupt motions against grace, and so I take it in this
place; The flesh lusts against the Spirit, that is, when the Spirit of God
does by divine pulsations beat upon the heart in holy motions, then there is a
contrariety in the flesh against these motions, suppressing them, and carrying
the heart to evil.

The corruption of nature may be called flesh for these reasons.

1. Because the soul was defiled with corruption immediately upon its union and
conjunction with the body. It is true, there is a contest among Divines, when
the soul comes to be corrupted, seeing it is infused by creation, and is
therefore pure? But the generality of Authors conclude upon this; that
immediately upon the conjunction of the soul with the body, the creature is
said to have natural corruption; and for this reason some think that corrupt
nature is called flesh; because man is naturally corrupted, as soon as soul and
body join together.

2. Corrupt nature is called flesh; because this corruption of nature remains,
as long as we carry flesh and blood about with us; as long as you have flesh,
you shall have sin. The body of death is not destroyed, but by the death of the
body, and therefore corruption may be called flesh.

3. Because the motions of corrupt nature are naturally as dear to a man,
Ephesians. 5.29.
as his own flesh: No man yet ever hated his own flesh, and this is the reason
why the Scripture calls it a right hand, Math. 5.29,30
and a right eye; corruption of nature it is closely joined to a man.

spirit!

spirit some understand the soul of a regenerate man; but this seems to be
incoherent, the scope of the place carrying it to something else, though this
also may be included. Therefore by spirit is to be understood, the holy motions
and workings of Gods Spirit, and there the flesh is said to lust against, Gal.
3.2,14. Gal 4.6,29. Gal. 5.5,16,17 18,22,25.
and it is apparent that it is thus to be understood, because spirit is so
taken in the foregoing Verse, and also in the Verse following my Text; so that
by spirit I understand the motions and workings of Gods Spirit in the soul.
And in this sense is the word spirit taken in most places of this Epistle.

lust?

lust against the Spirit, you may observe, that it is not said to work against
the Spirit, nor act against the Spirit; though sin be of an active nature, yet
it is not always in the act; but though it be not always acting, yet it is
always lusting; there is an opposite disposition in nature to the work of Gods
Spirit upon the heart. In the words you may observe three parts. 1. A double
conflict; The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh. 2. A double cause; These are contrary the one to the other, the flesh
contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit contrary to the flesh. 3. Here is a
double consequent; So that ye cannot do the things ye would; the flesh lusts
against the Spirit, so that ye cannot do the good ye would, and the Spirit
against the flesh, so that ye cannot do the evil ye would.


Before I raise the doctrine, I shall premise a few particulars to be
considered of.

1. This conflict between the flesh and the Spirit, it was not found in
innocence; then there was an harmony between the motions of Gods Spirit, and
all the powers and faculties both of soul and body; God made man upright.

2. This conflict, it shall not be found in a state of glory; for then thou
shall be all Spirit, and no corrupt flesh; for then the flesh shall be utterly
abolished.

3. This opposition, it is not found in infancy; it is true, there is a corrupt
nature in infants, sinful motions in children; but there is not that which we
call actual opposition, because they cannot exercise neither grace nor sin.

4. This conflict, it is not found in the state of unregeneracy: while a man is
wholly unregenerate, he has no saving motions in him; and there cannot be an
opposition, but where there are two contraries.

5. That the time of this life, is the time how long this conflict shall last;
it cannot be ended until this life be ended; until thou castest off the body
of flesh, thou shall not be rid of the motions of sin.

6. That even in the most holy that are, there will be this conflict between
the flesh and Spirit; and those who have most grace, are most sensible of the
contest of the flesh against the Spirit.

7. That even regenerate men do more often side with the motions of the flesh,
then close with the motions of the Spirit; they are more in sin, then in
obedience; more in embracing sinful motions, then in entertaining divine
motions: some gather this from the Apostles vatiation of speech, when he says.
The works of the flesh are manifest; but he does not say so of the fruits of
the Spirit; intimating that m^n are apt to close with the flesh rather then
with the Spirit.

7. These motions of corrupt nature, they do not only reside in the inferior
part of man, as the concupiscible faculty exciting to gluttony and lusts, and
irascible to envy and wrath; but also in the superior part; (though the
Papists would make us believe otherwise.) The more noble and rational faculties
of man are become corrupt, thou art become vain in thy reason, and in thy
imagination; thy understanding is tainted, and thy will rebellious; thy
affections displaced; thy superior faculties are defiled. -- Now having laid
down these particulars, I come to raise the Doctrine, which is this.



I shall not dilate upon the proving of this point; it is written legibly in
the Word, and engraven in every man's experience. -- Therefore in the handling
thereof there are several Queries I shall dispatch, and then shall give you the
use.

Wherein consists this conflict between the flesh and the Spirit?

Paul, Romans 7.5.
he speaks it in the name of the regenerate, (says he) When we were in the
flesh, the motions of sin which were by the law, (accidentally) did work in
our members to bring forth fruit unto death. Not only in unregeneracy do
motions arise from corrupt nature, James 1.7,14.
contrary to Gods Spirit; but in a regenerate man. Every man is tempted when he
is drawn away of his own lusts and enticed, that is, by original sin; and
thus Paul, he speaks of himself as converted, Romans 7.23.
(says he) I see another law in my members warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my
members; the Apostle he calls sin a law, because it had a force over him, and
brought him into captivity; the law of his members did war against the law of
his mind, by provoking him to sin.

Rom 7.19.
hence it is that Paul complains of himself, that the good he would do, he did
not, and the evil he would not do, that he did; and this arose from that
corruption of nature, which in the whole Chapter he complains of, and herein
chiefly consists the opposition that is between the flesh and the Spirit.

To will is present with me, Romans 7.18.
(says Paul) but how to perform that which is good I find not; as if he
should say, I have always an evil nature within me, which is interrupting me
and debilitating me, that I cannot do the good I would; herein consists the
conflict between the flesh and the Spirit.

How does the flesh oppose the Spirit and provoke to sin? the Spirit
disswades from sin, the flesh intices to sin. Now what way does the flesh
take to entice to sin, so as thereby to conflict with the Spirit?

Paul, Romans 7.11.
(says he) Sin taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me; by sin he means not actual, but original sin; the sin of nature is
very subtle to deceive, as will appear,

1 By the names the Scripture gives to the sin of nature, They are called
deceitful lusts. Ephesians. 4.22.
There is great deceitfulness in sin, according to that exhortation of the
Apostle, Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.13.


2. The sin of nature it is deceitful, as appears by the experience of Gods
people; Romans 7.11.
Sin taking occasion (says Paul) by the commandment, deceived me, and by it
slew me.

3. Because this sin of nature, it is that which makes the heart deceitful
above all things, and desparately wicked; Jer. 17.9. Quicquid efficit tale, est
magis tale.
the heart is deceitful, and is very subtle therein.



1. By varnishing over sin with the color and paint of grace. As a light
woman may sometimes dress her self in modest attire, that so she may not be
suspected; so thy heart may varnish over sin, that thereby it may the sooner
deceive thee. As it is usual that the beautiful face of grace by the corruption
of our hearts may be smeared over with deformity; as that tenderness of
conscience may be termed a needless scrupulosity; zeal may be called
rashness, holy walking, needless and precise niceness; patience in bearing
suffering, cowardice and lowness of Spirit: -- So thy corrupt heart on the
contrary may paint over foul sins with the varnish of grace. So many have
painted over the foul sin of covetousness with the virtue of frugality and
thriftinesse, pride called neatness, drunkenness good fellowship, prodigality
may be styled generous magnanimity, and such like varnish does the world put
upon the deformed face of sin.

And as for practice, so also for opinion; how are old Heresies that may be
found in Eusebius and other Authors, how are they now termed new lights? how
are Satan's delusions termed the Spirits motions? how is loose walking termed
Christian liberty? This varnishing of sin with the paint of seeming grace
comes from our corrupt natures, and is one way by which the flesh intices to
sin.

2. By persuading thee that there are some sins, that there is no fear of thy
committing them. The devil has a great advantage over men in this regard. Our
own hearts sometimes tell us that there are some sins so foul, and so
contrary to our natural temper, and we think we have such a measure of grace,
that certainly we shall never commit them; thus it was with wi^ked Hazael; when
the Prophet told him what evil he should do unto Israel, that he should burn
their Cities, slay their young men, dash children against the stones, and rip
up women with child: 2 Kin. 8.12,13.
Hazael could not believe this, but says he, Mat. 26.35.
Is thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing? Thus Peter's heart
deceived him; Though all men forsake thee, (says he) yet I will not; but how
did his heart deceive him? even a godly man may be thus cheated by his own
heart. Men will not believe their hearts to be so bad as they are, and when the
heart is once brought to this to think that there are some sins which it
shall never commit, by that means a man grows secure and is thereby the more
easier drawn unto it. Thus David, who made conscience of lesser matters, for
his conscience smote him for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, but he never
thought that he should fall into those gross and scandalous sins of adultery
and murder, and so his heart grew secure and deceived him.

3. The flesh intices to sin, by promising to a man pleasure and delight in
the commission of sin; but conceals the hurt and mischief which comes by it:
and how are thousands deceived hereby? Every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust and enticed. James 1.14. (...).
We are said to be enticed by our lusts; the word is very emphatical, being a
Metaphor drawn from fishermen, who will let the fish see the bait, but not the
hook; and as the fisherman deals with the fish, so also does the devil and thy
corrupt nature; they will show thee the pleasure, but not the danger of sin;
the bait, but not the hook; as the Apostle Peter speaks, beguiling unstable
souls. 2 Pet 2.14. (...).
It is thy own heart which deceives thee. As the devil before Adam had a sinful
nature, used this engine against him: so now thy own heart uses it against thy
self. If you will eat, (says the devil) you shall be as gods knowing good and
evil, and your eyes shall be opened; the devil hid the hook, did not show them
that they should be driven out of Paradise, but hid their danger, and so
deceived them. Now thy own corrupt heart sets upon thee in the same method. The
way of a wicked man seduces him, Prove. 12.26. Prove. 11.18.
says Solomon. The wicked works a deceitful work; but to him that sows
righteousness, shall be a sure reward. Pro thesauro carbones.
The work of the wicked shows him a seeming reward, but it is only the godly
whose reward is sure.

4 By persuading to entertain small and lesser sins, promising that if they will
but yield to these, they shall never be troubled to commit greater. This is a
great deceit of the heart, wherein thousands have been taken, whereas small
sins they are as an inlet to greater sins. A little thief put into a house,
may open the doors for greater, and stronger to come in. You know a wedge
small and thin in one part, makes way for a greater; little sins they will
draw us on to greater. I have read a story of a young man that was tempted by
the Devil and his own heart to three sins; to kill his father, to lie with his
mother, and to be drunk: the two former he would not do being abhorrent to
nature; but thought he, I will yield to the last, because that was the least;
which was enough, for being drunk, he did in his drunkenness kill his father,
and ravished his own mother. Take heed therefore of this deceit of sin, thy own
heart will not prompt thee to all sin at first; but will labor to draw thee on
by degrees, from less sins to greater, until thou become abominable therein;
Behold, Isa. 3.5.
says the Apostle James, what a great matter a little fire kindles! Little
sins yielded to, may be occasions to bring forth many great sins; therefore
take heed you be not deceived by the corrupt dictates of nature.

5. The flesh will tempt thee to sin upon this ground, because it is but a
little one; it is but a small sin, as Lot said of Zoar, Is it not a little one?
but consider that this is the mere policy of sin to undo thee; for though
there are some sins less then others are in respect of the act, yet all are
alike in regard of the object; there is no little God to sin against, and
therefore there can be no little sin; sin must not be measured by its act,
but by its object. A blow given to an ordinary man, it is accounted as nothing;
but a blow given to a great man, how heinous is it? therefore if thy heart
shall say to thee that it is but a little sin, do thou say, The God I sin
against is no little God; and the merit which must procure pardon for this sin,
can be no small merit; and the hell prepared for the punishment of a little
sin, is no small torment; therefore take heed to thy heart in this regard.

6. Thy heart may entice thee to sin upon pretense of good that may ensue upon
thy committing of it; and how many have been entangled in this snare? Hereby
were Lots daughters entangled to lie with their own father, Genesis 19.32.
upon this pretense that they might preserve seed of their father; they saw
there was no likelihood for a posterity to come from their father, and so
thought that the Church of God would cease; here was their end, and therefore
for preserving a seed, they would venture to sin. This is expressly against
the Scripture, which forbids that we should do evil, Romans 3.8. Job 13.7.
that good may come thereon; Will ye talk wickedly for God, and deal
deceitfully for him? and if upon pretense of good, we may commit evil; by the
same rule Judas his treason may be excused, because of the great good coming by
Christ's death. But let me tell you farther, that if you sin that good may come
thereby, it is the way to lose the good you aim at. It is very remarkable
concerning Saul, being to pursue the Philistines, he gave out a very cruel and
harsh command; 1 Samuel 14.24.
he commanded the people, and bound them under an oath that they should not eat
a bit of meat until evening, that he might be avenged of his enemies. Saul's
pretense was good, but using an unlawful means, the people became feeble and
faint for food; who otherwise might have obtained afar more glorious victory.
When men therefore shall use sinful means for the obtaining of good, it is
just with God to disappoint them of the good they aim at.

7. And lastly, thy corrupt heart will tell thee, though thou may not boldly
act sin, yet thou may safely venture on the occasion of sin, and yet be
preserved. Thus Peter's heart deceived him; he would go into the high Priests
Hall, venture upon the occasion of sin, thinking that he should not be taken in
it. And thus the Israelites, they would marry strange wives, and this was an
occasion whereby at last they fell to worship strange gods; keep off therefore
from the occasion of sin. Solomon has a good saying; Can a man tread upon
fire, and not be burned? his meaning is, that a man cannot keep company with a
harlot and be chaste; running upon the occasions of sin, brings to the acting
of sin: you will not venture upon ice, or slippery places, because of the
occasion of falling; and if you desire to be freed of the one, be not bold to
venture upon the other.

Peter tells you: 1 Peter 2.11.
I beseech you, (says he) as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts which war against the soul. The flesh aims to damn the soul; It is in
this conflict as Caesar said in the battle, he had once in Africa with the
children and partakers of Pompey, that in other battles he was wont to fight
for glory, but there and then he was feign to fight for his life: remember thy
precious soul lies at stake in this combat; therefore I beseech you, take part
with Gods Spirit against the flesh, and not with the flesh against the Spirit.



1. Not God, for he made man upright; Eccles. 7.29.
he gave a pure and unspotted soul to man; but they have sought out many
inventions; therefore blame thy own self. James 1.13,14
Let no man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God: for every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.

2. Blame not the Devil; it is natural to men, to take off the blame from
their own vicious natures when they fall into sin, and to lay all upon the
Devil; but if you observe the Scripture, you shall never find that a godly
man did ever lay the blame upon the Devil after he fell into sin: It is true
Adam and Eve did, but there was some reason for that, because they had no
sinful nature to tempt them; but after being fallen, their sinful nature did
tempt them, not the Devil. It is said of David, that Satan stood up and
provoked him to number the people; 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
but David he does not say so himself, Verse. 8.
but says he, I have sinned greatly, and I have done very foolishly. David he
charges his own heart, and the reason is, because the heart of man has a
greater stroke in provoking a man to sin, then the Devil has; alas, what could
the Devil do, if we had not a sinful inclination within? The Devil when he came
to tempt Christ, he found no matter in him to fasten upon him, and therefore he
could not prevail. The Prince of this world comes, and finds nothing in me,
said Christ; But it is otherwise with us, temptations meet with corruptions that
do suit them. The Devil when he comes to thee, thy heart it is as flax among
fire, or as gunpowder which having a spark of fire in it, is suddenly blown up;
therefore blame not the Devil, but thine own heart; neither the Devil nor the
world could hate thee, were it not for thine own heart, which like a false
Trayter lodges within thy breast, and betrays the soul to the snares and
temptations of the Devil.

Sermon. XIII. At Lawrence Jury. London, December. 22. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Come now to give you the properties of this enmity, and of this conflict;
and there are nine or ten qualities of this enemy, corrupt nature.

1. The flesh it is a potent enemy against the Spirit, it is no weak enemy, but
it is strong; and therefore says the Apostle, Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. In the unregenerate, the flesh is as
a mighty Monarch, which rules without control, the flesh, the power or a Law
over them; And in the regenerate, sin is an usurping tyrant, which gets a great
deal of the Believers soul into his hands: Romans 7.14.
Paul complains that he was sold under sin; though after his regeneration, he
did not sell himself to work wickedness, yet he was taken captive by the
flesh, as by a powerful and prevailing adversary, and as conquerors sell their
prisoners, so was Paul. -- Divines do usually compare corrupt nature to great
Goliath, and grace to little David; Goliath had more strength, yet David gets the
victory; though corruption be potent, yet grace in the end will get the victory.

The potency of the flesh may appear by these demonstrations.

1. By the names which in Scripture are attributed to corrupt nature, 2 Cor
10.4. (...).
it is called a strong hold; a man may easily win an ordinary dwelling house,
but it is hard taking a strong hold. Romans 7.23.
It is called a Law, The Law of sin; it has that power over the soul, as the
Law has over the subjects of a Kingdom; it is said to reign, having the
power that a Prince has over his people.

2. It appears to be potent, by that mighty power which must be set on work to
suppress this enemy, no less then the power of an Almighty God, can suppress
these corrupt motions; and therefore says the Apostle, The weapons of our
warfare, are not carnal; but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds. 2 Cor. 10.4.
It is a weapon edged with the power of a Deity, which must pull down these
strong holds.

3. Corrupt nature is strong, because it is set on by a powerful spirit, the
Devil; he provokes thee to sin, and that makes the corruption of thy heart so
potent. The Sea will move of it self, being a fleeting body; but when a
tempestuous storm arises, then it rages and roares: So is it with thy corrupt
nature; if there were no Devil, yet thou would be a Devil to thy self, and
would commit sin; but when the Devil shall set on this Sea of thy corrupt
nature, then how does it rage and swell? He is that Prince of the power of the
Air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 2.2.


4. It argues the flesh is potent, because it often prevails over the Spirit.
The Apostle tells you, that not only in wicked men, but even in the regenerate,
the flesh does many times carry a prevalence over the Spirit; The Law is
spiritual, Romans 7.14.
(says he) but I am carnal, sold under sin. He speaks of himself as a
regenerate man; he does not say he sold himself, that was the property of
wicked Ahab; but it is meant that corrupt nature did carry him away captive to
sin, just as a conqueror carries away his prisoner.

5. The flesh is a potent enemy, because there is a greater measure of the
flesh in regenerate men, then there is of the Spirit; thou have more sin in
thee then grace; more of a corrupted nature, then of a renewed nature. In the
best of Gods children, there is more ignorance then knowledge; more pride then
humility; and generally more sin then obedience; and this may be hinted from
the catalogue here enumerated of the works of the flesh, and of the fruits of
the Spirit. Gal. 5.19,20.
There are seventeen sins as the fruit of the flesh, and but seven graces as
the fruit of the Spirit; to note that there is more of the old nature in thy
heart, then of the new; more of the old leaven, then of the new lump; more
dross, then gold; and this God suffers in his children to keep them humble,
and in a continual dependence upon him; the spirits of just men are never made
perfect till they come to heaven, Heb. 12.21.
and in the mean time it is the admirable power of Christ to keep alive a
spark of grace in the midst of a sea of corruption.

2. As the flesh is a potent enemy, so it is a malicious enemy against the
Spirit; Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God, and its maliciousness against the
Spirit appears two ways.

1. It suffers no good to be left in it: I know in me (that is, in my flesh)
dwells no good thing, says the Apostle; Romans 7.18. Ca^o a carendo.
though there may be good in the man, yet there is no good in the flesh, that
is, in his sinful nature.

2. It is content with nothing, but with the death of the creature in whom it
is, and this is a very pernicious enemy; it not only kills the Spirits
motions, but is malicious against the man; Romans 7.11. Chap. 8,13.
and therefore says the Apostle Paul, Sin taking occasion by the Commandment
deceived me, and by it sl^w me; And again, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die; nothing less then death, and eternal damnation of the soul will content
it, this argues the maliciousness of the flesh ^o be great indeed.

3. Corrupt nature it is an universal enemy against the Spirit; and its
universality appears in three regards.

1. The flesh it is seated in the whole man, in all the parts of thy body, and
in all the powers of thy soul. The flesh is in the soul, just as the soul is in
the body; And Philosophers say, that the soul is in the body, the whole soul is
in the whole body, Anima est tota ^n toto corp^re and tota in qualibet part.
and the whole soul in every part of the body: just so is corruption and sin in
thy soul, the whole corruption of nature is in the whole soul, and in every
part of it; in thy body, eyes, ears, hands, in all the parts of it; not only
in the concupiscible and irrascible part, but also in the more noble parts, as
in the will, understanding, reason; it is universal in every part of man.

2. It contains in it virtually all sin. Nothing does virtually contain all
evil, but corrupt nature. As we may say of the first man, Primus homo fuit
omnis homo. Romans 7.8. Primum peccatum fwt omne peccatum.
that he was every man; So we may say of sin, the first sin had every sin,
that is, every sin virtually. Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought
in me (says the Apostle) all manner of concupiscence. Corrupt nature, it is an
inclination to all actual evil in the world: I may illustrate this by an egg.
An egg has in it potentially and seminally all the parts of the bird, only it
wants the warmth of the hen to hatch and produce it: So our corrupt flesh has
in it all sin, the seed and spawne of all sin, and as the hen produces the
chicken, so does the devil hatch sin.

3. It opposes all the graces of Gods Spirit; other sins, take what sin you
will, it opposes but the contrary grace; particular sins do carry but a
particular opposition; as for instance, the sin of pride, opposes humility;
lust opposes charity; drunkenness, sobriety; in justice opposes
righteousness; wrath opposes meekness; hatred opposes love; and so of all
other sins, they carry but a particular opposition to particular graces; but
thy flesh, it carries an universal opposition to all grace.

4. The flesh it is an insatiable enemy; insatiable in two regards.

1. In regard of sin; because if we yield to the motions of sin to day,
corrupt nature will not be satisfied: if thou yieldest to sin to day, thou must
to morrow, yea all thy days. Prove. 30.16.
Corrupt nature is like those four things which Solomon speaks of, which are
never satisfied; and as he elsewhere speaks, Hell and destruction are never
full, so the eyes of man are never satisfied; Prove. 27.20.
that is, corrupt nature in the eye, sinful concupiscence in the heart, causes
an adulterous eye never to be satisfied.

2. In regard of punishment as well as sin. Suppose sin does bring diseases
upon thy body, or poverty on thy estate, yet thou will not leave it; it aims
at no less then the damnation of thy soul.

5. Corrupt nature, it is an indefatigable enemy against the Spirit. Suppose
the flesh to have all the foregoing properties; yet wanting this, there would
be hope that it would be tired, and wearied out at last; but this is the nature
of corruption, it is unweariedly an enemy against the Spirit. Things that act
naturally, act unweariedly; the fire is never weary of burning, nor the water
of ebbing and flowing, because it is natural to those creatures; the Sun is
never weary of going its course, because its motion is natural; sin it is a
thing natural to thee, thou wast borne in in it, and bred up in it, and
therefore it acts unweariedly. (...).
This war between the flesh and Spirit, is a truceless war.

6. Corrupt nature it is an inward enemy; it dwells not only with us, but in
us; and therefore says Paul, It is not I, but sin that dwells in me. Romans
7.20.
An enemy without to assault a City, cannot do much hurt, if the walls be
strong and well manned; but if there be traitors within, as well as assailants
without, it will endanger that City: Remember thou have not only the Devil
without, but corrupt nature within, a sin within which ever seeks to betray
thee. A little thief once gotten in there is more danger of him, then of all
the robbers without. Corrupt nature is this little thief, which always will
seek to betray thee to the Devil.

7. This corruption of nature it is a continual enemy against the Spirit. There
is nothing which acts continually, but corrupt nature; the eye is not always
seeing; the Sea not always flowing; the Sun not always shining, but corrupt
nature it is always working; the Spirit cannot send forth a good motion, but
the flesh labors to send it back again, and to quen^h it. The Devil is not
always tempting, nor the world always vexing, but the flesh is always
resisting the Spirit.

8. The flesh it is a politic enemy against the Spirit; it works more by
flattery, James 1.14.
then by force; Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed. It is a Metaphor taken from fishermen, which show the bait, but hide
the hook; it works slyly and subtly.

9. It is an outrageous enemy against the Spirit. The Apostle exhorting the
Thessalonians to holiness, and sanctification, 1 These. 4.5. (...).
bids them not to walk in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles which knew
not God. Not in the passion of concupiscence, as the original has it; corrupt
nature it is inveterate against a man, and therefore it is called a burning in
lust; Romans 1.27.
and what is more fierce and outrageous then fire burning? Corrupt nature, it
puts the soul on fire; so also it is compared to a horse rushing into the
battle. It is called a drawing of sin with cart-ropes, to note the eagerness
of a sinner, it is fierce, out ragious and violent.

10. It is an equal enemy in all men; it is not in one man more, and in another
less; but in all alike, all are equally tainted with it, and there is this
reason for it, because all men are equally alike in Adam, otherwise some men
should be more in Adams sin then others, which is impossible. We are all sons
of Adam, and therefore are all equally polluted; yet this is true, that actual
corruption is more drawn out in some men then in others; some are more profane,
some more incontinent, some more passionate then others; because in some there
are strong natural inclinations, and more prevalent corruptions then in others
to some sins, yet no man is more corrupted in his nature then another; and
therefore thou which art regenerate, thou have as much cause to bewail a
corrupt and sinful nature, as any Devil in hell has. And these are the
properties of this enemy which wars against the soul.



2. Bless God for establishing grace. This is one of the wonders of the world
that a child of God should have so much corruption in him, and that that
corruption should not destroy grace: the wonder appears in this, Adam who had
no sinful nature, seeing only he was a mutable creature, left to the liberty of
his own will; yet being tempted by the Devil, fell. And the Angels in heaven,
who neither had an evil nature within, nor a tempting Devil without; yet rhey
fell also. But thou who have both, a tempting Devil without, and a corrupt
nature within, yet thou shall not fall: Oh bless the Lord for this. It comes
from this, thy being interessed in an unchangeable Covenant; because thou art
chosen by an unchangeable decree, and kept by an unchangeable God; therefore
being once in the Covenant of Grace, thon art always kept therein; Jude verse.
24. (...). 1 Pet. 1.5.
bless God for this unchangeable grace of his toward thy poor soul, whereby
thou art kept unto salvation, whereby the people of God are kept from falling.



1. It has been longer in thee, then grace has been: Therefore in the first
place it is said, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, which is a great
advantage. As we may observe in military affairs, when a pitched battle has
been fought, that Army which first takes the field, will be sure to choose
ground for their own advantage. Thy corrupt nature which wars with the
Spirit, it was first in the field, and so has got wind and ground; thou waft
borne a sinner, with an evil nature, but not with a divine nature; therefore
here in the Text the flesh begins the conflict, watch therefore against the
flesh, having this advantage against you.

2. The flesh has not only the advantage of time, but of number; there is more
of flesh in thee, then there is of the Spirit; more kinds of sin, then of
grace; there are more weeds then flowers in the best garden; more corruptions
then graces in the best soul.

I may appeal to your experience, whether ever you have acted so many graces,
as sins; in the Chapter wherein my Text is, there are seventeen sins mentioned
in the catalogue, but there are but seven graces, to show that the flesh is
more in us then the Spirit; there are swarms of lusts and vain thoughts, but
alas, how few good thoughts and holy motions of the Spirit of God are there in
the best?

3. In regard of constitution the flesh has a great advantage; corruption is
more suitable to thy nature then grace; grace it is above nature, but sin it is
in nature, and with nature; the way of grace is all up the hill, the way to
heaven is against both wind and tide; so is not corruption, for that is
favored by both; therefore watch your hearts upon this consideration.

leave thee to thy own inclinations, there would be no sin committed by any man
which thou also would not commit, thou would be an incarnate devil; bless
God therefore that thy practices do not carry correspondence with thy
disposition, and that thy life is not as bad as thy heart.

2. Bless God for other men. It is a wonder that wicked men having no new
nature to oppose the old nature, that they do no more evil in the world, it is
God which lays a curb upon, and restraines their wicked natures. If God did
not restrain the wickedness of the wicked, the world had long ago been
overwhelmed in confusion through the exorbitancy of their wicked practices.



There are these considerations to provoke us to remember, and to be watchful
against corrupt nature in us.

1. It is a sad consideration to provoke us to humility and watchfulness, that
thou have as much evil in thy heart as the worst man living upon earth.

2. It is ancient in us, it was in us before we were borne; before thou waft in
the world, sin was in thy nature, for as soon as ever thou had life, thou
had sin.

3. This corruption of nature, it will be continually with us while we live in
the world; Our bodies are compared to earthen vessels, and the Scripture tells
you that the leprosy of a vessel of earth; if any unclean thing were put into
it, all the washing and scouring that could be, should not make it clean.
Levit. 11.35 Chap. 15.12.
but it must be broken; so it is with thee, the vessel of thy body must be
broken, before thy corruption can be done away.

4. This corruption, it is that which does easily beset thee. Motions of sin in
thy nature, they are like sparks of fire in a heap of flax, Heb. 12.1. (...).
they easily take with thy nature, and put thee upon the acting of evil; and
therefore from hence be persuaded to a strict and diligent watchfulness over
thy own heart.

Sermon. XIV. At Lawrence Jury, London, December. 24. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Proceed now to a fourth Quere, and that is why, or for what reason is it
that in regenerate men God should suffer corrupt nature thus to war with the
Spirit? Why does not God deal with us in our regeneration, as he did in
creation, make us perfect?

This is a question worth discussing; God loves no sin, and yet he suffers
all the sins that are, and this Mass of sin, this one sin, which
vertually is every sin. For answer hereto I shall lay down five Reasons.

First, Corruption of nature is left remaining, even in regenerate men to
humble them; even as it was with the Israelites in the wilderness when they
were stung with fiery Serpents and Scorpions, Deuteronomy. 8.15,16
it was to humble them. So we whilst we are in the wilderness of this world,
have a corrupt nature always cleaving to us, wherewith we are stung, and this
fiery Serpent of sin should humble us before the Lord. God has so ordered it
in nature, that creatures of the greatest excellency should have some manifest
deformity: if we look either among birds, or beasts. Among birds, the Peacock a
bird of the finest feathers, yet it has the foulest seet; the Swan a bird of
the whitest feathers, yet of the blackest skin; The Eagle a bird of the
quickest sight, and of the highest flight, yet the most ravenous among birds.
Among beasts, the Lion, the most goodliest of all beasts, yet the most fierce
and cruel: The Fox it is most subtle, yet is a creature of the foulest smell:
Thus God has ordained even in nature, and thus it is with his own people in
respect of grace, though they may have many excellent endowments, and gifts,
yet he leaves this corruption in them to humble them. James 4.8,10.


That of the Apostle James is observable, Chap. 4. having spoken in the eight
Verse of corrupt nature, in the next Verse but one, he exhorts men to be
humbled; to note that the consideration of a corrupt heart, should be an
incitement to humiliation. It was a saying of Master Fax, that his graces hurt
him more then his sins, which riddle he expounded thus; that many times he
was proud of his gifts and graces, but humbled by reason of sin. The Apostle
Paul after he had those extraordinary Revelations, There was given him a thorn
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted
above measure. 2 Cor. 12.7.
It is true, this Text is variously expounded. Some expounding this thorn in
the flesh to be the sin of lust and incontinency: But this cannot be, because
he affirms of himself, (...). Morbus acutus.
that he had the gift of continency. Others say that it was a bodily disease,
and that it was the Sciatica or Gowt, or some exquisite pain in his body: but
the current of Interpreters vary from all these, expounding it to be corrupt
nature; and the thorn in the flesh to be some sharp temptation and motion to
sin, which did arise from the corruption of his nature, and the remainders of
lust. But then it will be objected, how can corrupt nature be called the
messenger of Satan! To this Divines answer, that it is called so, not as if it
were a temptation from the devil; but it is called so, because the devil is an
instrument to set on our sinful nature to sin; this thorn in the flesh was left
in Paul to humble him; and this is the true and proper reason why God will not
have regeneration to be as perfect as Creation, because he would keep us
humble. So it is, that humility the best of graces, comes from the worst root,
our sin; and pride the worst of sins, comes from the best root, our graces. How
wise, and how good is God, that by this thorn in the flesh he does prick, and
thereby let out the impostumation of pride out of our hearts!

2. To make the regenerate put a difference between earth and heaven, between
being in a course of pilgrimage, and in their fathers house. Heb. 12.22.
In heaven the spirits of just men are made perfect, but they are not so on
earth, if the spirit were made perfect, we should have all spirit and no flesh.
In the wilderness there were scorpions and fiery serpents, but in Canaan there
were none; this world is a wilderness, and whilst we live here, the fiery
serpents of sin will sting us, but when we come to heaven we shall be above
sin. Corruption now dwells in the soul, as the body in a house; and so long as
the soul dwells in the body, sin will dwell there in the soul; but when we come
to heaven, then corruption shall put on incorruption. And we shall be freed not
only from the natural corruption of the body, but also from the moral
corruption of the soul by sin.

3. Which is the chief reason of all; God suffers it, that so you may the more
prize a Mediator; if you had no sin you would prize God only as a Creator,
and not Christ as a Mediator. Sin makes you to prize a Savior; thus it was
with Paul, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; Romans 7.24.
as if he should say, if I had been perfect, I should have thanked God as a
Creator, as Adam in Paradise; but now having a sinful nature, it makes me to
prize Christ as a Mediator delivering me from sin. I may exemplify this by an
Elephant, which (as some say) if it once falls to the earth cannot rise again,
and therefore Naturalists say, that the Elephant does not lie down to sleep,
but does sleep leaning to a tree; now the story is this, An Elephant being
fallen to the earth, and a man having helped him to rise, the Elephant (like
Andronicus his grateful Lion) followed his Benefactor wherever he went; so it
is with us, we were fallen, and no help but Christ's could raise us up, how
should we then be lift up with humble thankfulness to God, who has therefore
suffered us to fall, that we might thereby learn to prize the help we have and
hope to have by Jesus Christ?

4. God suffers corruption in nature to try his people, which side they will
take in this conflict; here are two Camps pitched, army against army, and the
Lord leaves the flesh in thee to try which side thou will take; will thou
cleave to the strongest side? will thou worship the rising Sun? why, then thou will side with the flesh, for many times and for the present that conquers;
though indeed the final issue, and conquest will be on the Spirits side. Now
will you war against the flesh, and side with the Spirit in opposing the
motions of sin; hereby will the Lord make a trial of you. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
The Canaanites and Jebusites were left in the land on purpose to try whether
the Israelites would cleave unto the true worship of God: so God suffers
corruption to bein us, to try the truth of our grace.

5. The Lord suffers motions to sin to be in the hearts of his own people, that
so he might make use of the motions of sin, to keep men from the acting of sin,
and this is a mysterious consideration. God so disposes of it, that those sins
which we most are frequently tempted unto, we shall be most watchful against: A
man that is suddenly tempted may yield; but a man often haunted with motions to
sin, God in his wisdom makes use of these motions to prevent the action. Had
David been often haunted with motions to those great and abominable sins of
adultery and murder, he might happily had time to have bethought himself, and
so prevented the acting of them; and the like of Peter's denial of Christ, but
both these servants of God were suddenly surprised: And these are the reasons
why God leaves regeneration so imperfect.

The next Quere is, to show what rules you should follow, that so the motions
of the flesh exciting to sin, may not prevail against the Spirit?

1 If you would not have the flesh in its sinful motions prevail over you,
then resist them whilst they are but bare motions, before they break forth
into actions; Crush the Cockatrice in the egg, tread out sin which is the fire
of Hell while it is in the spark, the suggestion and motion. As we say, It is
easier to keep out an enemy, then to beat him out being once gotten in; so it
is easier to keep out sin, then to beat out sin; sin in the motion it is like
an enemy in the suburbs, not got into the city; and if thou would not yield
to these motions, resist them whilst they are so, quench them while they are
motions. A disease if it be taken in time, Principiis obsta, sero me^icina
paratur, Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
before the humors be gathered together, may easily be cured. Do to thy sins
as Pharaoh gave command should be done to the Israelites children; he would not
stay till the children were grown up to years; but commanded the Midwives to
kill them as soon as they were born; this was a cruel act in him, but thus do
thou to thy sins, and it will be a merciful act in thee to thy soul, what
Pharaoh did most cruelly, do thou do prudently against thy sins; kill them when
they are in the birth, and there are three cogent reasons why you should take
this course.

1. Because if you resist motions whilst they are motions, you shall be sure
not to find the devils suggestions to join against you with the fleshes
motions; take but this experiment, if thou have a motion in thy nature to sin,
and do act that motion, the devil will then join with thy corruption to make
thee act that sin again. The devil he knows not the motions to sin that are in
thy heart, but as thou actest such motions; as suppose thou art tempted to
lust, and thou yeeldest to it, hereby the devil knows what motion there was in
thy heart, and thy love to that sin, and so will be ready to tempt thee to the
committing of that sin again; therefore resist motions while they are so, and
by this means you will hinder the devil, that he shall not join his
suggestions to the sinful motions of your own hearts.

2. If you do not resist motions while they are motions, there will be a more
eager, vehement pronenesse to sin in your natures then was before; acting of
sin is not the way to cease and quell a sinful motion, but to increase it; it
is as it were a cas^ing oil into the fire to make it burn the more: the way
therefore to quell sinful motions, is to withstand whilst they are so. In
Philosophy we say, that acts do strengthen habits; Habitus acquiritur actibus,
actus confirmant habitum.
if a man has a habit of any grace, acting of that grace, makes the habit more
strong; thus it is in sin, acting of sin begets a greater pronenesse thereunto,
and therefore it behooves you to keep under sins motions, lest they lead you
farther to sinful actions. For sinful suggestions when they meet with our
sinful inclinations, the inclination begets consent; consent, acting; acting,
continuance of act; then delight; then security; and then scornful contempt of
all reproof, and means of amendment.

If you keep not under sin in its motion, it will be more difficult for thee to
suppress corruption; if a house be on fire, and you can keep the fire within,
there is no danger of a great conflagration; but if it break out into the air,
and the wind take hold on it, then it will burn exceedingly: thus it will be
with thee in regard of thy sin, if thou keep it not under in the motion, it
will be hard for thee to suppress it afterward. We take physic by way of
prevention; health of body and soul too is more easily preserved then restored.
A sore neglected grows a gangrene, one part being infected after another, till
there be no soundness in the flesh.

2. Keep off from all external occasions of that sin which thou have a motion
to commit, whatever thy sin be; suppose it be pride, wear not that apparel
which may minister an occasion of pride; suppose drunkenness, keep from bad
company; if it be uncleanness, Prove. 5.8.
keep off from the door of the harlot; carefully avoid occasions of sin. This
is very imitable in Joseph; Gen 39.10.
it is said that as his Mistress spoke to him day by day, that he hearkened
not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her; he kept out of her company as
much as might be. And this is the counsel and command of the Lord, Keep thee
far from a false matter; Exodus 23.7.
the occasions of sin are as it were the awakening of corrupt nature; what else
should be the reason that a man not thinking of sin when he has an occasion,
has a motion to commit it; therefore be not ventrous to run upon occasions of
sin; and whenever thou art moved to any sin, keep off from the external
occasion thereof. A Divine sets out men ventring upon occasions of sin to be
like those who pray to God they may not be burned, and yet will thrust their
fingers into the fire; thou which prayest against sins motions, have a care
also to keep from sins occasions. 2 Thessalonians. 5.27.
Gods children are bound to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
and to hate the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 25. Jude 25.
The Nazarite was not only to abstain from wine, but also from touching the
very husk of the grape, Numb. 6.3,4. Numb. 6 3,4.


3. Labor to unarm the flesh. As the godly have armor, and the pieces thereof
are registered in the 6 Chap. to the Ephesians. So the flesh has armor to fortify
it self; it is armed with power, labor to conquer it; with malice, with an
insatiable desire of thy ruin, with manifold solicitations to sin. Now labor
to disarm it, of all its pretenses, of all its policies. You must do with sin
in this case as the Philistines with the Israelites, they fearing that the
Israelites would wage war against them, used this stratagem; they would
suffer no iron weapon to be found among them, nor no Smith in Israel to make
these weapons. Do you as the Philistines did, unarm sin, take away any occasion
which corrupt nature may have to act transgression in you; you must do as the
Rechabites did, they were commanded not to drink wine, and they would not yield
to any temptation or solicitation to break that Commandment; disarm sin by
taking away its occasions.

4. Do not so much dispute with evil motions, as resist them. It is the folly
of many that they will dispute with sins temptations; whereas there is no man
that has ever consulted with flesh and blood, but at last has been overcome
by it. Count the flesh as thy enemy, but never let it be thy Counselor; the
flesh is a great dissembler, it has such subtle insinuations, such sly
evasions, that it will cheat a man into sin, and therefore do not dispute with
it; you will do with disputing with flesh, as our first parents with the devil,
after disputing they fall to eating; the flesh will tell thee, this sin is
profitable for thee, and the other sin is pleasurable, and suitable, and
therefore beware of sin, and be more in resisting, then in disputing with the
flesh.

5. Give thy self much to the exercises of mortification, and the exercises of
those duties which tend thereunto, and this will be an especial means to
preserve thee. There are three duties I shall commend to you for this end;
Spiritual watchfulness, prayer, and fasting. You have two of these duties
prescribed by our Savior together: Mat. 26.41.
Watch and pray, (says he) that ye enter not into temptation. The flesh will
be still assaulting thee, and Satan by thy flesh, and therefore we had need to
be still watching and praying; the war between the flesh and Spirit is (...).
Be much in watchfulness against the occasions of sin. Watch over the outward
senses of thy body, and over the inward faculties of thy mind; be much in
prayer, that sinful motions may be suppressed, and subdued. Do not pray as
Austin, Metuebam ne me exaudiret Deus. Aug.
who confessed that before his conversion, through the light of a natural
conscience he prayed against the lust of incontinence, and the sins of his
youth, but was afraid that God should hear his prayer; do not you so pray. And
join fasting with the duty of prayer; it was Paul's custom, 1 Cor. 9.17. (...),
vox a pugi ibus derivata qui proprie di cuntur (...), i. e. cum pugnis aut
coestibus An tagomstam obtundere.
says he, I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, that is, corrupt
nature. By the body cannot be meant the body in a natural sense, who hereupon
do excruciate and torment their body by whippings, fastings, and pilgrimage;
but the body here is termed the body of death: by fasting, prayer, and
watchfulness, hereby he kept under the sinful workings of corrupt nature, and
a little care will not serve the turn, but we must be as vigilant as wrestlers
or fencers, who are very ready to beat down their adversaries before them.

6. And lastly, be skilful in the Word of righteousness, and this will be a
great means to keep the flesh from prevailing over the Spirit. As Christ did to
the devil, so must thou do to the devil of thy flesh: It is written (says he;)
do thou come with a written Word against the devil and thy own heart; be so
skilful in the Word of God, that there may no temptation offer it self to
thee, but thou may draw arguments out of the Word against it; we ought to be
very careful to use the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, and sheath it in
the bowels of sinful flesh. And if this course were taken in this particular,
you would be less pestered with a tempting devil, and corrupt heart then you
are.

Use.
Use. he use which I shall make from what you have heard, shall be of comfort
to dejected consciences; me thinks I hear many a godly man say, Woe is me, I
have a sensible experience in my own soul, that my evil heart has all those
evil properties you named, and my soul bears me witness I use those means you
prescribed, I do keep off from occasions of sin, I watch and pray against sin,
and yet God knows I cannot keep under a naughty heart. To any man that in the
sincerity of his heart, and sense of his sins does make this complaint, I
have four words of comfort.

1. Thou must never expect a total extirpation of the corruption of thy nature
whilst thou live here, only a partial suppression. Corrupt nature will be in
thee; That as those beasts mentioned by Daniel, their dominion was taken a^cay,
yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time: Dan. 7.12.
so the dominion of sin is taken away, sin shall not reign over you, but yet
the life of sin remains, the body of death will live in us as long as we live
in the body. Corrupt nature it will live in thee though it shall not reign,
like unto that tree mentioned by Daniel, whose branches were cut off, Dan. 4.15.
yet the stump remained in the earth; thou may lop off actual evils, yet
remember, the root will remain; that as it is with Ivy which grows on a wall,
it cannot be rooted up until the wall be pulled down: so until thy body be
pulled down, sin in thy nature (which is as Ivy gotten into the wall) cannot
be gotten out. We have a promise made to Gods children, that sin shall not have
dominion in them, but no where it is said that sin shall have no being in them
while they are in being here.

2. There is great difference between yielding to the corrupt motions of thy
nature to sin, and between fulfiling the lusts of the flesh. I know there is
none of us all but do in some things yield to the motions of the flesh, but yet
all do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; thou may embrace the motion thy
sinful heart stirs thee up unto, yet thou may not fulfill the motions of
sin; the Scripture gives you this difference, Romans 13.14.
Make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: godly men may
commit the lusts of the flesh, but they do not make provision for them; (...).
thou do not provide for sin, as a man for his family, because he would have
them live; thou art not a Caterer for sin, therefore bear up thy heart with
comfort, though sin be in thee, yet thou shall not perish for it.

Thou who have used all means, and yet find the flesh prevailing against the
Spirit; consider that strong and potent motions to sin do not always argue
sins strength, but sins weakness; rather that sin is decaying, then in its
full strength. It is observed that dying things they strive and struggle with
most strength; a bird, a weak creature, yet if you pull off its head, with what
strength will it flutter? this does not argue that the bird is gathering
strength, but that its strength is departing; it may be thus with thee, thou
have strong motions to sin, and thou discernest it; it may be, sin is now
playing its last game. Lusts in the Scriptures are said to be crucified; now it
is with sin crucified, as it was with the wicked and impenitent thief, he was
bound and nailed hand and foot, and yet he raved, and raged; so it is when lust
is dying, yet it may be raging: and as we see in the taking of Physic, when it
is first taken, it will make a man more sick then the disease made him; not
that a man is indeed worse, but only from the Physic searching his body: thus
it may be with thee, sins struglings, is Gods giving of thee Physic; and
though it be strong, yet in the end God will make it tend to the purging out of
evil humors out of thy soul.

4. If corrupt motions be strong in thy soul, then bend the strength of thy
heart in prayer to God for the subduing of these corruptions. If a Virgin that
was ravished did not cry out, by the law she was accounted guilty and
consenting; the more the devil and thy corruptions do attempt thee, the more
earnestly must thou pray and cry to God for help. Complain upon those frequent
incursions which corrupt nature and the devil makes upon thee, and flying unto
God for help and succor, thy soul shall never perish for thy iniquity.

Sermon. XV. At Lawrence Jury, London, December. 29. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Proceed now to the last Question, and that is, How you may know when motions
to sin do arise from the flesh, or when they come merely from the devil, and so
are purely diabolical?

Before I answer the Question I shall first show of what use it is. Secondly,
premise some positions about it; and then give you the resolution to this
Question.

There is a threefold use of this Question.

1. It is needful to know it, because unregenerate men when they are tempted to
sin, they lay all the fault upon the devil, and none upon their own hearts.
These men when they put all their sins upon the score of Satan, they do not
give the devil his due. Thus Eve, she laid all the fault upon the Serpent, Genesis
3.13.
The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Though David was of another mind; for
he when he was tempted and stirred up to sin in his numbering of the people,
and that by Satan, yet he does acknowledge, 2 Samuel 24.17.
I have sinned, and I have done wickedly. It is natural to men when they are
tempted to sin, and if they act it, to charge the devil with the blame, and
therefore it is good for us to know the difference; for we must not wrong the
devil, but (as they say) give the devil his due for sometimes he is merely a
stander by, and has no hand in our sins.

2. The decision of this question will be needful, because regenerate men
(especially those troubled in conscience) do charge those sins upon themselves,
which of right ought to be laid upon the devil; as when the devil suggests
thoughts of blasphemy, which the nature of man rises against, yet will they
charge these upon themselves; and therefore as the wicked on the one hand
falsely charge the devil, so the godly on the other hand untruly charge
themselves.

3. Because if motions to sin be made to arise merely from the devil, then
those motions though they are our misery, yet they are not our sins if we do
not yield and consent to them. The devil lays his baits at our doors, and
often as a thief would break into the soul, but by faith he is resisted, and
when once entertained, it is not our sin. It Is to sin to be tempted, but the
sin is to yield to the temptation. But wicked motions coming from corrupt
nature, hough you never consent unto them; those first motions of the mind to
sin, they are materially sinful, because they proced from an evil nature within
you; evil motions that do arise and spring from evil hearts, they are such
fruits that do spring from an evil root, and therefore we should lament them.
For these reasons it is useful to answer this question; but before I come to
that, remember these cautions.

1. That whether temptations come from the devil, or from the corrupt nature,
yet thou may be sure they are both sinful, and therefore are both to be
rejected.

2. That we are not to be so careful to distinguish between these motions, as
to resist them; for a man to be more curious how to distinguish, then carefully
to resist them, it is but curiosity, not sincerity.

3. There is an apparent difference between motions to sin which come from the
devil, and those which come from corrupt nature, and yet it is hard to show
where the indivisible part of the difference lies, and there is this reason
which a Modern Divine gives; because the Scripture charges those temptations
which the Scripture says are from the devil, it lays them upon men's hearts;
therefore in the 5. Acts 5.3,5.
Chap. of the Acts, Ananias his lie is charged upon the devil, in the third
verse, and upon the man in the fifth verse. -- But to answer the question there
are these characters I shall give you to difference those motions to sin which
arise from the flesh, and those which come from the devil.

1. Motions to sin from Satan, they are usually such which are abhorrent to
natures light, unnatural sins, at which the very light of nature struggles;
and therefore Divines rank temptations to blasphemy against God, and to lay
violent hands upon a man's self, to be from Satan, because unnatural; these
motions do not arise primarily from the flesh, but from the devil; because they
are contrary to nature, and therefore not from nature. Temptations unto
unnatural evils are from Satan, their horror shows from whom they come, and
therefore to think ill of God is purely diabolical, because it is against the
light of nature to have any low or unfitting thought of God. It is a good note
upon that of Job, Job 1.16.
where it is said that the fire of God fell from heaven, and burnt up Jobs
sheep. Now why does not the devil strip him of his sheep, as he did of the rest
of cattle by the Caldeans and Sabeans, who did steal them away: There is this
given as the reason thereof: The devil he could not tell how to make Job
blaspheme God, and therefore he caused a fire from heaven to consume his sheep,
that so he ^ight look upon it as that which came from God immediately, and so
might blaspheme him; therefore all those temptations which provoke Gods people
to blasphemy, Satan is the chief instrument therein; not but that there is in
man's nature, as the seed of all other sins, so also of blasphemy; there is a
receptivenesse in man's nature of blasphemous temptations from the devil: but
yet the first suggestion comes thereof ordinarily and from the devil; Luke 22.3.
and therefore we read that when Judas went to betray Christ, it is said that
Satan entered into him; the motion came from the devil, because it was an
unnatural sin. For a servant to betray a Master, and a good Master, this is
accounted an unnatural sin, and therefore it is charged upon the devil: Romans
1.24.
Though Judas was guilty for receiving this temptation, yet the Scripture lays
it upon the devil, as the first motioner of this unnatural sin: And yet the
seeds of unnatural sins are in man's nature. And so the Apostle charges the
unnatural sins that he mentions of the Heathens upon the lusts of the heart.

2. Motions from the devil they are usually to gross acts of sin, which are
not seated in the inclination and affections. And the reason is this; because
sins which are gross, though there is the seed of these in the nature, yet
men naturally are most prone to spiritual sin, and inward sin; nature prompts
men to inward sins, and the devil to g^osse and outward sins; and this is
the great misery of man, that those sins the devil tempts not to, those
corrupt nature tempts to. Acts 5.3. Matthew. 5.37.
Ananias his lie is charged upon the devil; Why has Satan filled thy heart.
And so is sinful swearing charged upon the devil, it being a sin of a grosser
nature; it is the devils work to put men upon gross outward acts of evil: But
corrupt nature it is still enticing thee to those sins which are most
suitable to thy corrupt inclination, as self-love, vainglory, popular
applause, spiritual pride, carnal confidence, sinister aims, vain thoughts,
and such like; these are ^armes of inward lusts, which are bred in thy corrupt
nature, and to these thy nature inclines thee.

3. Temptations from Satan are usually accompanied with much horror and fear,
when they are first suggested. When a temptation is so strongly suggested, that
it makes a man quake, and horror comes upon it; this is an argument it comes
from the devil; and the reason is this: Because nature provokes to those sins
which are most pleasing unto nature; nature does not raisea combustion in the
mind.

4. Satan's temptations are usually suggested, when a fit object and occasion to
act a sin is presented, As when a man troubled in mind shall see water, the
devil tempts him to drown himself; or when he shall see a knife, to cut his
throat; or when a man sees an object of beauty before him, then to be tempted
to incontinency; such temptations as these usually come from the devil; it is
true, the devil can disturb the fancy, when there is no object, but that is not
so usual. But we read of examples in Scripture of those, that when occasions to
sin have been present, then they have been tempted thereunto. Thus Eve when she
saw that the tree was good for food, Genesis 3.6.
and pleasant to the eyes, there was the object, and then the devils
temptation, she took and did eat. And thus it was with David when he fell into
that sin of uncleanness, when he went to the top of his house, he had no
thought then of being unclean; but being on the top of his house, and seeing
Bathsheba naked, the devil tempted him the reto, and then his nature closed
with the temptation, when the occasion was offered; motions which come from
corrupt nature are usually, when there is no occasion offered; and therefore
when a man upon his bed shall have worldly and covetous thoughts, when there is
no occasion given, this comes from the corruption of his heart; and thus all
those speculations and contemplations of the mind about evil, they come merely
from thy own heart; and I must tell you, in occasions and temptations to sin,
though the devil may be first therein, yet if after you yield to the occasion
or temptation, you are to blame your own heart more then the devil.

5. Motions to sin that come from Satan, they usually seize suddenly upon a
man; before that instant of time that such motions were suggested, they were
never thought of, such motions as these come from the devil; (as Perkins says)
they flash like lightning into a house suddenly. Thus you read in Luke 22.37.
concerning Peter, Simon, Simon, says Christ, Satan has desired to winnow
thee; now what is meant hereby? why, it was that temptation, wherein the devil
did tempt Peter to deny his Lord and Master; now it is true that Peter's heart
was to be blamed, for he had the seed of that sin within him, but yet the
Scripture lays it upon the devil, as being first in the temptation; because
that before that instant Peter had no forethought of such a thing; but when he
came to warm himself in the Highpriests Hall, then did the devil tempt him
thereunto, and then was Peter overtaken therein; so that those temptations;
which come into a man's mind, which he never thought of before, they come
originally from the devil; but motions to sin which come from corrupt nature,
they are more deliberate, and more lasting, and come not with that violence,
and in such a hurry as temptations from the devil come; and the reason is,
because they are more suitable to nature, and so cause less violence in the
minds of men.

Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies. Mat. 15.19.
Our Sa^iour speaks of them in the plural number, to show that there is all
kinds of sin in the heart of man, and all sin in all its degrees; and if God
should but let loose natures raines, how soon would thou run into all
manner of evil?



Although it may be true upon thy examination, David, 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
it is said that the devil tempted him to number the people, yet when David
comes to call to mind that fact, he mentions not one word of the devil, but
says he, I have sinned, I have done wickedly, and very foolishly. And so also
Peter, he denies Christ; and the Scripture tells you that the first motion to
that denial, came from the devil, Luke 22.31.
Satan has desired to winnow thee, says Christ: Now Feter might have said,
It Is true, I have denied my Master, but Satan is in the fault; but we find not
one word of Peter's against the devil, but out he goes, and weeps bitterly; so
that hereby it appears, though motions to sin arise primarily from the devil,
yet if thou yieldest unto those motions, thou art to blame thy self, and not
the devil.

it was a tenent among them that the law of God did only reach to outward acts,
and that the inward motions of the mind were not any way sinful. But Christ
when he opened the nature of the Commandments, he taught another doctrine; and
therefore says he, Mat. 5.27,28.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
Adultery; But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart. here Christ shows,
that not only outward acts, but inward motions to sin were forbidden by the law
of God. Thus Paul, while he continued a Pharisee, he judged his life by the
outward letter of the Law, and so thought himself as to the Law blameless:
Paul never knew the Law was spiritual, until he was converted; Romans 7.7.
and therefore says he, I had not known lust to be sin, if the Law had not
said, Thou shall not covet; take heed then not only to the outward actions of
your life, but to the inward motions and lustings of your hearts, for the Law
reaches to these.

2. It reproves those who when they have yielded to sinful motions, are apt to
lay the blame any where rather then upon their own hearts; we are apt to
transfer the guilt of sin any where rather then charge it upon our selves.
There are three things which men usually lay the blame upon.

Either upon God, the devil, or else upon other men.

1. Upon God, and so did Adam. The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat; Genesis 3.12.
thus he lays the blame of his fall upon God himself: if thou had not given
me this woman, she had not tempted me, and I had not eaten.

2. Others say the blame upon the devil, and yet if there were no devil to
tempt us, weshould tempt ourown selves; and indeed neither the one nor the
other is to be blamed; God is never to be blamed, though the devil be sometimes
to be blamed; the Apostle James tells you that God tempts no man. James 1.13.
And the devil sometimes is not to be blamed, James 1.14.
because thy own nature is a tempter to thee: so the same Apostle declares that
every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and entised. Lust
conceives sin; the devil may be the Father to beget sin, but the flesh is the
mother which conceives, nourishes and brings forth sin; and the reason is
this, because the devils suggestions could do no harm, were it not for our
vicious inclinations; The devil came to Christ, but he found nothing in him;
the devil shook the bottle, but it was a Crystal glass of pure water, there
was no mud in it; but thou, though thou have a fair appearance, yet if the
devil do but rake into thy heart, the mud of thy corruption does quickly appear.

3. Again some there are who will lay the blame of their sin upon men, and
thus did Aaron, when Moses chode him for his Idolatry; Exodus 32.22.
Thou know the people, (says he) that they are set on mischief; he would
fain shift off, and excuse his own wickedness by laying it upon the people,
yet this would not serve his turn, for God charges the sin upon him. Nothing is
more natural, then to excuse and hide our sin, Job 31.33.
and therefore it is said that men cover their transgression, as Adam; if thy
heart were not in the fault, examples of sin would rather provoke to
detestation, then imitation. Others there are who will lay the blame upon the
badnesse of the times; whereas if thou had not a bad heart, thou would be
good in bad times; if thou had a good heart, the worse the times were, the
better thou would be; and therefore lay the blame of thy sin where it ought
to be, upon the naughtiness of thy evil heart.

Tostatus o^seves upon the 1 Chronicles 21.1. where it is said, That Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number the people. Observe, it is not
said that Satan stood up against David, but against Israel; and the reason is
this, David was a public person, and the devil knew if he could provoke him to
sin, Israel should smart for it, and therefore the devil in tempting David
stood up against Israel; so that if thou art a public man, and the devil get
thee to yield to sin, others will be hurt by it.

Genesis 25.22.
and say as Rebecca when she had two babes struggling in her womb, Why am I
thus? thou have an Esau and a Jacob within thee; nature and grace, evil
motions struggling against good motions; go unto the Lord, and say, Romans 7.24.
Why am I thus? and with Paul, Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?

Sermon XVI. At Lawrence Jewry London, December. 29. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Now proceed to the second part of the conflict, the Spirits lusting against
the flesh: the flesh began the onset first, because there was flesh in us
before the Spirit, but the Spirit does undertake the war; and as the flesh
lusts against the Spirit, so the Spirit against the flesh.

Before I draw out the point, I shall clear one Scripture which seems to
contradict this which is in Ephesians. 6.12. where it is said, that we wrestle not
with flesh and blood, but against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. --
This place may be renonciled with the Text two ways: First, when the Apostle
says we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against Principalities and
Powers; the words may be understood, not simply or absolutely, but
comparatively; and if you take flesh and blood there for corrupt nature, then
the meaning is this, that we do not only wrestle with flesh and blood, corrupt
nature within, but we have also the devil without, against whom we are to
stir.

But the more likely reconciliation of this place is this, it is said in the
Text that we do war with the flesh, and in the Ephesians, that we do not
war with the flesh; now though the same word be used in both places, yet it
is used in a different sense, and that you may know how it is used in both
places, ^ake these three acceptations of the word.

1. Flesh and blood is sometimes taken for corrupt nature, and so is that
saying of Christ to be understood, Matthew. 16.17.
Flesh and blood has not revealed these things unto thee.

2. Flesh and blood is taken for the natural body of man, and so it is used in
1 Cor. 15.50. 1 Cor 15.50.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, as now we are
living in the world, as our bodies are now natural, corruptible, mortal bodies,
they are not capable of the glory and happiness of Heaven.

3. Flesh and blood it is taken for wicked men in Scripture, and so it is taken
in Ephesians. 6.12. Isay 66.16,23. Ier. 25.31. Zech. 2.13. Gal. 1.1.
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, that is, not so much against wicked
men, as against the devil the ruser of the darkness of this world; and thus
you have the reconciliation of these places. --

The flesh lusts against the Spirit; that is, the motions and workings of Gods
Spirit, they do oppose the motions to sin of corrupt nature; so that from hence
take this doctrine. -- Doct.
That the motions and workings of Gods Spirit in the regenerate, do war and
conflict with the motions of sin, which flow from corrupt nature.

In the handling of which point, I shall do these four things. 1. Show what the
nature of this conflict is. 2. Wherein it consists. 3. How you may know that
conflict which the Spirit has against the motions of sin, from that conflict
against sin which may be found in a natural man's conscience. 4. Give you rules
about this conflict.




sin, which come short of the Spirits conflict.

1. There may be a conflict against sin, by sin; one corruption may conflict
with another, and a lesser sin may oftentimes be overcome by a greater, and
this oftentimes is found in natural men; as pride and covetousness: a man that
is proud, he must have something to feed his pride, and because he is proud,
therefore he will be in high company, and in brave and rich apparel; now
covetousness being a contrary vice, may give a check to pride; -- So a man
that is prodigal, that spends his days in revelling and roaring, inordinate
love of the world will tell him that he spends too much in money; thus one
corruption may contest with another, and yet may come short of the Spirits
conflict against sin.

2. There may be a conflict against sin in the natural affections, wherein
nature seeks to preserve it self; As it is with brute creatures, fear many
times keeps them from that which their natural appetite would carry them unto;
the wolf would fain worry the sheep, but his fear of the shepherd restraines
him; so between anger and fear: a man that is angry, his anger puts him upon
it, that he would fain be revenged on the man whom he is angry with: but
another passion (fear) tells him if thou killest the man thou art angry with,
the Law will take hold on thee, this arises not at all from the Spirit.

3. There is a conflict which arises from a man's natural disposition; some men
have such heroic and generous dispositions, that they naturally conflict with
many vices; as Luther said of himself, that he was never tempted to the sin of
covetousness, he was of such a generous and free spirit. It was a saying of
Plutarch, -- I had rather (said he) that men should say there was never any
such person in the world as Plutarch, rather then say Plutarch is unfaithful or
unconstant; of such a noble disposition was this Heathen to scorn all baseness.

4. There is a conflict which arises from the light of reason helped by a
natural conscience, which checks and controls a man for sin. The Heathens could
by the light of natural conscience see and detest sin, they counted it a base
thing to prostitute themselves to base and beastly lusts. Conscience, it is
Gods spy, and man's overseer, Major sum, and ad majora natus quam ut corporis
mei sim mancipium.
it is Gods officer in man to warn him against sin; now this is found in
unregenerate men, and falls short of the Spirits conflict against the flesh, as
shall be showed afterward.

But to show you positively, what this conflict is: I answer, that the conflict
of the Spirit against the flesh, it is a mighty and irreconcilable opposition
stirred up by the motions of Gods Spirit in regenerate souls, against all the
motions of sin proceeding from corrupt nature; this is a plain and full
description of this conflict.





In reference to sin, the Spirit does these five things.

1. It enlightens a man and discovers sin to a man which he never saw before;
Thus says Paul, Romans 7.7. John 16.8.
I had not known lust to be sin, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet;
The Spirit of God by the Law discovered sin to Paul, and the discovery of an
enemy, is a degree of opposition.

2. The Spirit does not rest only in discovering sin, but resists the motions
of sin which proceed from corrupt nature; the Spirit it lusts against the
flesh, that is, it opposes the workings of corrupt nature; this is in the Text.

3. The Spirit puts conscience on work to check and rebuke a man for
entertaining evil motions, for making his heart a lodging for sin; It convinces
the world of sin. John 16.8.


4. The Spirit it sanctifies the nature of a man, and washes him from the filth
of sin, 1 Cor. 6.11. and therefore the Spirit of Christ is called (...) the
holy Spirit because of the sanctifying work of the Spirit, upon the hearts of
Gods people; the Spirit is not only holy himself, but the Author and maker of
holiness in the hearts of believers.

5. The Spirit of God it suppresseth the motions of sin' it not only resists,
but helps a man to mortify the motions of sin. Romans 8.13.
If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live,
says the Apostle; and you have a promise for this in the verse before my Text,
Gal. 5.16.
That if ye walk in the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; he
does not say, you shall not act, but you shall not fulfill them; it shall not
have so much power and prevalency over you, as over wicked men; thus as to sin,
you see how the Spirit conflicts with the flesh.

2. In reference to the doing of good, the Spirit opposes the flesh several
ways.

1. By enlightening and discovering to a man what is good; Isay 30.21.
thus the Lord promises by the Prophet, Thou shall hear a voice behind thee
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it; the Spirit discovers to a man his way,
his work, and his duty.

2. Not only so, but the Spirit stirs up holy motions, and holy resolutions
in thee to do that duty; it not only shows thee the way, but presses thee to
walk therein.

3. The Spirit assists a man in the doing of good, when the flesh hinders; Romans
8.26. (...).
We know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, and helps our infirmities.

4. It more and more communicates grace to his people, whereby they may be
enabled to do that which is good; it gives continual supplies of help, and
therefore you read of the supplies of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.19.
Thus you see wherein the conflict of the flesh against the Spirit consists,
both in reference to sin, and in reference to good.



This Question is handled by many late Authors. Perkins in his Treatise
concerning the flesh and the Spirit, and so Downam and many others; Vide
Amesium de conscientia lib. 2. cap. 11.
therefore I would refer you to read them; but yet I would not leave the point
wholly: and that you may know the difference, I shall lay it down in these
particulars.

There is a difference, 1. In the manner of this conflict. 2. In the extent of
it. 3. In regard of the principles from whence this conflict arises. 4. In the
time of duration. And 5. In regard of the issue and end of this conflict.

First, in regard of the manner of this conflict; there is a threefold
difference about the manner.

1. That opposition which is in the unregenerate, it is an involuntary
opposition; if conscience did not trouble him, he would never trouble sin, he
comes to this battle not as a voluntier, but rather as one impressed to this
service by the impressions of a natural conscience; he comes not to the field
like a stout Champion, but is dragged thither; Conscience is Gods spy, and
man's overseer, and therefore whether a man will or no, it will fly in his face,
so that the opposition from natural conscience, it is an involuntary
opposition; the commission of sin is voluntary, but the opposition is
involuntary. Conscience in a wicked man is like the light of a candle to a
thief, it is still shining in his face, whilst he is in the act of stealing:
But in the godly it is quite contrary; the commission of sin is unvoluntary,
Romans 7.19. the opposition in them it is a voluntary opposition, they rejoice
when the Spirit does its office, when grace in the renewed part does suppress
the corruption of their hearts. Wicked men are said to be willingly ignorant,
Heb. 13.18.
but the Apostle tells you that the godly are willing in all things to live
honestly. Indeed a wicked man is loath to conflict with corruption, his heart
would always be in the house of mirth, as the wise man tells you; Eccles. 7.4.
he is loath that his conscience should trouble him, he would fain strangle
conscience, he is unwilling to conflict with the flesh: but a godly man is most
willing; therefore you read that they groan to be unburthened; (for sin is the
greatest burden) they lie under sin as a burden, 2 Cor. 5.4.
and would fain cast it off.

2. The conflict which is in the wicked, it is but a jesting conflict; it is
like childrens playing together, who will wrestle and strive, but it is only
for sport, not to hurt one another, or as Fencers who will make many
flourishes, and give one another some slight hurts, but intend not to kill; it
is not like that of the warrior, who comes into the field with an intent to
kill his enemy; but thus it is with the regenerate; in their conflict with sin,
they endeavor in good earnest to kill it, as the Apostle Paul says. So fight I
(says he) not as one that beats the air, but I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection. 1 Cor. 9.26,27. (...). Dicuntur Pugiles cum pugnis
aut coestibus antagonistam obtundunt. Pareus. Gal. 5.24. Romans 8.13.
The words (...), are very emphatical; it is a metaphor drawn from wrastlers,
wherein the Champions did strive for life, the word imports the beating of an
enemy black and blue, to do him all the hurt I can; therefore says Paul, I do
not beat the air; but do beat down my body in good earnest. They which are
Christ's have crucified the flesh (says the same Apostle,) unto which also we
have a promise, That if we through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, we shall live.

3. The conflict proceeding from natural conscience, it is a disorderly
opposition, just like men fighting in a tumult; but the regenerate fight
against sin as men in an Army. Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor. Sen.
Med.
The disorderlinesse of the unregenerates conflict appears in this, because it
is found in different faculties, a wicked man has a will and desire to commit
such or such a sin; now there is no regenerate part in their will; there is
nothing in the will against the will, but there may be something in the
understanding, and oftentimes there is; and therefore wicked men, though they
desire to do such, or such an act of wickedness, yet their understandings tell
them, that sin will not only disgrace them here, but will damn them hereafter.
Thus the conflict in the wicked is in several faculties, and so is disorderly;
but in the regene rate, the combat it is an orderly combat, in the same
faculty, not the will against the understanding, and the understanding against
the will; but the will against the will, and the understanding against the
understanding, and the affections against the affections; the renewed part of
these do war against the unrenewed part. So the memory, as far as it is
converted, it labors to retain holy truths, and to justle out the retention of
evil; the regenerate part opposes the unregenerate; in the affections, the
war is in the same faculty; the love that we bear to God and heavenly things,
wars against self-love, the love of the world, and love to sin. These are
the differences between that conflict found in the regenerate and unregenerate
against sin, in reference to this manner of the combat.

2. In regard of the extent of this conflict, the difference appears in these
three particulars.

1. The conflict of a natural conscience against sin reaches only to the
opposing of sins of life, to outward sins, but extends not to the sin of
nature, inward sins; and the reason is this, because natural conscience does
not know natural corruption to be a sin, and if nature wants an eye to discover
sin, Romans 7.12.
it will also want a hand to oppose it. Paul while he was unregenerate, knew
not that lust was a sin, therefore original sin falls not under the cognizance
of a natural conscience. We read of wicked men, that natural conscience has
gone so far as to check them for sins of life, as Cain for his murder, Ahab for
his idolatry, Saul for his cruelty, and Judas for his treachery, but nature
cannot oppose nature, it may oppose the branch, but not the root; but it is
otherwise with a conscience enlightened by the Spirit of God, it wars with
the inward motions and workings of sin; Paul after he was converted, complains
of a law of sin which was in his members, and of a body of death, and therefore
you have him crying out, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me therefrom! natural conscience
may check a man for sin of life, but only a renewed conscience will rebuke a
man for sin of nature.

2. Natural conscience as it does not reach to sin of nature, so neither to the
nature of sin. My meaning is this, natural conscience it never conflicts
against the nature of sin, but only against the punishment of sin; it rebukes
not a man for sin under this consideration, that it is against a holy God, and
contrary to a holy and pure Law; it is the punishment of sin, and not the
nature of sin, which natural conscience relucts at; not because sin defiles the
soul, but because sin destroys the soul; not because sin blots out the image
of God, but because sin keeps men that they shall not see the face of God; not
because God hates sin, but because God punishes sin. But the regenerate, they
do not only through the Spirit conflict with the sin of their nature, but with
the nature of their sin; with their sin, not as destroying their souls, but as
defiling their souls; not as tormenting the conscience, but as polluting the
conscience; not as damning the soul, but polluting the heart. A natural man may
be afraid of sin, as a child is afraid of a fire-stick, not that it fears to
handle it, because it will colly his hands, but because it will scorch his
fingers. It is a main difference, for a child of God would abstain from sin
because of God, not only because of hell. The godly would not offend against
the purity, holiness, authority, and goodness of God, and therefore abstaines
from sin. The natural man as Augustine says, metuit ardere, non metuit
peccare; is afraid to burn in hell, but is not afraid to sin.

3. Natural conscience may conflict with sin, yet it comes far short of the
Spirits conflict, because it reaches only to open and gross sins, not to
secret and small evils. Cursing, it is so execrable an evil that a man's own
heart will tell him of it, Eccles 7.22.
as the wise man says: Oftentimes thine own heart knows that thou thy self
have cursed others; natural conscience will not so often check thee for secret
and bosome-sins, as spiritual pride, wandering thoughts in holy duties, and
emptiness of mind; but a renewed conscience, when the Spirit of God comes by
it to convince of sin, it reaches to secret sins, it reaches to the very
motions, is well as to actions; and thus it was with the Apostle Paul; says
he, Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, Wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence; Romans 7.8.
whilst original sin did work but in its motions, before they were acted, the
Apostle was sensible of them. And so Hezekiah a good man, it is said that he
humbled himself for the pride of his heart, for the lifting up of his heart, as
in that no man could accuse him of. These are the differences between the
conflict which natural conscience has against sin, and that conflict which the
Spirit has against corruption.

Gal 5.16.
and therefore he acts not sin as wicked men do, If ye walk in the Spirit, ye
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; 1 John 3.9.
and according to this is that of the Apostle John, Whosoever is born of God
does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God. He cannot sin, it is not to be taken absolutely, but
comparatively, he shall not sin after that manner, and in that measure, and
with those circumstances, as the wicked do, because they are born of God, and
have a seed of grace remaining in them; this is the reason why godly men live
not as the wicked do. The godly have another kind of spirit in them then the
mere natural man has; he has the Spirit of Christ, whereas the other has
only the spirit of the world.

undone, if the Spirit were but withheld from you, what will that man be that
wants the Spirit, will he not be an habitation for swarms of lusts, and a cage
for every unclean bird; if thy heart be not a storehouse for the Spirit, it
will be a workhouse for the devil; if it be not Christ's garden wherein he sowes
the seed of grace, it will be the devils seminary, wherein nothing but sin will
thrive and grow; oh therefore bless God seeing thou have such an evil heart,
that thou have the motions of the Spirit, to war against the motions of the
flesh.

3. Pray unto God that his Spirit may do its office in thee, thou need not
pray thy heart to tempt thee to sin, but the Spirit needs entreaty to do its
office in thy heart; do thou every day put up that request of David, Lord,
withhold not thy Spirit from me; seeing every day I have sinful motions, let me
every day have the motions of thy Spirit; seeing every day Satan persuades me
to sin, let thy Spirit every day persuade me to good.

Sermon XVI. At Lawrence Jewry London, December. 29. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Come now to the third difference touching this conflict, A third difference.
Of this conflict.
in an unregenerate and a regenerate person, and that is in regard of time,
concerning which, there are these particulars to be handled. 1. The time when
this conflict begins. 2. The time of its continuance. 3. The time how often
this conflict comes.


1. The conflict between natural conscience and sin, may begin as soon as ever
a man has light of nature, whilst a man is in an unregenerate estate. Romans
2.14.
The Apostle tells you that the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law; that is, natural conscience it carries the
force of a Law with it, and has power over them, so that they shall not break
out into many evils contrary to natures light; so that the time when a natural
conscience may conflict against sin, may be whilst a man is in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: But the time when the Spirits
conflict begins, is not till God brings you into the state of grace.

2. Touching the time of duration, how long this conflict continues; it lasts
but a while, it is but a transient rebuke given in by conscience, like unto a
flash of lightning in a man's face, it comes suddenly, and is suddenly gone;
just so is that opposition which is in a man's natural conscience, either jovial
meetings, or sensual delights will quickly deface, obliterate and extinguish
the impressions of natural conscience: But on the contrary, the conflict of the
Spirit it is an abiding conflict, until the regenerate part in some measure
has got the victory over that lust which it does oppose; it stays with a man
all his lifetime, from the first day of his conversion, to the last day of his
dissolution.

3. The conflict of a natural conscience, it comes but seldom, it checks a man
but now and then, by fits and starts; as the Apostle Paul speaking of the
Gentiles shows, Romans 2.15. (...).
that their consciences between whiles accused them, for so the words are to be
read; the opposition in the unregenerate, it is not a constant opposition: but
the conflict of the Spirit it is an abiding conflict in the godly; and as it
continues long, so it comes often; hardly can a godly man be tempted to a
gross sin, but the Spirit will cast in a cross suggestion to that sin; this
is the third difference, whereby the conslict of the Spirit may be known from
the conflict of a natural conscience.

4. It differs in regard of the principle, A fourth difference between the
conflict, between the flesh and Spirit, and that conflict which is only between
a natural conscience and sin. Genesis 4.13.
or moving cause, from whence this conflict arises, as:

1. The opposition that is in a natural conscience, it arises from a principle
of slavish fear: but the opposition that is in the godly from the Spirit, it
comes from a principle of love to God, and hatred to sin; it appears thus: Cain
he cries out, Oh (says he) my punishment is greater then I am able to bear. He
complains, not that his sin was greater then he was able to bear, but of his
punishment.

A wicked man that opposes sin from a natural conscience, may be compared to
a thief that refuses and abstaineth from stealing, not out of any hatred of
theft, or out of any love to justice, but only because he is afraid of being
hanged for his theft; even so it is with wicked men, they abstain from sin and
acting of sin, merely out of slavish fear of hell and condemnation, not out of
love to God. I may further exemplisie it thus: you know there is this
difference between a Collier and a cleanly man; a Collier will not touch
charcole if they be burning coals, but he will touch them, though they be black
coals; but a cleanly man will not touch them, neither as they are burning, nor
black coals. Wicked men will forbear sin, because it is a cole of fire; but
the godly will reluct at sin, because it is a black cole; they love God, and
they hate sin, and therefore says the Apostle Paul, What I would that I do
not, but what I hate that do I. Romans 7.15.
He does not say, the evil I would not do, and the evil I would fain forbear;
but the evil I hate, that I do.

Divines gather thence, that a godly man conflicts with corruption out of a
hatred to corruption; not because he fears the punishment, but hates the sin;
wicked men reluct at sin, but it is not because they hate the evil of sin, but
because they fear the punishment thereof; as Balaam, he would not curse the
people, yet it is said of him, that he loved the wages of unrighteousness; 2
Pet. 2.15.
though he feared the punishment, yet he did not hate the sin. Godly men reluct
at sin, from a principle of hatred thereof; and there are four spiritual
principles from whence the conflict of a godly man arises.

1. Because that sin it is against a holy God; and this was Joseph's principle,
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39 9.


2. Because it is the breach of a holy Law; thus Paul, What I hate, (says he)
that I do; Romans 7.16.
if then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law that it is good;
as if he should say, I oppose sin out of the consent that is in my conscience
unto ths Law, that it is good.

3. Another principle upon which the godly oppose sin, is a hatred to the very
nature of sin it self; and thus David professes of himself, that through the
precepts of God he got understanding, Psalm. 119.104.
and therefore hated every false way.

4. He opposes sin out of love to Jesus Christ; seeing that Christ died for
sin, they will labor to die to sin, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.14,15
The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead, and that he died for all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them,
and rose again.

5. The fifth difference is this; the conflict between the flesh and Spirit,
and the conflict between natural conscience and sin, differ in regard of the
event and issue thereof; and there is a fourfold different event and issue:

1. The issue of the conflict of a natural conscience and sin is this, that it
leaves a man unquiet, and the sin unmortified; Matthew. 27.5.
and this was the very case of Judas, his conscience told him that he had
sinned in betraying his Master, and thereupon he was so troubled, that he went
and hanged himself, yet notwithstanding his sin remained unmortified; but it
is contrary with the Spirits conflict, that not only quiets the mind, but
mortifies the sin, and therefore you find the Apostle after he had been
speaking of the Spirits conflict with the flesh, Gal. 5.22.
telling you, That the fruit of the Spirit is joy and peace; this was the issue
of the conflict of the Spirit, it will not only quiet the mind, but kill the
sin; Romans 8.13.
If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

2. Another event of the conflict of natural conscience is, that the unruly
affections of a man, they are too hard for a natural conscience to oppose and
subdue. Wicked men will many times contend with sin; but mark the issue, and
you shall find, that the strong inclinations of their hearts to sin, do
overcome them. I shall give you three instances hereof, in Saul, Pilate and
Pharaoh. -- As for Saul, his conscience told him that he did ill in pursuing
David, 1 Samuel 24 17.
and his conscience constrained him to confess that David was more righteous
then he, and that he had done wickedly in pursuing his life; and yet
notwithstanding all this, Saul's unruly affections did overmaster Saul's unquiet
conscience; his ambition of the kingdom caused him yet to go on further in the
pursuit of David. -- So Pilate his conscience told him, that Jesus Christ whom
he was to judge was an innocent person, and therefore he washed his hands, and
told the people that he found no cause of death in him; this was his
conscience, but his ambitious affections did overpower it, fearing lest he
should hereby lose Cesars favor; Luke 19.12.
If thou let this man go (say the people) thou art not Cesars friend; he feared
this saying of the people, and therefore went against his conscience. -- And so
also Pharaoh, his conscience told him that he did wickedly in disobeying Gods
command, for letting the children of Israel go, and he confesses that he had
sinned and done wickedly in the Lords sight, and begged Moses to pray for him:
but observe, Pharaohs ambitious affections did over-master his conscience, and
therefore when the plage was over, he would continue in sin still. -- But
when the Spirit of God comes to conflict with the lusts of the flesh, though
the affections be unbridled and unruly, yet in time the Spirit of God will
check and curb them, and overcome; though the Spirit cannot throw them out, yet
it will throw them down, as the Apostle Paul speaks, I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection. 1 Cor. 9.27.
A godly man thus deals with sin, though he cannot give it an utter
extirpation, yet he will endeavor to bring it into subjection.

2. Natural conscience in opposing sin, it rests contented with a bare
restraint of the Act, though there be no mortification of the vicious
inclination. As it was with Pharaoh, when the plagues were upon him, then
conscience wrought, but yet his sin was not at all subdued, but only
restrained; and therefore says the Text, Exodus 8.15.
When Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened
not unto them, as the Lord had said; And so Haman, when he saw that Mordecai
his mortal enemy was preferred by the King; when he saw that he was taken into
royal favor, it is said that he refrained himself, that is, he would not now
attempt to destroy him; Esth. 5.10.
and though he refrained himself, yet his revengefull disposition remained
still unmortified. Thus a drunkard may be outwardly restrained, and yet his
drunken inclination remain. But the Spirit of God in its conflict, it does not
only restrain the act, but also weakens, Romans 8.12,13.
and suppresses the inclination; If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds
of the flesh, ye shall live; there is the mortifying of the act of sin; and
thus also we are commanded to mortify our members which are upon the earth, as
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness; Col. 3.5.
and again, to crucify the affections and lusts; Gal. 5.24.
that is, not only to restrain the act of sin, but to kill and mortify the
sinful inclination.

4. And lastly, natural conscience conflicting with sin, it works not more
watchfulness in a man against the assaults of sin for the time to come, but the
Spirit of God when that conflicts with a sin this day, it makes him watchful
against all sin the next day, and all his days; and thus you have the third
Quere dispatched, touching the difference that is between the conflict of the
flesh and the Spirit, and that combat which is only between the natural
conscience of an unregenerate man, and his lusts.





1. Listen to what conscience shall say to you, when you are tempted to any
sin; conscience, it is Gods spy, man's overseer, and the Spirits officer: and
in hearkening to its checks you take a ready way to embrace the Spirits
motions, and deaf your ear to the motions of sin; it is the Spirits office not
only to witness with our Spirits, but also to check and rebuke us for sin with
our spirits; therefore hearken to what your own conscience shall speak, whether
it will solicit thee after this manner, saying, Why will thou dishonor so
good a God, hazard thy precious soul, and break a good Law? As sin gives a
wound to conscience: so conscience awakened, enlightened, and sanctified gives
a great check to sin, that it shall not reign in a cihlde of God.

2. If you would have the Spirit prevail over the flesh, then be sure you
minister no occasion of sin unto the flesh, lest from vicious motions there
come sinful actions. This rule the Apostle gives to the Galatians, Gal. 5.13.
exhorting them not to use their liberty for an occasion to the flesh; that is,
do nothing which may administer an occasion to the flesh, to take hold on you.
It is true, the flesh can sin without an occasion, and a man may be an
adulterer though he never saw a woman, and a man may be a thief though he never
stole, and a murderer though he never spilt blood; but occasions to sin they
do the more strengthen corrupt nature, as the Philosophers tells us that acts
do strengthen habits: so the more thou acts sin, the more strength it gathers;
and hence it was, Numb. 6.9.
that the Nazarites who were forbidden to drink wine, were also forbidden to
eat any thing that came of the Vine-tree; they were not to eat the raisin nor
the husk of the grape, that an occasion of sin might not be admitted to them.
And the wise man showing the mischief of whoredom, Prove. 5.8.
exhorts not to come near the door of her house; it is no sin in it self to
come nigh any ones door; but because being nigh the door of an harlot, may
occasion and stir up unclean thoughts and lustful desires, therefore we are
commanded not to come near her door. It is observable, that God would not be
called Baali, but Ishi: there was no harm in the word Baali, for it signified
in the common use of the word my Husband, Hosea 2.16. Isai. 54.5.
as Isai: 54.5. Thy Maker is thy husband. It is in the Hebrew thy Baal, (...)
Dominus, mari^us.
i. e. thy Lord or husband, but this is forbidden, that so the name of an Idol
continued amongst them (for they usually called their Idols Baalim) might be no
allurement to idolatry.

To this purpose Divines make much use of that place in Deuteron. Deuteronomy. 25.13.
25.13. where it is said, Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a
great and a small; the having of these weights in the bag, you would think to
be no sin; you will say, though I have them in my house, yet I never buy nor
sell by them, you may say they are only in my bag, not in my scale; but says
God, Thou shall not have them in thy bag, lest it be a temptation to thee to
bring them from thy bag into thy scale.

So the Israelites were commanded not to eat swines flesh, Levit. 11.7,8.
Levit. 11.7,8. Now you shall read in Isaiah 65.4. how the Lord blames the
Israelites for two things, They eat swines flesh, (says he) and the broth of
abominable things are in their vessels; God did only forbid the eating of
swines flesh, and yet here he condemns the broth also. And why? but because the
eating of the broth, might be a temptation to them to eat the flesh also;
therefore take heed that you minister no occasion to the flesh, lest you be
entangled thereby. --

An example you have of this related by Augustine of one Allipius, Aug. Confess.
l^b. 6. cap. 8.
that was drawn by importunity of friends to be present at the Gladiatory games
of the Romans, but being there resolved to shut his eyes all the while, that
so though he was present in body, yet he might be absent in heart, but upon a
great shout the people gave at the fail of one of the Combatants, he opened his
eyes, and became an approver of that bloody and barbarous spectacle; and
therefore take heed of yielding to occasions of sin.

3. If you would not have the flesh prevail against the Spirit, roll not sin
in your thoughts and contemplations; rolling of sin in the fancy and
speculation, is that which weakens the Spirits motions and workings, and does
strengthen the motions of sin in thy heart. Ezekiel. 23.19.
-- This the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of in Chap. 23. and verse 19. She
multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance the days of her youth;
bodily uncleanness is caused by contemplating the sin in ones mind, and is
the way to fence thy heart against the Spirits motions.

4. If you would have the Spirit prevail, resist and conflict with your lusts
timely; do not stay too long before you begin to conflict: many times men
stay so long before they begin, Principiis obsta, etc.
that they are vanquished before they fight. Be ready therefore to oppose sin in
the birth; do as Pharaoh, who would not let the children of the Hebrews grow
to men of years, but killed them as soon as they were born: so deal thou by thy
sins.

5. Cherish and entertain the Spirits motions; Intus existens P^ohibet alienum.
whenever you find them dissuade you from sin, let the motions of the
Spirit be within, and they will keep the motions of the flesh without.

6. Entertain no Treaty with sin; if you parley with sin, you have reason
to suspect the conquest; the flesh is a mortal enemy, (...). Qui deliberant
desciverunt.
and you must either kill or be killed. There is no Treaty of Peace to be
obtained between the flesh and the Spirit; this combat is of such a nature,
that there is neither a Treaty of Peace, nor a cessation of arms all your
lifelong. It is a notable observation if you compare the first of the
Galatians, verse 16. Gal. 1.16. compared with Acts 26.19.
with the twenty sixth of the Acts, verse 19. In the Galatians you there read
the story of Paul's conversion, and says he, Immediately I conferred not with
flesh and blood; that is, with my corrupt heart, what dangers I should meet
with, and what hazards I should go through; and in the Acts, where you have
Paul relating the same story to King Agrippa; he says, Oh King, I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision. To note, says a learned man, that
consulting and debating with flesh and blood, it is a kind of disobedience to
the heavenly vision; though thou do not yield to the flesh, yet it is a
kind of disobedience to consult with the flesh: and therefore never enter into
a Treaty with thy sin.

7. Resist sin impartially, that is, every sin; and do this in sincerity:
if thou will hate the garment spotted with the flesh, then also thou will hate
the flesh. Herod did many things, but left not his Herodias.

Sermon. XVIII. At Lawrence Jewry London, Januar. 5. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Proceed now to the cause of this conflict, whence it is that the flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and the Apostle
assigns the reason, these being contrary the one to the other. The words need
not much explaining, only the saying of the Apostle, when he tells you that the
flesh and the Spirit are in the same man, and that these are contrary the one
to the other; Touching which I shall lay down this conclusion, That contraries
may be found in the same subject. It is true that contraries cannot be in the
same subject, in an intense and highest degree, but they may be in a lesser and
lower degree; and thus it is here. The Apostle tells you of the flesh and the
Spirit in the same regenerate man, Contraria non possunt esse in eodem subjecto
in gradu intenso.
and of these being contrary the one to the other, that is, not in the highest,
but in a more remiss degree; In the highest degree they cannot be found,
because in heaven there is perfect grace without sin, and in hell there is all
sin and no grace; but on earth, we are partly sinful, ann partly gracious, and
therefore these two contrarieties being in a regenerate man in a more remiss
degree, they may be very fairly consistent. These two are contrary the one to
the other; it is impossible to conceive a more bitter opposition and direct
contrariety between any thing in the world, then between the flesh and the
Spirit; there is not more contrariety between light and darkness, between
heaven and hell, fire and water, then between the flesh and the Spirit.
Contrariety, it is more then enmity; enemies may be reconciled, but contraries
never; indeed one contrary may expel another, but one contrary cannot be
reconciled to another; water may quench fire, but it cannot be reconciled to
fire; and light may expel darkness, but they are not to be reconciled. The
contrariety of the flesh against the Spirit consists in this, that whatsoever
good the Spirit wills, the flesh wills; and what good the Spirit excites to,
the Spirit disswades from; this is the contrariety, and this is the cause of
the conflict in regenerate men.



I call it a mutual contrariety, because it is not a single opposition, the
flesh is against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and then I call
it an irreconcilable contrariety, because though enemies may be reconciled,
yet contraries never.

In the handling of which point, I shall only demonstrate the truth of it, and
then conclude with a practical application.

Romans 13.12.
Romans 13 12. It is called a law of death, Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Timothy 4.12.
but grace is called the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2. Corruption is
called filthiness of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7.1. but grace is called purity of
spirit. 1 Timothy 4.12. So that by the these contrary names given both to the
flesh and the Spirit, the contrariety of both is set out.

2. They are both contrary principled and origined; for, First, corruption it
is called the work of the devil; and, For this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil, John 3.8. 1 John 3.8.
but grace is called the work of God, Phil. 1.6. Phil. 1.6.
Again, corruption it is called the lust of the devil, John 8.44. John 8.44.
but grace is called the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Gal. 5.22.
so that these proceed from a contrary original. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. John 3.6.


3. They have contrary acts and contrary uses; the flesh is said to lust
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, they are contrary in
their works; and hence in Scripture, sin it is called a work contrary to God;
Levit. 26.
sin makes a man walk contrary to God, but the Spirit draws a man to walk in
the ways of God; sin is the Dalilah that will never let a man alone, but
press him with importunity to yield to the temptations thereof.

4. They are contrary in their ends and issues; the end of the flesh is to
damn the soul, but the Spirit its motions and workings are to save the soul.
We are commanded to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;
and the Apostle tells us, That if we live after the flesh, we shall die: but if
we through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live. Romans
8.13.
The tendency of sin is unto death, but of grace unto eternal life. And
therefore says the same Apostle, The law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death. Romans 8.2.
Upon these demonstrations it appears the flesh and the Spirit are contrary the
one to the other.



1. Learn to admire the free grace and mercy of God, that notwithstanding this
contrariety of the flesh against the Spirit in thee, yet that this should not
stir up anger and fury in God, but rather pity and mercy; herein is Gods
great love showed to his people. God does to us as we would do to a man that
has taken poison, we pity such a man; but poison in a tode that we hate: when
God sees sin in his people, tormenting them as poison in the body, though
they have such sinful natures, and so contrary to grace; yet this stirs not
up fury, but favor, and pity in God. It is a note worth your observation, by
comparing two Scriptures together, Genesis 6.5,6. Compared with Genesis 8.21.
Genesis 6.5,6. with Genesis 8.21. In the sixth of Genesis, it is said there that the
Lord saw that the imaginations of man's heart were evil, and only evil, and
that continually; and therefore says God, I will destroy man from the earth;
there their corrupt nature, and the issues and acts of it provoked God to fury;
but compare that place with Chapt. 8.21. and there you read that God will not
any more curse the ground for man's sake, because the imagination of his heart
is evil from his youth; this is a strange reason, one would think it should be
on the contrary, but God does not bring a curse, but annexeth a promise, as if
he should say, though I might destroy man as I did in the flood, yet I will not
do it, though the imagination of his heart be evil, and that continually; no,
though his heart be so bad: this should teach us to admire the grace of God,
that notwithstanding the contrariety of our natures unto holiness, yet that
this should not stir up fury, but rather pity and mercy in God to us.

2. Learn to admire the grace and mercy of God, that notwithstanding the
contrariety that is in our natures against the Spirit, that yet there is an
irresistibleness in the Spirits working converting grace, that the Spirit
should conquer a man, and break down the strong holds of nature, 2 Cor. 10.4.
that the Spirit of God should out of these contraries bring other contraries;
for so the Lord does, commanding light to shine out of darkness. Oh admire the
omnipotency of Gods grace, 2 Cor. 4.6.
that notwithstanding the contrariety of thy nature, yet it has not been able
to resist converting grace.

3. Admire the grace of God, that notwithstanding the contrariety of thy
nature, yet that there should be in the regenerate either activity or
perpetuity of grace, that thou do act grace seeing thou have a principle of
sin in thee, Gratia in nobis est flamma in extingui bilis in med ^o mari.
and that thou have a perpetuity in the state of grace, that this contrariety
should never be able either totally or finally to conquer grace: admire that
this spark of fire should not be drowned by this flood of corruption; that this
contrariety in thy heart against grace, should not destroy grace: if thou art
once in the state of grace, thou art ever so; and therefore let this heighten
your admiration, Adam had perfect grace, and yet not perpetuity in it, but thou
have imperfect grace, and yet thou art established therein, that thou shall not
fall.

The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary the one to the other; now here I shall speak not only to
unregenerate men, but to the regenerate also; and there are these seven
considerations to provoke you to be humbled.

1. Consider that the flesh, and thereby this contrariety against grace, it was
more ancient in thee then grace was in thee; it was in thee before the Spirit
of grace was. Divines make the struggling of Esau and Jacob in the womb of
Rebeccah, an emblem of corruption and grace in a regenerate man; they strugled
in the womb; and it is observed that Esau the bad son was born first, and
Jacob the good son born last; it is a fit resemblance of nature and grace which
strive in the heart of a regenerate man, but remember this, that sin is the
elder of the twain; before thou had the Spirit thou had the flesh: nature
is the elder brother, nay as soon as ever there was an union between the soul
and body, sin was in the soul; nay not only before thou could act grace thou
had sin, but before thou could act reason. I remember Augustine has a
relation in his Confessions concerning a little child, Vidi infantulum
Zelantem, etc.
which saw another child suck his mothers breast, and says he, before the
child spoke, I saw an envious nature in it, the child grew pale to see the
other suck his mothers breast, and this, says he, made me call to mind my
original sin; and truly this is a great advantage to the flesh, that the flesh
is first in a man; as if two Armies come to fight a pitched battle, that Army
which first comes to the field, has much advantage against the other that come
after into the field; the flesh has gotten the sun and wind against us, it
has many advantages upon this consideration that it was first in thee, and
therefore be humbled.

2. Be humbled on this consideration, that the flesh and this contrariety of
the flesh against grace in thy nature, it is more abundant in thee then grace
is; it is not only more timely, but also more abundant; though a Christian has
the Spirit, yet every regenerate man has more of the flesh; you have now
received but the first fruits of the Spirit, but you have the whole crop of
sin, the whole harvest of original corruption; in a regenerate man there are
more swarms of lusts and unholy thoughts, then there are gracious thoughts; as
in every hedge there are more briars and thorns then fruitful trees, so in
every man's heart, more briars and thorns of corruption, then of the fruitful
trees of grace. And as in every field there are more thistles and weeds; then
lilies and roses, so in every heart there is more of corrupt nature then of
true grace. Sin grows naturally, but grace only by divine culture. Corruption
is natural, but grace is supernatural. That of the Apostle is observable to
this purpose, Rom 6.19.
where he exhorts us, As we have yielded our members to uncleanness, and to
iniquity unto iniquity: so now to yield cur members servants to righteousness
unto holiness. Divines gather hence, that the Apostle speaking of sin, makes
mention of three To's, there is to uncleanness, to iniquity, and unto
iniquity; but when he speaks of grace and holiness, he mentions but two To's;
to note that there is more abundance of sin in thee then grace. -- Ransack a
believer in every faculty, and in every faculty you shall find more sin then
grace.

First, look into the understanding, Hoc tantum scio me nihil scire. Hieronym.
and there you shall find more ignorance then knowledge; and so Hierom
himself confesses, that he was ignorant of more truths then he did
understand. In the memory there is more forgetfulness then retention of good;
thou forgettest more good then thou do remember; Heb. 2.1.
the best man alive does not remember so much of a Sermon as he does forget.
And therefore the Apostle gives this counsel, that we should give the more
earnest heed to those things which we have heard, lest we let them slip as a
broken and leaking vessel runs out; for the word signifies, (...), which is a
metaphor taken from leaking vessels. And so likewise in the fancy there are
more vain sinful, and unclean speculations, then there are divine and holy
contemplations. In the affections there is more love to earthly things then to
heavenly; thou more fear man then God, and grievest more for affliction then
sin; for the punishment more then for the evil of sin; if you ransack all men,
you shall find more corruption of nature, then holiness and grace in them,
Gal. 5.19,20.
this the Apostle hints in that catalogue which he gives of the works of the
flesh, and the fruits of the Spirit, where he reckons up seventeen sins, and
but seven graces; to note that there is more sin then grace in men.
Corruption it is like great Goliath, and grace is but like little David; but yet
though corruption be strong, and there be more of it in us then grace, yet we
shall get the victory in the close; though Goliath be stronger then David, yet
as David, so all the regenerate shall have the final success and conquest.

3. That you may be humbled, consider that this contrariety of nature to grace,
it works unweariedly in you; if this contrariety did show it self now and
then, upon some extraordinary occasion, it were not so much; but this
corruption it works unweariedly against grace; grace and good motions are
supernatural, and therefore are sometimes irksome to us that are flesh and
blood: but corrupt motions to sin they are natural to a man, and things which
act naturally, act unweariedly; as the Sea, it is never weary of flowing, nor
the Sun of running its course; and as the fire is never weary of burning: so
neither is corrupt nature of opposing the holy Spirit; our whole course and way
to heaven is up the hill, and against the tide and wind, both of corruptions
and temptations.

4. Be humbled also on this ground, that this contrariety of nature it will
work continually against grace, even to thy dying day; if it did but oppose
sometimes, and then would be weary, or else if it were stinted to some age of a
man's life, it were something; but this corruption will show it self contrary to
grace; as long as thou live, thou may get rid of actual sin, but thou
can never rid thy heart of this habitual corrupt nature. It is a notable
saying of Cyprian to this purpose; It is more (says he) to take away one sin,
then many sins; his meaning is this, that it is harder to take away this one
sin of nature, then to take away many sins of life; as for actual sins, the
sins thou wast haunted with the last year, thou may not be troubled with
them now, nor the sins that now thou art troubled with hereafter; but the sin
of thy nature, it has troubled thee the last year, and this year also, and it
will do all thy days; that as Ivy in a wall, though you lop off the branches,
yet it is so fastened in the joints and intrals of the wall, that till you
pluck down the wall, you cannot root up the the Ivy; so it is with us, till God
pull down this wall of your body, the root of your sin cannot be plucked up.
This was typified under the Levitical Law, Lev. 14.41,45.
in that house which was infected with a fretting Leprosy, all their scraping
and pouring out of the dust thereof, could not make the house clean, and
therefore God commanded that the house should be pulled down and be removed:
The corruption of our natures is like this Leprosy, which nothing but the
pulling down of the wall of the house would remedy: so nothing but the death of
the body will perfectly destroy the body of death. This leprous house is a type
of thy defiled body, and the scraping thereof, an emblem of thy endeavor to
sweep thy heart of sin, and yet for all this, the house could not be cleansed
till it was pulled down: neither can the house of thy body be wholly purified,
and sin quite extirpated, until it be plucked down and laid in the dust. I
remember a learned Author, Luke 23.40.
he makes the impenitent thief on the Cross an emblem of the sin of our
natures, when he was nailed to the Cross, and (as we say) bound hand and foot,
he had only one member untied, and that was his tongue, and with that he falls
a reviling on Jesus Christ; just so, says this Author, are our natures, when
a man lies on his deathbed, and cannot stir hand nor foot, even then has he
a nature kindled with fire from hell, wherewith he sins against God; Oh let
this greatly humble us in the sight of God.

5. Consider that this contrariety in thy nature against grace, though it be
repugnant to grace, yet it is suitable to thy nature. Corrupt nature will tempt
men to those sins which are most suitable to flesh and blood; as the devil when
he tempted Christ in the wilderness being an hungry, Command, says he, Matthew.
4.3.
that these stones be made bread; this was a very suitable temptation to
Christ's condition, for he had fasted forty days and forty nights and was
hungry, the devil did suit him with a temptation; and if the devil do suit
temptations to our condition, our natures will much more, because a man's own
heart knows what is more suitable to his inclination then the devil does; it
is true, the devil knows what a man's inclination is by his actions, otherwise
he cannot know; but our natures are so corrupted, that they will propose
temptations that are most pleasing to flesh and blood; and to those sins
which either by custom or inclination we are most inclined to. And this the
Apostle James speaks of, as I have formerly noted; Jam. 1.14. (...).
when he says, that every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own
lusts, and enticed. It is a metaphor taken from fishermen, who will suit their
bait to the fish which they desire to take, and will not always fish with the
same bait; thus it is here, thy corrupt nature does play the fisherman, and
lays such a bait which is most suitable to every man's inclination; therefore
on this consideration be humbled, that sin is so suitable to thy corrupt nature.

6. Be humbled on this ground, that thy corrupt nature will carry thee to
commit such sins, which thou did believe in thy heart thou should never
fall into; an eminent example hereof we have in Hazael, who when he was told by
the Prophet Elisha what evil he should do unto the children of Israel: That he
should set their strong holds on fire, and slay their young men with the sword,
dash their children against the stones, and rip up women with child; Oh, says
he, is thy servant a dog, that he should do these things? 2 Kings 8.12.
he could not believe it, and yet this he did, and worse then there the Prophet
had told him. Here is cause therefore to be humbled; there is that evil
seminally in thy nature that will provoke to sin, which thou could not
imagine to be there; why else should Christ admonish his Disciples, Luke 21.34.
to take heed that their hearts were not overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and worldly cares; Alas^ what danger was there for poor Disciples
to be overtaken with these sins? yet Christ knew that there was cause for them
to take heed; though they were eminent Apostles of Christ, yet they had the
seed of those evils in their natures. It is an observation of Mr. Capel, Capel
of temptations.
that a godly man at one time or other before his death shall be tempted either
by the devil or his own heart to break every Commandment of the Law, and to
doubt of every article in the Creed; and therefore do not think thou art so
well settled in thy judgment, that thou shall never fall into error; and thou
which live holily, be not over-confident, nor too secure, thinking that thou
shall never fall, as such a man fell; remember thou have as bad a heart, and if
God should suffer the devil, thy own corrupt nature, and an occasion to
concur together, thou would fall into as bad a sin as ever any in the
world fell into, there is such a contrariety in thy nature against grace, that
it would carry thee to the most unnatural and gross sins that are in the
world. Augustine had a good saying when he saw a man fall into sin, Tu hodie;
ego cras, Thou fallest to day, and I to morrow, if God help me not.

7. Consider that this contrariety in thee it is an universal contrariety; if
there were a contrariety against some grace, and not against all, it were
somewhat excusable; or if there were only a contrariety in some parts, not in
all, it were somewhat tolerable: but when this contrariety is universal in
every respect, how intolerable is this? though thou art a godly man, not only
the wicked, but even thou who art a godly man, all thy body and all thy soul is
defiled; it is true, there is grace in every part of thy soul, so there is
sin too. There is ignorance in thy understanding, forgetfulness in thy
memory, stubbornness in thy will, disorder in thy affections, hardness in thy
heart, searednesse in thy conscience; now it is true, though every faculty be
infected, yet also is every part regenerated too in those that are godly.
Corruption it is in the soul, as the soul is in the body; the whole soul is in
the whole body, and the whole soul is in every part of the body; just so it is
with original corruption, it is whole in every man, and it is whole in every
part of a man.

One has this note, that corrupt nature it is more in the soul, then the
soul is in the body; for though the whole soul be in the whole body, and
every part of it, yet it is not in that manner in every part of the body, as it
is in the whole body; it is more eminently in the whole, then in part: but
corrupt nature it is more in man, then the soul is in the body: for though the
soul be in the body, yet it is but in the members of the body for particular
uses; it is in the eye to see, not to work, and in the hand to work, and not to
see; it is in the ear to hear, and not to go, and in the foot to walk, and not
to hear; but sin is in the soul, not for particular acts; but it is in every
man, and in every part of man, provoking and enticing to all kind of evil:
this the universality of that corruption found in man's nature, for which we
have great cause to be humbled.

Sermon XIX. At Lawrence Jewry London, Januar. 19. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
HAving opened the enmity and contrariety that is between the flesh and the
Spirit: I come now to answer two cases of conscience relating to this Doctrine,
and the first is this: 1. If the flesh does carry such a contrariety to grace,
what are the reasons why God is pleased to leave such contrary principles in
the hearts of regenerate men? 2. If there be such a contrariety which can never
be reconciled, then to what end is it for a man to oppose the flesh?






1. God does it for the clearer illustration of his mercy; God would have
showed his goodness if man had never fallen; but being fallen, Romans 5.21.
(...).
God shows his mercy to him. The end of our redemption is that Gods grace and
mercy might reign. And herein you may see a manifest signal thereof, that God
should work grace in thee when thou had such a contrariety in thy heart
against it, this is great mercy; though thou have a contrary principle in thy
nature to grace, yet converting grace will overcome; and though it do not
remove, yet it will subdue corruption; and grace though it be opposed, yet it
shall never be expelled; grace shall be conqueror at last, though it be always
fighting, whilst we are in this life.

2. God is pleased to leave such a contrariety against grace, even in the
hearts of regenerate men, that they might put a higher estimation on Jesus
Christ. If you had not had a contrary principle to grace, you would only have
admired God as a Creator; but now having a principle of sin within you, you
come to see the need you stand in of a Mediator. Adam in innocence needed not a
Savior, but now thou being fallen by sin, and having a principle of enmity in
thy nature, nothing but the power of a Savior can take away this enmity by the
work of sanctification, and nothing but a Savior can free thee from the guilt
of this enmity, even Jesus Christ; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.24,25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ that has delivered me from this body of
death; it is he by whom thou art delivered from this guilt and enmity.

3. The Lord leaves this corruption of nature in the hearts of his people, to
stir up in them a greater and deeper measure of humiliation. Humiliation, it
had not been a duty in us, if the Lord had not left the remainers of original
corruption in the hearts of his chosen: indeed thou should have delighted in
God to all eternity; but thou should not have had this ground of
humiliation, if sin had been totally extirpated. This was Paul's case, 2 Cor.
12.7.
an eminent Apostle; There was given him a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of
Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above measure. --

There are four interpretations given of these words, some refer this thorn
in the flesh to be meant of Hymeneus and Alexander, which did vex Paul so; but
this is groundless. Others refer it to some exquisite bodily disease; but
that can harldy be proved. (...). Cypr.
Others refer it to the particular sin of lust of uncleanness; but that
cannot be admitted, because Paul had the gift of continency, and wished that
all men were as himself, as to that particular. But here by the thorn in the
flesh. the most inquisitive and exquisite Interpreters understand it to be the
sin of nature; and it is called a messenger of Satan, because the devil does
join with man's nature, and does set on the corruption of man's heart; Now why
was this thorn in the flesh left in Paul? was it not to humble him, lest he
should be exalted above measure? Deuteronomy. 8.15,16.
Thus the Lord left the fiery scorpions in the wilderness, to humble the
Israelites; and the Lord leaves corruption in thy nature to humble thee, that
thou might not be puffed up in thy self, but that when thou perceivest the
corrupt workings of thy nature, thou may be the more vile and base in thine
own eyes.

4. The Lord leaves this corrupt nature in thee for the exercise of thy grace.
Grace is never more exercised, then when it is opposed; hereby God will try the
truth of thy grace, and the honesty of thy heart, whether thou will fall in
with the Spirit, and side with it against the flesh. Thus the Lord left the
Canaanites in the land, to try whether the Israelites would join with them;
there is a contrary principle to grace left in us, to try whether we will join
with the flesh, or follow the motions and dictates of the Lords Spirit.



I shall name three reasons; that though it be true, you cannot remove the
contrariety that is in your hearts against grace, yet there is just reason why
you should maintain a contest against it.

1. If you will not oppose corruption of nature, it will break forth with
greater rage and violence in your lives; thou have now an unclean nature, but
if thou do not oppose it, thou will have a vicious life: let but thy nature
alone, and it will be like a field unmanured, over-runne with briars and
thorns; Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornication, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; Matthew. 15.19
if we stifle not evil thoughts in the heart, they will break out you see into
evil and inordinate practices of life; so that herein though you cannot remove
original corruption, yet if you do not oppose it, you will not only have it in
your hearts, but also visible in your lives.

2. Though you cannot remove and destroy this contrariety of nature, yet you
may be able to suppress it; it is true, destroy it you cannot, but weaken it
you may; remove it you cannot, but repress it you may: You may do with it as
Joshua did by the Gibeonites, he saved their lives, but made them hewers of
wood and drawers of water; and as the Israelites did with the Canaanites, they
did not throw them out, but made them tributaries, so though thou can not
drive out corruption of nature, yet thou may keep it under; and the more
thou do contest with thy corrupt heart, the more thou will be able to keep i^
under. Lev. 14.41,46.
It is an observable Law which the Lord gave the Jews touching an house that
was infected with the p^agu^ of Leprosy; God bid the people do this, that if
the Leprosy were in the house, they should scrape every stone in this house,
and if it could not be clean by scraping, afterward they were to pull the
house down: Thy nature, it is this leprous house: the plague of leprosy has
defiled thy nature, and the Lord bids thee do with thy nature, as the Jews
were to do with their houses, they were to scrape every stone: so do you labor
to cleanse your hearts, sweep thy heart with the beesom of sanctification; and
if all will not do, when this house of thine shall be pulled down by death,
then it shall be cleansed. But as long as thou live in the world, be
contesting against the workings of corrupt nature; and though thou can not
expel it, yet thou may subdue it. Though our grace in this life will never
be so strong as to expel and utterly subdue our corruption, yet by our
striving and laboring to keep up this contest, thou will keep thy corruption
at such an under, as it shall never extinguish grace.

3. Consider, that not to conflict with thy corrupt nature, it is an argument
that thou have no grace in thee. Between one there is no opposition; opposition
must be betweeen two: These are contaary the one to the other; as corrupt
nature is contrary to grace, so grace is contrary to corrupt nature; and
therefore if thou do lie still, and not conflict with corruption, it is an
evident argument thou have no grace.

Libera me Domine a meipso. Aug.
make us ever watchful and jealous over our own hearts, you know not how far
the contrariety and corruption of your hearts may carry you before you die; do
not think, surely I shall never fall into such a sin, and such a sin; be not
secure, thou have a nature in thee that may prompt thee to the worst sin, that
ever was committed upon the earth. I told you of an observation of Mr. Capels,
that a Christian before he died, should be tempted to break every Commandment
of the Law, and to doubt of every Article in the Creed; thou have a contrariety
against all grace, and therefore an inclination to all sin; carry therefore a
jealous eye over thy self: Peter he was not suspicious enough of himself,
when he told Christ, That though all should forsake him, yet he would not; Nay,
says he, though I die with thee, yet I will not deny thee; and yet Peter he
did both, he forsook him, and denied him, Matthew. 26.35.
and that with a curse and an oath. Had Peter known his own heart, he would
never have said so. Good men know not to what the corruption of their natures
may carry them; it may be thou art a holy and a gracious Christian, thou
walk unblameably in the place where thou live; but consider, if God should
let thy nature loose, with what impetuous violence will thou be drawn to sin?
Hazael, as I noted before, thought not that there was that wickedness in his
heart, which the Prophet foretold him of, 2 Kings 8.13.
and therefore says he, Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this
wickedness? Nay, Christ himself forewarnes his disciples, Luke 21.34.
That they should beware of surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this
world; a strange exhortation one would think to such as they were, one would
think it had been a useless caution to such good men; the disciples they were
not at that time hungerbitten, and that they should be guilty of surfeiting;
and they who had not a house to put their heads in, that they should be
overtaken with drunkenness; that they who had not the things of this life,
should be careful about them* this was very strange, yet Christ he knew that
they had the feeds of these sins in their natures; and as they, so also have
all we, and therefore we ought to have a suspicious eye over our own hearts. As
in the first creation, all creatures were seminally in the Chaos, and there
wanted only the motion of the Spirit to bring them forth; so in our natures
there is the seed of all evil, and there wants but occasion and temptation to
draw it forth.

Remember,

1. Because it may proceed, not from an increase of sin in thy nature, but from
a clearer discovery of sin; not that the object is multiplied and greatened,
but because thy sight is cleared; a godly man he sees more corruption in his
nature then ever he saw before: this proceeds not because there is more
corruption then indeed was before, but because the Lord has given him a
clearer inspection into his own heart. I may illustrate it by this comparison.
In a dark and gloomy day, you see no dust, nor motes flying up and down your
chamber; but let the bright beams of the Sun shine in there, and then you
see abundance of dust: now the dust was there before, but you saw it not,
because the Sun made it not appear to you; thus it is with men: Before
conversion they have an abundance of lusts in their hearts, but they see them
not, because the Sun of righteousness has not shined into them. -- You have
a notable passage of Paul in Romans 7.13. Romans 7.13.
But sin (says he) that it might appear to be sin, wrought death in me; sin
was sin before, but sin did not appear to be sin, until he was converted; and
now says he, I perceive the workings of my corrupt nature; whilst I was a
Pharisee, I did not then see, nor know my self to be so vile and sinful as now
I do; and so when light breaks into the soul, those sins appeared which lay
hid, and those which seemed but as motes, now appear beams; and those which
seemed as little as gnats, now appear as big as Camels,

2. It may proceed from a more gracious and tender sincerity in thy conscience,
then there was in times past. In former time thy conscience was hard, seared,
and senseless, fighting against the sense of sin, but now God has melted
and mollified it; God has made thy conscience to be not as seared, but as raw
flesh: godly men may complain of corruption, and think they have more then ever
they had, but it is because they are more tender, and more sensible. When a man
has hurt his finger, he thinks he does never so much touch it as then, and
this arises from the tenderness of the part, so God having made thy heart a
broken and a soft heart: therefore the corruption of thy heart is more felt
then before. Prove. 7.2^
Sin to a wicked man is as a blow on the back, but sin to a godly man is as a
blow upon the eye.

3. Consider this, though you discern the corruptions of your nature, and see
more of it then ever you saw before; yet be confidently assured of this, that
thou shall have the final victory. To this purpose I may accommodate that
passage concerning Rebecca, who having conceived the children strugled together
within her, and she said, Lord, Why am I thus? And the Lord said unto her, Two
Nations are in thy womb, that is, the rise of two Nations, Genesis 25.22,23.
Esau and Jacob; two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and
the one people shall be stronger then the either, and the elder shall serve the
younger. Whence mark 1. It is said, There was two manner of people in her womb,
and these separated; Thus is Sin and Grace.

2. The one is said to be stronger then the other, that is, the posterity of
Esau they shall be stronger fot a while then the Israelites, Numb. 22.18.
for they did defeat them once; but now what is the comfort? Why, The elder
shall serve the younger; and so it came to pass, that the Edomites did serve
the Israelites: 2 Samuel 8.14. 1 Kings 22 47. Obad. 8.17,18.
Thus I may say as of Esau and Jacob, Corruption of nature is stronger then
Grace in many good men, and it is elder then grace; but here is your comfort,
The elder shall serve the younger; Grace shall get the final victory.

Romans 8.7. (...).
and what the Spirit wills, that the flesh wills; and therefore you have great
cause of humiliation.

4. Learn to reduce all actual sins that have broke out in your lives, to their
original; that is, to this contrariety of nature. Thou do not sin, because
the devil tempts thee, nor because thou art in bad company, but because thou
have a corrupt nature. It is a saying of a learned Divine, that a Christian
has many enemies to fight withal, but he has only one which overcomes
grace, and that is the flesh. Were it not for corruption within, all
temptations would be no other to thee, then they were unto Christ; the Tempter
came to him, but he found nothing in him; his temptations were but as a spark
of fire cast into the sea: but the devil comes to thee, and the world comes to
thee, and they find fit matter in thee, a suitablenes in thy nature to fall
into and close with the temptation; and therefore reduce actual sin to its
original; thus Paul did, It is no more I that sins, says he, but who does he
blame? Rom 7.20.
not the devil, nor the world, but sin that dwells in me; that is, an evil
and corrupt nature; it is my corrrupt nature which draws me to evil, and
hinders me from good; and if you would thus reduce your sin to its original,
what cause of sorrow and debasement would it give unto you? It is said of
David, that the devil moved him to number the people, but he does not charge it
upon the devil, 1 Chr. 21.1. 2 Samuel 24.10.
but upon himself; and says he, I have sinned, and I have done foolishly: we
are all transgressors from the womb. Complain not of the evil that is in thy
life, but charge it upon thy corrupt nature; and thus also David in another
place, Isai. 48.8.
he duces those two great evils of murder and adultery to the corruption of
his nature; and says he, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. And thus Augustine in his Confessions, Psalm. 51.5.
when he confesses how he robbed an Orchard, he says, neither hunger, nor
want of the fruit he stole, for he had better at home, but it was merely to
gratify corrupt nature.

5. If there be contrariety in thy nature against grace, oh then do not join in
with this contrariety against the Spirit; would thou join with an enemy? this
contrariety, why is it in thee? is it not to damn and destroy thy soul? 1
Pet. 2.11.
therefore says the Apostle, Abstain from fleshly lusts, because they war
against the soul; the flesh strives to damn you, but the Spirit strives to
save you; therefore do not take part with thy enemy. Yet how many men are there
that join with the corrupt motions of their hearts when they prompt them to
evil? and how unreasonable is this; the Apostle tells us, that We are not
debtors to the flesh, to live after the flesh; Romans 8.12.
as if he should say, You owe nothing to corrupt nature, and why will you yield
thereunto? It is honesty in every man to pay his debts: But you owe nothing to
corrupt nature, but you are Debtors to the Spirit; and if ye through the Spirit
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: Therefore indulge not the
flesh, or, as the same Apostle speaks, Make no provision for the flesh. Romans
13.14.
If an enemy come into your houses, will you victual his camp, will you send in
Arms to an enemy to destroy you? this is that which men do, when they join
with the flesh against the Spirit. By how much any man makes provision for the
flesh, by so much does he join in opposing, resisting, quenching, and grieving
of the Spirit. Thus I have done with the double conflict between the flesh and
the Spirit, and the double cause of this conflict, These are contrary the one
to the other.

Sermon XX. At Lawrence Jewry London, Januar. 19. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Am now come to make entrance to the double consequent of this double
conflict, which carries also a double reference, The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, so that ye cannot do the good ye would, and the Spirit lusts against
the flesh, so that ye cannot do the evil ye would. The words they are not much
difficult, and therefore I shall not say much in their explication. Augustine
understands these words, so you cannot do the things you would, that is, you
cannot do the good you would. Musculus understands it of both jointly; you
cannot do the things you would. As if he should say, The flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and so you cannot do the good you would; and the Spirit lusts
against the flesh, so that you cannot do the evil you would. The Doctrine is
this from the first part of the consequent, The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, so that ye cannot do the good you would.



To confirm this point, you have not only the testimony of the Apostle, that it
was so with other men, but also his own experience, Romans 8 18. Romans 7.21.
you have him complaining, that to will was present, but how to perform that
which is good, I find not; that when he would do good, evil was present with
him.

I shall branch out this Doctrine into two parts, and shall show that this
corruption of nature in reference to good, has a double mischievous
consequence, or effect. First, it hinders a man from the doing of good.
Secondly, it hinders a man in the doing of good.


These are the particulars I shall insist upon, and shall now begin with the
first, That corrupt nature hinders a man from the doing of good.

To illustrate this, there is a fit emblem in that History mentioned in Genesis
38. concerning Tamar, Genesis 38.27,28
who had twins in her womb, Pharez and Zarah; now the History mentions that
Zarah did first put out the hand, and the Midwife tied a scarlet thread about
his finger, but Pharez strugled with Zarah, and so got out first. Divines
accommodate this History to this purpose, that a godly man may like Zarnh set
on for the doing of duty, but corrupt nature like Pharez hinders the birth of
Zarah. Corrupt nature hinders regenerate men from doing of good.

That which I shall now do, shall be to show you what are those politic
devices of man's nature, that hinder him from the doing of good; and there are
these twelve stratagems which corrupt nature uses to this end.

1. The flesh hinders us from doing of good, by persuading a man that he is
above the use of duty; this is a suggestion which comes from proud fantastical
nature; Duties says the foolish Familist, they are but fleshly forms, and but
for the inferior rank of Christians, not for those that are grown up to a
tall stature, and are people of a higher dispensation. Corruption does often
make this plea, for the neglect of the use of duty; and this was seen to work
in the days of the Apostles, as the Apostle Paul speaks, Are there not
contentions among you, 1 Cor. 1.12.
says he, whilst every one of you say I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, I of
Cephas, and I am of Christ; here the Apostle does not only blame them that
cried up parties among the Apostles, but condemns a fourth sort also, which
said they were of Christ, and why should the Apostle condemn such? why, the
meaning is this: the Apostle condemns Enthusiasme; these were so far from
crying up Paul, or other of the Apostles, that they were all for Christ; that
is, they were for Revelations, and Inspirations; now the Apostle condemns
those that so cry up Christ, as to decry an ordinary Ministry. And to antidote
you against this infection of corrupt nature, I shall give you these three
particulars.

1. That in the most glorious times of the Church, the Word has promised that
duties and Ordinances shall be of use among Believers; Thus S. John speaks,
Rev. 11.15. Revel. 11.15. compared with verse 19.
The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever; and in the nineteenth verse it
follows, The Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was sat in his
Temple the Ark of his Testament; That is, there was to be Gospel Ordinances
even in the purest times of Gods Church, after Antichrist should be destroyed;
yet then there should be a Temple, and within it the Ark of Gods Testament,
meaning Gospel Ordinances.

2. The Scripture tells you that the strongest Christians are to be conversant
in the duties of Religion; and thus the Apostle Paul to the Romans, Romans
15.14,15.
he tells them that he was persuaded that they were full of goodness, filled
with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another; nevertheless, says he,
I am bold to put you in mind, as if he should say, though you are full of
knowledge and goodness, yet I must put you in mind of your duty. The strong
had need to be exercised in duties and Ordinancs,

1. To have their judgments confirmed in knowledge, and belief of the truth, 1
John 2.21. I have not written to you, because you know not, but because you
know the truth.

2. To have their memories strengthened in the remembrance of the truth, Jude
3. I will put you in remembrance, though you once knew this.

3. To have their affections more excited to the love of the truth, 2 Pet. 1.12.

3. Until you come to heaven, you must be conversant in the use of duty. You
read of the Israelites, that all the while they were in the wilderness, the Lord
sent them Manna from heaven, but when once they came to Canaan, then Manna
ceased; so whilst you are in the wilderness of this world, you must be fed
with the Manna of Ordinances, but when you come to heaven, then, and not till
then will Ordinances cease; only the heavenly Jerusalem had no Temple, Rev.
21.22,23.
Rev. 21.22,23. And therefore the more abominably unthankful are all they who
make no other use of their so long living under Ordinances, but proudly to
profess themselves above Ordinances.

2. Another stratagem which corrupt nature has, is a pretense of urgent and
extraordinary affairs and occasions in the world, and this some will make a
hinderance to duty. They will tell you that their conditions are necessitous,
and that they have time little enough to follow their callings, and therefore
they hope God will dispense with them, though they be not so much in duty as
other men. Such as these were they who were bidden to that great Supper
mentioned by Luke, Luke 14.18, to 26.
who with one consent began to make excuse, One had bought a piece of ground,
and he must needs go and see it, another a yoke of Oxen, and he must go and
prove them, and another married a wife, and he could not come; Such pretenses
as these are found in corrupt nature, to make callings in the world to be a
dispensation to duty to God; and that I may take off this mistake, I shall lay
down these three particulars.

1. That God never ordained our particular callings as men, to justle out our
general callings as we are Christians, or that civil duties should justle out
Divine duties. A wise management of, and forecast in your worldly affairs,
would give you time enough to set about divine duties; a holy prudence and
providence will redeem time for prayer, hearing, etc.

2. Consider that the way for God to bless you in your outward callings, is to
be much employed in religious duties. It is the saying of one that had but two
acres of ground, and a rich Lords land was by his; the poor man's was fruitful,
and the Lords was barren; whereupon the Lord came to him, and ask't him the
reason: Oh Sir, says he, I water my little ground with prayers and tears
every morning, this is the way to be blessed in the world: Psalm. 34.10. Mat.
6.33. (...).
give God his due, and he will give you yours. Seek ye first the Kingdom of
God and his righteousness, and then all other things shall be given in unto
you.

3. Thou say thou must follow thy calling, and so neglectest thy duty to
God; consider that for this, God may be provoked to blast thy outward
employments; without Gods blessing it is in vain, to rise up early, and to sit
down late, and to eat the bread of sorrows, Psalm. 127.2.
as the Psalmist speaks. God does many times curse thy outward condition,
because thou deniest him duties of religious worship.

4. And lastly, God was angry with Moses for neglecting duty, and with the
Israelites also, though they had more urgent affairs to plead, then all you
have. Moses, though he were in a journey, and one would have thought, that
might have been a good excuse for him, for the not circumcising of his child;
and yet the Lord was so displeased at this neglect of his, that he met him in
his Inn, Exodus 4.24.
and had like to have killed him. God would not dispense with the neglect of
his Ordinance, though the necessity of a journey might have pleaded an excuse
for Moses. So the children of Israel, whilst they were in the wilderness, God
was angry with them, because they neglected this Ordinance of circumcision, and
yet they might have pleaded for themselves, that they were moving from place to
place, pitching their Tents now here, now there; and though this pretense may
seem very fair, Josh. 5.5,6.
yet God was not pleased with them; which may teach us that it is not our
worldly employments, nor necessary affairs in the world, that can give us a
dispensation in the performance of our duty to God.

3. Another stratagem of corrupt nature in this point is this: Semper incipio
vivere.
That a man will purpose, and promise to do duties, but not till his present
estate and condition is changged; when a man shall sit down and say, If I were
in another condition, God should have more duty and service from me, then now
he has; but in this condition that I am now in, I have not time nor
opportunity. -- This is a most plausible stratagem, whereby your corrupt hearts
labor to take you off from duty. Suppose thou art a young man, and a servant,
thy heart will suggest unto thee thus: but if thou were then a Master, Oh how
many hours would thou spend in Gods service? thou art a poor man, and thou
say, Oh if I were a rich man, how liberal would I be? Thou art a private
man, but if thou were a Magistrate, what good would thou do, this was
Absalom's vain conceit. But remember this, if thy condition should be changed,
and thy heart remain unchanged, thou would still be the same man, though thy
condition were altered; and to you that have been, or may be thus deceived by
your deceitful hearts, I would lay down these partilars:

1. Know that it is a mere deceit of heart, to think that if thy condition were
changed, thou would be a changed man; it appears to be a deceit upon this
ground, because if thou art not good in thy present condition, thou can not
be good in any condition, if thy heart be the same; and the reason is, it is
thy naughty heart which makes thee bad in thy present condition, Coelum non
animum mutat.
and if that continues with thee, thou will be bad in another condition; if
thou art a bad servant, thou will be a bad Master, and if a bad child, thou will be a bad father; if thou art not good in a single condition, thou will not
be good in a married estate, unless thy heart be changed: if thy heart be not
changed, thy lifee will not.

2. Consider that every other condition which thou do so admire, and desire
after, it has peradventure more snares, more encumbrances and inconveniences,
then the present condition thou complainest of; thou art now a young man, and
thou complainest that thou have not time to pray, what would thou do, 1 Cor.
7.34.
if thou had the charge of a house and family? a public condition has more
distractions and encumbrances then any private condition, and therefore do not
deceive your selves.

4. Another stratagem of corrupt nature to keep a man from duty, is by putting
a foul vizard upon the beautiful face of religious duties. Just as the flesh
to provoke a man to sin, will smear over sin, and make it appear like the
beautiful face of grace: so the heart on the other side, to keep a man from
duty, will smear over the beautiful face of godliness, with carnal prejudices;
even as Judas did disparage that most excellent and memorable act of Mary in
that honorable liberality she showed unto Christ in breaking the box of
ointment, as a profuse and riotous waste, Matthew. 26.8. So thy corrupt heart
will suggest to thee, what is zeal for God, but rashness and indiscretion? and
what is holiness, but baseness of mind? what is patience, not to give injury
for injury; but a sordid temper? and what is walking with God, but a Monkish
kind of life? what is a conscientious care to sanctify a Sabbath? it is but
Judaisme; and what is it to be of a tender conscience, but to have a needless
scrupulosity? By this means, men allowing their corrupt hearts to argue thus
carnally, they are hindered from much good; and therefore if thou would be
taken off from this deceit, thou must labor to see the native luster and
beauty that is in holiness, and the filthiness of sin.

5. Another way whereby the heart of man deceives him, is by pretense to do
some lesser good, and thereby neglect the doing of a greater; and thus the
devil and a man's own heart diverts him many a time. It is an observation of Mr.
Greenham, that in many families, every trisling business shall hinder prayer;
and this is the nature of a man's heart, to make every slight business to
divert him from duty, and the exercises of religion. Thus it was with the
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.
They would tithe Mint Annise and Cummin, and so neglect righteousness, and
the more serious and weighty things of the Law.

Many men will content themselves to read a Chapter at home, and neglect the
Ministry of the Word, and prayer in public; this is merely the sly deceit of
a man's own heart, even as the ancient heretics called Euchitae, they were so
intent on prayer, as that they neglected all other service of God.

To this I would only say, that those who make one duty to justle out another,
let such remember that duties are not contrary, but subordinate and subservient
one to another. I may say of the duties of religion, as the Scripture speaks of
the Lamps of the Sanctuary; they were so seated, that one lamp should kindle
another: so duties they are so ordered by God, that one duty shall help
another, and fit for another; prayer fits for hearing, hearing fits a man for
meditation, and meditation fits for prayer, and so of all other duties; and
therefore they which make one duty to hinder another, they make those things
contrariant, which the Lord has made concordant.

6. Another stratagem which the flesh uses is this, that if it cannot persuade
men wholly to neglect duty, yet it will endeavor to make them abate in duty.
It may be thy corrupt heart cannot prevail with thee to cast off prayer, and
hearing the Word, so as never to perform these duties; yet will it labor to
gain thus much upon thee, that thou shall pray more seldom then thou have
done, and hear not so often as formerly thou have done. As it is a deceit of
the heart to bring us from small sins to great sins; so also is it the policy
of the flesh, from the doing of duty seldom, at last to bring us not to do it
at all. -- And to antidote you against this infection of nature, I shall lay
down these following considerations.

1. It is the policy of thy heart, not to make thee cast off duty wholly, and
at once, but to make thee abate gradually; Revel. 2.4. The Church at Ephesus
did gradually decay, first left off her first love, and afterward her first
works; and the reason is, because hereby thy heart and the devil knows, that
abatements when they are gradual, they are less sensible; but neglects when
they are total, they fall under the cognizance of a natural conscience: You
must pray sometimes, and hear sometimes, else conscience will check a man; but
gradual decays they are not so sensibly perceived, and therefore the devil
and thy own heart will let thee pray, and will let thee hear, but not so much
as formerly thou have done; this is a snar, which many of Gods people have been
taken in.

2. Consider that the soul is in as much danger by gradual decays and
abatements, as by total omissions. A leake in a ship though but small, will at
last as certainly, and more dangerously, because more insensibly and
unperceivingly cause the ship to miscarry, as a violent storm. Lingering
consumptions do kill men, as surely as violent burning fevers; it is true, a
fever or the plague may kill a man in three days, but a consumption will as
certainly bring a man to his end, and to his grave.

7. Corrupt nature will suggest to thee that thou should leave off duty,
because of the unalterable decree of God. Corrupt nature will tell thee, that
if thou art ordained to damnation, all thy praying and all thy hearing will
never save thee; and if thou art ordained to salvation, though thou do not
hear so much, and pray so much, it shall not procure thy eternal damnation;
this deceit is rooted in the hearts of all the sons of men: and in answer
thereto, I have only these three things to lay before you.

1. As to duty, you are not to consult with Gods secret decrees, but with his
revealed Word; Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but revealed things to
us and our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law. Deuteronomy.
29.29.
We are not to look to the decrees of God, and upon them, either do or not do
our duty; but we are to look to his revealed will, which bids us be conversant
in holy duties of religion and godliness; we are not to search the secret
records of heaven, but the Scriptures. It was a good saying of holy Mr.
Bradford, A man should not go to the University of Predestination, until he be
well grounded in the Grammar School of obedience and repentance.

2. Consider that the same decree which determines the end of a man, Qui
destinat ad finem, destinat ad media.
determines also the means to bring about that end. If thou art decreed to be
damned, the same God decrees that thou shall be left to walk in such ways
which lead to damnation; and if thou art decreed to be saved, God has also
decreed that thou should walk in those ways which lead to everlasting
life; and this the Apostle tells you. Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works which God has
before ordained, that we should walk in them; not only our happiness, but our
holiness is decreed by God.

3. You which yield to this plea of nature, you will not yield to this plea in
other things, you will not reason thus in matters of the world; should a man
reason thus, God has decreed from all eternity how long I shall live in the
world, and therefore because the decree is irrevocable, I will neither eat meat
nor wear clothes, you would account this man rather a mad man, then one in his
wits. He that refuses meat, Gods Ordinance to continue life, is a
self-murderer; and he that omitteth duties of Religion out of any pretense of
Gods decree, is a soul-murderer; as it is thus in nature, so also is it in
grace; as God has decreed the end, so also has he decreed the means conducing
thereunto.

8. You will say, through the suggestion of a selfe-deceiving heart, you are
unable to perform any good, this is the plea of many, they will say, If I were
able, I would pray more; if I were able to remember more, I would hear more;
but because of my disability, I am discouraged from duty. I know this is my my
misery, if I do not read, and hear, and pray; and if I do these duties, this is
my further misery, that I sin in the performance of them. This is natures plea,
and in answer thereto, consider,

1. That thy impotency does not not nullify thy obligation to a moral law.
Though thou art unable to perform duty, that does not free thee from thy tie to
duty; thou art bound to do duty, though thou can not do it well. If thou have
lost ability to obey, see thou to that; God has not lost authority to command;
natural impotency can give no excuse to wilful neglect.

2. Suppose this be true, that thou art unable to do duty, yet consider that
thy ability herein depends upon Gods promise, not upon thy own strength; thou
art unable, but God is not unable; thou art under a promise, do thou set upon
the performance of duty, and God has promised his Spirits assistance.

3. Consider that there is less evil in the performance of a duty, though
thou sinnest in the manner of doing it, then in a total omission; that man
sins less, which prays, and does not pray well, then that man which does
not pray at all. Indeed defects in duty they break part of a command; but total
neglects, they break the whole command: the duty is essential, but the defect
is but accidental.

Sermon XXI. At Lawrence Jewry London, Januar. 6. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Proceed now to lay down some other pleas which corrupt nature makes, to
divert us from duty. I have laid down eight already; the next in order is this:

9. From the austerity that men perceive in the duties of Religion, what will
the flesh tell a man? If thou devotest thy self to holy exercises, Spiritus
Calvinianus, est spiritus melancholicus.
thou do but give thy self to a rigid course of life, and thereby abridge
thy self of many lawful pleasures. Calvinisme, say the Papists, makes men
melancholy. -- This is a great prejudice to many men, unexperienced in the way
of holiness; and to this I have three things to answer:

1. There is not so much austerity in the exercises of Religion now under the
Gospel, as there was under the Law. The worship under the Law was a very
austere worship; they were to sacrifice their ^ul^ocks out of the stall, and
their sheep out of their flocks; and they were to go out of all the regions of
Judea, once a year to Jerusalem to worship; and so the Apostle speaks also of
circumcision, That it was a yoke, which neither our fathers nor we were able to
bear. Acts 15.10.
But now for the duties under the New Testament, God does not require you to
offer your beasts for a sacrifice, but rather your lusts. He requires not any
thing which is laborious and painful; he requires not the circumcision of your
flesh, but the circumcision of your hearts. That man which complains of the
austerity of Gospel-duties, if he were a Jew, he would then complain much more.
Gospel Ordinances they are easy; Christ calls al such as are weary and
heavy-laden to come to him, Matthew. 11.28,29,30.
and they shall find rest; and to take his yoke upon them, and to learn of
him; for his yoke is easy, and his burden is light. The invitation, is to
embrace the Christian Religion, in opposition to the Jewish religion, which was
a heavy yoke: but says Christ, Take my yoke, for it is easy; that is, walk in
a Christian course, and you shall find ease and rest to your souls.

2. Thou which art kept off from the exercises of Religion, because thou
fear thereby thou shall be abridged of thy joys and delights in the world;
consider, that the duties of Religion they will not extirpate, and nullify thy
joys, but only regulate them; not remove, but raise your delights. Religion,
it is not a mattock to dig up your joys by the roots, but a pruning-hook to
pare and cut off your luxurious branches.

3. Know that there are none that have more ground of joy, then those who are
most conscientious and careful in the performance of the duties of Religion.
Romans 15.13.
There is joy and peace to be had in believing, as the Apostle tells you; there
is none before, nor none without believing; and as the Apostle Peter tells you,
Believing ye rejoice, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. 1 Pet. 1.8.
It is not spoken of the joy which shall be in heaven, but of the joy which
believers have in this world; love to Jesus Christ, and believing in Jesus
Christ, it fills the soul with joy and glory in this life. You may tell all the
dimensions of an outward joy; but the joy of a believer, it is a joy
unspeakable, and a joy full of glory.

10. Another plea of corrupt nature is this, that you have done enough already,
that you have spent so many years in a course of Religion; so many years you
have been a professor, and what need you more? Thus Jehu he thought he had done
enough in destroying Baal, and therefore he needed not to put down the Calves.
This is a pleawhich many times takes off the heart from further progress; and
I have three things to speak to it. --

1. The people of God in former ages, they never used to make this a plea; nay,
they have been of a quite contrary temper. Phil. 3.13,14.
Paul tells you that He forgot those things which were behind, and reaching
forth to those things which are before, I press toward the mark; that is, I
forget all my part past duties and performances; I will not rest contented in
them, but I will press forward. If I have done much good, I will do more good;
oh therefore be thou as abundant in duty for time to come, as if thou had
never been employed in duty for time past.

2. The Scripture does make your abounding in duty in former time, to be an
argument why you should abound more in after time; have thou prayed and heard
much formerly? hear more hereafter; this the Apostle makes an argument unto the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8 7.
that as they had abounded in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and in all
diligence and love; so also, they should abound in a charitable contribution to
the poor Saints that were at Jerusalem; and says he, as you have abounded, so
abound in this grace also. Phil. ver. 8,9.
And as Paul to Philemon, in that Epistle says he, Show mercy to Onesimus;
why? for thou have showed mercy; thou have refreshed the bowels of the Saints,
refresh this also: so that if you have been much in duty, it is an argument
that you should be more therein for time to come.

3. You which plead you have been much in duty for time past, and are negligent
in that which at present you ought to do; you would not reason thus in things
of this life; where is the man that will say thus? I have gotten so much money
this last year, that I will get none this; thus you see the unreasonablenesse
of this plea. Men think they can never enough abound in temporals, but any
measure of spirituals will serve the turn, and satisfy them.

11. Another plea of corrupt nature is this. The flesh will tell you, you have
not been so much in sin, and therefore you need not be so much in duty; we are
not men who break out into notorious evils. -- This is a cunning deceit of the
corruption of men's hearts, and therefore I shall speak the more to this plea;
and there are five particulars, which I shall lay down by way of answer:

1. This plea savours of pride, sloth, and ignorance: of pride, as if muchnesse
of duty could expiate the sinfulness of sin: it savours of much idleness,
when the heart will take hold on such poor shifts and excuses to take you off
from, or make you neglective in the performance of religious duties; and then
it savours of much ignorance, as if a man could be much in duty, that is much
in sin; the more thou art in sin, the less thou art in duty; and if thy duties
do not abate thy sins, thy sins will abate thy duties.

2. Consider that the Angels and Saints in heaven, they are not at all guilty
of sin, yet they are much in duty; always in duty, though never in sin: ever
singing praises and hallelujahs to God, but never sin; and our duty is to do
the will of God, as it is done in heaven; that is, constantly, and cheerfully.

3. Consider, though thou had less sin then thou have, yet thou have more
guilt which cleaves to little sins, then all thy duties can expiate or take
away; that man will deceive himself, who thinks to set his duty over against
his sin by way of expiation, because there guilt and sin cleaves to our duties.

4. This which thou make to be a plea, why thou should not be much in
duty, if it be well weighed, will rather prove an argument why thou should
be much in duty: As thus, if thou art not much in sin, thou have the more
cause to be much in duty, and to praise God that he has kept thee from those
sins which other men have fallen into; thou have cause to be much in prayer to
God for preventing grace, that thou may not fall into sin for the time to
come.

5. Consider, that those men who have been least in sin, the Scripture tells us
they have been most in duty. Zacharias, Luke 1.
it is said of him, that he walked in all the Commandments of God blameless,
and yet the Scripture commends him in this, that he was often in the Temple.
And Cornelius, Acts 10.2.
the Scripture reports him to be a devout man, and one that feared God, with
all his house, who gave much alms to the poor, and prayed to God always; though
he was a devout and holy man, yet he prayed to God always; he was much in
duty, though he was not much in sin. So it is said of Anna, Luke 2.37. (...).
And of the Primitive Church, that they continued in the doctrine of the
Apostles, etc. (...), etc.

12. The flesh will tell you, that they who have formerly been much in duty,
they have now cast off duty; and you will say, Why may not I do so too? I see
those men that formerly were desirous to hear Sermons, they now hear not; those
who prayed much and often formerly, now never pray; those that formerly were
much in duty, have now cast off duty; this is a plea which man's naughty heart
takes notice of; and to it I have three things to say:

1. It is true, the more is the pity, that many who have formerly much used
duty, have now cast off duty; and yet though this be true, do you take heed
that you fall not into the same sin and same condemnation. The Scripture lays
a great blame and blemish upon such; there are two Texts to this purpose; the
one is, in Hos. 4.10. where the Lord complains, Hos. 4.10.
that they had left off to take heed unto him; they did once seek after God,
and did take heed unto his ways, but now they had left it off. Another passage
to this purpose also you have of the Psalmist, They have left off to be wise,
(says he) and to do good; Psalm. 26.3.
they did formerly do much good, but now they have left it off; the Scripture
brands such men as these for wicked Apostates.

2. Consider, that you would account this a vain plea in other things; you that
account this rational in spiritual things, you judge irrational in worldly
things. If a man should tell you that other men had left off trading, and
turned bankrupts, and therefore why should not you do so too? you would account
it very irrational, and say, Though other men have played the fools, and run
themselves out of their estates, yet that is no warrant for you to do so.

3. Know, that those who have been much in duty, and have now cast it off, if
they belong unto God, he will bring them home by weeping cross; God will make
them see their folly, to their shame. An example hereof you have in the second
of Hos. ver. 7. Hosea 2.7.
The Church did there apostatize from God; but, says she, I will return to my
first husband, for then was it better with me, then now; then when I served my
God, and walked in his ways, which now I have gone astray from, therefore will
I return. This will be the language of all those who have cast off duty, if
they belong unto God.

13. This is the plea of some, that they abstain from the doing of duty,
because they would avoid more evil thereby, and this is a cunning insinuation
of the flesh; and thus as on the one hand men are deceived by their corrupt
hearts, to commit sin, that good may come thereon: so on the other hand, Sunt
quidam homines, qui cum audierint, quod humiles esse debent, nihil volunt
discere, putantes si aliquid didicerunt, se superbos fore. August. in Psalm. 130.
their hearts would persuade them to omit duty, that evil might not come
thereon; both the deceits are the delusions of corrupt nature, and this Papists
are guilty of; for they under a pretense that the common people should not run
into error, detain the reading of the Bible from them. And to this purpose
Austin mentions some that would not hear the Word, nor get knowledge, upon this
pretense, that some men have grown proud of their parts and knowledge: to this
deceit I shall say three things:

1. It is a good rule of the Schoolmen, that you must not neglect that which is
good in it self, and necessary to avoid a sin, which may be by accident a sin;
for otherwise you should never perform duty. If a man will avoid hearing lest
he should be distracted therein, and praying lest he should have wandering
thoughts; by this reason a man should never perform duty. Now to hear and to
pray, it is good in it self; but that thou art distracted in hearing, or thy
mind wandering in praying, this is an accident, and therefore thou must not
upon a pretense of being guilty of less evil, leave undone those duties,
which in themselves are good.

2. Those men which make this a plea, they will not perform duty, because they
sin in duty; upon the same reason they may as well say, they will not follow
their callings in the world, because they sin in them; and therefore this plea,
though it be a plausible one, and doubting Christians are many times entangled
therewith, yet by this plea you will not only be taken off from religious, but
civil duties also.

3. Consider, that the avoiding of evil upon this pretense, you do thereby run
into a greater evil; and the reason is, because wilful neglects, and total
omissions, are greater then spiritual defects in the manner of religious
performances; it is a lesser sin to be distracted in prayer, then not to pray
at all. This plea therefore is but a lazy plea of corrupt nature, to make us
neglect religious performances.

14. Another plea is a pretense of disability to perform as we ought. The flesh
will tell you, if thou were able to perform duty better, thou should be
encouraged to do it often; but alas, thou art not able to perform duty; when
thou come to hear, thou want faith to believe the word, and memory to
treasure it up. When tho^ come to pray, thou want a composed mind, and
thou want apt expressions; and hence the flesh pleades, that disability to
duty should take a man off from duty. This plea prevails with many Christians
troubled in conscience; and in answer thereto consider,

1. That many Christians which pretend disability, it may be the reason is not
disability, but rather enmity against duty, which is the cause of their
neglect. Nolle in causa est, cum non posse praetenditur, Sen. Epist. 116.
Seneca has a passage to this purpose in one of his Epistles, Men, says he,
pretend that they are not able to do good, but the true cause is, they are not
willing; not a disability in the nature, but an enmity in the heart, which is
the cause. It is worth your noting, that where the Apostle mentions a
disability to duty, he there mentions also the enmity of a natural man's heart
against duty. The carnal mind, Romans 8.7.
says he, is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, nor
indeed can be. So that those who plead a disability, they have cause to look to
their hearts, whether their neglect of duty does not rather proceed from a
dislike in judgment, rather then a disability in affection.

2. Christians are apt to make disability a plea to neglect duty, when indeed
it is rather the danger that does attend duty, that keeps them off, then
disability. You have a notable instance of this in Moses, a good man, you have
the story at large in the fourth of Exodus. God commands Moses that he should
go into Egypt, Exodus 4.10,13,19.
and there to take the care and charge of his people; but what says Moses? Oh,
says he, Will thou send me to conduct this people? alas, I am not able; I am
not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken unto thy servant;
but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue; this was a plausible pretense;
and therefore in the thirteenth verse says he, Lord, I pray, send by the hand
of him whom thou will send. But now was Moses disability the real cause
wherefore he would not go? why, no; and therefore in the nineteenth verse you
have there the true reason discovered; Return, says the Lord, into Egypt, for
all the men are dead which sought thy life. There the Lord hints the cause;
Moses had formerly killed an Egyptian, and there was great search made after
him. And when God bid Moses go again into Egypt, he was afraid; Moses does not
tell God so, but pretends disability; then the Lord told him shat the men were
dead which sought his life; and then the Text says, that Moses took his wife
and his children, and went down into Egypt.

15. Another plea is succeslessenesse in duty; the flesh will suggest thus unto
thee, What need thou continue in a godly course of life? thou have made many
a prayer, and heard many a Sermon, and yet thou art never the better. To this I
answer,

1. That thou owe duty to God as thou art his creature, though he should
never give thee success in his service.

2. Duty it self is success; the very performance is a recompense: if God
should never bring thee to heaven, thou have in part a recompense, that God
suffers thee to perform duty to him here: You have your fruit unto holiness,
Romans 6.20.
as the Apostle tells you, and in the end you shall have everlasting life;
holiness and duty, they are the reward of duty

3. Consider, that there is a twofold success attendant on duty. First, a
real success. -- Secondly, a sensible success. Sometimes the success is
sensible, and a man's affections are raised, and his lusts subdued; but though
success may not always be sensible, yet it is always real: a godly man gets
real good by all the duties he performs. Ephesians. 6.8.
Whatsoever good any man does, the same he shall receive, whether he be bond or
free. No man shall open the doors of Gods house in vain. Wicked Ahab that did
God but temporal service, God requited him with a temporal reward; 1 Kings
21.29.
there is always a real success, which goes along with the performance of our
duty. And thus I have laid down the stratagems and deceits of the flesh,
whereby it labors to divert men from duty, and have given you answers to them
all, that you might not be deceived by the sly subtility thereof.

corrupt nature, so as to omit good duties. Before such I would lay these five
considerations:

1. That a man may go to hell for the omissions of good duties, as well as for
the commissions of sin. Natural conscience will tell a man that gross sinners
shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven; but Scripture will tell you also, that
men shall go to hell for the omissions of good. It is observable in the
sentence which shall be pronounced at the last day by the Judge of all the
world, that the form of it runs, not so much for commissions, as for
omissions, Matthew. 25.41.
that men shall be sentenced for. Depart from me ye cursed, says Christ: for I
was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink; a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick,
and in prison, and ye visited me not. Bonum est non fecisse malum, malum est
non fecisse bonum.
Merely for omissions is the sentence pronounced against them; it may be thou
do not die a drunkard, an adulterer, a swearer, or a deceiver, but do
thou die a man neglective of good duties? I tell thee, the indictment will be
found against thee. Matthew. 25.30.
It is likewise observed of the man that had but one talent, Christ commanded
that he should be cast into utter darkness; what was the cause? he did not
imbezzel his Masters talent, but because he did not improve it, therefore did
the sentence pass against him; and therefore remember you that are omitters of
good duty, not for the imbezzelling, or ill use of your time, Matthew. 3.10.
but for the not improving of it you may go to hell. The tree is threatened to
be cut down, not because it brought forth bad fruit, but because it did not
bring forth good fruit.

2. Consider, that the Scripture lays a brand of infamy upon those who do
constantly neglect the duties of Religion; they have left off to be wise, and
to do good, Psalm. 6.3. Hosea 4.20.
says the Psalmist; and they have left off to take heed unto the Lord, says
the Prophet Hosea. But above all, consider that heavy imprecation of the
Prophet Jeremiah, Pour out thy fury, says he, upon the Heathen that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not upon thy Name. Jer. 10.5
And to this purpose, that concerning the Ammonites and the Moabites is very
remarkable, Deuteronomy. 23.3,4.
in Deuteronomy. 23.3,4. where because of an omission, because they met not the
Israelites, and helped them not with bread and water in the way, when they came
out of Egypt, they were excommunicated (as I may say) from the Tabernacle of
Gods worship, even to the tenth generation.

3. Consider, that omissions of duty, they do unfit men for duty when they
should begin it, and set upon it. Keys that are used, keep clean; but if they
are thrown by, how soon do they rust? so it is with thy heart, thou will gather
rust, if thou throwest thy duties aside. Fire, it is not only put out by water,
Prove. 26.20.
but by the withdrawing of fuel; Where no wood is, the fire goes out: and
therefore remember that if you do not add fuel to your duty, the heat of your
affection will quickly go out. The longer we disuse uny duty, the less able
are we to do it; as a Scholar, if he disuse his study, he will be the more
unfit for that exercise.

4. God is more displeased with sinful, and toral omissions of good, then he is
with many commissions of evil. It is worth your noting, that passage
concerning Moses, in Exodus Exodus 4.24.
4.24. God was more angry with Moses there for a sin of omission, then for any
sin of commission which he had committed all his life. It is said, The Lord met
him in his Inn, and had like to have killed him; what was the matter? why, it
was only this, that he omitted the circumcision of his child, when he was
eight days old; this did so provoke God, that he sought to kill Moses, and yet
Moses might have had more plausible pretenses for his omission, then we can
have for many of the duties which we neglect. I mention this to show you the
danger of the sin of omission.

5. And lastly, consider this, that you will not admit of this plea in other
things; should your servants deal with you thus, when you bid them go about
such and such a business, and command them to perform such a service, if they
are negligent; and when you shall call them to an account, will you admit of
their excuse, when they shall tell you that they do not steal your wares out of
your shops, nor your money out of your Cubboards; we do not do you any injury;
will you suffer these excuses? why, no certainly: Let me tell you, you are all
servants to the God of heaven, he is your Master; and though you can thus
plead, Lord, I am not a gross sinner, I have not dishonored thy Name as
others have done, and I am no blasphemer of thy Name; yet God will reckon with
you, because you call not upon his Name; therefore take heed of omissions of
good duties, and of all those secret insinuations of the flesh, which lead into
this sin, and make excuses for it.

Sermon XXII. At Lawrence Jewry London, Januar. 26. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
HAving formerly showed by what means and ways the flesh labors to divert men
from duty; I come now to show you also how it labors to interrupt men in duty;
and this is a very practical point, and there are many cases of conscience,
which are incident, and may pertinently fall in in the handling of this
particular. But before I come to give you the Queries I intend to handle, I
shall premise these ten Conclusions, or Positions about the flesh, its
disturbing good men in good duties.

1. The first is this, that the corruption of the flesh it is more prevalent
with good men to disturb them in, then to divert them from holy duties. Indeed
with men unregenerate corrupt nature prevails more to divert them from duty;
but it is contrary with the regenerate. Godly men are not so subject to have
diversions from, as disturbances in holy performances; neglects of duty they
fall under the cognizance of a natural conscience, and therefore good men are
not so often overcome in that way; but as for disturbances in duty, they are
not taken notice of by a natural conscience.

2. A godly man is more interrupted in duty by his own beart, then he is either
by the devil, or the world, or any thing else beside. We many times blame our
callings, and the devil, that he is busy with us; when we have more cause to
blame our own naughty hearts. As it is the property of good men when they sin
to blame their corrupt natures, and not the devil, for so did David: 2 Samuel
24.10.
So on the contrary, when good men are interrupted in duty, they do not blame
the devil or the world so much as their own hearts. As the Apostle Pavl says
of himself, Romans 7.18.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find
not; that is, I find not ability to be intent and serious, in the worship of
God; but what does he blame, Romans 7.25.
not the devil, or the world, but it is sin which dwells in me. And in the
25. verse he says, With my mind I serve the law of God, but with the flesh,
the law of sin. It is the flesh which carries the force of a law, whereby we
sin in the service of God; and therefore, oh man, do not blame the devil, or
the world, but thy own heart.

3. Another Position is this, that the corruption of the flesh interrupting of
us in duty, it is manifest and violent both in secret, as also in public
duties; thy heart will be violent against thee, when thou art alone, between
God and thy own soul, as also when thou art in public; your own experience
will contribute to the truth of this. What roving minds, and what distracted
thoughts are you haunted with in your secret retirements? Yea, also in public
duties, how hard is it to bound the thoughts, and to compose the mind, to lay
a restraint upon devotion?

4. That a man's heart, and corrupt nature, is more apt to interrupt him in
extraordinary duties, then in common and ordinary duties. A man therefore shall
be more haunted with evil thoughts upon a solemn fast day, then upon an
ordinary day: did you ever set your selves upon the solemn duties of
examination and meditation? if you did, you have found your hearts have more
troubled you in those duties, then in reading, hearing, and praying; and the
reason is this, because those duties that are more solemn, are most conducible
to a Christians growth in grace; and therefore in those duties nature will be
most indefatigable, to disturb and interrupt you, and the devil will not fail
to set thy heart at work to disturb thee in those duties, whereby his Kingdom
is battered and assaulted,

5. That the less men do prepare their hearts for duty, the more they shall be
disturbed by corrupt nature in duty. Greonham in his observations, takes notice
of this: What is the reason that Christians can never pray without
distractions, nor hear without wandering thoughts? Oh man! (says he) take my
experience, did thou prepare more for duty, thou would be less distracted
in duty. Physic does the body little good if it be taken on a full stomach,
and if the body be not prepared; so it is with duties and Ordinances, they will
do thee little good, unless thou do first prepare thy self for them.



did appear to be upon your first conversion. At a man's first conversion
happily he could pray, and not be distracted, but have his love, his joy, and
his delight, and all his soul taken up with the service; but in process of
time, and after some continuance in the ways of Religion, he may begin to grow
flat and formal, perfunctory, accustomary in all his performances; and this was
that which Augustine observed, Many at first conversion, they will pray with
much feeling and fervency, but afterward with coldness and deadness, losing
that vigor and warmth of affection, which they found in themselves at first
conversion.

When I would do good, Romans 7.15.
says Paul, evil is present with me. It is true, the natural motions of the
flesh may be pared off, but still there is a sinful tincture which cleaves to
thy duties. It is observable, that the ceremonial law which you read of, in the
28. of Exodus v. 38. Exodus 28.38.
where you read that Aaron was to have a plate of pure gold upon his forehead,
when he went into the holy of holiest, that he mighe bear the iniquity of the
holy things of the children of Israel. And this notes, says a Divine, that
Jesus Christ our forerunner, he is gone into the holy of holiest, and he by
his intercession, and sitting at the right hand of his Father, wears that
plate of pure gold upon his forehead, and there bears not only the iniquity
of our lives, but the inquity of our holy things; and if this were not so, and
did there not a viciousness cleave unto all our holy duties, then we might
commend some duties to God without the mediation of Jesus Christ; but because
there is no duty can be done without a tincture of evil cleaving to it,
therefore you cannot stand before God in the best prayer that ever you made,
nor in the best service that ever you performed. We have need of a Christ, a
Mediator, not only for our sins, but also for our duties.

Eliphaz reasoned with Job, Job. 15.12,13.
so may every man with his own heart: Why does thine heart carry thee away, and
what does thine eyes wink at, that thou turnest thy spirit against God, and
let such words go out of thy mouth? Thus may every man reason with his own
soul, and say, Why does my heart carry me away, when my spirit would keep
close to God? Augustine has an excellent note upon 2 Samuel 7.27. 2 Samuel 7.27.
Dixit se invenisse cor suum, quasi soleret fugere, and ille sequi quasi
fugitivum. August. Nihil est cord meo fugacius. Bernard. Posit, 10.
upon David's words, I have found in my heart to make a prayer unto thee; as if
David would intimate, that he often lost his heart in prayer; as if David did
many times come to pray, but could not find his heart. It is the hardest thing
in the world, when you come to pray to find your hearts, and when you have
found your hearts, to keep them,

10. That the blood of Jesus Christ wipes off that guilt and filth, that
cleaves to your holy duties. God knows that when you come to worship him, you
are men, and not Angels; you are the spirits of good men imperfect, and
therefore God does not expect from you that your service should be perfect,
because your state is imperfect; therefore here is your comfort, that your
defects in duty, shall never damn you who are regenerate souls; thou may
be often hindered in duty, but that interruption shall never damn thee, Jesus
Christ wipe off the stain of all thy duties. In the ceremonial law you read
that the Altar for the burnt-offering, Exodus 27.4,5.
it had a grate made for it of network of brass, that the dust and the ashes
might fall out, and so be carried away: This is a type of the intercession of
Jesus Christ, that though in your services and sacrifices to God, though you
have much affection and zeal, yet also there is much ashes of corruption; and
as that grate was made to carry away the ashes, so Jesus Christ he is the
Mediator, which will carry away all your defects in the service of God. And
this should encourage the people of God, though you are weak in duty, yet
neglect not duty; though you are forgetful in hearing, yet leave not to hear;
and though distracted in praying, yet neglect not prayer; because it is the
office of Jesus Christ to bear the iniquity of your holy things. These are
those Positions, or Conclusions, that I desired to premise before I came to
handle the Queries. The point that I am to handle is this: That such is the
prevalency of corrupt nature even in regenerate men, that it does oftentimes
interrupt them in holy performances.

1. I shall prove the point that it is so. 2. I shall show you how the flesh
does hinder in duty. 3. Wherein the interruption of the flesh does most appear.


1. For the proof of the point, Romans 7.18. (...). Phil. 2.12. (...).
you have not only Paul's testimoy, but his own experience; how to perform the
good I would, I find not how to work it out; that is, to carry on a duty from
the beginning to the end, it is the same word in the original, as that in
Philip. 2.12. where we are commanded to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling. As he complain of himself, and as he gives you his experience, so
we may confer all our experiences with his, and say, that how to do that
which is good we find not. As rust cleaves to the iron, so cleaves the flesh
to our holy duties. In general, do not our own hearts tell us that there is
much of the world in them? and are there not many vain and impertinent thoughts
in the duties we perform to God? and that not only in general, but in
particular duties? in prayer, how does the flesh interrupt us by vain and
impertinent thoughts, and wrong ends? how does it dead our affections, damp our
zeal, and straiten our hearts? in hearing, how does the flesh cast in
prejudices, and misconstructions, infidelity, and forgetfulness? In
meditation, how does it make the mind roving and wandering up and down, so that
thou can not bring thy meditations to a perfect issue? In discourse, how does
the flesh mingle censures and vain glory? when thou come to the Lords Supper,
how does the flesh hinder thee that thou can not exercise godly sorrow, that
thy love is not inflamed, and that thy joy in Christ is not elevated? Therefore
what cause have to complain, as Augustine, when he saw a shepherd tie a stone
to the leg of a bird, and the bird assaying to fly upwards, was still pulled
down again by the stone: Just thus, says he, is it with my soul; fain would I
so are aloft by holy meditation, but there is a stone tied to my leg; a
corrupt nature, whereby I am coutinually pulled down.

Quest. The next Question is, how does the flesh hinder us in holy performances?

I shall confine my answer to these two particulars; there are these two ways
how the flesh does hinder us in holy duties. 1. By soliciting men to abate, and
lessen their duties. 2. By injecting, and casting in vain and impertinent
thoughts.


Answ. 1. By soliciting men to abate in their duty; if so be nature can
prevail with you to omit duty, or not to be so much in duty as thou have been
heretofore, to pray less, and hear less; herein is a great policy of thy
corrupt heart, to persuade the heart that thou need not be so zealous,
because remiss acts do weaken habits; to pray remissely, and coldly, will in
time bring thee not to pray at all. -- Now to those who are thus entangled by
the flesh, that they decay in duty; to such I have three things to say.

1. You have not less need to pray, nor perform duty, then in former time, and
therefore why should you lessen your duties; you have not less temptations from
Satan, no less corruptions in thy soul, nor fewer spiritual wants, no less
troubles on the Church; and therefore let not nature prevail with you to decay
in duty.

2. As it is a deceit of the heart in sin, to bring you from little sins to
great sins: so in grace it is the deceit of nature, to bring you from doing
little in duty, at last to do nothing at all.

3. Gradual abatements and decays in duty, may be as dangerous to thy soul,
as total omissions; and thou may go to hell as well for the one, as for the
other; not but that total neglects do more provoke God. Though a man is in more
danger of present death, that is sick of a fever, then he that is sick of a
lingering consumption; yet the one will kill as surely as the other. Men that
cast off Religion, they die by a burning fever, but thou which decayest in
Religion, thou may die of a lingering consumption; thou may consume and
consume, until thou come to a mere skeleton in Religion, and to have no
verdure, nor vigor in thy spirit, in the exercises of holiness.

Answ. 2. And chiefly, the flesh interrupts in duty, by injecting and casting
in vain thoughts, and impertinent, when thou art about duty. Now those thoughts
which the flesh casts in, they are of two sorts: either such which for the
matter of them are lawful, or else, which are for their matter unlawful.

1. Levit. 28.12. compared with Prove. 26.1. Though it be not cogitatio mali,
yet it is cogitatio mala.
The flesh will cast in thoughts which are for their matter lawful, but only
unseasonable; And I may say of these as the Scripture speaks of rain; rain in
season is a blessing; but rain in harvest is a curse; so good thoughts in their
season are blessed, but a good thought coming into your mind, to divert, or
distract you in a good work you are about, that thought is sinful; when you are
hearing a Sermon, then to be thinking of prayer; and when you are at prayer,
then to be thinking of hearing; these thoughts are unseasonable, and and
therefore sinful. As in Printing, though the letters be never so fair, yet if
they are misplaced, they would make nonsense. As that motion, Luke 12.13. was
lawful: Master, command my brother to divide the inheritance; but yet it was
not seasonable, because it was propounded while Christ was preaching.

2. Sometimes again, the flesh will inject thoughts which are for their matter
sinful; and thus the Prophet complains of the Israelites: They come unto thee
as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy
words, but they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but
their heart goes after their covetousness; Ezekiel. 33.31.
even in their duties they had sinful thoughts how to accomplish their covetous
desires.



I shall answer this querie by these two particulars. 1. That the flesh labors
to interrupt men in the manner, how they do duty. 2. In their ends, why they
perform duty. These are the two chief attempts of the flesh in this particular,


1. The flesh interrupts a man chiefly in the manner how he performs duty; and
there are these several ways whereby the flesh hinders a man in the manner of
his duty.

1. The flesh makes a man perform duty weariedly, without alacrity; Eccles.
12.12.
that as Solomon says, Much study it is a weariness to the flesh; and if much
study, why, then religious exercises: when the mind is taken up with them, the
devil and a man's own nature are ready to divert and interrupt them, especially
a man's nature is apt to be wearied: and hence it is that you have such pressing
persuasions, that you would not be weary of well-doing, Gal. 6.9. 2 These. 3.13.
and what is the reason hereof, but because of the corruption of a man's heart,
which is apt to make him to be tired in holy exercises? Mal. 1.13.
Things that act naturally, act unweariedly; and therefore the Sun is not
weary of shining, nor the fire weary of burning, neither the Sea of ebbing and
flowing, because these are natural motions. It is natural to a man to commit
sin, and therefore the Scripture says, that men are not weary of committing
iniquity; but to do that which is holy, and to act grace in any duty, it is not
only above, but against nature. Hence in Scripture hell it is compared to a
pit, and heaven to a hill; now it is an easy matter for a child that can but
go, to tumble into a pit, but it is a hard matter to climb up a hill; you may
easily fall into the bottomless pis, but the way to heaven it is a way up the
hill, and hard to get up; and therefore, in the second of Isaiah, The mountain
of the Lord is said to be established on the top of the mountains, and exalted
above the hills; and this is, because duties they are against nature, it is a
going against wind and tide.

I remember a Divine he does illustrate the corruption of a man's heart
disturbing in duty, by a comparison of a birds being in an egg; while it is in
the shell it cannot stir, but that bird as soon as ever it is hatched, and the
shell broken, then it is of a lively motion: thus a man in duty, whilst he is
pestered with flesh and blood, he is like a bird in the shell, that cannot
stir; but let once the shell be broken; let corruption of nature be subdued,
and let grace get the upper hand, and then he is as a bird out of the shell,
that can move and act vigorously, and lively in holy duties.

The Prophet Zechariah speaks of those that had wings, and the wind in their
wings, Zech. 5.9.
to note the swiftness (as Expositors render the sense of that place) and
speed that those reformers made; but we in our way to heaven, have neither
wings nor wind, naturally going against wind and tide, and are glad to run
continually, Heb. 12.1.
which is apt to make us weary, especially when it is up the hill. Herein the
corruption of your hearts appears, to make you perform duty weariedly. It is
as a clogge to hinder us, and therefore the Apostle commands us to lay aside
every weight, and every sin that does so easily beset us. Heb. 12.1.
Corrupt nature it is a weight, and you know if a man run a race with a weight
upon him, he will soon be tired out.

2. Corrupt nature makes you perform duty wandringly; that as in the Sea one
wave follows another, and as in the air the clouds follow the rain: so in the
heart, one impertinent thought follows another; the corruption of a man's heart
makes him vain in his thoughts. Whilst thou art, O man, in Gods house, the
devil is in thy heart as in his workhouse, forming and framing many
contemplative vain thoughts in thy mind, whereby thou art carried away from
God. You have a notable passage to this purpose, if you compare two Scriptures
together, and they are both the words of Solomon: In Eccles. 2.14. you read,
that a wise man's eyes are said to be in his head, Eccles 2.14. compared with
Prove. 17.24.
but a fool walks in darkness; Now if you look to the natural situation of
the eye, is it scated in the head, as of a wise man, so also of a fool; what
then is Solomon's meaning, when he says, that the eyes of a wise man are in his
head? his meaning is, that a wise man's eyes they are fixed and not wandering;
but what is the fools eye? Solomon tells you in Prove. 17.24. that the eyes of
a fool are in the ends of the earth; that is, he has a wandering heart, and is
no ways intent in the worship of God. Prove. 4.25.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thy eyelids look straight before thee.
This is Solomon's advice; the meaning is, that the thoughts of thy heart should
never turn aside, neither to the right hand, nor unto the left; but this is the
misery of a godly man, that the flesh makes him perform duty wandringly; as
Augustine complains, My hearr is gone from me, and I cannot catch it; and if I
do eatch it, I cannot keep it. You know what a slippery thing an Eele is, the
harder you graspe it, the more apt it is to slip out of your hands; so it is
with thy heart, thou may labor to hold thy heart fast, but thy slippery
heart breaks away from thee, do what thou can; and whence comes this, but by
reason of the pravity of thy nature?

3. The flesh makes thee perform duty confiding in duty, so to perform duty as
to rest in duty and if the devil cannot disturb you by injecting wandering
thoughts, he will labor to disturb you by casting in vain tonfiding thoughts;
this is an evil which you are to watch against. We are they (says the
Apostle, speaking to the Philippians) who worship God in the spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh; Phil. 3.3.
that is, we do not depend upon our performances. Trust not in lying words,
says the Prophet, ye who say, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord;
This was the devils policy, Jer. 7.4.
if he could not make them slight the Temple, he would endeavor to carry them
to the other extreme, to rely upon the Temple, and the worship there, and
therefore the Lord calls them lying words. Thus it was with the children of
Israel. 1 Samuel 4.2.
The story mentions a battle fought by the Philistines against Israel, wherein
there fell of Israel 4000 men, and when they had received this great loss, the
residue went to inquire the reason of this hand of God against them, and they
concluded that it was because the Ark of God was not among them; well, say
they, Let us fetch the Ark of the Covenant of God from Shiloh, that when it
comes, it may save us out of our enemies hands: they do so; but when they had
got the ark among them, 1 Samuel 4.10.
the story tells us, that in a second battle, they lost 30000. men. 1 Samuel 4.10.
Now what was the reason why they had worse success when they had the Ark
among them, then they had before; the reason was, because they depended upon
the Ark, that outward badge and testimony of Gods presence, and therefore God
would punish their carnal confidence; this being the policy of the devil, if
he cannot distract you in duty, yet he will labor to make you rely upon it.

Sermon XXIII. At Lawrence Jewry London, Februar. 2. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
IN the last Sermon I showed you three ways, by which the devil and your own
hearts, labored to distract and hinder you in duty. I proceed now to add some
more, and the fourth in order is this.

4. The flesh will labor to make you perform duties distrustfully. Faith it is
that shield by which we resist the devil; Ephesians. 6.16.
and the Scripture presses us, Above all things to take to us the shield of
faith, that we might be able to quench the fiery darts of the devil. Corrupt
nature labors above all things to weaken your faith: Luke 24.25.
O fools, and slow of heart to believe! says our Savior. Christ he lays the
blame upon your hearts, this being the work of the flesh to make you slow of
heart to believe, and rely upon Jesus Christ. Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him; without faith you cannot perform ally acceptable
duty to God, and therefore also this is a main design of the devil, to rob
you of your faith. Christ he tells Peter, that Satan had desired to winnow him
as wheat; Luke. 22.31,32.
but says he, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Satan singled
out Peter's faith above all his other graces, and therefore the care of Christ
was most seen in the preservation of Peter's faith from failing; and as this is
the work of the devil, so also is it of our own hearts, to rob us of our
faith; but Christ has prayed for us, and true faith shall never fail.

5. Another design of the flesh is, to make thee perform duty constrainedly,
and not voluntarily; the flesh puts a man into that posture, that he is rather
carried then led to duty; Nil nisi jussus agit.
he is driven to duty as a child to School, or as a Bear to the stake, with
much regret; whereas he goes from a duty, as a bird from the snare, with much
delight.

6. The flesh it will labor to make you perform duty uncomfortably, without
delight of heart. And this is the great policy of the flesh; though it cannot
make you disuse duty, yet it will make you, that you shall never have delight
in the use of them. Thus I have showed what those interruptions of the flesh
are, in regard of the manner of our duties.

2. The interruptions of the flesh in duty, they are not only seen in the
manner how you do duty, but also in the end why you do duty. And herein I shall
show you how the flesh casts in sinister aims and ends, when you do duty; if
it cannot interrupt you in the manner, it will in the end. I shall give a short
survey how the flesh interrupts men in doing duty, in reference to their ends.
And there are seven sinister ends that the flesh casts in when you are about
duty.

1. The flesh will cast in this sinful end, to make you perform good duties
rather for vain glory, then for Gods glory. It is observable, what you read in
Gal. 5. The Apostle concludes that Chapter with this exhortation, Be not
desirous of vain glory; after he had been showing them what were the fruits of
the Spirit, and had exhorted them to walk in the Spirit; he gives in this
counsel, that they should not be desirous of vain glory, intimating that there
is a pronenesse in man's nature, to make him vainglorious in the doing of good.
Hence the Apostle James has an expression; Jam. 4.5.
says he, Do ye think that the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that
dwells in us, lusts to envy; envy it is a fruit of vain glory, a desire to
have another man's abilities eclipsed, that so our candle may shine brighter,
Phil. 1.15.
and hence some among the Philippians, are said to preach Christ out of envy;
that is, they would discover their parts, to gain applause, that they might
carry away the bell from Paul; it was their vain glory which made them seek to
outvie Paul: not that they aimed at Christ's glory, but their own seeking, not
the things of Christ, but their own things.

2. Another sinister end of the flesh will be this, to make you do duty, more
for outward and secular advantage, then for any inward and saving benefit; and
thus the Lord complains of his people, Hosea 7.14.
That they assembled themselves for corn and for wine; they did not cry for
grace, but for corn and wine, their doing duty was for their secular
advantage. And so the Lord by the same Prophet speaks concerning Ephraim, and
says he, Ephraim is a beifer that is taught, and loves to tread out the
corn: Ephraim loved duties, Chap. 10. v. 11.
but such, which would bring in profit and advantage. The flesh in duty never
looks for spiritual benefit, nor labors in duty and communion with Christ, to
get mortification for corruption, and excitation of holy affections, with a
furtherance in a way of grace, and holy experience.

3. The flesh will put men upon duty, rather to pacify, then purify conscience;
just as a thief will give meat to a dog, but it is to still the dogs barking,
that those which are in the house may not be awakened: Just thus will men do
with their consciences; they will perform duty, because their consciences are
like barking dogs, checking and accusing them, and therefore they will perform
duty, that they may still the noise of conscience, Jonah 1.5.
which otherwise will fly in their faces; as the mariners in Jonah prayed, but
it was only because danger of death awakened their natural conciences.

4. The flesh will put men upon duty, rather out of a fear of the threatenings
for neglect of duty, then out of love to the command which injoynes duty. The
flesh never cares for the commands of God; all it fears, is the terrifying
threatenings of Gods law. Were the Scripture all promises and precepts, a
wicked man would be idle, and yet presume; but because there are threatenings
mixed with these, therefore wicked men set upon duty, Prove. 13.13. For nidine
poenae.
and holy exercises. It is said of a righteous man, that he fears the command,
but a wicked man never fears the precept: he may fear the threatening and the
punishment, but a godly man dares not neglect duty, because of the command of
God.

5. The flesh will put upon the performance of duty, rather out of the hope of
the eternal reward of duty, Mercedis amor, vel amor mercenarius.
then out of any inward and spiritual excellency, that the soul sees in them.
Now though God may allow us a love of the reward, yet he does not allow of a
mercenary love.

6. Corrupt nature will put men upon duty, to remove outward judgments, rather
then inward judgments; judgments upon the body, rather then those on the
soul. Thus the Heathen mariners cried unto their gods when they were in a
tempest, and like to lose their lives, Jonah 1.5.
that they might have the storm abated, and get safe to land; every man falls
to prayer: now this is but a servile, fleshly end of duty, for a man to be put
upon it rather to avoid bodily, then soul-judgements; and thus it was with the
Egyptians, when the Lord slew their firstborn, then it is said, Exodus 12.32,33.
that Pharaoh and the Egyptians cried unto the Israelites, Rise up and be gone,
you and your flocks and your herds, and go and serve the Lord your God; and
they were urgent with them, for they said, We are all dead men. Pharaoh would
not let them go before; but when their going out would conduce to their safety,
then he bids them be gone; this is the nature of all men, naturally to set on
duty rather to avoid bodily afflictions, then inward judgments. To this
purpose the Prophet Jeremiah speaks, Jer. 22.23.
O inhabitant of Lebanon, that make thy nest in the Cedars, how gracious
shall thou be, when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travel?
Outward not inward judgments, put wicked men upon the performance of duty.

7. The flesh will put men upon performance of duty, that they may sin with
more freedom, and less suspicion; This the Apostle was driven to vindicate
himself from, 1 These. 2.3,5. (...) Prove. 7.14.
that he did not preach the Gospel, to be a cloak unto sin. This is natural to
men, as the Harlot would cover over her wickedness with her peace offerings;
so many wicked men they will cover over the^r sin with the garb of godliness;
and thus our Savior condemns the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.14.
who devoured widows houses, and for a pretense made long prayers. They did not
offend in the thing, nor in the manner of their prayers, for long prayer is not
a sin, but in the end of their prayers; they made long prayers, that they might
devour widows houses; they took upon them the profession of Religion, that they
might be esteemed just and righteous people, and fit to be entrusted, and so
they might get widows estates, and widows money into their hands, and thereby
deceive them; for this I conceive is the particular scope of that place. And
thus I have finished the doctrinal part of this point.

The Use I shall make of this point, shall be; First, by way of Instruction.
Secondly, by way of Comfort. And first, there are seven practical inferences,
that I shall draw from this general head, by way of Information of the flesh,
its hindering of regenerate men in doing duty.

1. From hence see the great misery of unregenerate men; if the flesh disables
the godly in doing duty, that have grace how does the flesh disable wicked men
that have no grace at all; Ephesians. 2.1.
men that remain in a natural estate, they are in a dead condition, Romans 5.6.
and dead men, they cannot act; men in a natural estate, they have no strength,
as the Apostle speaks; he compares a man unto one that is fallen into mud and
dirt, that has no power to help himself: Homo lapsus super acervum lapidum
and in luto. Beruard. 1 Cor. 15.43. (...).
or a metaphor taken from a dead corpse, which is utterly unable to help it
self or move it self; and therefore the Apostles word is, (...), a body dead,
weak, i.e. helpless.

The Scripture sets out a natural man four ways.

1. As one that has lost his strength; thou can not do any good action. The
imagination of man's heart is evil, and only evil, and that continually; man's
heart it is evil, Gen 6.5.
there is no good in it; and it is evil, that is, it is all evil; and then it
is evil, that is, it is aiwayes, and that continually evil; this is man's
natural estate: The carnal mind it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be; Romans 8.7.
there is the feebleness of man's nature.

2. Thou art without strength to have any good motion; not only to have good
actions, but good thoughts; and this the Apostle Paul asserts, but good
thoughts; and 2 Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God.

3. A natural man is not able to speak one good word; he can neither do good,
nor think good, nor speak good. Christ reproving the Pharisees, says unto
them, Mat. 12.34.
O generation of vipers, how can ye being evil, speak good? for out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

4. A natural man he cannot savingly understand good; He receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolish^esse unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14.
If a godly man be disabled in the performance of good duties, then much more
an unregenerate man.

Object. But you will say, Do not wicked men hear, and pray, and give alms,
and do many other duties, and are not these good actions? therefore, how is a
man disabled from doing good?

I answer, that good works may be considered two ways, either formally, or
materially; now indeed a wicked man, he may do that which is materially good;
and so hearing, and praying, and giving of alms, the matter of these duties is
good; he may do external good duties: but to do good formally, with all those
requisites, and concurrent circumstances required in a good work, so no wicked
man in this world is able to do good.

There are many concurring circumstances to a good action.

1. The person must be in Christ, which does the action. The same action which
a wicked man doing shall go to hell for, the same action a godly man
performing, in the doing thereof, shall go to heaven; so that the person must
be interessed in Christ who does good: we must acknowledge every good thing
which is in us in Jesus Christ, Philem. 6. Joh. 15.5. (...). Non dicit nil
difficile potest, sed nihil; nec dicit nil potest perficere, sed nil potest
facere. August.
as the Apostle speaks; so that the person must be in Christ; and therefore,
though wicked men may do that which is morally good, yet they can never do any
action which is theologically good.

Object. 2. But if wicked men cannot do good works, but if when they do them,
they sin in doing of them, then to what end should a wicked man do any good
duty? he sins if he does not pray, and he sins if he does pray; therefore to
what purpose is it for him to do any of these duties?

Sol. For answer, I confess that this is an objection very suitable to flesh
and blood; Job 9.29.
and Job he makes it in the person of a wicked man: If I be wicked (says he,)
why then labor I in vain? as if he should say, if when I pray, and when I
hear, I sin, then why do I labor in vain? this was an objection boiling in
Job's breast. -- But to answer the Question:

1. Though a wicked man does sin in duty, yet he must do duty; he is bound to
duty, though not to sin in that dury; that which is good in it self, is not
to be forborne, though an accidental evil follow; It is good in it self, that a
man should hear, and pray, and do other duties, but it is only casual that a
man sins in these; if this should be admitted, by the same reason the Sun
should not shine, because it over-heats some bodies, and puts them into a
fever, or because it parches and over-dries the ground.

2. You sin less in doing duty, though you sin in the doing of it, then if
you did totally neglect it.

Object. 3. But you will say, xIf a wicked man be thus disabled to do duty,
then to what purpose are Gods commands? This is the Pelagian objection: Does
not God mock men, say they, God bids wicked men to pray and repent, but they
are no more able to do these duties acceptably, then to move the world?

I answer hereunto; that though the wicked are thus unable, yet there is great
reason, why God should command.

1. To let them see what once they were, in innocence they being perfectly able
to do the will of God.

2. Deus jubet non quod possumus, sed quod debemus.
Though God commands men to do what they cannot do, yet it is useful to humble
them; that thereby they might bewail their impotency.

3. Though God commands men what they are not able to perform; yet to all
elect men, though unregenerate, God sometime or other, will send forth his own
power with his own command, and make it efficacious in their souls; Thus there
went a power with Gods command to dead Lazarus, whereby he came out of the
grave; Verbum Dei non est declarativum modo, sed effectivum.
God who commands a wicked man to repent, can convey a power into his heart, to
make him repent; therefore there is great reason, and use of Gods commands,
though natural men are not able to obey them.

Pelaegian, Popish and Arminian doctrines, which does advance the power and
ability of nature, and the free will of man to good supernatural; now how does
this Scripture confute them? the flesh hinders even godly men that they cannot
do the good they would. What enemies of Gods graces are these, who advance the
power of nature above, Sub laudibus gratiae latent inimici gratiae. Aug. Non
liberum, sed servum arbitrium; non liberum, sed liberatum.
and beyond its bounds, and that too under pretense of advancing Gods grace? It
is true, man has not lost the faculty, but the form, man has lost the
rectitude of his will. I may say of them, that their mistake arises from the
same ground as Sampsons; when his wife had cut off his locks, he awoke out of
sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times, but he wist not the Lord was
departed from him: So I may say of such men as these, they would stir up
themselves as at other times, but their locks are cut: by their fall in Adam,
that is cut off, wherein their strength lay; and if they would but study the
fall of man more, they would not advance, and admire the power of nature so
much.

2 Samuel 12.27,28.
if you are enabled to do any good, it is of Gods grace. Do as Joab to David,
when he had taken the skirts and suburbs of the City, he then sends for David,
that he might have the glory of the conquest; he that did the work, would yet
give David the glory; do thou thus to Jesus Christ. It may be thou dischargest
the duty well, do as Joab to David, and do not say, I have done thus and thus,
1 Cor. 15.10.
but Christ has done it in me; as the Apostle speaks: I luboured more
abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me;
and so the same Apostle in another place, I live, says he, Gal. 2.20.
yet not^, but Christ lives in me. He would arrogate nothing to himself. It
is Gods grace whereby we act, and this that servant in the Parable
acknowledges, Lord, says he, Thy pound has gained ten pounds; He does not
say my labor and my industry, Luke^ 9.16.
but thy pound; give God the glory of all the good thou do, extol the free
grace of God both for initiall, progressive, Phil. 1.6.
and consummative grace; He which once begins a good work in you, will perform
it to the day of Jesus Christ: Heb. 12.^.
and he which is the author, will also be the finisher of your faith. Phil.
2.13.
It is the grace of God whereby we are able to do any thing; it is God which
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. The whole series of
our salvation is to be ascribed unto the grace of God; art thou called in
grace, and established in grace, admire grace, and not nature. Hos. 11.3. Ezekiel.
34.16. Romans 8.14. 1 Pet. 5.10,11.
If the Spirit of God do not lead us, and uphold us, we shall faint, Hos. 11.3
Ezekiel. 34.16. Romans 8.14. This the Apostle Peter excellently sets forth: The God
of all grace who has called us unto his eternal glory by Jesus Christ, after
that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, AMEN.

4. Does the flesh disable you to do good? Oh then labor to have a sight of,
and to mourn under the sense of the impediments and interruptions which you
have from the flesh. Thus did Paul cry out, Exodus 3.88. Romans 7.14,24
Oh wretched man that I am! Romans 7.14,24. In Exodus 38.8. you have mention made
of a laver, which was a great vessel wherein the sacrifices which the people
offered, were to be washed; and the Scripture tells you that the foot of the
laver, was made with looking-glass, to note as some say, that when they came to
offer their sacrifice, the people in that glass might see, and have a view of
their own faces, what spots there were upon them: So when you come to duty,
behold, here are looking-glasses for you to see your selves; behold the
interruptions of the flesh to hinder you, and be humbled. It is said of the
Spouse, Return, O Shulamite, that we may look upon thee. -- And then the
question is put, what will you see in the Shulamite? and the Answer is, as it
were the company of two Armies, Cant. 6.13.
noting this opposition. Genesis 25.22,23.
And that as Rebeccah said, when the children strugled in her womb, Lord, why
am I thus? so do thou; thou have an Esau and a Jacob within thee, the flesh
against the Spirit; do thou complain unto God, and say, Lord, why am I thus?
why does the flesh thus disturb and interrupt me in all my performances to God?

Sermon XXIV. At Lawrence Jewry London, Februar. 2. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Proceed now to lay down some more practical inferences from this point; The
flesh its hindering and interrupting even godly men, so that they cannot do the
things they would; and the fifth in order is this.

5. What great need have the best even of Gods children of the mediation and
intercession of Jesus Christ, when they present any duty to God. If so be we
should come to God with these defilements, and interruptions of the flesh in
our duties without a Christ, God might say to us as Elisha to the King of
Israel; Verily, were it not that I regard the presence of Iehosophat King of
sudah, I would not look toward thee nor see thee; 2 King. 3.14.
thus God the Father might say to each of us, Verily, were it not that I regard
Jesus Christ, I would not see nor regard thee in any duty thou do; and as
Joseph said to his brethren, Except ye bring Benjamin with you, ye shall see my
face no more; Genesis 43.3.
so except ye bring the Lord Jesus Christ with you, you cannot expect to see
the face of God with approbation. You read in Exodus 28.36. that Aaron the
Priest of the Lord was to have a plate of pure gold upon his forehead, Exodus
28.36.
and upon it was to be engraven, Holiness to the Lord; to note, that when you
come to do any service to God, you need the intercession of Jesus Christ, who
by his intercessions bears the iniquity of our holy things. Though you have the
assistance of the Spirit in performance of duty, yet you stand in need also of
the mediation of Christ for your acceptance; and therefore you read not only or
an intercession of Christ, Romans 8.26. (...). Ver. 34. (...).
but of the intercession of the Spirit; The Spirit makes intercession in us,
and Christ makes intercession for us.

6. If the flesh does interrupt in duty, then what great need have you, when
you are about duty, to watch over your hearts, and to fortify them against the
incursions and disturbances of the flesh. Those that live by the Seaside, they
are forced for the preservation of themselves in safety, to make great mounts
and banks to keep out the Sea from overflowing them; whereas those who dwell in
Inland-countreys, little ditches will serve their turns: Corrupt nature it is a
Sea, and thou have need to make many a mount, and many a bank in thy heart,
otherwise corrupt nature will send in an inundation of vain and impertinent
thoughts. Numb. 4 23.
It is a good note of Ainsworth upon Numb. 4.23. where all from thirty years
old to fifty of the house of Gershon, are said to enter in to perform service,
and to do the work of the Tabernacle. The word which signifies to perform
service, signifies also to war a warfare, and so Ainsworth translates it; and
why does the Scripture mention this, but to note that when you are doiug any
service to God, 1 Pet. 4.7.
you are then to war a spiritual warfare. You read in 1 Pet. 4.7. of watching
unto prayer, and in Coloss. Col. 4.2.
4.2. Of watching in prayer. You are not only to watch unto, before you pray,
but in prayer, whilst you pray, You have not only ground to watch against the
interruptions of the flesh, but there are also other interruptions; As first
from the world; and this is the Apostles desire, that we might be without care,
1 Cor. 7.35.
and that we might attend upon the Lord without distraction. Cares of the world
they are a hinderance unto holy duties, and therefore we are to watch against
them. Secondly, we are hindered also by natural infirmities, and those we are to
watch ugainst; and so I understand Piscator upon Matthew. 26.41. Mat. 26.41.
where Christ speaks, that the spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak.
Flesh there is not to be taken for corrupt nature, but for bodily infirmity.
And then not only from the world and natural indispositions, but; Thirdly,
from the devil are interruptions, and hindrances cast in; and in this case you
are to do as Abraham did, when the fowls did light upon his sacrifice, he
drove them away. Genesis 15.11.
By the fowls coming upon the carcases of Abraham's offering, as Deodate says,
it is an evident sign of the devils disturbing the elect, when they are about
any holy performance; now as Abraham did, so do you; when these fowls as they
are compared in Matthew. 13.4 to the devil, those foul and infernal spirits, when
they come to disturb you in worship, you must drive them away; all those
impertinencies, and vain thoughts, which the devil casts in. Job 1.6.
In the first of Job you read, that upon a certain day, the Sons of God
presented themselves before the Lord, and Satan also came among them; By the
Sons of God there cannot be meant the Angels; for then it would follow that
the devils would be in heaven where the Angels are; therefore by the Sons of
God are meant the children of Job; and thus were the posterity of Seth called
in Genesis 6. Genesis 6.2. See Zech. 3.1.
The Sons of God saw that the daughters of men were fair. Now to my purpose,
the children of Job are said upon a certain day to appear before the Lord, that
is, say Interpreters, on the Sabbath Day; now when they appeared on that day
before the Lord, it is said, that Satan came among them; Celeberrimum sabbati
festum. Pined.
and you may be sure the devil came for no good intent, but to labor to
interrupt, and disturb them in those religious performances. And therefore
seeing that you have not only your own hearts, the world, and natural
infirmities; but the devil also to hinder and divert you, what cause have you
with utmost diligence to watch over your selves.

7. If the flesh does interrupt you in Gods service, then learn not to place
any confidence in your most religious performances; dare thou lay the weight
of thy soul upon such a weak foundation? if thy duties are tainted, and mingled
with so much evil, how dare thou rest in thy duties? It is the speech of
Job, Though I were righteous, yet would I not plead with thee; Job 9.28.
and again says he, I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou will hold
me innocent. In the vulgar translation it is, I am afraid of all my good works;
and further says he, Though I should wash my self with snow-water, and make
my self never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in a ditch, and my own
clothes shall abhor me. Cap. 30.31.
Though I should acquit my self never so well in duty, yet thou would find
much evil in me. If then thy best services are mingled with sin, rely only upon
a Christ for salvation; and here to set home this inference, I shall lay down
three cogent considerations.

1. Thou have more acts of sin that come from the flesh, then acts of grace
that come from the Siprit in thy duties; and will thou rest upon such a duty
that has more sin then grace acted in it? more wandering thoughts then holy
thoughts? thou forgettest more of a Sermon, then thou remembrest of a Sermon,
and the sin of thy nature does cast in more wandering thoughts, then the Spirit
of God does cast in holy thoughts; thy graces are as the filings of gold, but
thy sins as heaps of dust, and therefore how dare thou rest on thy duties,
expecting life and salvation by them?

2. Consider that one circumstance in a duty, is enough to make it evil; but
many concurring circumstances is not enough to make a duty good. Suppose thou
prayest, one circumstance in thy prayer may make it sinful: though thou prayest
well for the manner, yet if thou art defective in the end; or if the end be
right, yet if thou failest in thy principle, it is not right. It is a rule in
moral Philosophy, In moralibus plus circumstanti a quam substantia actio^is
that circumstances are more to be weighed then acts; and so it is in Divinity.
One circumstance may make a duty defective, but many circumstances concurring
together, cannot make a duty good.

3. Consider, that thou art guilty of many past sins, and present duties cannot
make a recompense for past sins. Suppose a tenant who pays his rent duly for
time present, yet being in arrear, it may be ten or twenty years, his payment
of his rent at present will not recompense his past arrear: Thus it is with
thee, thou art much in debt, and in arreare to God for past time, and if there
were merit in thy duties, as there is not, yet present duty could not expiate
past sins; therefore rely not upon duty.

8. Does the flesh thus interrupt us in duty? then from hence we may see the
evil nature of sin, the mischievous quality of original corruption. It is a
doctrine which cau never be too much insisted upon, and therefore from this
doctrine I beseech you turn a little to see the evil nature of original sin. I
may illustrate it by this example: if you have a vessel full of liquor, a
little gall shall more imbitter it, then a great deal of honey shall sweeten
it; behold, the mischievous nature of sinee, how does it taint both thy person
and performances? You read of a Law in Numb. Numb 19.22.
19 22. that whatsoever an unclean person touches, shall be uuclean: this is
spoken of ceremonial uncleanness; but it holds true also in spirituals: thou
art an unclean man, all thou touchest becomes unclean; thou defilest all thy
duties. There is an useful passage in Haggai 2.12,13. Hag. 2.12,13.
there was an case of conscience which the people were to demand of the Priests
concerning the Law. The question was this, If one beat holy flesh in the skirt
of his garment, and with his skirts do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or
oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? and the Priests said, No. And then said
Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be
unclean? and the Priest answered and said, It shall be unclean. Here you may
observe that holy things could not make common things clean and holy; but if a
man that was unclean did but touch holy things, they became unclean. Now if you
would know the meaning of this, it is explained by the Prophet in the 14.
verse. Then answered Haggai and said, So is this people, and so is this Nation
before me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, and that which
they offer there, is unclean; that is every sacrifice, and every duty is
unclean. In Gospel-language the meaning is this, if a man be in the state of
nature, all his offerings, and all his sacrifices, Tit. 1.15.
that is, all his duties, they are unclean unto him: For unto the unclean, all
things are unclean.



1. Know to your comfort, that as you have the flesh to hinder, so you have the
Spirit to help you in duty. The Spirit will help thy infirmities, with sighs
and groans, which cannot be untered; Rom 8.26.
thou have the flesh to harden thy heart, and deaden thy spirit; but thou have
the Spirit of God also to soften thy heart, and quicken thy spirit; to make
thee pray with sighs, 1 John 4.4.
and groans. And though the devil be busy to tempt thee, yet Stronger is he
that is in you, says St. John, then he that is in the world.

2. Consider, that a desire to do those duties you cannot do, is in divine
account a doing of them. It is worth your noting what you find recorded
touching Nehemiah; if you compare two Scripturts together: -- The first is
Nehem. Neh. 1.11.
1.11. where he prays, Lord, let thy ear be attentive unto the prayer of thy
servant, who desires to fear thy Name. Compared with Neh. 5.15.
And Nehem. 5.15. says Nehemiah, I did not oppress the people as former
Governors did, because of the fear of the Lord. So that Nehemiahs desire to
fear the Lord, is accounted by God, the fear of God; a desire after any grace,
is in divine account the having of that grace. The Lord he will accept the will
for the deed If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a
man has, and not according to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12. See Mat. 5.5.
Joh. 7.37. Psalm. 10.17. Psalm. 145.19. Exodus 14.15. 1 King. 8.17,18.
Therefore see what a good God you serve, who will accept of purposes for
performances, and intentions for executions, as may appear by many testimonies
of Scripture.

3. Feeling the want of any grace, or ability to discharge any duty, and being
grieved for that want, is in the account of God, as if that want were supplied.
Thou say thou can not mourn, but would thou mourn for thy sins? why,
a sense of the want of any grace, is in divine acceptance, the having of it;
and this some make to be the meaning of that place in Romans 8.26. Romans 8.26.
We know not what to pray for, as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with sighs and groans; that is, the Spirit helps us to
grieve that we cannot pray, nor repent, nor do duty no better; and herein is
the assistance of Gods Spirit seen. And this God will accept.

4. Remember this, that God accepts of sincerity of heart, where there is not
perfection of grace. You live under a Covenant of grace, wherein God accepts of
sincerity instead of perfection, and God had rather see truth of grace, then
strength of parts. Thou complainest thou can not pray, it may be thou want
the gift of prayer; thou have not a voluble tongue, but thou do not want
truth of desire, neither the ornament of a meek spirit, a pure heart. God had
rather have truth of grace, then strength of parts; you may consider it in the
case of Moses and Aaron, in Exodus 4.4. I know, says God to Moses, Exodus 4.4.
that Aaron thy brother can speak well. Now Moses he was a man of a stammering
tongue; but yet when Moses and Aaron was to be employed in that great work of
prayer, when Joshua fought against Amaleck. God makes choice not of elegant
Aaron, Exodus 17.11.12.
but of stammering Moses to make the prayer. Moses could pray better then
Aaron, though Aaron had better parts.

5. Consider, it may be thou complainest that it is the interruption of the
flesh, which hinders thee in duty, when only it is the disability of thy
natural body. Thus godly men do many times charge their unfitness to duty upon
their own hearts, when it is only from an indisposed, and disabled body. You
must know that sometimes the body does disable a man to do duty, and that
disability is not sinful; it is thy misery, but not thy sin. Thus it was with
Paul, Gal 4.13,14.
he speaks thus to the Galatians, Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I
preached the Gospel to you at the first; and my temptation which was in my
flesh, ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even
as Christ Jesus. Jerome understands these words of a bodily weakness,
disabling Paul to preach, and yet it is said the Galatians bore with him, and
rejected him not under this bodily infirmity. Thus Paul tells the
Thessalonians, that he would have come unto them once and again, but Satan
hindered him. 1 These. 2.18.
Some think this hindrance was persecution, others that it was a tempest at
Sea, but most think that it was some bodily disease whereby the devil hindered
him. So that if thou have a sick, pained, diseased body, and thereby art
disabled to duty, this though it be thy misery, yet it is not thy sin; and
therefore in such a case do not lay the blame upon thy own heart: Mat. 26.41.
for it is with a man in this case, as with a strong healthful man that rides
upon a poor tired horse: -- thus the soul though active, and vigorous, is
sometimes forced to keep pace with a weak, sick, and tired body.

6. Remember this, that God accepts what is his own in duty, and covers what is
thine. That water which is salt in the Sea, is fresh in the river; that duty
which comes from thee, is salt and brackish, but coming through the river of
Christ's blood, it loses its unsavory taste; and what a great indulgence is
this in God, to, cover what is ours, and to accept what is his own? It is a
rule in Philosophy, Denominatio sequitar majorent partem.
that the denomination is always taken from the greater part; God denominates
a man from his better part; be sins in prayer, and he acts grace in prayer;
that as wine, though it be mingled with water, and that mixture does in part
debase the wine, yet because the wine gives a relish, and still retains the
color of wine, therefore the whole cup is called wine: So though in thy heart
there may be a mixture of sin with thy grace in thy duty, yet the whole shall
be called gracious act.

7. Though the flesh hinders you in the doing of duty, yet there is a vast
difference between a godly and a wicked man in this very case, though the
interruption be both in the one and the other; -- as

1. The wicked they are interrupted by the flesh, but they have not the Spirit
to assist them against corruption, as the godly have.

2. The wicked have not renewed principles of grace in their hearts to
withstand the corruptions of the flesh, as the godly have. Regenerate men they
cannot sin, (that is, 1 John 3.9.
so sin as the wicked) because they have a seed of grace remaining in them.

3. Wicked men they do not so clearly discern, and sensibly bewail the
interruptions of the flesh, as those who are godly do.

4. The wicked they shall never be rid of the evil workings of the flesh,
neither in this world, nor in that which is to come. Sin in this life shall
hinder duty; and in the world to come they will cast off duty. But the godly
though pestered with the flesh, yet they shall one day be rid of the flesh. And
thus I have finished the first part of the double consequent.

Sermon XXV. At Lawrence Jewry London, Februar. 9. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Am now to proceed to the second reference of these words, and that is, the
Spirits conflicts against the flesh, so that men cannot do the evil they would:
-- And the observation is this.

Doct. That the Spirit of God keeps regenerate men oftentimes that they shall
not do the evil they would.

In the handling of which Point, there are three particulars in the doctrinal
part, that I shall insist on. 1. I shall show you how the Spirit does keep a
man from doing the evil he would do. 2. Wherein consists this work of the
Spirit. 3. How you may know the difference between the restraining grace of the
Spirit, in keeping a wicked man from sin, and the renewing grace of the
Spirit, in keeping regenerate men from evil.


1. How does the Spirit keep a man from doing the evil that he would do? To
this question I shall give you five particulars, by way of answer.

1. The Spirit keeps a man from doing the evil he would, by enlightening his
judgment, and making him to see the evil of sin in its nature, and the
danger of sin in its event. Thus you read in Job 36.9. Job. 36.9.
He shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have
exceeded; here is the inlightening of their judgments: and then it follows in
the tenth verse, He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that
they return from iniquity; verse 10. verse. 12.
and in the twelfth verse, If they obey not, they shall perish by the sword,
and shall die without knowledge. The sin of nature, it is described by a
state of ignorance; to note that a man without the Spirit, is blind, and
cannot see those evils which he commits; the Spirit therefore enlightens a man,
and hence you read, Acts 26.18.
that the Apostle Paul was sent to open men's eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, See 2 King 6.15.
intimating that there must be first the opening of the eyes, and the
enlightening of the judgment, before there can be a rescuing from sin.

2. The Spirit keeps a man from sin by setting conscience on work to check
and rebuke a man, when he is tempted thereunto. Conscience is Gods Officer, and
man's Overseer; and were it not for a natural conscience, a wicked man would
commit all imaginable evils, every wicked man would commit every sin that he
had opportunity to act. Now as sin wounds the conscience after commission, so
conscience checks for sin before commission. It is conscience which is as an
iron gate, and as a brazen wall to keep thee from many evils which otherwise
thou would run into. And therefore Joseph consults with his conscience, How
can I do this great wickedness? and this kept him from committing folly with
his Mistress.

3. Another way whereby the Spirit keeps a man from sin, is by infusing into
a man a principle of grace and holiness, repugnant to that principle of sin,
which is in the nature; and thus the Apostle John tells you, that Whosoever i^
born of God, does not commit sin: for the seed of God remains in him; and
he cannot sin, because he is born of God. 1 John 3.9.
1 John 5.18.
He that is born of God has a renewed nature, and a new principle put into
him, contrary to the sin of his nature.

4. The Spirit keeps a man from evil, by calling to his remembrance some
particular passage out of Sctipture, against that sin unto which he is
tempted. To this purpose David speaks, that he had hid the Word of the Lord in
his heart, Psalm. 119.11.
that he might not sin against him. This is the way whereby the Spirit
fortifies the heart against sin; you have it often mentioned in particular
cases. Solomon gives this counsel to his son, that he should keep his words,
Prove. 7.1,5.
and lay up his commandments; and that to this end, that they may keep thee
from the strange woman; and thus David, Psalm. 17.4.
says he, By the Word of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the
destroyer. Thus Augustine reports of a young man who was given to wantonness,
and it pleased God by bringing this passage to his remembrance, Not in rioting,
and drunkenness, not in chambring, and wantonness; it pleased God to make
this a means whereby he left off his dalliance, and wantonness ever after.

5. The Spirit keeps a man from doing the evil he would, by possessing the
heart with an awe and dread of the presence of God, when he is tempted to evil:
Fear the Lord, and depart from evil; Prove. 37.
the wise man joins them both together, to let you know, that when the heart
is possessed with the fear of God, it keeps a man from evil. And thus Solomon
in a parallel place speaks to the same purpose, Prove. 16.6. Prove. 14.16.
that By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil. An awefull fear of the
great God, is a good preservative against sin.

Wherein this work of the Spirit in keeping a man from sin, consists? -- And
for answer hereto, in the general it consists in three things. 1. In regard of
the kinds of sin. 2. In regard of the time, and place where sin would be
committed. 3. In regard of the manner of sin.


1. In regard of the kinds of sin, so the Spirit keeps a regenerate man,
that he shall never commit the sin against the Holy Ghost; not but that there
is the seed of that sin in the godly, as well as others, this you have fully
proved by John, in 1 John 5.18. 1 John 5.18.
After he had been telling that there was a sin unto death, and says he, I
do not say, ye shall pray for it; he tells you after in the eighteenth verse,
We know (says he) that whosoever is born of God, sins not; but he that is
begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not; That
is, shall not prevail over a godly man to sin this sin unto death; grace
in the hearr will keep a man, that the wicked one shall not so touch him.

2. The Spirit of God will keep a man that he shall not commit sin, at that
time, and in that place where he would. Thus the Spirit kept David; in a
pettish mood he resolves to kill Nabal, and all his family: but Abigail coming
to meet David, by good persuasions soon allayed David's hot spirit; and herein
the work of Gods Spirit was exceedingly seen, that though David resolved that
at such a time, and in such a place he would do thus and thus, yet the
overruling hand of Gods Spirit kept him back.

3. And chiefly the Spirit keeps a man from sin in respect of the manner, how
a man does evil. A regenerate man, he shall not sin after that manner as he
did sin before he was converted. I showed you before how the Spirit keeps a
man from fulfilling sin: And now I shall show you how the Spirit of God keeps
a regenerate man from sinning after that manner as formerly he did. And there
are seven particulars, which I shall mention in this Point.

1. A regenerate man he shall not sin so ignorantly as formerly he has done.
Paul tells you of himself, that during his unconverted state, the Lord had
mercy on him, 1 Timothy 1.13.
because he sinned of ignorance; but when a man is once converted, his eyes are
then opened, and he shall not sin so ignorantly. 1 Pet. 1.14.
Hereunto referres that exhortation of the Apostle, As obedient children, not
fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance: before
conversion a man walks in darkness; and as the wise man speaks, Prove. 4.19.
Joh. 12.35.
he knows not at what he stumbles. An unconverted age is a dark age, a man
sins, and he knows it not; but after conversion God puts a light into the soul,
whereby he shall be able to see into the mischievous nature of sin.

2. Thou can not commit sin so stupidly, and insensibly as formerly. Before
conversion sin did no more trouble thy conscience, then gravel in the fingers
of thy glove; but now it is as gravel grating in thy bowels; before thou waft
stupid, and as the Apostle speaks, thou had thy conscience seared as with a
hot iron: 1 Timothy 4.2. (...)
seared flesh is unsensible, it is your raw and galled flesh which is tender;
formerly thy conscience was sensible of no sin, whereas now if thou do sin,
it is as the pricking of a sword into raw flesh; before conversion the Law was
cast behind a man's back, Ephesians. 4.17,18. (...).
but now a godly man sets it before his eyes; before thou waft past feeling,
now sin is as a dagger at thy heart.

3. Thou can not sin so contentedly as in former time: heretofore thou
wallowedst in sin, as a Sow in the mire, but now thou art as a Sheep in the
mire, which would ^aine be in the green medows again. I told you formerly, Jude
18.
that corruption in a godly man, it was like poison in a man's body, troublesome
and painful; but sin in the wicked; it was but like poison in a toade, which
was natural; before thy conversion thou wast as much content with sin and
corruption in thee, as a toade that has poison naturally in it: but now after
conversion, sin troubles thee as if poison were in thy bowels; Prove. 13.23 2
These. 2.12.
sin to a wicked man is his sport and pastime, to the godly his grief and
burden.

4. Thou do not so fearlesly commit sin, as in times past. Formerly thou
did rush into sin, as a horse rusheth into the battle, thou had not the
impression of Gods fear stamped upon thy mind, the dread of God did not keep
thee from sin; but when God has converted a man, he sins with more fear of
heart then ever he did before; and it is worthy your noting, that when the
Scripture speaks of a converted man, it does not speak of him, as forbearing a
sin, but fearing of it. A good man is one, who not only forbeareth idle
swearing, Eccles. 9.2. Prove. 13.13
but fears an oath. And hence godly men are said to fear the command. A
wicked man may fear the threatening, and the punishment, but it is only a good
man which fears the command; and therefore will not sin, because it is against
a holy law.

5 The Spirit will keep thee, that thou shall not sin so maliciously as thou
have done formerly. Before conversion the Scripture speaks of wicked men, Judge
15.
that the Lord shall convince them of their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed. The Scripture speaks not only of ungodly men, and ungodly
deeds, but of committing ungodly deeds, ungodlily; that is, after a most
ungodly manner, after a most wilful, and malicious manner: But so thou can
not commit sin after conversion. We read of some who do despite unto the
Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29.
but a godly man shall never so sin; he may quench the Spirits motions, and
he may grieve the Spirit; but he shall never do despite unto the Spirit. A
godly man shall never sin out of malicious wickedness. Psalm. 59.5.


6. Thou can not do evil, as to the maine, not so voluntarily as thou have
formerly done; before conversion thou did rush into sin voluntarily, but
now thou go and yieldest to sin, with much unwillingnesse. This change
does converting grace make in thee; formerly thou did sin with all thy
will, but now there is one part of the will against the other, and therefore
says the Apostle, With my mind I serve the law of God, but with my flesh the
law of sin; Romans 7.25.
whereas before conversion, the whole of man was given up to the service of
sin: a child of God when he is converted, though he sin: yet it is upon
some surprise, as Peter rashly denied Christ; but a wicked man sins
deliberately, even as Judas betrayed Christ.

7. Not so impudently as before conversion; then men sinned and were not
ashamed, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, but now with fear and blushing shame.

The next Question is, seeing this is a blessing in common to wicked men as
well as to the godly, to be kept from evil; then what difference is there
between the restraining grace of the Spirit in wicked men, Jer. 6.15.
and the renewing grace of the Spirit in the godly? -- But this question I
shall not now handle, but shall reserve it for the next Sermon. -- That which I
shall now do, shall be to conclude this Sermon, with some use of what you have
heard.



1. The great misery of those men who are destitute of the Spirit to do this
great and good office for them; what slaves to sin are they who are void of
the Spirit, they are liable to every incursion, and invasion which the devil
shall make upon them. Now the Spirits motions and disswasions, they are as a
bulwark and fence to guard the heart against sin. The Spirit it is as the
sluice of a pond, if the flood-gate be down, it keeps the water within its
bounds; but if you pull up the sluice, what an inundation of water will there be?

2. If thou would have the Spirit to keep thee from evil, thou must labor to
keep thy self; the Spirits keeping of a man does not exclude his holy care to
keep himself: Psalm. 18.23.
this was David's practice, He kept himself from his iniquity; he would not
make Gods care to keep him, an occasion for him to be idle. Remember and take
this for a rule, that if you do not take care to keep your selves from the
occasions of sin, the Spirit will never keep you from the execution thereof;
and therefore you read, 1 John 5.18.
that he that is begotten of God, he keeps himself, that the evil one
touches him not; and so speaks Jude, Keep your selves in the love of God. Jude
23.


3. What cause have regenerate men to bless God, both in reference to
themselves, and in reference to wicked men?

1. In reference to themselves; to what evil would not the flesh have drawn
you, had it not been for the contrary working of the Spirit in you? I appeal
to your own conscience, how often have you resolved to do wickedly, nay, how
far have you gone in it? insomuch that you have resolved on the time when, on
the place where, and the manner how to bring your intended evil about, and yet
God has kept you from your intended purpose, so that ye could not do the evil
ye would; what cause have you to bless God for positive grace, and not only
so, but for preventing grace, that you have been restrained from sin? It was
thus with David, with a full resolution, he did resolve to kill Nabal, and all
his family; but the Spirit of God prevented it, by setting home the counsel of
a poor woman; and therefore here upon see what cause you have to bless God for
preventing grace; and that you may be provoked hereunto, I would leave with you
some considerations upon a twofold account. 1. If you consider the universality
of that corruption, that is in your natures. 2. If you consider the strength of
it.


1. If you consider the universality of corruption, in the universality of
persons, all the children of Adam are infected with this common contagion, all
having sinned in him, and so are guilty of the punishment, so are they
obnoxious to the contagion of Adams sin. Romans 5.12.


2. If you consider the universality of parts; there is never a part of man,
but it is defiled with sin; even regenerate men, as there is something in
every part sanctified, so there is something in each part unsanctified; as
there is grace in every part, so there is sin in every part.

3. In regard of the object; a man's nature it is averse to all good, and prone
to all evil. Corruption of nature it is set out by Divines, by comparing it to
that rude Chaos which was before the creation, in which rude heap there was
vertualiy all creatures, which afterward the Lord created: So it is with
corruption of nature, it has vertually in it all the sins acted in the world.

4. There is an universality in respect of the time; this corruption of nature,
it was not only in one age of the world, and not in another; but in all ages of
the world. It reigned from Adam to Moses, Romans 5.14.
even over those who had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression. Now put all these together, that all persons, and all parts of
men are corrupted, and that in all times, and that this corruption prompts you
to all sin, consider but all this, and have you not great cause to admire,
that there is no more wickedness committed in the world?

2. Consider not only the universality of corruption, but the strength of it.
If it were but a weak enemy, it were not so much, but there is great strength
and potency in it, and therefore it is called sometimes an enticing, and
sometimes a drawing enemy; and if it cannot entice by policy, it will draw by
power.

2. We are to magnify Gods grace in reference to wicked men, that are enemies
to the Church of God; if the restraining grace of Gods Spirit did not withhold
wicked men from doing the evil they would, there would be no living in the
world; if it were not thus, every wicked man would murder every man that
angered him, and he would deceive every man that dealed with him; we should have
all humane societies overturned, the Church of God rooted out from under
Heaven, did not God by the common workings of his Spirit restrain men. Psalm
76.10.
God he will turn the wrath of man to his praise, and the remainder of wrath
will thou restrain. It is spoken of Gods enemies, and God will restrain their
wrath by the common workings of his Spirit, and it shall evidentially, turn to
his praise, and shall be conducible to the glory of God, and the good of his
people. You have a famous instance in Laban and Jacob, Laban came with a
mischievous intent against Jacob, but God meets with him, Genesis 31.29.
and gives him a charge, that he should not meddle with Jacob, no not so much
as to speak against him. God laid a mighty restraint upon Labans spirit, so
that he could not do the mischief he intended. Genesis 33.4.
So likewise in the case of Esau and Jacob; Esau he pursued his brother with a
deadly hatred, insomuch as he resolved when the days of his fathers mourning
were over, to kill his brother; but God did so alter his disposition, and
restrain his bloody intent, that when he met with his brother, he fell on his
neck and kissed him. To this purpose the Psalmist has an expression, that the
Lord shall cut off the spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the
earth. Psalm. 76.12.
In other translations it is, The Lord shall restrain the spirit of Princes
and it was so in all ages, and it is so in this age. Men that hate religion,
though they have much power in their hands, yet the power of their hands shall
not come into act; and because there is no wicked man in the world, which shall
do the evil he would, therefore you have much cause to bless God. Pharaoh
though he had much power in his hands, yet God delivered his people out of his
hands, and thus the Lord would not suffer Balaam to curse his people; Number. 23.
Psalm. 105.14,15
he will suffer no man to do them harm, as David speaks, yea, He reproved
Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm.

Sermon XXVI. At Lawrence Jewry London, Februar. 9. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Come now to handle the third Question, which is this, wherein does the
difference appear between the restraining grace of the Spirit, in keeping
wicked men from sin, and between the renewing grace of the Spirit, which is
in the godly?

For answer to this question Ishall lay down seven differencing marks.

1. The restraining grace of the Spirit in wicked men, Number. 23.13.
it does only suppress and abate the acts, but does not alter the disposition,
and will of a man as to siune. Restraning grace to a wicked man it is just as a
chain to a Lion, or a prison to a thief, which restraines the rage of the one,
and thy theft of the other, but changes not at all the nature of either. You
have two Scripture-instances for the confirmation hereof. The one is of Balaam,
who told Balack, That if he would give him his house full of silver and gold,
he could not curse the people. But this forbearance to curse them, did not
arise from any indisposition that he had thereunto, Number. 23.1. and ^4. and ver.
27.
but only from Gods restraint. The Scripture gives you a fourfold attempt of
his to curse them; and in Number. 24.1. Number. 24.1.
you have there a high expression; when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to
bless Israel, he went not as at other times to seek for enchantments, but he
set his face toward the wilderness. The meaning is this, Mr. Arthur Jackson.
his Annotations on Number. 24.1
as a learned Expositor observes, that Balaam went three times to have the
devil to curse the people, but first he would ask Gods leave whether he should
curse them or no. But now the text says, he did not ask God leave, but did
look toward the wilderness, that is, toward the place where the people of
Israel were encamped; and so he attempted to curse the people without Gods
leave, and therefore he set his face toward the people to see if he were able
to do it; and the Apostle Peter tells us, that though he did not curse the
people, yet he loved the wages of unrighteousness. 2 Pet. 2.15. Est. 5.9,10.
So we read of Haman, it is said, when he saw Mordecai preferred, that he was
moved with indignation against him; but yet the text says, that Haman
refrained himself; not that Hamans passion was subdued, or altered against
Mordecai; but merely God restrained and kept in his rage. Restraining grace to
a wicked man may be illustrated by these two example: of the fiery furnace
wherein the three children were cast, and the den of Lions into which Daniel
was thrown. The fiery furnace it was as hot as ever, and seventimes hotter then
it formerly had been; but at that time while the three children were in, God
did suspend, or restrain the natural property of the fire to burn: Thus it is
with wicked men, their lusts do burn as hot in them as ever; only God by a
mighty power, keeps under their lusts. Dan. 6.22.
The Lions among whom Daniel was thrown, they kept their ravenous disposition
while Daniel was in the den, but God restrained it all the while Daniel was
there: thus God deals with wicked men; he may restrain their sin, but their
disposition is toward sin still. -- But now it is contrary with renewing grace;
it reaches not only to the suppressing of the act, but works an alteration in
the disposition of a man; it does not only restrain a Lion, but turns a Lion
into a Lamb; Romans 12.2.
there is in the work of regeneration, A renewing of the mind, as the Apostle
speaks; there is a change in the mind that was not there before, and therefore
says the same Apostle, If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live; Romans 8.13.
not only restrain the act, but mortify the disposition; this is the effect
of renewing grace.

2. Restraining grace makes a natural man refrain from sin more because of the
severity of the law which condemns, then because of the purity of the law
which forbids sin. And this is it which Austin speaks of; says he, That man
which fears hell, Impii metuunt ardere, non metuunt peccare: ille autem
peccare metuit, qui peccatum iplum sicut Gehennam odit. Aug. Epist. 144. Ps.
119.140.
he does not fear to sin, but fears to burn; but that man fears to sin,
that fears sin as he would fear hell. Restraining grace never makes a man
thus fear sin; but renewing grace does, and therefore says the Psalmist,
Because, says he, thy Word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it. It
is not only a threatening Word against sin, but a pure Word, which forbids
sin.

3. Restraining grace it does only make a man forbear gross and palpable sins;
but does not reach to any abstinence from secret and inward evils. Outward
restraint does not reach to inward sins. Natural conscience may see sins
that are more gross; that as we have a sight of the stars, in a bright night
we may see the smallest stars, but in a dark night we can only see those that
are of a greater magnitude: Thus it is with restraint which comes from natural
conscience, it only keeps in those sins which are of a more gross nature;
whereas we are to mortify our sinful and inordinate affections; and thus the
Apostle Paul commands, Col. 3.5.
Mortify (says he) your members that are upon the earth, fornication,
unclcannesse, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry. Here you see that not only the act, but the disposition; and
not only irregular actions, but inordinate affections are forbidden; and
hereupon it was that Hezekiah he humbled himself for the pride of his heart; 2 Chronicles. 32.25 2 Samuel 24.10.
and David also for the pride of his heart in numbering the people.

4. Restrained corruption it is unwillingly left; a man does unwillingly leave
that sin he is kept from; and this is hinted to us by that expression
concerning Abimelech in Genesis 20.6. where the Lord said, Genesis 20.6.
I also withheld thee from sinning against me; the word notes a forwardness on
Abimelech his part to commit fornication with Abraham's wife. Restraining grace
makes a man leave his sins as unwillingly as a man that leaves his wife and
children, country and estate; he leaves these with much regret, and bids them
farewell with tears in his eyes, and sorrow in his heart; but a man that has
renewing grace he is kept from sin willingly; he is as willing to leave a lust
as a slave the gally, a prisoner the dungeon, or a beggar his rags; whereas a
wicked man still in his natural contion does as unwillingly leave his sin, as
Abraham did put Hagar and Ishmael out of doors, Genesis 21.11. and as Phaltiel did
take his leave of Michal, 2 Samuel 3.16. where it is said that he followed her
weeping; even as the mariner does cast his goods over board in a storm,
because he cannot help it.

5. Restraining grace though it keep a man from the act, yet it stirs up a
more vehement eagerness to commit that sin when the restraint is over;
though the act be suspended, yet the desire is increased. Just as it is with a
river, the more it is dammed up, with the force and violence it will return
greater to its former course: so restrained corruption, when the restraint is
over, will return upon a man with the greater eagerness. And as it is with a
Smiths forge, if ye cast much water upon it, it will quench the fire; but if
you do but sprinkle some water, it causes the fire to burn the hotter: so it
is with restraining grace, it lets the lust out with greater violence; renewing
grace it suppresseth not only the act, but takes away the impetuous and eager
desire of committing sin.

6. Restraining grace it is but partial, whether you respect the subject, or
the object.

1. In respect of the subject, restraining grace it binds but one part of a
man, and leaves the other loose; it binds the tongue, but not the hand; it
binds the hand, but not the ear and eye; it binds only one part of a man, and
not another: But now renewing grace, it is universal, 1 These. 5.23. (...). 2
Cor. 5.17. Ezekiel. 36.26.
and reaches to th whole man; it is a throughout work, as the Apostle speaks,
The very God of peace sanctify you throughout, both in body, soul, and spirit;
the work of Regeneration is not a new tongue, or a new ear, but all is become
new in a new heart.

2. Restraining grace it is partial in that it reaches but to part of the
object, as thus: it reaches but to some sins, not to all; it keeps a man from
one sin, and gives him scope to another: But renewing grace it is universal; as
it keeps under one sin, so it will labor to keep under all sins; Psalm. 119.3.
this is the particular and proper work of renewing grace, that a man is thereby
enabled to have respect unto all Gods commandments.

7. Restraining and renewing grace they differ in their ends, and that two
ways. 1. In regard of Gods end. 2. In regard of man's end.


1. In regard of Gods end. Gods end in giving restraining grace is to maintain
humane societies for the good of others; but Gods end in giving renewing grace
is, that man's nature might be sanctified, and that man may be saved.

2. They differ in regard of man's end. As first the end of men that have
restraining grace, is, that they may preserve their souls in safety; but a
godly man's end in keeping under sin is, that he may keep the peace of his
soul; and this was Jabez his end; you find it mentioned in 1 Chronicles. 4.10. He
called upon the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou would bless me indeed,
and enlarge my coast, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou would
keep me from evil that it may not grieve me! 1 Chronicles. 4.10.
A godly man aims at the peace and purity of his soul; but a wicked man's end
is, only that he might have his soul not disturbed by the present trouble for
sin, and condemned for the desert of sin.



Seeing that the Spirit of God does often keep regenerate men that they cannot
do the evil they would; Then

1. You may gather hence, that a man is not able to keep himself. Hence Christ
prays to his Father for his people, not that he would take them out of the
world, but keep them from the evil: John 17.15.
We are not able to keep our selves; and this the Prophet Jeremiah
acknowledges, saying, O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself:
it is not in man that walkech to direct his steps. Jer. 10.23.
We cannot keep our selves from do committing evil.

2. The Spirits keeping of us from evil, does not exclude our care and
endeavor to keep our selves. The Lord he makes a gracious Promise, 1 Samuel 2.9.
that he will keep the feet of his servants; and yet the Scripture tells you,
that it is their care, and their duty also, to make straight paths for their
feet, and to ponder the path of our feet, Prove. 4.23.
as Solomon expresses it. Hence you find in Scripture, Promises not only of
what God will do, and of Christ's Prayer that you may be delivered from evil;
but of the practice of the godly, and their care in keeping themselves; 1 John
5.18.
and this is their duty, He that is begotten of God keeps himself; and as the
same Apostle says, Little children, keep your selves. We must not trust so in
Gods keeping of us as to be idle, but we must labor to keep our selves, as the
Psalmist did, who kept himself from his iniquity. Psalm. 18.23.


3. It is a great evidence of integrity and sincerity of heart, when men labor
to keep themselves from inward and constitution-sins, as well as from gross
sins; and this David did, He kept himself from his iniquity; that is, from
those sins which by constitution he was inclined to; and this was an argument
of his great sincerity.

4 Consider, that though the Spirit of God does keep regenerate men from doing
the evil they would, yet the inclination and will to do any evil, does make us
guilty in the sight of God, as if we had actually done it. That in Scripture
sense is said to be done, that is either purposed or intended to be done. A
notable passage to this purpose you have in Josh. 24.9. Ihshua 24.9.
where it is said, that Balack King of Moab waged war against Israel; and yet
if you read the History, Numb. 2.23. and 24. chap.
in the 22.23. and 24. chapters of Numbers, you shall not read one word of any
such war; Now the reconciliation of these two places are easy; Balack did not
actually wage war against Israel, but he did intend so to do, and therefore
he hired Balaam to curse the people; and then, says he, I shall prevail. I
mention this to this purpose, that you may not think your selves guiltless, so
ye keep out of the act of sin; but if so be you have a will, and an inclination
to those evils, you will be found guilty before God; and hereupon it is that
Christ tells us, that He that is angry with his brother without a cause, is
guilty of murder; and he that looks after a woman to lust on her, has
committed adultery already in his heart. Mat. 5.22.
Ver. 28.
This Position may greatly humble us; we are guilty of many actual sins which
we have committed; and we are guilty of many sins, which though we have not
acted, yet have they been in our purposes and intentions, and these the Law of
God will judge.

5. Judge not thy self to be righteous and gracious, by bare restraints from
sin in particular actions; but if you would judge your selves, judge by the
ordinary course of your lives. It is possible that in a particular act a good
man may not be kept from that sin, from which a wicked man may; and it is
possible that a wicked man may do that good, which a godly man may not be able
to do: Now you are not to judge of your selves by particular acts, but by the
constant course of your lives; for if you should do otherwise, you would
condemn the generation of the just. I shall give an example, by comparing
together good King David, and wicked King Abimelech, they were both tempted to
the same sin; and should you have guessed at these two men by their particular
restraints, you would have taken Abimelech for the good King, and David for the
bad King. Abimelech in his restraint was far better then David; it is said of
Abimelech that he took Sarah; he did not know that she was Abraham's wife, but
David did know that Bathsheba was the wife of Vriah; and then further,
Abimelech the Heathen King, though he had Sarah in the house, yet the Scripture
tells you he did not defile her: but David took Bathsheba into his house, and
was actually unclean with her: Now should you look upon these two men in this
particular case, you would judge Abimelech to be the gracious King, and David
the Heathen King. -- But now if you look upon David in the ordinary course of
his life, he was far better then Abimelech; you are not therefore to pass a
verdict upon any man that he is good or bad, by any particular act; that as it
is a rule in Philosophy, that one act does not denominate; so when you go to
judge of men you must not look upon a particular act, but upon the general
scope and current of their lives. Prove. 16.17.
The high way of the righteous is to depart from evil.



1. Bless God that ever you have been crossed in the doing of those sins which
you would have committed. How near the brink of many a sin has many a godly
man been at, when an occasion and an inclination has met together, but God
has put in a restraint? O bless God, it is the greatest mercy next converting
grace. It was the prayer of Jabez, O that thou would bless me indeed! and O
that thou would keep me from evil! let it be thy prayer also. Sometimes men
are angry when they are kept from an intended sin; and this is just as if a man
going to execution, should be angry with a man for stopping him in his way:
Alas, poor man, thou art going to the execution of thy sin, if any stop thee,
it is the saving of thy soul, at least the saving of thy peace, therefore bless
God. How did David bless God, when he intended to have cut off Nabal and all
his family, when Abigail came with smooth words and prevented him? O then,
says he, Blessed be God, and blessed be thou, and blessed be the Counsel thou
have given me; 1 ^am. 25.32.
so it may be thou have determined the Commission of a sin, with all
circumstances which may further thee in the execution of it; and has God
stopped thee in thy way? what great cause have thou to magnify him?

2. From hence gathet what cause the people of God have to suspect their own
hearts, lest they should carry them to such evils, which they think they should
never have committed. Suppose the Spirit should be suspended, that it should
not restrain thee, what evil would thou not commit. There are
Scripture-instances of godly men, who have fallen into those sins, that
themselves never thought they should commit; and such sins which were repugnant
to those graces wherein they were most excellent. -- Abraham he was the
eminentest man alive in his age for faith, Gal. 3.9. Abrahamus pa^er fidelium
non efficienter, sed exemplariter.
and therefore was called the father of the faithful; now would any man think
that Abraham should fall into unbelief; why? yes, he did; for being distrustful
of Gods Providence, he told two lies, one to Pharaoh King of Egypt, Genesis 12.13.
and the other to Abimelech King of Gerar. -- Likewise Moses, the Scripture
tell of him, that he was the meekest man upon earth, Psalm. 106.33.
and yet he spoke unadvisedly with his lips; he fell into passion, which was
that sin which was contrary to that grace, wherein he was most excellent. --
And so also Job, Jam. 5.11.
whom the Scripture tells you was the most patient man on earth; and of all
sins Job was most hurried to impatiency, Job 3.
insomuch that he bitterly curses the day of his birth, and the night in which
it is said, A man-child is conceived. I name these examples to you, to let you
see what cause you have to bless God for the sin you have been prevented from,
and what cause you have to suspect your hearts, if the Spirit of God withdraw
from you. And so Moses, he was noted to be the meekest man on earth, Numb.
12.3. And yet even this meek Moses is transported with passion, and he speaks
unadvisedly with his mouth.

3. Pray unto God for the Spirit to do its office in thy soul, Psalm. 106.33.
that the Spirit may keep thee from doing the evil thou would. We read of
David, Psalm. 19.13.
that he made this prayer, Lord, keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins.
Thou have need to pray that the Spirit may check and curb thy corruptions when
thou art tempted to sin, because there is no man, though never so good, that
can stand by his own strength, though never so great, and thereby avoid an evil
when he is tempted to it, though never so foul. O therefore pray for
preventing grace, that God would keep thee by his Spirit, that so thou might
not do the works of the flesh. And therefore Christ has taught us to pray,
Lord, deliver us from evil, Mat. 6.13.
viz. from that evil which we cannot of our selves avoid.

Secondly, as this point refers to the unregenerate, who have only restraining
grace to hinder them from sin: Let even such consider what cause they have to
bless God for this mercy; though they shall go to hell, yet they have cause to
bless God for restraining grace on earth; for though it will not make you
good; yet it will and does make you less evil; and though it cannot make you
spiritual, yet it will make you good moral men. By restraining grace a man may
have this good. 1. He may not commit so many and great sins. 2. He may not
incur so great punishment. 3. He will bring the less scandal to Religion. 4.
He will give the less bad example.


2. Unto such who have restraining grace, I would give this caution, that you
would not boast thereof; The Pharisee had restraining grace, but he made ill
use thereof: Luke 18.11. Non Deum, sed seipsum laudavit Pharisaeus.
I thank God, says he, I am no extortioner, nor no adulterer, nor as this
Publicane is. Does God restrain these sins in thee? do not thou boast in these
restraints; who has made a difference between thee and others? is it not God?
therefore be not proud of it.

3. Take heed that you do not take restraining grace to be an evidence of
renewing grace; and here I shall show you twelve ways, whereby you may be
deceived: but of this in the following Sermon.

SERMON XXVII. at Lawrence Jury. Land. Feb. 16. 1650.
GAL. 5. verse 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would.
I Shall by Gods assistance in this Sermon finish this point; and there is only
one question that depends upon the last caution I named in my last Sermon,
which was, that you should not look upon the restraints of the Spirit in
keeping you from sin, to be the saving and gracious work of the Spirit. And
hereupon I shall answer this question, and show you what other causes there may
be, besides the renewing grace of the Spirit, that may keep wicked men from
doing evil.

1. Men may be kept from wickedness, from the power which a religious
education has had on them while they were young; when you are under the
tuition of Parents or Masters, or Governors, this may restrain men from doing
much evil. 2 King. 12.2.
You have an instance hereof in King Jehoash; He did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord all the days wherein Jehoiada the Priest instructed him:
All the days his Uncle lived he walked in the ways of the Lord; but as soon as
ever he was dead, he fell to work wickedness. Thus you read concerning Paul,
that he was according to the Law blameless, Phil. 3.6.
that is, as to the outward letter; now how came he to be thus? why, says he,
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. --
I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and touching the law a Pharisee; that is, he
was trained up in the Jewish religion, and the force of education had made Paul
a man of a very good moral life. And so the young man he says to Christ that
all the Commandments he had kept from his youth; this was the power of
education, Mark 10.19,20. Plutarch.
A colt if he be never taken, nor tamed with bit nor bridle, will be a very
savage and wild creature all his lifetime; and if you let him run too long,
he will hardly be tamed at all; but if you take up a colt when he is young,
though he be wild by nature, yet by breaking of him, you will make him fit for
service. It is true, religion does not run in a blood, yet the profession of
it may; and this may be one cause why men do not the evil they would, because a
religious education has a power to keep them back; yet this falls far short of
renewing grace.

2. Disability of body, whether through age or sickness, may be a means to
restrain men from many sins: Ambrose calls diseases the shops of virtue.
Indeed sickness it is a prison, but not a grave to sin; it is only
mortification which is a slaughterhouse to sin, Morbi virtutis officinae.
Ambr.
sickness keeps sin in; when men are fastened to their beds, and when their
bones are made to rattle in their skin, they have then no pleasure, nor leisure
left them to think of Luxurious excess: Thus we see in Abimelech, how God kept
him by laying some sickness or other upon him. Genesis 20.6. compared with verse.
17.
This you see by comparing Genesis 20.6. with the 17. ver. of that Chapter. In
ver. 6. God told Abimelech, that he withheld him from sin; there it is only
said in the general, that God restrained him; but in ver. 17. is hinted the
manner how God did this; Abimelech would feign have defiled Abraham's wife; but
God laid some disease upon him, and therefore it is said that Abraham prayed
unto God,and God healed Abimelech. Rivet.
Rivet upon these words says, that as soon as ever he took Sarah into his
house, God smote him with a sore sickness, so that he was not able to commit
folly with her: And he gives this reason; because Isaac was the promised seed;
and if Abimelech should have lain with Sarah, the child would have been
thought Abimelech's, and not Abraham's; and therefore God did send some
exquisite disease upon him, that so he might be disabled to his intended folly.

3. Outward meannesse and poverty of a man's present condition, is a cause to
hinder many men from sin; whereas if they had wealth, they would work
wickedness with greediness. And this was Hazaels condition; while he was a
servant, he could not then do much mischief, his outward condition was so mean
that he had not opportunity and advantage, 2 King. 8.12.
but when he came to be King in his Masters room; Then shall thou burn the
City, rip up women with child, and dash children against the stones; he never
thought he should have been so bad; but when he came to be King he did this and
much more: We may bless God, as it is a common proverb, That cursed cowes have
but short horns; that wicked men are not sometimes rich men, and great in
place and power, God many times so orders it, that men that have much evil in
their natures, should not have opportunity to act it in their lives.

4. Another way whereby men may be kept from sin, may be from the affrightment
of a natural conscience; Gods Spirit does not only sometimes witness with the
spirit in godly men, but also checks the spirits of wicked men; and though a
wicked man does not forbear to act sin obedientially, with any respect to
the command of God; yet he forbeares to sin rationally, out of conviction
from a natural conscience. Natural conscience it is that which overrules and
swayes a wicked man, so that he shall not do the evil he would; the Gentiles,
having not the law; as the Apostle says, that is the written law, Romans 2.14.
yet they do by nature the things contained in the law, and these having not
the law, are a law unto themselves; these Gentiles, though heathens, the
Scripture says they were a law unto themselves, that is they have a conscience
which is instead of a law to them.

5. The fear which is implanted in men of humane laws, and penal statutes is
another means to keep men from much sin; when a divine law cannot bear sway
with a wicked man's conscience, a humane law will restrain his practice; if it
were not so, how many murders would there be, were it not more for venturing
their neck^, then their souls? It is a mercy to have good laws in a Nation,
because they restrain men from the practice of evil, when the law of God has
not a sway upon men's consciences. You find in Scripture how men have been
restrained merely upon this account; the favorites of Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon informing against Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, Dan. 3.29.
touching their God, there was an order made that the three children should be
cast into the fiery furnace, and that it should be seven times more hotter then
formerly; well, they were cast in, and the story tells you, that they walked in
the fire as in a pleasant room. Now this did so convince the King and his
Nobles, that the King made this law, and sent out this Edict, that every
People, Nation, and language which spoke any thing amiss against the God of
Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, they shall be cut in pieces, and their houses
be made a dunghill; here was a humane law, and this did so quell, and awe the
people, that though they did rail against the God of Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego before, yet now they were silent: I only mention this to show what
force and power a humane law has to restrain the sin of wicked men.

6. Men may be kept from sin, merely by the presence and example of good men
among whom they live; who do take notice of, and observe their ways. I
remember that it is reported as a proverb among the Romans, they will say,
Take heed, Cato beholds you. Cato who was esteemed a good man, and being so
esteemed, when any man was doing evil, this was their Proverb, Take heed, Cato
sees you. And thus you find in Scripture concerning Herod, that he feared
John, knowing that he was a just man, and an holy, and observed him. Jo^. 6.20.
We have a story in the book of Martyrs in the beginning of the first vollume,
concerning John the Evangelist who wrote the Revelation; as he was riding upon
the high way, a company of thieves met with him; and it so happened that the
Captain of these thieves was a youth which lived under John's Ministry; and
though John hardly knew him, yet he knew John; and it is said, when he saw the
old man, he ran away; the guilt of his conscience did so recoile upon him, and
the presence of John, that he ran away, not daring to act his accustomed
wickedness. To this purpose is that of the Apostle Paul, It is good to be
zealously affected always in a good thing, and not only when I am present with
you. Gai. 4.18. Phil. 1.27. Phil. 2.12.
It intimates that whilst Paul was present, they walked mavelous well; but
when he was absent, they then grew idle; the presence and example of good men
is an occasion many times to keep others from sin.

7. Men may be kept from sin, from an heroicknesse of Spirit, and from the
ingenuousnesse of a man's natural temper. And thus Luther before conversion,
whilst he was a Monk in the Church of Rome, yet he professes that then he was
never tainted with covetousness; he was of so ingenuous a spirit, that such a
sordid sin did not cleave to him. And so Paul, he tells you of a natural gift
which he had, which was continency. Thus it is reported of Plutarch that he
should say. Malo nullumsuisse Plutarchum, etc. Romans 2.14.
I had rather you should say there is no such man in the world, then to say
that Ps^tarch is either vain, unjust, or unconstant; the natural temper of the
man did incline him to equity and justice. Paul speaking of the Gentiles says,
that though they had not the Law, yet they did by nature the things contained
in the Law; that is, by a refined nature. What is the reason that some men are
passionate, and others not? the reason is not from renewing grace; but it is,
because there is in some a more ingenuousnesse of spirit then in others; and
hereby many evils as to the act of them are restrained, though men be destitute
of renewing grace.

8. Wicked men they may be kept from doing evil, for fear of punishment,
either temporal or eternal; sometimes fear of outward judgments: and thus it
was with the Egyptians; Formidine poenae potius quam detest^tione moli. Exodus
12.33.
they cry, Let the Israelites go, or we are all dead men; depart they must, but
not because God would have them go; nor yet out of love to the Isralites, but
out of love to themselves; we are all dead men, if they be not free men. So we
read the High Priests and Pharisees, Mat. 26.5.
they would not kill Christ upon a feast day, lest there should be an uproar
among the people; it was not love to Christ, but love to themselves. So many
Politicians they would do many injurious acts, were it not that they feared the
people.

9. The fear of hell, and Gods wrath, that may lie hard on the soul of a
sinner, and may keep him from doing wickedness, fear of everlasting burnings.
To this purpose you have a notable passage of the Prophet Isaiah, The sinners
in Sion, says he, are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites; Isa.
3.3.14.
what? what is the matter? This is the reason, Who among us can dwell with
devouring fire? who can dwell with everlasting barnings? The fear of Gods
wrath made them afraid of sin.

10. Hope of temporal and eternal reward may be another cause why men may
forbear sin. Mark. 10.17.
And this was the conceit of that young man: What shall I do, that I may
inherit eternal life! Christ answers him, Thou know the Commandments, Do not
kill, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal: and he answers, All these have I
kept from my youth; he had more regard to the reward then to the rule in his
obedience of the Commmandments. And thus Balaam his hope in a happy end did
curb him that he did not commit an unrighteous act. Upon all these
forementioned occasions wicked men may refrain from sin; such who are wholly
without any truth of grace.

Pu^c^rum est in secundis t^rti^sque consister^, etc. Cicero.
even to those who upon any of the forementioned grounds have been kept from
sin.

1. Hereby you have less sin then others have, or then your selves would
have had, if you had been without restraining grace; though restraining grace
in checking sin do not make you good; yet it makes you less evil; though not
holy and spiritual men, yet good moral men.

2. Your punishment will be less then otherwise it would have been, in that
God has given you restraining grace to keep under sin. A Heathen shall be
punished less, that has restraining grace, then a Christian which wants it. A
sober Heathen shall be punished less then a drunken Christian.

3. Consider, that in keeping under sin, you will not so fearfully break the
peace of your consciences; open and gross sins they lay the conscience open,
and fill it with terror and amazement; but the less thou actest sin, the
less shall thy conscience be troubled.

4. Hereby thou do less scandal religion, then otherwise thou would have
done; lesser evils they give a scratch to the face of religion, but open sins
they give religion a stab at the heart; religion receives not so much
disreputation by close hypocrites as by open profaneness.

5. Thou might do more hurt by thy sins example if God should leave thee,
then now thou do. Though thou art a bad man, yet if God restrain sin in
thee, thou doe^t not give so bad an example as otherwise thou would do.

6. Who knows but that these small beginnings of restraining grace may be a
forerunner of renewing grace? thou which art restrained from evil, though thou
art at present wicked, who knows but that God may turn restraining grace into
r^n^ing grace?





Paul while he was unconverted, thought himself alive, and in a very happy
condition before he saw the spirituality of the Law; Romans 7.9.
but when he was converted, When the Commandment came, sin revived, and then he
died; that is, the Law coming in power upon his conscience he then saw sin
alive, and yet then he was in a converted estate and in a happy condition. As
light breaking into a room does discover what wants and disorders are there,
which were unknown, and unseen in the dark: so does light breaking into the
understanding, discover our spiritual wants.

2. Do not judge your selves to be in a bad estate, by the want of particular
restraints under sin; but judge your selves by the powerful manifestations of
habitual grace in your more ordinary and constant course and practice. It may
be one man can bridle his passion, but thou can not; yet he may be a bad man,
and thou a good man. A traveller perhaps may sometimes step into a wheel-tract,
but his ordinary course is in the beaten road: so if thou fallest into sin, and
want restraining grace, this may be thy falling into a wheele-tract; Prove.
16.17.
thy ordinary way is the beaten path. It being the high way of the upright to
depart from evil; yet now and then thou may lose thy way. You are not to
judge of your selves by particular acts of restraint.

3. Though thou art overtaken with a sin when other men are not, who are worse
then thy self; yet consider, thou have more temptations unto sin then other men
have. It is true, in some cases a godly man's sins they are more to be
aggravated then a wicked man's, yet in other cases a godly man's sin is not so to
be aggravated. The devil is more solicitous to tempt a godsy man to sin, then
he is a wicked man. Job. 1. Zeck. 3.1,2.
When the sons of God came together, the devil came also in the midst of them.
He owes them a spite; and therefore if they be now and then overtaken, they
should not judge themselves by those particular acts, but by the constant
course of their lives.

4. Consider, though thou do yield to a sinful act, Romans 7. (...).
yet if sin be not a Tyrant, nor a Lord over thee, thou have no cause to fear.
Thou yieldest to sin as to an Usurper, not as to thy Liege Lord; though thou
want the restraint of the Spirit in some particular acts to keep thee from
evil, yet if thou art kept by God from the reigning power of sin: be not
discouraged, thou art in a happy condition.

5. Let this be your comfort; though now and then thou can not restrain the
acts of sin, yet ere long thou shall be a complete conqueror over all thy
sins; God shall tread down Satan under thy feet shortly; now thou fightest with
the devil hand to hand, but then thou shall trample him under thy feet: and let
this be your comfort, who have the Spirit lusting against the Flesh; your
combat is but short, your victory is certain, your conquest is great, and
your reward, and Crown everlasting.

FINIS.
An ALPHABETICAL TABLE, TO the foregoing Treatise of the conflict between the
Flesh and Spirit.
A
SPirit of God works not alike in all. Page. 66 Attendance on Ordinances. p.
103 Affections unruly. p. 179 Aptness to fall into any sin. p. 194 Spiritual
Abatements. p. 214 Christian Religion not Austere. p. 218 Arminian objections
answered. p. 249
B
Blame of sin only due to us. p. 131, 132 And not to God or devil. p. 161
Business of the world hinders holy duties. p. 210
C
Conviction for sin long after the Commission of it. p. 40 We must not go out
of our Calling. p. 49 We must follow our particular Calling. p. 52 Constancy in
duty. p. 65 Customary sinning. p. 117 Conflict of Flesh and Spirit. p. 124 Of
Corruption of our natures. p. 141 Concupiscence a sin. p. 160 Conflict
against sin fourefold. p. 165 Conscience Gods spy. p. 182 Contrariety of
Flesh and Spirit. p. 186, 187 Why God suffers this Contrariety of our Corrupt
natures to good. p. 198 No Confidence to be put in duties. p. 256
D
Despising Ordinances. p. 10 Depending on Ordinances. ibid. Deliberate sinners.
p. 33, 34 Devil may move a man to that which is good. p. 48 We must not Depend
on that we do. p 54 Spiritual desertions of three sorts. p. 59 Duties
spiritually done. p. 63, 64 Duties diligently done. p. 64 Satanical delusions.
p. 86, 87 Difference between the godly sinning, and the wicked. p. 112, 113,
114. Diabolical motions. p. 156 Corruption in us to our dying day. p. 192 Sin
diverts from and disturbs in duty. p. 207 Gods decrees abused. p. 216
Defilement cleaves to duty. p. 233 Desire to do is doing. p. 258
E
Our Flesh a malicious enemy. p. 135 An universal enemy. p. 136 Other
properties of this enmity. p. 137, 138 We can never do good enough. p. 220
False ends of doing duty. p. 244, 245 Education may restrain from evil. p. 283
F
Fervency and Frequency in duty. p. 62 Fulfill lusts of the Flesh what. p. 110
Flesh, the meaning of it. p. 121 How the Flesh opposes the Spirit. p. 120
Slavish Fear. p. 176, 177
G
Spirit of God our Guide. p. 82 Why we must follow the Spirits Guidance. p. 83,
84 We have more sin then Grace. p. 191
H
Health must be preserved. p. 51, 52 Humiliation for corruptions. p. 144 Our
corruption hinders us from doing good. p. 208
I
Jesus Christ a faithful High Priest. p. 66 Inobservancy of the Spirit. p. 92,
93 Indulgence of sin. p. 118 Inticements to sin. p. 127, 128, 129 Inability
to do good pretended. p. 217 Of Interruptions in holy duties. p. 231, 232
K
How godly kept from doing evil. p. 262, etc. The holy Spirit keeps us. p. 265
We are not able to keep our selves. p, 277 Gods keeping of us implies our
care. ibid.
L
Lusts of the Flesh. p. 109 Of seeing Little sins. p. 129
M
Moral persuasions what. p. 13, 105 Sevcral Motions of the Spirit to good. p.
45 Evil Motions of the heart. p. 47 Misery of those from whom Gods Spirit is
withdrawn. p. 71 How we may know the Motions of the Spirit from the Motions of
our natural conscience. p. 84, 85 Common and saving Motions of the Spirit. p.
88 Our natures receptive of evil Motions. p. 94 Mortification. p, 150 Mourn
for corruption. p. 251
N
Great is our Need of Gods Spirit. p. 70 Of a Natural conscience. p. 175, 176
Necessity of Ordinances. p. 208
O
A child of God may Often commit the same sin. p. 41 Avoid Occasions to sin.
p. 149 Of Opposition of sin by the godly and wicked. p. 169, etc. Of Original
sin. p. 205, 257 Of necessity of Ordinances. p 209 Omission of good damnable.
p 228
P
Pouring out of the Spirit in latter days. p. 14 Pretending to have the
Spirit. p. 101, 102 Potency of the Flesh. p. 133, 134
R
Repentance a work of the Spirit. p. 31 Motions of the Spirit in Reprobates. p.
89 Rejoicing in evil. p 113 Why corrupt nature remains in the Regenerate. p.
266, 967 A Regenerate man does not sin as he did before. p. 134, 144 Of
Restraining grace. p. 276
S
Sons of God, what it implies. p. 2 Spirit of God withdrawing. p. 6 Spirit of
God works mediately. p 16, 17 Saints may fall into those sins which are
contrary to their graces wherein they are most eminent. p. 37 38 Signs of the
Spirits withdrawing. p 60, 61, 62 Sin causes the Spirit to withdraw. p 73, 74
Sin brings no good fruit. p. 97 How the Spirit is in us. p. 100 Suppress the
first stirring of sin. p. 147, 148 Sense of sin. p. 202, 203, 204.
Succeslesnesse in duty, whence. p. 226 Sincerity accepted. p. 259
T
Spirit of God keeps us from yielding to Temptations. p. 28. Gods Spirit
withdrawes but for a time. p. 77
V
Good unseasonably done. p. 50
W
Withdrawing of the Spirit. p. 6 Wrong six fold to Gods Spirit. p. 7
Withdrawing of Spirit from the Word. p. 18 Symptoms of the Spirits withdrawing
from the Word. p. 23, 24 Reasons of the Spirits withdrawing. p. 32. Christians
are weak to do good. p. 69 Of walking in the Spirit. p. 80 Of wearisomnesse in
holy duties. p. 238 We must watch our hearts. p. 254 Wicked men restrained. p.
271, 272, etc. Wicked men may abstain from sin, and yet not upon gracious
grounds. p. 286, 287, etc.
FINIS.
THE Christians Directory, TENDING To guide him in those several conditions
which Gods providence may cast him into. Digested in several SERMONS, BY The
late faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Minister of
Laurence Jury.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in Goldsmiths Row
in Cheapside, 1653.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe experience which the World has had of the worth of the works of this
Reverend Author, renders a commendatory Epistle needless to any thing of his.
Our business therefore at present, is only to put this piece likewise into thy
hands; and (according as we promised at the first) to assure thee that it is
genuine, having been faithfully compared with, and corrected by Mr Loves own
notes. Yet thus much we shall say of it, that it cannot but be singularly
useful unto Christians, in regard that it contains directions how to carry
themselves in the various and several conditions they shall be in, in this
world; whether their condition be afflicted or joyons; whether they buy or
sell; or what way soever they make use of the world, here is excellent advice
and counsel for them. And so beseeching the Lord to accompany it with his
blessing, and make it profitable to the souls of his people; in him we rest,

Thy faithful Friends, Edm: Calamy, Simeon Ash, Jer: Whitaker. Will: Tailor,
Allen Geere.


A CHRISTIANS DIRECTORY.
1 Cor. 7.30,31. And they that weep as though they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they
possessed not: and they that use this world, as not abusing of it; for the
fashion of this world passes away.
I Have chosen this place of Scripture, intending through Gods assistance, to
make many Sermons upon it, being a Text that affords us so much variety of
matter; but I shall not stand long upon any one particular Doctrine, because I
would gladly end it, in some convenient time.

This Text may well be called A Christians Directory, to guide and direct him,
in his ordinary course, and walking through all the various mutations,
vicissitudes and alterations, he may meet withal here in the world, whatsoever
his condition be, here is matter of advice and Counsel for him. If he meets
with crosses, troubles and afflictions, then his duty is to weep as if he wept
not; if he meet with a gale of prosperity, with an affluence and confluence of
all outward happiness, then his duty is to rejoice as if he rejoiced not. If he
be a Tradesman, and by buying and selling, and trading in the world, he gets a
great estate: then his duty is, to use his wealth so as if he possessed it not.

And least these particular cases and directions should not reach every man's
particular condition: therefore the Apostle gives this general rule to all
that have any thing to do in the world, whether in one kind or other, that they
that use this world, must use it, as not abusing of it, because the fashion of
this world passes away.

Here you see what work I have cut out to you, which will afford abundance of
matter, I shall only at present, make a short entrance into the first direction
the Apostle here gives to those that meet with crosses and afflictions in the
world, namely, that they that weep be as if they wept not. There is some
disagreement in opinion amongst interpreters, touching the scope of these
words. Pareus thinks this Text has a special reference to marriage, though it
be intensive also to all sorts and conditions of people in the world, yet he
thinks it carries a nearer relation to men in a conjugall condition. A man in a
married estate must look to meet with cares and crosses, and troubles, as the
Apostle intimates in the next verse but one to my Text, Verse. 3.
and therefore he gives this advice; you that are in a married estate, and do
meet with troubles and afflictions in the same, why, you must weep as if you
wept not, you must mourn regularly and moderately; suppose you meet with
troubles and afflictions, as a froward wife; or if you have a good wife, yet no
Children by her, or if you have, they are bad Children; or if they be good;
they die, God takes them away from you; or if they live, they take pernicious
courses, and are a grief and sorrow, and vexation to you: why in all these or
the like conditions, you should so moderate your sorrows, as to weep as if you
wept not.

And (truly beloved) the scope of the Chapter caries the sense this way; and
from hence I might note to you.

That a married life exposes a man to a great many crosses and troubles; either
unsutableness of temper and constitution between man and wife, the having of
bad Children or no Children; or Children, or wife die: these and many more
afflictions do sometimes happen in a married estate.

that people ought to take heed, what ever troubles they meet with in this
condition, that they be not cast down with over much sorrow and grief: but I
only hint these things by the way. And though I believe, this Text caries a
great reference to people in a conjugall estate, yet because the Scripture is
large, and speaks in general terms, that he that weeps, should be as if he
wept not, etc. therefore I shall rather choose to handle it in this sense, that
whatsoever crosses, troubles, losses, or afflictions, befalls any men here
below, they should mourn and w^ep as if they wept not, that is, so regulate and
moderate their sorrows, that they should not be inordinate or excessive in the
same; and the Doctrine I shall observe from hence is this.

That Christians should take a great deal of heed, that they be not immoderate
or excessive in worldly sorrows, either for the meeting with any crosses,
undergoing any troubles, or the losing of any comforts here in the world.

Whatsoever afflictions you meet with, or whatsoever comforts you part with,
you should take care your sorrows be not immoderate and inordinate.

In the handling of this, it may be I may come near the bosoms of many of you,
some of you (it may be) are troubled for want of trading, that you are not able
to buy bread to put in your mouths: others troubled for losses, some for
crosses and afflictions, some for outward, others for inward troubles: why, in
all these conditions, you must weep as if you wept not, you must have a care of
immoderateness, and excessiveness in all your sorrows.

Before I shall discuss those quaeries I intend about this Doctrine, I shall
first lay down three conclusions concerning it.

would not have you stupid and insensible under his hand: this Doctrine of
weeping as if you wept not, does allow of natural sensibleness of any cross
or affliction that befalls us, God would have none to be stoically insensible
of heart.

David, at one time when Absalom was dead, he cried out with great impatiency
in the 2 Samuel 18.33. Oh Absalom my Son, my Son, oh Absalom, would to God I had
died for thee my Son, my Son.

And yet at another time when his Child was dead, in the 2 Samuel 12.20. He
rises up and anoints his face, and eats bread, and takes patiently the hand of
God upon him; the people of God are more able to bear afflictions at one time
then at another.



I come now to the Queries which I promised to handle, and they are these
three. 1. When peoples sorrows are immoderate and excessive for worldly
afflictions. 2. Why a Christian should take heed, that his sorrows be not so.
3. I shall give you some considerations to allay excessiveness, and
immoderateness in sorrowing what ever befalls you here in this world. For the
first.


Signs of immoderate sorrowing for worldly afflictions
or the losing of any comforts here in this world,) be said to be immoderate?



1. Then is your sorrow inordinate and excessive, when it lays you under great
indisposition of heart, to the performance of religious duties; when it makes
you unfit and indisposed to holy duties; and especially these two, hearing the
word and private prayer.

First, When it indisposeth you for hearing the word of God, as in Exodus 6.9.
Moses spoke unto the Children of Israel, but they hearkened not unto him, for
anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage. The people were so grieved and
over-pressed with sorrow, that what Moses spoke to them from the Lord, they did
not regard it, because of their afflictions and great bondage: Now if ever any
sorrow or cross went so near thy heart, as to disturb thee, and indispose thee
to the hearing of Gods word, that has been an immoderate sorrow. And therefore
it is a great sin, and greatly to be reproved in those that when any of their
nearest relations are dead, they are so dejected with sorrow, as not to come to
Church, in 3. or 4. Sabbath-dayes afterward, which is very usual with a great
many. In Levit. the 21.1,2,3,4. The Lord commanded there, that there should
none be defiled for the dead amongst his people. There was a custom amongst the
Heathen, when any of their friends were dead, in token of lamentation and
sorrow, they would make their heads bald, and shave the corners of their
beards, cut their flesh, and the like; but God prohibits his people, the doing
of these things, as shaving their heads, cutting the corners of their beards,
and the like. When the duties of Religion, as hearing the word, is interrupted
by your sorrows for any worldly cross, then look upon it, as an irregular
sorrow.

Secondly, When your sorrow indisposeth and keeps you from private prayer, then
it is inordinate: as in Psalm. 77.3,4. my spirit (says Asaph) is overwhelmed
within me, and I am so troubled that I cannot speak. When troubles do so stop
men's mouths that they cannot pray, or make known their wants to God, then it is
an inordinate sorrow: and you women especially, that are naturally more tender,
and apt to grieve then men, do you look to it, if your sorrows have been never
so small, yet if they have interrupted and kept you from hearing the word of
God, and from private duties, they have been excessive and immoderate. So Mal.
2.13.14. We read of women that covered the Altar of the Lord with tears, with
weeping and with crying out, etc. it is not meant of godly, but of worldly
sorrow, women so grieved for the churlishness and unkindness of their Husbands
to them, that they covered the Altar with tears, etc. Now God regarded not
such services, because when sorrow is excessive for affliction, there is then
little or no sorrow for sin.

2. Your sorrows are then inordinate, when they swallow up your comforts in the
present mercies of God which you do enjoy. Thus it was with Ahabs sorrow in the
1. Kings 21.4. you read there that Ahab was grieved and sore displeased,
because he could not have Naboths Vineyard; and the Text says, he went home,
and laid him down upon his bed, turned away his face, and would eat no bread;
though Ahab was a King, had a goodly Palace, and had Vineyards enough of his
own, yet because he could not enjoy Naboths, he could take no pleasure nor
comfort in those he had. Thus good old Jacob did so excessively mourn for
Joseph, who in his thoughts was dead, that though all his Sons and Daughters
came to comfort him, yet he refused to be comforted; but said, he would go
mourning to his grave. The loss of one Child did swallow up the comfort of all
the other eleven Sons. Genesis 37.35. If the sense of the present sorrows and
afflictions you lie under, be so great, that they swallow up all the mercies,
and present comforts you enjoy, then are your sorrows inordinate. Some people
are so overwhelmed with a few light afflictions, that they forget the many
great mercies they enjoy: many men that are worth ten thousand pound, if they
should lose but one thousand pound, it would so trouble them, that they would
take no comfort in all the rest.

3. When your sorrows for worldly losses or crosses, put you upon sinful
shifts and wicked courses, to make up and repair your loss again, then look
upon it as an immoderate sorrow. 1 Samuel 28.6,7,8.
Thus Saul when he was in great trouble and perplexity of mind, and could not
tell what to do, then he went to the witch at Endor for help, which did declare
his sorrow to be immoderate. Look to it, you that have met with great losses in
the world, and undergone great afflictions and crosses, if these have made you
run to sinful courses, to repair your losses, or lighten your afflictions,
then your sorrow has been excessive: as it may be you are in debt, and not
able to maintain your self and Family by your Trade: and therefore you will
betake your self to sinful shifts and deceits, as false weights, false lights,
false measures, or the like, to repair your losses; if it be so, your sorrows
are immoderate.

4. Then your sorrows are immoderate, when you do so grieve for your own
trouble and afflictions, as to carry no compassion in your breast toward the
afflictions of others, when thy Family losses do so afflict thee, that all the
public losses of Church and State do not at all affect thee, when thy own
private and personal afflictions do so trouble thee, that come what will to
the Church or Kingdom wherein thou live, thou carest not: when thou can
shed a flood of tears for thine own misery, but not a drop for the misery of
the Church of God, then are thy sorrows inordinate and irregular.

5. When you are so sensible of your own afflictions, as to think no bodies
afflictions are so great as yours, then are your sorrows irregular. When you
are like these in Lament. 1.12. that say, come and see if there be any sorrow,
any affliction like unto mine wherewith the Lord has afflicted me. When you
shall say, never did any man lose such an Estate as I have done, or such a
loving Husband, or Wife, or Children as I have done; never did any undergo
such troubles and crosses as I have done, then are your sorrows immoderate. But
I shall show you hereafter, that there are others that have lost more, and
suffered more, and undergone greater afflictions, and have greater cause to
complain then you; but thus much shall serve for the first Query.





First, It proceeds from evil causes, and those are,

1. From an immoderate love to the things of the world; that, in the want, and
for the loss whereof, you do too much grieve, it is a sign you did too much
love in the enjoyment of it, Genesis 37.35. When Jacob supposed that his Joseph
was slain, he so exceedingly mourned for him, that though all his Sons and
Daughters rose up to comfort him, yet he refused to be comforted, and said, I
will go down into the grave unto my Son mourning. And why did Jacob thus
mourn for him, but because he loved him more then all the rest, it was his
immoderate love to him, that made him sorrow so immoderately. If your hearts be
glued to the things of the world, you cannot part with them, but with a great
deal of vexation and sorrow. If thy sorrow be excessive for the loss of any
thing, thy love was immoderate toward it in the enjoyment of it. John
11.35.36. when Christ came to Lazarus, and he being dead, Christ wept: then
said the Jews, behold how he loved him, his weeping for him did manifest the
greatness of his love to him: not that his love was excessive, I do not say so:
yet this we may see from hence, that grief in the want of mercies proceeds from
love in the enjoyment of them.

2. This immoderate sorrow proceeds from a murmuring discontent at the dealing
of Gods providence toward you; there is a clashing between Gods will and
yours, as if God did not so well know how to deal with you, as you do with your
selves; else you would quietly submit to his will.

3. Another evil cause from whence this immoderate sorrow arises is
ignorance, both of the vanity of temporal things, and the reality of
spiritual things: we discover thereby, that we think temporal things to have
more worth in them, then indeed they have, and spiritual things less.

But 2dly, As it proceeds from evil causes, so it produces evil effects:
there are these five evil effects that immoderate sorrow produces, as

1. It prejudiceth your natural health, 2 Cor. 7.10. godly sorrow works
repentance never to be repented of; but worldly sorrow causes death. And
Solomon tells us, a sorrowful spirit dries up the bones, Prove. 17.22. so
says David in Psalm. 31.10. my life is spent with grief, and my years with
sighing, my bones are consumed.

2. It is a blemish to Religion for a Christian to be excessive in his sorrows,
for the joy of the Lord should be his strength. A godly Christian has always
cause of joy unspeakable, and full of glory: therefore it is a blemish to
Christianity, to see a godly man overpressed with worldly sorrow; it is an
aspersion upon Religion, for a godly man to hang down his head, for the loss
of any outward things, as if he had no greater concernments to look after, no
joy, nor comfort, nor happiness to look after but here in this life.

3. It exceedingly indisposeth the heart to holy and spiritual duties, it
hinders and interrupts you in hearing the word, and prayer, Exodus 6.9. They
hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit and cruel bondage, etc. Psalm.
77.4. I am so troubled that I cannot speak.

4. Excessive sorrow, imbitters those sweet and comfortable mercies you do
enjoy, a thousand mercies are buried under the excessive sorrow for one
affliction: as in Genesis 37.35. the place before quoted, Jacob did so extremely
mourn for Joseph his youngest Son, which he supposed to be dead, that though
he had eleven Sons, and many Daughters, and all of them came to comfort him,
yet he could take no comfort in any of them; but resolved that his gray hairs
should go down to the grave in mourning for him: this one excessive sorrow for
Joseph, did imbitter many mercies and comforts which he did enjoy. So Esther
5.13. though Haman was admitted to the greatest intimacy and familiarity with
the King, yet all this availed him nothing, so long as he saw Mordecai sitting
at the Kings Gate: in this regard many men discover a temper much like the
Hedg-hog, which as naturalists tell us has this property, it will gather a
great many apples, or such like fruit, upon his bristles, and then go to a
Hedge and eat them; but it is so mournful a Creature, that if it chance but to
let fall one of his apples by the way, it will so vex and trouble him, that he
will throw down all the rest. So many men, if they meet but with one cross or
affliction, it will make them throw away all the other mercies they enjoy, and
take no comfort in any of them.

5. Excessive sorrow for worldly crosses, provokes God many times to send
heavier and greater afflictions then ever yet you suffered. As I told you
before, a stubborn Child, that blubbers and cries, and murmurs under the
Fathers corrections, will fare the worse, and have the more blows for it; so
the more we repine and immoderately grieve for any worldly afflictions, the
more crosses and troubles we are like to have. And thus I have done with the
second question, why Christians should take heed of immoderacie and
excessiveness in worldly sorrows. We come now to lay down some considerations
whereby to allay your sorrows; but I must leave that till the afternoon, I
shall only for the present, make a short application of what has been said,
and so have done.

Use. Is it so, that Christians should not be excessive in worldly sorrows, but
weep as if they wept not: then this reproves those that can mourn for every
cross that befalls them; but yet cannot shed a tear for any sin they commit.
Many men complain of small inconsiderable troubles and affliction; but yet
never complain of their sins and corruptions: these never trouble them, nor
come near their hearts, they can mourn for that which can but at most prejudice
the body, and yet never grieve for that which can prejudice and destroy their
souls.

2. I beseech you beloved, take heed of being lavish of your tears for worldly
crosses or afflictions, it is pity to wash a foul Room with sweet water. I
must needs tell you tears are too precious to sh^d for every trifle: it were a
great deal better you would keep this precious water to wash away your sins;
for though it is Christ's blood alone that can wash away the guilt of sin, yet
your tears may much conduce to wash away the filth and power of sin. When you
mourn for worldly crosses, then weep as if you wept not; but when you mourn for
sin, mourn as much as you can. Be like ye before the Sun, that will soon melt
and convert into water: you that are the Children of God know, that you have
greater things, and of higher concernment to bestow your tears upon, then any
outward troubles; you have daily failings, and many sins and corruptions
unmortified and unsubdued, and the loss of the light of Gods countenance to
mourn for, your sorrows never run aright, but when they run in this Channel,
when your tears run into the Mill-pond, to grind your lusts and corruptions, to
consume and weaken them, then are your sorrows right and regular.

Lastly, Let me entreat and advise you not to mistake in reference to your
sorrows, to think you do mourn and grieve for sin, when it is only for outward
afflictions. Many men when their Neighbors ask them why they are so sad and
mournful, and weep so much, will be ready to say, it is for their sins and
failings, and corruptions that are too strong for them, or the like, when
indeed it is only for some cross or outward trouble they have met with:
therefore do not mistake that sorrow to be for your sins, which is only or
especially for some outward affliction you have met with.

SERMON. 2.
We come now to the third Question, which I shall spend this whole Aftemoon
upon, and that is this, to lay down to you 12 considerations, whereby to allay
and keep under immoderateness and excessive sorrow for any worldly crosses or
afflictions, and how to keep our selves in the frame and temper of spirit,
which the Apostle here enjoins us, namely, to weep as if we wept not. I told
you in the morning, God would not have us stupid and insensible of his hand in
any affliction; but yet as we should not be stoicall, so neither must we be
excessive in our sorrows. I have therefore in my meditations revolved these
several considerations, Several Considerations to allay immoderate sorrow.
Job. 2.10.
as likely to be most prevalent, to allay excessiveness and immoderacy of
sorrow.

1. Consider, that you have had more mercies in your lifetime to cheer you up,
then ever you have had crosses to discomfort you: this consideration did
strongly work upon Job, to support his spirits under afflictions, says he,
shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? I
have read a story of a man of 50 years of age, who lived 48. years and never
knew what sickness was; but all the two last years of his life, he was very
sickly, and very impatient under it; but at last he reasoned the case thus with
himself, and said, the Lord might have given me 48 years of sickness, and but
two years of health, but has done the contrary; I will therefore rather admire
the mercy of God, in giving me so long a time of health, then repine and murmur
at him for giving me so short a time of sickness: the Lord does ever leave with
us more mercies then he takes from us; and therefore how should this support
our spirits, seeing our mercies have been more and greater then ever our
afflictions have been: what though the Lord does now visit me with sickness,
yet I have had more years of health, then I have had of sickness: what though I
have lost friends, why yet let me consider, they have lived a great while with
me: what though this or that comfort is taken from me, yet I have a great many
more left still. The Scripture is very sensible how apt we are to grieve
overmuch, and therefore prescribes this Rule to allay immoderate sorrow,
Eccles. 7.14. In the day of adversity consider; why? what must we consider?
that God has set the one over against the other, (that is) though you are in
afflictions now, yet he has given you mercies heretofore, and it may be he
will give you prosperity again, he has balanced your present afflictions with
former mercies, and if you set the mercies you have enjoyed against the present
afflictions you suffer, you will find the tale of your mercies, to exceed the
number of your sufferings. 2 Samuel 18.33.
When David cried out in such immoderate sorrow for his Son, Oh Absalom my Son,
my Son, would to God I had died for thee my Son, my Son: if he had then
likewise said, oh Solomon my Son, my Son; and seriously considered, what a good
Son he had living: this would have been a great means to have quieted his
spirit. The consideration of those many mercies we have enjoyed, will be an
excellent means to bear up our hearts under any present affliction we lie under.

David, God took away a Child by death, that was gotten illegitimately, and he
gave him a Solomon, a lawfully begotten and better Child in the room of it; yea
this consideration did bear up David's heart, Psalm. 71.20,21. Thou have showed
me great and sore troubles; but thou shall bring me again from the depth of the
Earth, and shall increase my greatness and comfort me on every side: and were
this seriously considered, it would be a means to bear up our hearts under
losses and troubles: what though this or that comfort be taken away, it may be
God has some gracious end in it, to make way for the bestowing a greater mercy
in the room of it. Would you be angry with that man that should pull down your
smoaky Cottage over your head, if he would erect a stately Palace for you in
the room of it; every mercy that God takes from you, he will give a greater for
it: as the Prophet told Amaziah, who expended his Estate on the Israelites, the
Lord is able to give thee much more then this: Job 1.3. with cap. 42.12.
thus God dealt with Job, as you may see in the first and last Chapters of that
Book, compared together, the Lord took away from Job all his Estate and
substance; but gave him twice as much as he took away from him: there was taken
from him seven thousand sheep, and God gave him afterward fourteen thousand for
them, he lost 3000 Camells, he had afterward 6^00 for them, he lost five
hundred yoke of Oxen, and 500. she Asses, afterward he had double restored for
them. And this case of Jobs may be as an example and ground of encouragement
for Christians in all ages, to wait upon God, in an humble submission to all
his dispensations. So James 5.11. says the Apostle, you have heard of the
patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with him, that the Lord is very
pi^ifull, and of tend^r mercies: this example of his should bear up your hearts
in the time of affliction: the Lord takes away small mercies to make room for
greater. It Is very observable how this consideration wrought with Isaac, Sarah
his Mother was lately dead, and to make up his loss, God gave him Bebeckah to
wife, and it is said, Genesis 24 67. She became his wife, and he loved her, and
Isaac was comforted after his Mothers death.

Haman, Esther 4.11,12,13. He called for his friends and Zeresh his Wife, and
told them the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his Children, and all
the things wherein the King had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above
the Princes, and the Servants of the King. Now you cannot but think this man
was a gallant man. Nay Haman said moreover, Est^er the Queen did let no man
come in with the King unto the banquet, that she had prepared, but my self, and
to morrow am I invi^ed unto her also with the King, yet says he, all this
avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings
Gate, and will not reverence, and make obeisance to me; here was the curse of
God upon him, in that he could not enjoy any mercy he had with comfort, because
Mordecai did not reverence him; so we see in the instance of Jacob formerly
mentioned, Genesis 37.35. Excessive sorrow for one affliction loses the comfort
of all our mercies.

Prove. 14.14. A good man shall be satisfied from himself, a godly man has
matter of rejoicing in himself, whatever befalls him in the world. We read,
Luke 13.21. when the Disciples doted upon a temporal flourishing Kingdom,
Christ told them, the Kingdom of God was within them, if we have Christ's grace,
etc. though we have nothing else, that's greater cause of exceeding joy, then
any other wants can be ground of excessive sorrow; what though they have
nothing here below, yet God is their portion, and they have an inheritance with
the Saints in light reserved for them. What though they have not a penny of
money in their purses, yet have they true treasure which moth cannot corrupt,
nor thief break through and steal? What though they have no bread in their
Cubbords at home, when every day they feed upon the bread of life, the precious
body and blood of Christ? What though you are reproached and defamed in your
good name, when notwithstanding your name is written in the Book of Life? You
have every way more cause of joy within you, then you have cause of sorrow
without you, Genesis 33.11. I have enough, said Esau, I have enough said Jacob
too; but the word signifies, I have all: yet Jacob was poorer then Esau: ille
habet omia qui habet habentem omnia.

Genesis 30.5. you read there of Rachel, an impatient woman overcome with passion
and sorrow for want of Children, she cried to her Husband, give me Children or
else I die; well this woman had her desire granted, and she that before cried,
give me Children or else I die; when she had Children she dies in Childbirth,
Genesis 35.16,17,18. As they journeyed from Bethel, Rachel travailed, and she had
hard labor, and the Mid-wise said unto her, fear not, thou shall have this Son
also: And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing (for she died) that
she called his name Ben-oni, 2 Samuel 12.16.
she died after her Son was born. God can make those comforts that we desire,
to be crosses to us. So to David, had God given him the life of his Child, it
would have been a living monument of his shame, that all that knew the Child
would have said, yonder goes David's Bastard.

I have heard a godly Minister relate a story, that once he went to visit a
Neighbor of his, (whose Child lay a dying) to comfort her, she was very much
grieved and dejected with sorrow, and would by no means be comforted: the
Minister said unto her, woman, why do you grieve so much? if your Child should
live, it may be God might make it a scourge and vexation to you, by taking
wicked and sinful courses; she answered, she did not care if her Child did
recover, though he were hanged afterward: this her Son did recover, and was
afterward executed for some villainy that he had committed: why now it had been
a greater mercy, and a thousand times better for her, to have seen him buried
before, then that he should have come to such an unhappy end. I only mention
this, to show you, that God can turn those comforts which we so much prize and
dote upon, into crosses to us; and therefore this should allay excessiveness of
sorrow for the loss of any worldly comfort.

Omni^ brevia tolerabilia^sse de bent, etiamsi magna sint. Cicero.
(says he,) Brethren, the time is short, it remains therefore, that they
that weep, be as if they wept not, though your afflictions be heavy, yet they
shall not continue long: therefore be patient under them; though they be never
so great, yet because they are short they are tolerable; and this the Apostle
presses in 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And so says
God, Esa. 54.7.
for a moment have I forsaken thee; but in everlasting loving kindness will I
have mercy on thee. Our afflictions are always computed by days and hours;
but our mercies by years, to show that the time is but short, wherein we do
endure afflictions here below: they are soon over, and like Clouds the Sun
will quickly break through them. When Athanasius was banished, he said it was
but a little Cloud, it would be over presently. A Martyr said unto his fellow,
shut but your eyes, and the next time they are opened, 'twill be in another
world.

Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his Stature? may be said
in this case, which of you by excessive sorrow can any whit lessen your
affliction? the way to remove our afflictions, is to accept of the punishment
of our sins. A Child that submits and beggs pardon for his offense, and
promises amendment, saves many a blow by it.

etc? Lo wicked men may have all these, and therefore why should thou be so
much troubled for the loss of that which any Reprobate may enjoy. Indeed were
it for the loss of Christ, of Heaven and everlasting happiness, we could never
sufficiently mourn for the loss of these; but in the loseing of these outward
mercies, we lose no more, then a damned wretch may enjoy, the things that we
mourn for, are not of that worth and value, that we estimate them. I have read
a story of two godly men that met, named Anthony and Didymus. Now Didymus was
blind, yet of excellent parts. Anthony asked him, if he were not troubled at it?
yes said Didymus; but said Anthony, will you be troubled for want of what flies
and Dogs may have, and not rather rejoice that you have what Angels have?

Psalm. 119.
it is good for me that I was afflicted, and in very faithfulness he has
afflicted me. It Is the observation of Salmeron on John 3. Suppose a man should
throw a rich Pearl or Diamond at you, and hit you upon the hand, so you might
have the Diamond for it, would you count that an injury? why so God deals with
us, he turns our losses into gain, and all our crosses into comforts. Suppose a
man that is very much in debt, and has great need of money, even to buy bread
to put in his mouth, should go to a friend of his and make known his condition,
and beg some relief from him: if this friend of his should go to his Chest, and
take out a great bag of money or gold, and throw it at him, bidding him take
it, though he should hurt him with the blow, do you think he would take it
unkindly? no certainly: why so every affliction that God lays upon us, shall
work for our good: we may say as Joseph did to his Brethren, though you intend
all this for my hurt, yet God intended and turned it to my good. So when any
body do wrong or injure us, we may say to them, though you intend this to my
hurt, yet God will work benefit and advantage to me by it. The Lord never
intends us any harm, but good, by all the afflictions he lays upon us. All
afflictions like Jonathans rod have honey on the top, and therefore let us bear
them patiently. You would be very angry if an enemy should draw blood from you;
but if a Doctor does take away a great deal more from you in reference to your
health, and for your good, you will not take that amiss. Be persuaded
therefore to patience under all worldly crosses and troubles, because God
intends your good by them, and to promote your spiritual advantage, that as
your afflictions do abound, so your consolations in Christ may abound much more.

Pet. 5.9. there the Apostle exhorts them to resist the Devil with
stedfastness, as knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in their
brethren that are in the world: there are none now in so miserable a condition;
but there are others that have been, or are, or shall be in as sad a condition
as they: there has no temptation befallen you, but such as is common to man,
for God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able. 1 Cor. 10.13.
Have thou lost a great Estate? why Job lost more then ever thou did; he lost
seven thousand Sheep, three thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, five
hundred she Asses, he lost all that he had, not so much as any outward comfort
left him; and therefore seeing the same affliction has befallen others, why
should not you be contented? But it may be you will say I have lost my
Children. Why Job lost more Children then ever thou did, he lost ten Children
in one day, taken away by an untimely death; but it may be though you have lost
as many Children, yet they went to their graves in peace, and therefore that
may comfort your heart; others have been in a worse condition then you are in,
and yet have undergone it patiently. Notwithstanding all the afflictions that
lay upon Job, he sinned not, he did not open his mouth against God.

And so our Lord Jesus Christ, he was a man of sorrows; says he, the Foxes
have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests; but the Son of Man has not
where to lay his head. Jesus Christ though Heir of all things, was yet as poor
as ever thou have been; and therefore let these considerations stay your hearts
in what ever afflictions may befall you here in this world; for the Lord knows
what a Cloud of blood is yet hanging over our heads.

Pear Tree, and so lose them: so it is pity to throw away tears upon the
things of this world, to wast such precious commodities upon every slight
occasion.



And thus I have done with these twelve Considerations, and also with these
three Queries. I have showed you when sorrow is inordinate, and I have given
you some reasons why Christians should not mourn immoderately for the things of
this world; and now I have laid you down twelve confideraions to keep you from
excessive mourning for the loss of any outward comfort.

SERMON. 3.
Rule 3. How to moderate our sorrows for the loss of worldly comforts.
I Have now one Query more, and that is in the fourth place, to show you what
Rules or helps you are to use, so as to keep your sorrows for worldly crosses
within bounds, to weep as if you wept not. I shall here likewise give you 11.
or 12. directions for the performance of this duty.

1. If you would keep your sorrow within bounds, use this help, look upon those
things, for the want of which you do so excessively grieve, as mere nothings.
You will say it is a childish thing for a man to cry for nothing; why many such
childish pranks do we play very often, we do grieve and mourn, and weep for
mere nothings, which if we did seriously consider, when we do mourn for the
loss of this or that comfort, it would allay our sorrows, seeing they are mere
nothing: Oh but you will say, my Trade fails, so much of my Estate is lost, and
do you call this nothing? yes I do, for so the Scripture calls them, Prove.
23.5. says Solomon, will thou set thy heart upon that which is nothing? for
riches take unto them wings and fly away: and if so, why should we set our
hearts so much upon them, as to grieve for them in the want of them. When King
Agrippa came to pass judgment upon Paul, Acts 25.23. Its said, he came with
great Pomp; (...).
but in the Original it is, he came with a great fantasy. Such fancies and
nothings are all worldly Pomps and comforts, in comparison of the great and
weighty things of salvation: there is but one thing necessary says Christ, and
that is to get an interest in him; Luke 10 42
it is not necessary that you should have riches and honor in the world, the
only thing necessary is to get Christ, and therefore why should we spend our
time, and take pains about that which is not bread, and after that which will
not profit us, which are but mere nothings. What a Childish part was it in
Haman, Esa. 55.2.
when he had so many privileges and dignities as the favor of the King, to
sit at the Kings Table, and ride upon his Horse, etc. that he should be so much
grieved and troubled, because Mordecai would not reverence him? what a poor
small matter was this, to interrupt all his comfor^s? and Ahab, etc. he could
not have Naboths Vineyard, when he had so many of his own: many men suffer
themselves to be overwhelmed with sorrow for poor slight trivial things.
Seneca sets out such a man that has a stately house, fair Orchards and
Gardens, with much fruit, yet should grieve because a few leaves fall off.

2. If you would keep your sorrows within bounds, then take heed you do not
place an inordinate and immoderate love, upon any comfort you enjoy here below.
If you love any thing too much in the enjoyment of it, you will grieve too much
for that thing in the loss of it, and therefore let not your hearts be glewed
to any comfort here below. Let the comforts of the world be to you as Gloves to
your hands, and not as the skin to your flesh; you cannot pull off the skin
from your flesh without a great deal of pain and torment, but you may pull of
your Glove from your hand without any trouble. If your hearts be glewed too
much to the love of worldly things, the loss of those things you did so
immoderately love, will provoke you to excessive sorrow and grief. A man will
never grieve for the loss of that which he hates, but for that which he loves,
and you can never keep your sorrow within bounds, if you do not keep your love
within bounds. As it is with a Picture, if you put it into a frame, and hang it
up against the wall, you may easily take it down again; but if you glue or past
it to the wall, you cannot take it down without tearing it all to pieces. So if
your love to the World be like a Picture, glewed to the wall, you will not part
with the things of the world, but with a great deal of sorrow and trouble and
vexation. Genesis 37.3.35.
It is said of Jacob when he heard his Son Joseph was dead, that he wept and
would not be comforted, and the reason was, because he loved Joseph
exceedingly, and more then all the rest: his excessive love to Joseph did make
him sorrow so much in the want of him.

3. Look upon all comforts here below, Scio me geunisse mortelem.
as loseable and uncertain. God in his wisdom has not joined permanency to any
comfort here below. Look upon your comforts as mutable and perishing: have you
lost a Child? why say, I knew before that I had begotten a mortal Child: there
is an appointed time for us all once to die, and the comforts we enjoy here
below, are not like the Anchor in the bottom of the Sea that holds fast in a
storm; but like the flag upon the top of the mast that turns with every wind;
and therefore seeing in your greatest comfort you are subject to an alteration
every moment, why should you immoderately sorrow in the loss of them, and
grieve so much for that which you may lose you know not how soon. A man should
sit loose from things loseable, and never give way to certain sorrows, for the
loss of so uncertain comforts.

4. If you would keep your sorrow within bounds, consider that you have no
cause of sorrow for the loss of worldly things, if God leaves you enough for
the necessities of your life, though he does not leave you a superfluity for
the complacency and delight of your life, having food and raiment, let us
therewith be content. 1 Timothy 6.8
If thou have bread, though not junkets, be contented with it: if you have
raiment, though not Ornaments, yet be contented. If you have food and raiment,
though never so course, being enough but merely to maintain life, you have no
cause to complain, but to be contented. Jacob was a richer man then any of you
that hear me this day; yet says he in Genesis 28.20. if so be thou will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, it shall suffice me. If the Lord gives us
meat and raiment, though the meat be homely, and the raiment course, yet we
should be content with it, and say it shall suffice me: though God does not
give us abundance for our delight and convenience, yet if he gives us enough to
relieve our necessities, we should be contented, and therefore have no cause of
excessive sorrow in that particular.

Genesis 35.17,18. It is said there of Rachel, that when she was a dying, the
Child being born, she called its name Benoni, the Son of my sorrow; but now
mark, Ja^ob would not let it be called by that name the Mother called it by;
but he called it Benjamin the Son of my right hand. And Divines give this
Reason of it, because if Jacob had suffered the Child to have been called by
that name, every time he had heard it, it would have been a means to recall to
mind the loss of his Wife, who died while she was in labor with him, and so
have revived his grief and sorrow for it: therefore we should not call to mind
our afflictions, so as to renew our sorrows.

6. If you would keep your sorrows within bounds, live much in the meditation
and contemplation of divine things. The reason why you mourn so much for things
below, is because you meditate no more on things above; were your
contemplations raised up to the speculation of divine and spiritual things,
the joy of these would swallow up your sorrow for the loss of any thing here
below. Adam in innocence did so converse with God, that he did not see his own
nakedness. I have read of the Eagle, that she is of a temper and condition
contrary to all other Birds: whereas all other Birds that fly when they are
hurt, or in want, will cry and make a noise; as the Crane will chatter, the
Dove will mou^ne, the Raven will croake, all creatures will make a noise when
they are heart or in want: but now the Eagle she will fly aloft toward the
Sun, and there recreate her self with its warm beams. Oh now beloved that
you would be Eagle like, to soar up in your meditations heavenward; to raise
up your thoughts to spiritual and heavenly things; and this would greatly
allay your sorrows for the loss of any outward comfort.

Esaias 8.12,13. says the Text, Fear not their fear, neither be afraid, but
sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread. They that fear the Lord will not fear men; they that have a
religious fear, will not have a worldly fear: so if you have a godly sorrow
for sin; it will keep you from any immoderate worldly sorrow; and therefore I
could wish, when you find your sorrows breaking out for the loss of worldly
comforts, and things go crossse with you here below, that you would consider,
that you have greater evils, to mourn for, and a great deal more cause to let
your sorrows run in sins Channel, then for any outward cross or affliction.

8. If you would allay excess in wordly sorrow, balance your outward wants
with your inward and spiritual enjoyments; and your outward crosses with your
inward comforts; and see whether the scale of your spiritual comforts does not
exceedingly weigh down the other: and if God make your spiritual mercies to
outvy your outward afflictions, you have more cause to rejoice then to mourn.
This course David took in 2 Samuel 25.5. says he, Although my house be not so
with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things and sure, for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow, as if he should have said, although I have not an
affluence and confluence of all worldly happiness, yet I care not, seeing God
has made with mean everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure;
though things go amiss without, yet all is well within; God has made with me
a covenant, and that is all my desire, and all my salvation, so that now if you
would with David balance your outward crosses with your inward comforts, Pro.
14.14
you would there see more cause of joy then outwardly of sorrow. A good man
(says Solomon) shall be satisfied from himself; he has that within him which
will afford him comfort, whatsoever his outward condition be.

You that are dejected with worldly sorrow, reason thus with your selves, what
though my condition be said, and I want necessaries for this life, and have not
a house to put my head in; or if I have, it is but a poor smoky Cottage; yet
why should I be troubled, seeing I have a house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens, though I have no habitation here, 2 Cor. 5.1.
yet Christ is gone before me into heaven to prepare a place for me there. What
though I am a man of a mean estate, and can scarce with all my labor and
pains bring the year about? Joh. 14.2.
yet God is my portion, and I have an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in Christ: what though I am in debt, and in continual
danger when I go abroad to be arrested and imprisoned, yet my great debt is
paid, Christ has satisfied divine justifice for me: and I shall never go to
the Prison of hell to all eternity: what though I have no money in my purse to
buy bread? yet I have a treasure in heaven, that shall never be exhausted; what
though I have scarce clothes to cover my nakedness? yet I have the long Robe
of Christ's righteousness to cover my sinful nakedness: and though I have
scarce meat and drink to put in my belly, yet I do feed upon the bread of
life, the Lord Jesus Christ: what though I am reproached and scandalized and
defamed in my good name? yet my name is written in the book of life, and
though I have never a foot of Land here to enjoy, yet I am an heir to a
Kingdom. A Prince in disguize in a foreign Country meets with ill usage; but
it troubles him not much, why? because he is heir to a Crown, and knows that
when he is in his own Kingdom he shall have respect enough. Beloved let these
inward and spiritual enjoyments allay all worldly sorrow, considering that if
thou do balance thy spiritual enjoyments with thy outward wants, and thy
inward comforts with thy outward losses, the former will infinitely
preponderate and outweigh the latter.

9. Would you keep your sorrows within bounds? then make the most of the
mercies you receive, and the least of the afflictions you endure; it is the
property of a sorrowful spirit to make the most of his afflictions, and the
least of his mercies; but if you would keep your hearts from excessive sorrow,
you should amplify and enlarge Gods mercies to you, and extenuate and lessen
your afflictions in your memories, and you will greaten your thankfulness, and
lessen and abate your murmurring and sorrows. Consider with your selves that
the least mercy that you do enjoy is more then you do deserve, and the
greatest affliction you endure, a great deal less then your demerits; and
consider likewise, that you brought nothing into the world, neither can you
carry any thing out; and that if you do escape hell torment hereafter, it is a
greater mercy, then if you should enjoy all the treasures and pleasures in the
world: but many people if they meet but with one day of adversity, they will
pore upon their misery, and amplify their sorrows, and never think of those
loads of mercies which God has heaped upon their heads: you have more cause to
rejoice that God gives you the least mercy, then to rpine when he sends on you
the greatest affliction.

10. Compare your afflictions with others, that have endured greater
afflictions with more patience, and less sorrow, then you have done; consider
the patience of Job, and the end that the Lord made with him: you never lost so
much as Job lost, he lost 7000. Sheep, 3000. Camels, 500: yoke of Oxen, and
500. she Asses, he lost seven sons and three daughters, and all in one day,
he endured a great deal of misery in his body, and lay upon the very dunghill,
and yet was patient under all these afflictions; Why nowconsider, that better
men then thou art have had greater miseries, and troubles, and afflictions then
you, and yet have had a great deal more patience and less sorrow and grief
then thou. The Apostle Peter persuaded men to patience in a suffering
condition, 1 Pet 5.9.
considering that the same afflictions are accomplished in their brethren which
are in the world; and Paul 1 Cor. 10.13. There has nothing befallen you, but
such as is common to man; Nay Jesus Christ himself underwent many afflictions
and miseries, and yet he opened not his mouth, but as a Sheep before the
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. Those that have more grace have
less mercy then thou, and those that have less sins have more afflictions.

11. To allay your sorrow, and keep it within bounds, consider that it is better
with you when you are at the worst, then it is with wicked men when they are at
the best; if this consideration did lie near your hearts, it would greatly
allay all excessive sorrow. A little that a righteous man has is better then
the revenues of the wicked, Prove. 15.6. In the house of the righteous is much
treasure, but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble; Observe, it is not
said, in the revenues of the righteous, is much treasure, but in the house of
the righteous; it may be a righteous man's house, may be a poor cottage, a
beggars house, and in it not a stool to sit on, or a fire to warm him, or
food to nourish him, etc. and yet says Solomon, in the house of the righteous
is much treasure; but have wicked men treasure too? no, in the revenues of the
wicked is much trouble, he does not say in the house of the wicked; but in
their revenues, there is much trouble; there is the curse of God upon all that
a wicked man enjoyes, the poor beggarly cottage of a righteous man has more
treasure and happiness in it, then the great revenues of wicked men, a godly
man when he is at worst, is better then a wicked man at best, Prove. 16.8.
Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without right, a
little with the fear of God, is better then a great deal that a wicked man
has. Why now will you lay this to heart? suppose you lie under great
afflictions, and have lost an estate, or wife, or children, or friends, or any
thing: yet thou art a godly man; I dare assure you that in your worst
condition, you are better then a wicked man in his best estate; though there be
little or nothing in your house, yet there is great treasure; and though there
be much in a wicked man's house, yet there is likewise a great deal of trouble,
and sorrow. I have only one consideration more and I have done.

12. If thou would allay excessive sorrow for worldly crosses, consider that
you will live a great deal more happy, in being contented with what you have,
then you can do in over much grieving for what you want, for thou do by this
means pierce thy self through with many sorrows. A man may be a very rich
man and drive a great Trade, and yet that man may be a miserable man, and have
a hell in his conscience, and a hell in his family. Therefore if you cannot
bring your estate to your mind, you must bring down your mind to your
estate, for the comfort of a man's life does not consist in riches, but in being
contented with his condition, therefore rather bless God for what thou have,
then mourn and grieve for what thou want: for this is the way to make thy
life uncomfortable, and full of trouble and sorrow, take the Apostles advise
Hebr. 13.5. says he, Let your conversations be without covetousness, and be
content with such things as you have. And thus I have done with these twelve
helps or considerations, to keep your sorrows within bounds. yet when God
calls for mourning and weeping and baldness, their heads are like a Rock, that
cannot shed one drop: though they can mourn for small light afflictions, yet
they cannot shed a tear either for their own sins, or the sins of the
Nation, these men are justly to be reproved for their preposterous sorrow.

SERMON. 4.
I come now to make a further improvement of this point: if it be so that
Christians must take heed of immoderate sorrow, and weep as if they wept not
for worldly afflictions; then this doctrine will administer these three
cautions to you, from whence will arise three Cases of conscience.



Answ.
1. Where there is only a natural sensiblenesse a kindly grieving for worldly
crosses; it will rather animate and quicken the soul to religious duties, then
any way indispose and interrupt them; and therefore it is that you so often
find weeping joined with prayer and supplication in Scripture; thus it is
said, Jacob wept and made supplication, and in Jer. 3.21. Hos. 12.4.
A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of the
children of Israel; so in Ier. 31.9. They shall come with weeping, and with
supplication will I lead them. So in Judge. 2.5,6. it is said, the children of
Israel at Bochim, lift up their voice and wept, and sacrificed to the Lord. All
which places show, that that sorrow which is only a natural sensiblenesse of
Gods hand will quicken and encourage the soul to duty, rather then indispose
him; but now on the other side, excessive sorrow renders a man unfit for
prayer, reading, hearing the word, or any other holy duty. As in Psalm. 77.4.
Asaph was so overwhelmed with sorrow, that he could not speak. And Exodus 6.9.
then is thy sorrow immoderate, when it interrupts thee in the performance of
holy duties.

2. Where there is only a kindly grieving and a natural sensiblenesse of
worldly crosses, there is kindled in that man's heart a sympathizing and
fellow-feeling of other men's troubles; that man will carry compassionate bowels
toward other men that are in trouble, as well as themselves. Job 30.25. says
Job, did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for
the poor? but now, where sorrow is immoderate, you will so think upon your own
troubles, that you will not pity any that are in the like condition with you.

3. Where there is only a natural sensiblenesse of worldly crosses, there is
retained in that soul a fence of those many mercies you do enjoy, as well as
of the afflictions and sufferings you do endure: natural sensiblenesse of
afflictions does not take away the comfort and enjoyment of present mercies;
there is a sense of mercies enjoyed, as well as of afflictions endured. But
now, in immoderate sorrow, the very sense of your trouble and crosses does take
away, and imbitter all your former or present mercies. As in Numb. 16.12,13. Is
it a small thing, that thou have brought us out of a Land that flows with
milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness? Pray mark, for there is much of
Gods mind in this place; the Land that these men speak of here, is the land of
Egypt, where they were under bondage and slavery; and yet when they met with
afflictions in the wilderness, they forgot the bondage they were delivered
from in Egypt, but said, it was a Land flowing with milk and honey; immoderate
sorrow for afflictions does quite take away all sense of the mercies you do
enjoy.

4. Where there is only a natural sensiblenesse of worldly crosses, there
prayer to God, or a promise from God, will quiet the heart. This you may see
verified in Hannah, in 1 Samuel 1.18,19. she was grieved for a child, but what
then? She prayed and said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight; so the
woman went away and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. After she
had poured forth her heart in prayer to God, she was comforted, she went her
way, and was no more sad. Then is your sorrow right, when going to God upon
your knees will quiet your heart. Or,

2. When a promise from God will comfort you; thus it was with David, in Psalm.
119.50. says he, This is my comfort in affliction, for thy word has quickened
me; that is, the word of a promise. So in Verse. 92. Unless thy law had been my
delight, I should then have perished in my affliction. And in Verse 107. I am
afflicted very much, quicken me, O Lord, according to thy word. Then is your
sorrow moderate, when either a prayer to God, or a promise from God will quiet
your hearts; and then are your sorrows immoderate, when under any affliction
all the promises in the Bible cannot quiet you; nor any prayer to God comfort
you. And thus it was with Job, in Job 9.16. says he, If I had called, and he
had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.
And therefore beloved look to it, you that have met with many worldly crosses
and troubles, and never a prayer could comfort you, nor promise quiet you, it
is an argument that your sorrows were immoderate.

5. Where there is only a natural sensibleness of worldly crosses, there that
soul does notwithstanding all his afflictions justify God, and condemn
himself, acknowledging his own sin to be the cause of all crosses: This you
have an instance of in Lamen: 1.18. In all the evil that is come upon us the
Lord is righteous; and in Dan. 9.14. the Lord is righteous in all that is come
upon us; for we have rebelled and done evil in his sight: So David, Psalm.
51.3. I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever before me: then is
your sorrow right, when you can justify God, and take shame to your selves.
But now where sorrow is vexatious and excessive, there a sinner flies out
against God, and rather justifies himself, there the finner accounts God very
severe and cruel in his dispensations, and murmures against him, thinks ill of
him, and of his ways; and in this condition was Job once, Job 16.17. He
breaks me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without a cause, he
blamed God and justified himself, which declared his sorrow to be immoderate
and excessive. You have a notable passage for this in Esaias 8.21. it is said,
that when God shall bring afflictions and trouble upon the Land, then they
shall curse their King and their God, and look upward, they shall be so
overcome with sorrow, as that they shall curse God, and justify themselves: so
in Prove. 19.3. says Solomon, the foolishness of man perverteth his way, and
his heart fretieth against the Lord.

6. Where there is only a natural sensibleness under the hand of God, there
will be an aptness to hearken to comfortable counsel from the word of God to
bear up the heart under afflictions; and therefore it is said, Job 33. when God
laid afflictions upon him, he opened his ears to counsel; when you are so tamed
by afflictions, that you will hear the voice of the rod, and the voice of the
word, and hearken to any counsel that is tendered to you to bear up, and
support your spirits, then is your sorrow regular, and such as God allows of;
but now where sorrow is inordinate, that man is not fit to receive any
instruction, from any friend that goes about to comfort him. Thus Asaph in
Psalm. 27.2. when he was overwhelmed with sorrow, his soul refused to be
comforted, they are then like Rachel, that would not be comforted, Matthew. 2.18.
In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning,
Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not. The women of Bethlehem, did weep and mourn, and would not be comforted,
which did evidence their sorrow to be immoderate. When no promise in the Bible,
no comfort nor support from the word, will ease and quiet the heart, this shows
that such a spirit is too much overcome with sorrow, vexation, and grief for
worldly crosses.

And thus I have done with the first caution, to take heed when you are over
much grieved for worldly afflictions, that you do not then say it is only a
natural sensibleness of the hand of God upon you, and no more.

but must weep as if we wept not: then take heed ye do not judge that to be a
mourning for sin, which is only for outward troubles. And beloved, the reason
why I give you this caution is, because of that aptness and propensity there is
in people, when they have lost Husband, or Wife, or Children, or Estate, etc.
and are extremely troubled and dejected. If you ask them, why they mourn and
grieve so much? they will answer, it is for their sins, and will say, what,
will you not give me leave to mourn for my sins? it is my sin that is the cause
of all my grief and sorrow, and tears, and I hope you will allow me to do so?
yes, mourn for your sins in Gods name;

1. Then a man does grieve under worldly crosses, Discove^ies of men that mourn
rather for sin then for affliction.
rather for his sin then for his afflictions, if so be that man did grieve and
mourn for his sins before ever he was afflicted. It is an Argument that your
grief is rather for sin, then for affliction, if when you were in prosperity,
sin did break your heart, and you could then have no rest nor quietness within
you, by reason of your sins: and thus David did mourn for his sins, when he did
water his couch with his tears, for defiling of Bathshebah, for he had then no
affliction or cross lay upon him, and yet David did roar in the disquietness
of his soul, and he had no rest in his bones by reason of his sin. When David
sat upon the Throne in worldly glory and prosperity, yet then could he lie in
the dust in spiritual shame, and this before the Child was sick. And therefore
if upon examination you find that you did weep and mourn for your sins and
corruptions, before ever you had this or any other cross lying upon you, then
you may conclude, that your sorrow is more for sin then for worldly
afflictions; but now when a man shall pretend to grieve for sin, and yet that
man's sins never troubled him all his lifetime before, his corruptions never
grieved his heart, nor troubled his conscience before, this shows it is more
for afflictions then for his sin, that such a man mourns and weeps.

Hosea 14.2. Oh Lord take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: they
did not say, Oh Lord take away affliction, although they had many then upon
them; but say they, Lord take away the iniquity of thy Servants, and receive us
graciously; but he that desires rather to have his troubles removed then his
sins, it is a sign he does not mourn for sin, but for affliction. Thus Pharaoh
when the Judgments of God were upon him, when the Thunder and Hail came, and
the froggs and lice, Exo. 9.28.
and murrain of Beasts, etc. says he to Moses, entreat the Lord that there be
no more mighty Thunderings and Hail: he desired Moses to pray to God to remove
the plagues from him; but never desired that his sin, and the hardness of his
heart might be taken away. You that can cry out, oh Lord take away this
cross, or this affliction from me; but never pray to have your sins removed,
and your corruptions subdued: this is an Argument you mourn for affliction more
then for sin.

3. If when the committing of a sin, and the removing of an affliction stand
in competition together, you would rather have the affliction continued, then
commit a sin: this shows you grieve for sin, rather then for affliction. As
for instance, when a man is brought to a lovv condition, and a great decay in
the world, his Trade fails, and his stock is spent, if that man be more
troubled for his sin that brought him into that condition, then for the
affliction it self, then he will not commit a sin to repair and make up his
losses, though he did know, that the committing of such a sin would do it;
and so in any other case: as I have read a story of a Noble man, whose Son
and Heir was supposed to have been bewitched, and being advised by some to go
to a Witch, to have his Son helped and unbewitched again; he answered, no, by
no means, for he had rather the Witch should have his Son then the Devil.
But if you make no conscience to commit a sin, to avoid or remove an
affliction, if you will break the hedge of a command to avoid a little foul way
of affliction, it is a sign that you mourn for your crosses and afflictions
more then for your sins, and that you never grieved so much for your
corruptions as you have done for your corrections, Job 36.21. so those that in
their distress go to Witches and VVizzards, and Fortune Tellers, as Saul did
to the vvitch at Endor, show that they grieve more for affliction then for sin.

4. If you mourn for sin, the true joy that arises from the forgiveness of
sin, will swallow up the grief that comes to thee, through any worldly cross
or affliction, and will likewise make thee to undergo them with patience. That
man grieves for sin most, who when his sin is pardoned, grieves least for
outward trouble; when the comfort of his sins forgiveness does more rejoice
him, then the continuance of any affliction upon him, can grieve him: as in the
33 of Esaias, and the last, The Inhabitants shall not say I am sick; for the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity: those people they
were like a Ship in a great tempest, their Mast broken, and their sails loosed,
all their tackling lost and gone; why? what then? yet the Inhabitants shall not
say I am sick, because the Lord has forgiven them their sin, he does not say,
they shall not say they were sick; but they shall not say they are sick, because
their sins are pardoned: the sense of their pardon should take away the sense
of their pains under their present sufferings: now when it is thus with you, it
is an argument that your trouble was more for sin, then for affliction. But
then is a man more troubled for his afflictions, then for his sins, when he
will grieve, though he be assured that his sins are pardoned, and that he is an
heir apparent unto glory. All the persuasions he has of sins forgiveness, does
no whit allay his impatience. And thus I have done with this second caution,
that you take heed you do not look upon that as a mourning for sin, that is
only for some outward trouble and affliction.

Before I come to the third caution, give me leave to lay all close to your
hearts by a word or two of application, and the use that I shall make of what
has been said in these two Queries, shall be first for reproof, Use of
Reproof.
and then for exhortation.

1. For reproof to those that are so far from weeping as if they wept not for
afflictions, that they weep so excessively, as if their whole bodies were made
of a lump of Ice, that does all dissolve into tears, when the Sun of affliction
does scorch them. How many men are there that are easily drawn to sorrow
immoderately for worldly crosses. We use to say when a man weeps, that he
waters his plants; and you know, that when you water your plants in your Garden
too much, you drown and kill them, and so when you weep over much for
afflictions, you drown your plants, and discompose your spirits, and make them
unfit for any spiritual employment.

2. This reproves those that when they come to mourn and weep for their sins
and corruptions, they are so sparing of their tears, that then they weep as if
they wept not, a slight superficial sigh, or some tear extracted by violence,
is the greatest sorrow that many men have for sin: when men are like a Cloud,
that will easily drop down tears for any outward affliction; but like a Rock
that cannot shed a drop for sin, for dishonouring and displeasing of God. Many
people are like to Lewis the ^th, King of France, that did always carry a
Crucifix in his hat, and when he committed any gross and abominable sin, would
take off his hat and bow to his Crucifix, and ask forgiveness, and then
thought all was well presently. Most men are apt to be slight and superficial
in their griefs for sin: why now? how do you invert the Apostles Order and
direction here? when you weep for sin as if you wept not, and are excessive and
immoderate in your worldly sorrows.

2. Use of Counsel.
By way of counsel, be persuaded to look upon your sins as greater matter of
sorrow and grief, then all the afflictions that ever befell you: oh weep, and
weep again for them; for your sins are worser and greater evils then all your
outward troubles, and the better to encourage you to this duty, consider

First, That sin is the cause or inlet of all your afflictions, had it not been
for sin, you had undergone no suffeirngs^* rather therefore mourn for the
cause, then for the afflictions themselves.

Secondly, Afflictions are not so bad as sin, in regard God is the Author of
all our afflictions; but sin is such an evil, that God disclaims that though
there be no evil in the City but God does it, that is, he is the Author of
the evil of afflictions; yet he disclaims being the Author of sin.

Thirdly, Consider, that all outward afflictions are consistent with grace; but
many sins are utterly incompatible and inconsistent with grace. Let your
afflictions be never so great, yet you may be a godly man for all that, you may
be as poor as Job was, or as miserable as Lazarus, and endure any afflictions
whatsoever, and yet all this be consistent with grace; but all sin is not
consistent with grace, as the sin against the Holy Ghost, the sin of final
impenitency, or final obduracy and hardness of heart, these are not consistent
with grace, and therefore you have more cause to mourn for sin then for
afflictions, and

4thly, Consider, that afflictions they reach but to the body, but sin that
reaches to the soul, afflictions can make but the outward man miserable, but
sin will destroy and undo the soul, and make that miserable; and therefore be
persuaded rather to weep for your sins and corruptions then for your sufferings
and corrections.

SERMON. V.
concerning mourning for sin.
is it so, that we must weep as if we wept not, then take this caution, that
Christians are not only to take heed, that they weep moderately for worldly
afflictions; but they are also to take care, that they be not excessive in
their sorrows for their sins and corruptions. But before I handle this case of
Conscience, give me leave to premise three conclusions.

Cor. 2.7. The Corinthians did fear that the excommunicated person, would be
swallowed up with over much sorrow for his sin, says the Apostle, ye ought
rather to forgive him, and to comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be
swallowed up with over much sorrow.

2.

3.

And here comes in the third case of conscience, Case of conscience when
Christians may be said to grieve too much for sin.
how or in what case a man may weep and sorrow overmuch for sin.

I shall resolve this case very briefly.

First, That sorrow for sin is excessive, that makes a Christian pore so much
upon his corruptions, that he over-looks his graces. A Child grieves too much
when he so blubbers and cries, the tears trickling down his eyes, that he
cannot see his Letters, nor read his Book: so a Christian grieves too much for
his corruptions, when he cannot see, nor bless God for those graces he gives
him.

2. You grieve overmuch for sin when it does damn and darken your evidences
for Heaven; when a Christian does so pore upon his sins, and discover such
cause of grief and sorrow from them, that he never looks into his own heart to
see what cause of joy he has there, in having an assurance of his interest in
Christ, and a right and title unto glory. Beloved, God would not have one grace
to justle out another, sorrow for sin is a grace; but yet God would not have
this to justle out spiritual joy. When a Christian does so grieve for sin,
that he casts away all hopes of Heaven, then his forrow is excessive, when he
grieves and blubbers so that he cannot read his evidences for Heaven.

3dly, Sorrowing for sin is excessive, when it lays discouragements upon the
soul to come in to Christ for pardon and remission; when a man shall so grieve
for sin, that he dares not venture to look up to Jesus Christ for mercy, and to
lay hold upon a promise for his comfort, when a sinner does thus, then he
mourns excessively. If the Children of Israel in the wilderness, when they were
stung of the fiery Serpents, had not had the boldness to look up to the Brazen
Serpent, they could not have been healed and recovered; so when sorrow for sin
makes us that we cannot look up to Christ for pardon, then it is excessive.
Sorrow and tears for sin are never right till they are like floods of water to
drive us to Christ.

Fourthly, sorrow for sin is then immoderate, when it so overwhelms you, that
you can take no comfort in the outward blessings that God has given you, as
Houses or Lands, or Corn, or Wine, or the like.

When a Christians sorrow for sin does so damp his spirits, that he cannot take
that outward joy and lawful complacency in worldly comforts that God allows
him, then is your sorrow inordinate: though many think that God allows that
sin should be so bitter to them, yet it is no such matter, you must be sorry
for sin, and yet take comfort in the outward blessings that God bestows upon
you.

Fifthly, Sorrow for sin is inordinate, when it puts a man into an incapacity
to receive comforts from the Gospel, when a Christian shall see his sin so
great, and his case so sad, that if you tender the promises of the Gospel to
him, they are as things of no worth to him, he thinks they do not belong to
him, and therefore can find no comfort nor savor in any of them. When a man
shall be obstinate, and peremptorily stand out against the comforts of the
Gospel because of his sin, then is his sorrow inordinate. Thus Asaph did in
Psalm. 74.2. says he, I was in trouble, and my soul refused to be comforted.
When a man's condition is sad, and yet he refuses to be comforted, then is his
sorrow excessive.

Sixthly, Then is sorrow for sin immoderate, when it disables, or indisposeth a
man to perform his duty, either in his general or particular calling, when it
does indispose him to the duties of his general calling as a Christian, that
he cannot pray, nor read, nor discourse, nor hear the word of God; but lies
alone in a corner, and will not admit of any body to comfort him, or confer
with him; that sorrow that indisposeth a man to holy duties, is an irregular
sorrow, Ps. 77.4. I am so troubled that I cannot speak, to wit, to God in
prayer. And so again that sorrow that indisposeth a man to the duties of his
particular Calling as a man, that he cannot work, or study, or trade, and
follow his particular employments, that sorrow is an inordinate sorrow. God
does require us to work in our Callings, as well as to work out our salvation:
and therefore that sorrow that hinders and indisposeth us to it is excessive,
and immoderate. And thus I have showed you when sorrow for sin is excessive,
and have only given you the heads of things, and have likewise done in
resolving the third case of conscience.

he is able to save to the uttermost all that shall come unto God by him. All
you that do belong to Christ, do neither weep too much for your sins, nor yet
too little, do not say I will not grieve nor shed tears at all for them; for as
Christ's blood was shed for our sins, so we should shed tears for them; but yet
we must not so grieve for them, as to discourage us from going unto Christ, and
to darken our evidences for Heaven.

that they weep as if they wept not, (for that is the scope of the Text) then
let me in the bowels of Christ, persuade all you that are the people of God,
to labor to fulfill this Apostolic Rule, that you would so carry your selves,
as those that have better hopes, Several Considerations to keep men from
excessive sorrow.
and better things to look after then any thing here below. And as before I
gave you twelve considerations to allay and keep under excessive sorrow: so now
I shall give you 7 or 8 Considerations more to keep out excessive sorrow, which
if seriously laid to heart, may be a great help to keep you from breaking out
into immoderate sorrow whatever betides you.

London streets, that a pair of new Cart wheels will skreak and make a noise as
they go along; but an old Cart goes away silently. So if when God lays
afflictions upon thee, thou art like a new Cart, that thou criest out, and
mournest immoderately under his hand, it argues, that thou art but a new and a
weak Christian: he that faints in the day of adversity says Solomon, his
strength is small. But now a Christian that has been long used and experienced
in troubles and afflictions, you may lay a great and heavy burden upon him, and
he will make no noise under it.

David from excessive sorrow in 2 Samuel 12.21,22. David's Servants wondered that
he should fast and weep for his Child while it was alive: but when the Child
was dead, he should rise up and eat bread, and be no more sad. And David said,
while the Child was yet alive I fasted and wept; for I said, who can tell
whether God will be gracious to me, that the Child may live; but now he is
dead, wherefore should I mourn? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me. Now I see the will of God is accomplished, why
should I grieve at it? I will hold my tongue, and not open my mouth, because
the Lord has done it, Psalm. 39.9.



4. To keep out worldly sorrow, consider, that God never lays any outward
cross or affliction upon his people; but it is for sin, either for the
punishment of sin, or the prevention, or purging of it out.

1. For the punishment of thy sins; and if it be for the punishment of thy sin,
then, if thou mourn for any thing, mourn for thy sins that was the cause,
rather then for affliction, which is but the effect of thy sin; accept the
punishment of thine iniquity, Levit. 26. with submission; but look upon the sin
with detestation: we have no reason to complain of our afflictions, Lamen:
3.39. why does the living man complain, man for the punishment of his sin? you
should in this case rather grieve for your sins, then for your punishments.

And 2dly, If it be not for the punishment, then it is for the prevention of
sin, to keep thee from sin, and this was the end why God punished Job, 33 Job
17. it was, that he might drive man from his purpose, and hide pride from him.
And therefore suppose God takes away an Estate, or friends, or any outward
comfort from you, as long as it is to prevent a sin, to preserve you from Hell
and damnation, you have no cause of grief. If a Doctor takes away your blood
from you, to prevent a pleurisy, will you be angry with him? surely no; so God
never takes away any outward comfort from his people, but it is in mercy that
he may prevent sin thereby.

Or 3dly, If not for the punishment or prevention of sin, then it is for the
purging out of sin, as in Esaias 27.9. by this therefore shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit of it to take away his sin. A man
will not be grieved, that Physic makes him sick, and pains him in his bowels,
because it purges out noxious and hurtful humors. Beloved, your crosses are
but purging pills to purge out your corruptions. All worldly afflictions are
either for the punishment, prevention, or purging out of sin, and therefore we
have cause to bear them patiently.

look upon this as any wrong or injury done to him, but would rather be
thankful for it. So God turns all our seeming crosses and afflictions into
real and spiritual advantages to us. Phil. 1.19. I know said Paul, that this
shall turn to my salvation. All things shall work together for good to them
that love God. Romans 8 28.
Though we cannot see how it should come to pass, but are in this case, like
unto little Children, who when they see a heap of beautiful and sweet Roses
lying upon a Table, and their Mother goes and puts them in a mortar, and pounds
them all to pieces, the Child cries and thinks the Mother spoils them, though
she does it to make a conserve of them, that they may be more useful and
durable. So we think we have comforts like beds of Roses, and when the Lord
takes them from us, and breaks them all to pieces, we are apt to conceive they
are all spoiled and destroyed, and we undone by it, whereas God intends it to
work for our greater benefit and advantage.

Adam in innocence was not sensible of his nakedness, was because he was so
taken up with immediate converse and communion with God. So now, if you were
more taken up with conversing with God, and apprehensions of glory, though you
had nothing here below, yet you would think you wanted nothing. The
consideration of Heaven, and glory, and happiness, would make you overlook all
worldly crosses and afflictions: it is said of Paul, that he was rapt up into
the third Heaven, and saw things ineffable; but whether in the body or out of
the body, he could not tell: that is, he saw so much glory, and was so taken up
with the joys of Heaven, that he could not tell whether he was in the body or
no, it made him to forget all his troubles and miseries here below. I remember
I have read in Jerome, what advice he he gives a young man in his time that was
overmuch pressed with sorrow and grief for worldly crosses. Says he, do but
now and then take a turn or two in Paradise, and then you will never think of a
wilderness, or be troubled at the miseries of a desert. Oh beloved, that your
souls had once this art of divine speculation, and contemplation, that you
might have an experimental knowledge of the joys of Heaven, and this would
keep you from mourning any more for worldly crosses. When Christ was
transfigured upon the Mount, says Peter to him, Master, Master, it is good for
us to be here, let us build three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and
one for Elias, he was so lifted up, with the sight of Heaven, that he never
thought that he was then upon a barren Mountain, and of what wants and
exigencies they should be driven to there. I have formerly told you what I have
read of the Eagle, that she is like no other Bird that flies in the Air; for
whereas all other Birds when they are hurt, or want meat to satisfy their
hunger, will cry and mourn, and make a noise: the Eagle, when it is hurt, will
fly aloft, and comfort her self with the warm beams of the Sun. And oh Beloved,
if you would Eagle-lik sore aloft in divine meditations, and contemplations of
heavenly glory and happiness: this would arm you against worldly sorrow very
much.

8. Remember that your sins call for more tears from you, then you are able to
shed; and therefore do not wast them about worldly things. Beloved, could you
dissolve into tears for your sins, it would all be too little to express your
grief and sorrow for them; nay, were every drop of tears you shed, an Ocean, it
would be too little to shed for sin. Tears are sweet water, and it is pity to
wash foul Rooms with them, reserve them for your sins, they have more need of
them; and if you had more tears, all would be too little: nay, were your head a
Fountain, and your eyes Rivers of tears, they would all be too little to shed,
for those many sins and iniquities that you have committed against God.

And thus I have done with this first part of the Text, and they that weep as
if they wept not.

SERMON. VI.
1 Cor. 7.30,31. -- And they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not.
We now proceed to the second part of the Apostolical Directory, and they
that rejoice as though they rejoiced not. If your condition here in the world
be sad and miserable, and afflicted, then your duty is to weep as if you wept
not. But if you meet with a gale of prosperity and happiness, and enjoy the
comforts of this world in abundance, then you must rejoice as if you rejoiced
not; that is, you must rejoice moderately and with discretion. And the point of
instruction that I shall give you from hence, shall be this.

Doct. That it is the duty of Christians, not only to take heed that they be
not excessive in worldly sorrow for outward crosses; but also to take care that
they be not excessive in worldly joy for outward comforts. All under-moone
comforts, we may joy in them too much.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall dispatch these 2. or 3. queries.
1. I shall show you when your joy is excessive. 2. I shall lay you down some
Rules to keep your joy within bounds, that you do not over-joy in the comforts
of this life. 3. And then I shall give you something by way of Use and
Application.


I shall not come to handle any of these at this time; Several Conclusions
concerning immoderate joy for worldly comforts.
but shall first as my usual method is, lay down 6. or 7. Conclusions by way
of premise.

1. Take this Conclusion, That though Christians must take heed, that they are
not immoderate in their joy for worldly comforts; yet you must know that you
are allowed by God, to rejoice in the outward comforts that he gives you here
in this world. Eccles. 3.4. says Solomon, There is a time to mourn, and a time
to rejoice, and in Eccles. 9.7.9. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart, live joyfully with the wife whom thou
love. So in Eccles. 7.14. in the day of prosperity rejoice; so Deuteronomy. 12.7. ye
shall rejoice in all that you put your hand unto. This Con^ sion is necessary
for sad and melancholy Christians, that though they enjoy an affluence and
confluence of worldly comforts, yet will not at all rejoice in them: beloved,
God allows you to rejoice.

Abraham, he promised him a Son, and God gave him the name, saying, thou shall
call his name Isaac, which signifies laughter. Genesis 17.19. to show, that after
thou art in Covenant with God, thou may have joy and pleasure; and therefore
do not harbor such ill thoughts of Religion, as to imagine you must shake
hands with joy, when you close with Religion.

3. Take this conclusion, that the worldly joy of a wicked man is oftentimes
mingled with more inward gripes, and grief of spirit, then the worldly joy of a
godly man is; As in Prove. 13,14. In the midst of laughter the heart is
sorrowful. 2 Cor. 5.12. the Apostle there speaks of some that did glory in
appearance, but not in heart. The joy of the wicked is but in appearance, but
not in reality. When they are in their greatest jollity and mirth, even then
they have some inward gripes and anguish of conscience that galls and troubles
them: a man may have a neat shoe on his foot, yet no man knows where it
pincheth, but he that wears it. A wicked man's joy, is like a godly man's sorrow:
the formers joy is but in appearance, not in truth; and a godly man has
something like sorrow; but it is not so indeed, they are but as sorrowing, yet
always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.10. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he
adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10.22.

Esth: 5.13.
How soon was Hamans joy interrupted? though he had so much cause of joy in the
glory of his riches, and the multitude of his Children, and his promotion in
the Court above all the Princes and Servants of the King. And yet because poor
Mordecai did not bow to him and reverence him, he was sore displeased, and
could take no joy in all that he had. So it was with Ahab, though he had a
whole Kingdom, yet he could take no content in it, for want of Naboths
Vineyard: a little thing diverts the joy of a wicked man, and therefore their
joy is compared to the crackling of thorns under the pot, Eccles. 7.6. they
make a noise and a blaze for a little while, but are soon put out. Belshazzer,
when he was quaffing in his golden Bowls, and in the midst of all his jollity,
yet a handwriting upon the wall quickly dashed all his joys, and made him hang
down his head.



1. You must not rejoice in your own sins, the sins you do commit must never be
matter of rejoicing to you; but thus wicked men do many times, as in Jer.
11.15. when thou do evil then thou rejoycest: so in Prove. 2.14. Solomon
speaks of some who did rejoice to do evil, so in Psalm. 52.1. it is said of
Doeg, why boastest thou thy self in mischief oh mighty man, and thou love
evil more then good, Gaudia panitenda.
God does not allow us to boast and rejoice in sin. Such rejoycings (as one
says) are joys to be wept for, these go merrily to Hell.

2. Neither are you to rejoice in the sins of other men, they are never
permitted by God to be matter of your joy, 1 Cor. 13.6. it is said of love,
that it rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth, that is, love to
any man, does not make us to rejoice in that man's sin, but in his well-doing.
In Romans 1. last, those are not only condemned by God that do the same things
with wicked men; but those also that have pleasure in them that do them, not
only Covenant-breakers, uninercifull men, backbiters, haters of God,
despitefull, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, etc. not only those
that commit these things, but they also that delight in those men that do
commit them are condemned. This is rather matter of grief then joy, Psalm.
119.136. Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because men keep not they Law, and
2 Pet. 2.8. it is said, Lot vexed his righteous soul with the ungodly
conversation of wicked men; and upon this ground, learned Mr. Perkins condemns
the use of Stage Plays, they being for the most part representations of men's
villainy and wickedness, to provoke the spectators to joy and laughter, and
therefore are unlawful, and not to be used.

3. You are not to rejoice at all for the punishment of sin, in the
unreasonable Creatures. And upon this ground, the same Author condemns the use
of Bull or Bear-baiting, or Cock-fighting, because it is a rejoicing in that
which is the product of sin; for it was sin that first put an enmity between
the Bear and the Dog, and between Creature and Creature, sin was the cause of
all discords and antipathies between Creatures, and therefore it is not
allowable for us to rejoice in that which is the effect of our own sin. Indeed,
for Bullbaiting more may be said; it may make the Bull the more serviceable for
man's food; but merely to bait a Bull for recreation is unlawful. So likewise
hawking and hunting, are allowable, because those Creatures cannot be taken
without it. But all you that delight in Stage Plays, and make other men's sin
the matter of your joy. And you that frequent Bear-beatings, and
Cock-fightings, and the like, are to be reproved; and let me persuade you to
leave it off in time to come.

And upon this ground likewise, the same Author condemns Noblemen that keep
fools in their Houses, to be matter of sport and pleasure to them. This is not
allowed by God, because it is a rejoicing in that which is a punishment for sin
in another Creature.

4. You must not rejoice in goods ill gotten, goods ill gotten the Lord never
allows you to rejoice in, Psalm. 62.10. Rejoice not in robberies, neither in
goods ill gotten; so in Habakkuk 1.13,14,15. The Lord is of purer eyes then to
behold evil, wherefore look thou upon them that deal treackerously, and
hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous
then he, and make men as fishes of the Sea, as the creeping things that have
no Ruler over them. They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them
into their Net, and gather them in their drag, that is the poor; and what
follows? therefore they rejoice and are glad. The Lord condemns the rich men,
because they got their Estates by wronging the poor, and by usury, and the
like: therefore you had more need make restitution for what you have injured
men, and fraudul^ntly taken from them, then to rejoice in it, or to build
Hospitalls, and make a great flourish in the world, to advance thy pride and
vain glory. Levit. 6.4.
You may rejoice in your lawful negotiations in buying and selling, and
getting gain honestly, these you may rejoice in. But you are not to rejoice in
goods illgotten. If thou can in buying or selling overreach or circu^vent a
man, and when thou have got a good penyworth then to laugh in thy sleeve,
that is an evil, Prove. 20.14. it is naught, it is naught, says the buyer; but
when he is gone his way, then he boasts. In Deuteronomy. 23.18. I hate, says God,
the hire of a whore, or the price of a Dog to be for a sacrifice; though the
money in its self be good, yet because gotten by wickedness and uncleanness, the
Lord abhorrs it; the Lord abominates those that bring their wickedness before
him to rejoice in. Micah 1.7. all the graven Images of Samaria were to be
beaten in pieces, and all the hire thereof burnt with fire, because she
gathered it of the hire of an Harlot. When Ahab was heavy, and displeased,
because he could not have Naboths Vineyard in 1 Kings 21.7. Jezebel his wife
did very wickedly, when she bid him rise up and be merry, because she would get
the Vineyard for him. It is a very ungodly practice to rejoice in goods ill
gotten, by cozening and defrauding the poor.

5. You must not rejoice for the afflictions and sufferings of Gods people:
this is that which the Lord condemned the Edomi^es for, in the Prophecy of
Obadi^th 12. thou should not have rejoiced over the Children of Judah, in
the day of their destruction, neither should thou have spoken proudly in the
day of distress, and so on; and so the Lord threatens Mount Seir and Idumea
for their hatred of Israel, and rejoicing over her in the day of their
distress, Ezekiel. 35.16. says God, as thou did rejoice at the inheritance of
the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee, thou
shall be desolate oh Mount Seir, etc. Micah 7.8. says the Church there,
rejoice not against me oh mine enemies; for though I fall I shall arise, Prove.
17.5. he that is glad at other men's calamities shall not go unpunished, Lam.
1.21.

6. You are not to make the miseries and sufferings of your very enemies to be
matter of rejoicing to you, Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls,
and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth. Job was so conscientious in
this particular, that he quite disclaimes any such practice, Job 31.29. says
he, if I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my self
when evil found him, neither have I suffered my mouth to sin by wishing a
curse to his soul. Job disavoues such courses as these: you ought not to make
the afflictions and sufferings of the worst enemy you have in all the world, to
be matter of rejoicing to you. Indeed, if you look upon them as the enemies of
God, and of his Church, then you may rejoice at their destruction as they are
Gods enemies: thus David did, says he, I hate them that hate thee, yea I hate
them with a perfect hatred. You must hate no man as he is your enemy, or does
an injury to you; but as he is Gods enemy, you ought to hate him, and to
rejoice at his destruction: neither of these six particulars ought to be the
matter of a Christians joy.

Sometimes unfit to rejoice in lawful, things.
6. Take this conclusion, that there are some times and seasons, wherein it is
not expedient to rejoice, even in lawful things; I shall name them to you very
briefly.

First, in days of public and solemn fasting, and humiliation, then the Bride
must come out of her Closet, and the Bridegroom out of his Chamber, expressions
of joy are then unseasonable.

Secondly, When a Land is made desolate by wasting and ruining Judgments, Isa.
23.12.
Esaias 24.8. all rejoicing shall cease, because the day of their captivity is
drawing on, Ezekiel. 21.10. A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished, to
make a sore slaughter, should we then make mirth, it contemns the rod of my
Son, as every Tree. As if he should have said, now the Sword is sharpened, and
afflictions ready prepared for us, if we should now make mirth, were not this
to contemn the Rod of God? and to account no more of his glittering Sword, then
of a rod that grows upon a Tree, Nehem. 1.4.5. it is said of Nehemiah, that
was the Kings Cup Bearer, though he were never sad aforetime in the Kings
presence, yet when he heard that the remnant that were left of the captivity
were in such great distress, the Wall of Jerusalem broken down, and the Gates
thereof burnt with fire; then he sat down and wept, and mourned, and fasted,
and prayed before the God of Heaven, and would by no means rejoice.

Thirdly, when the hand of God lies heavy on any particular man or Family
wherein he dwells, it should be a house of mourning then, Eccles. 7.2.

Fourthly, after some great defection or apostatizing from God; after you have
fallen into some great and foul sin or transgression, then is no time to
rejoice. You have an excellent Text for this, Hosea 9.8. rejoice not oh Israel
for joy, as other people, for thou have gone a whoring from thy God: other
people may rejoice; but thou must not, because thou have gone a whoring after
other Gods: Psa. 38. Psa. 31.10.
thou should go mourning all thy life long, till the scandal were stopped,
thy sin subdued, and thy soul reconciled. It is very observable of David; you
read, after he fell into the sin of uncleanness, what a sad man he was a great
while, says he, I have no quietness in my bones by reason of my sin, I roar in
the disquietness of my heart; but was all David's joy gone? Yes; for though he
had many mercies that might have promoted his joy, yet he could take no comfort
in any. There were three circumstances more especially, that might have
provoked David to break forth into worldly joy.

As first, he was a King, and sat upon a Throne in State and pomp, and
dignity, and yet this could not cheer up his spirits; but he lay humbling
himself, and sorrowing in the dust.

And secondly, David was a Musician, a man cunning in playing upon the Harp, 1 Samuel 16,17,18. and yet the melody of his music could not cheer up his heart.

Thirdly, He was naturally a man of a merry constitution, David was of a ruddy
countenance, and merrily disposed, and yet all these advantages could not make
him rejoice. His sin did so trouble him and deject him, lying upon his
conscience, that though he were a King, a Musician, and of a merry temper, yet
all these could not make him rejoice, neither could he rejoice till after his
sin was pardoned. So much for the sixth Conclusion.

etc.

should take heed that they be not excessive in their spiritual joy, as well
as in their worldly sorrow, and then they are excessive when their spiritual
joy makes them inconsiderate and rash in their undertakings, when it makes them
wilful and precipitant, and neglect their Callings, and live above Ordinances,
and the like; in these cases spiritual joy is immoderate, which I shall prove
to you by two places of Scripture: the first is in the 12. Acts 12,14,15. there
were many gathered together, praying in the house of Mary the Mother of John,
and as Peter knocked at the door of the Gate, a Damsel came to hearken, named
Rhoda, and when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for gladness;
but ran in again, and told how Peter stood without at the Gate. the Damsel
rejoiced so much that Peter was at the door, that she could not open the door,
which was a sin in her, and her joy was excessive, because it made her
inconsiderate, no^ to open the door when Peter stood without knocking, she
opened not the door for gladness, that is one Text to prove your joy may be
excessive. Another we have in Luke 24.39. This was spoken here after Christ's
Resurrection from the dead. When Christ came and stood in the middst of his
Disciples (where they were together) and showed them his hands and his feet
which were pierced, that they might believe it was he, and that he was risen
from the dead, it is said, they believed not for joy. This was a spiritual
joy, when Christ had conquered death, and hell, and the grave, and was risen
again from the dead, they rejoiced so much, that they could not believe it, one
grace hindered and interrupted another; and therefore their joy was excessive.
I speak this only in reference to young Converts, they may have much sin
mingled with their joy.

And thus I have done with these eight Conclusions, I shall now proceed to the
dispatching of the Queries which will be more useful, in the prosecution of
this Doctrine, That Christians must not only take heed of being excessive in
their sorrow for worldly crosses; but also of being excessive in their joy for
worldly comforts.

SERMON. VII.
1 Cor. 7.30,31. -- And they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not.
I Shall at this time briefly speak to these two things. First, I shall show
you when your worldly joy is excessive. And secondly I shall lay you down some
Rules, whereby to keep your joy within bounds.

Worldly joy, when excessive in 8. particulars.
Q. 1. When is worldly joy excessive and inordinate? and that I shall show you
in these 8. particulars.

Belshazzer, in Dan. 5.2. He spent his days in mirth and jollity, quaft and
caroused in the Vessels of the Temple, in one day he feasted a thousand of his
Lords, and was merry through wine; but what was the issue of all, you may see
in the 20. verse, his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride: his
joy was excessive, because it hardened his heart, and hindered and interrupted
him from mourning for sin. Thus Saul called for Music, when he should have
given himself to sorrow for sin. 1 Samuel 16. Why now beloved, look into your own
bosoms, though God allows you to rejoice moderately in his mercies, yet if you
be so taken up with joys and pleasures, that you are averse from sorrow and
serious thoughts of heart, in remembrance of your sins, then your joy is
excessive.

2. Your rejoicing in worldly comforts is then excessive, when it deprives and
robs you of that fellow-feeling and compassionate affections which you should
have toward the sorrows and afflictions of Gods Church and people. This you
have laid down as a mark of excessiveness of joy, in Amos 6.4,5,6. They lie
upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, that
chant to the sound of the violl, and invent to themselves instruments of
Music, that drink wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with chief
ointments, but they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. Israel here
was wanton, and spent their time in pleasures and jollity; but they were not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, what is that? why, by the afflictions of
Joseph are to be understood, the miseries of the Tribe of Manasseh, because
that Tribe came from Joseph: as the 10. Tribes were called Ephraim, because
Jeroboam the first King of the 10. Tribes, came of the posterity of Ephraim:
and that one Tribe enduring great afflictions, as we may read, 2 Kings 13.7.
under King Joash, the nine Tribes were not mourning for them, that was their
sin; and therein their joy was excessive. Now beloved, all you whose hearts do
suggest this to you, that you live merrily in the world, and so spend your time
in mirth and jollity, that it quite eats out all compassion and fellow-feeling
in you, toward the miseries and afflictions of the Church of God; that let
Religion and the cause of God, sink or swim, and let the people of God stand or
fall, it shall never trouble you, in this case your joy is excessive.

3. When your worldly joy does damp and dull your delight in God, and in
spiritual duties, then is your joy excessive, when thy delight and relish in
the Creature is as sweet as honey; but yet can take no more joy in communion
with God, in performing duties to him, and receiving grace and spiritual
mercies from him, then there is taste in the white of an Egg: this is a sign
thy joy is excessive: as in Job 21.11,12.13,14,15. Job speaks there of the
wicked, that they send forth their little ones like a flock, and their Children
dance, they take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ,
they spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go down into the grave: here
are jolly men indeed, they spend their days merrily; but what is the issue of
all this? therefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, what is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Here you see their joy was
excessive and immoderate, because it did damp their love and duty to God. All
recreation should be as a whetstone to sharpen us to duty, as Physic to
sharpen the stomach to relish food, not to dog and dull our appetite to
spiritual things.

4. Your joy was excessive in that worldly comfort which you grieve too much in
the loss and want of. A man never grieves too much in the want of any mercy;
but he did rejoice too much before in the enjoyment of it.

5. Then your joy is excessive in outward comforts, when it makes you insult
and triumph over the miseries and afflictions of other men, that want those
comforts that you enjoy. Judges 16.23.25. Sampson (you know) when he discovered
wherein his great strength lay, the Philistines cut off his hair, and then his
strength was gone, and he became as another man, and the Philistines took him
and put out his eyes, and bound him in fetters of brass, and made him grind in
the prisonhouse, they made him their drudge and their slave, and the Lords of
the Philistines gathered themselves together to offer sacrifice to Dagon, and to
rejoice, and when their hearts were merry, they called for Sampson to make them
sport: their immoderate joy did make them insult over this poor blind man in
misery. Beloved, then is your joy excessive, when you make the afflictions of
other men to be matter of your Joy.

6. Your Joy is excessive when it is mingled with luxury and sensuality. 2 Samuel
13.28. Luke 15.23,14.
Hence it is that you read so often in Scripture, of men's being merry with
wine, in 1 Samuel 25.36. and as an Author observes, the same word in the Hebrew,
that signifies to be merry, signifies to be drunk, in the 43. Genesis last; when
mirth proceeds so far as to drunkenness and sensuality, E^h. 1.10.
then it is excessive.

7. When worldly joy breeds security and insensibleness of Gods judgments
approaching any place, then it is inordinate. Thus Ethiopia was called the
rejoicing City that dwelt securely, Zeph 2.16. and hence it is, that in Psalm.
2.11. fear is adjoined to rejoicing; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling. And hence it is, that Absalom when he would by treachery shed the
blood of Amnon, gave this Counsel to his Servants, When you see Amnon merry,
then fall upon him, as knowing that when his heart was merry, he would then be
secure. And so those in Amos 6.3.6. that chant to the sound of the Violl, and
drink wine in Bowls, are said to be men that put far away the evil day, and
were secure in their pleasures, and so these in Esaias 22.12.13. In the day that
the Lord called for weeping and mourning, and baldness, and to girding with
Sackcloth, behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating
flesh and drinking wine, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die: they
would not believe the prophet that foretold them the Judgments of God that
were coming upon them; but in scoffing and jearing manner, said one to another,
let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. And so again in Esaias 56.12.
Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, they feared
not want nor alteration of their condition; which security of theirs, declared
their joy to be excessive and inordinate.

8. When men will run to worldly joys and pleasures, to still and stifle the
troubles and terrors of their consciences.

When a man shall have a conviction upon his conscience, which troubles and
perplexes him for some gross evil he has committed in his life, and shall
then run to his recreations and pleasures, or get amongst jolly Company, to
cast away and shake off these troubles that are upon him: this shows his joy is
immoderate. And thus Saul did discover a joviall and sensual spirit, 1 Samuel
16.15. when an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him, that is, when he had
some guilt and terror lying upon his Conscience, then he commanded his
Servants to seek him out a man skillful in Music to play before him; but he
had been better to have gone to prayer upon his knees, then to call for Music,
and run to sensual delights to remove his trouble. And thus it was with those
Idolaters, that sacrificed their Children unto Moloch, they had Instruments of
Music, but what to do? why first it was to drown the cries of their Children,
and secondly, to provoke them to merriment and jollity, that their Consciences
might not trouble them for so cruel a murder as the sacrificing their
Children. Why (now beloved) you that can when a Sermon has come home to you,
and touched you to the quick, and the word of God has come with power, and
wrought effectually upon you, to the discovering and convincing you of your
sin. If you then run to your recreations and pleasures, to company-keeping and
Stage Plays, or the like, to divert your thoughts from your sins, and remove
the terror and trouble of your conscience. This is a sign your joy is
excessive and sinful; indeed this is the way rather to increase then to quiet
the checks of conscience. The Pelican to put out the fire, flaps it with her
wings, and so instead of putting it out, kindles it the more, and burns her
self; so do those that seek by worldly pleasure and jollity, to stifle the
checks of conscience. And thus I have very briefly run over these 8.
particulars, to show you wherein a man's worldly joy for outward comforts is
excessive.

I have only now a second thing to run over, and then give you a short use, and
so have done.



Answ. I shall give you 3. or 4.

1. Consider, that you have better things to rejoice in, then any thing here
below; Directions for mode rating our joys in worldly comforts.
thou have better objects to transport thy soul with joy, as thy reconciliation
with God, communion with Christ, the comforts of the Holy Ghost, assurance of
the pardon of sin, the justification of thy person by the merits of Christ, the
sanctification of thy nature by the spirit of Christ. Thou have thy election,
vocation, redemption, glorification, thou have all these objects to provoke thy
Joy, and to fasten thy delight upon. Would any man rejoice and delight himself
in Counters, if he might have so many pieces of Gold in the room of them: or
would any man delight or rejoice so much in Pibbles, if he might have as many
Pearls for them, or in a flint stone that has a Diamond, (oh beloved) you have
things of more worth then any thing in this world to rejoice in. There is a
great deal vaster difference between the things of Heaven, the mercies of
eternity, and these outward comforts here below, then there is between Brass
and Gold, between Pibbles, and Pearls, between the Sun and a Candle. Therefore
Consider, I have a God and Christ, Heaven and happiness, pardon,
reconciliation, sanctification, Justification, redemption, and glorification. I
have all these to fix and place my Joy upon, and therefore why should I rejoice
so much in the things of this world. The Disciples of Christ thought themselves
some body, and were puffed up because they could cast out Devils, and work
miracles; but says Christ to them, rejoice not in that the Devils are subject
to you; but rejoice that your names are written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. the more
any is taken with the estimation and contemplation of the Joys of Heaven, the
less he will be in the valuation and admiration of comforts here on earth. The
higher you stand, the less you see things below: will any rejoice in the light
of a Candle, when he sees the brightness of the Sun shining in its full
strength. It is a Rule amongst Divines, that as Physicians when a man bleeds at
nose, to stop and make a diversion of the blood, will open a vein: so the way
to keep your worldly Joy from being excessive, is seriously to ponder and
consider what great cause you have of spiritual Joy and rejoicing, and this
will divert your joy from worldly objects. To turn all the affections on the
right objects, is the way to keep them from being excessively bent upon the
wrong; fear God, and you will not fear men, love Christ and you will not
over-love the Creature, weep for sins and corruption, and you will not mourn
too much for outward crosses, rejoice in spiritual things, and you will not
joy overmuch in temporalls.

2. Heb: 11.38.40.
and therefore says Amos in Amos 6.13. why do ye rejoice in a thing of naught,
the world is as nothing, the fashion of this world passes away, it is not
worthy of a Christians joy, Acts 25.23. when Agrippa came to the court of
Judicature to judge Paul it is said, he came with great pomp; but in the
original it is, (...).
he came with a mere fancy, all the honors, and riches, and bravery of the
world, are but mere fancies, very unworthy of a Christians Joy.

3. Consider, that the more you rejoice in any outward mercy, the less you
will rejoice in the God of your mercies: the more you rejoice in your comforts,
the less you will rejoice in the God of your comforts. And therefore excessive
joy in outward comforts is no less then robbery, you deprive God of that which
of right belongs to him.

4. Consider, that thou spoilest thy mercies by rejoicing too much in them, you
provoke God to take away that which you so much rejoice in; I may very fitly
compare rejoicing in your mercies to a posie in your hand. Now you know, if you
handle a posie gently, and smell to it now and then, it will continue fresh and
fragrant a whole day together; but if you crush it in your hand, and are
continually smelling to it, it will die and wither the soo^ So the more you
rejoice in the things of the world, (...) they will forsake and leave you,
whereas if you did (...), and joy in them moderately, and not affect them so
much, you would enjoy them more, and keep them longer with you.

5. Consider, that if you rejoice overmuch in those mercies you enjoy, you
will grieve and sorrow overmuch in the want of those mercies when God shall
take them from you. If you would live with such weaned affections from the
world, that the comforts of it might be but as the Gloves to your hands, then
you would easily part with them, without any great trouble; but if you love the
world so dearly, and the comforts of it cleave so close to you, as the skin to
your flesh, you will not part with them but with a world of grief, and a world
of pain and trouble. And thus I have done with the second query, I have but a
word of application, and so I shall conclude.







Calvin says, that because he was such a pensive and sorrowful man, the
Papists would not embrace his Religion, he being so sad and mournful.



Pelican, of whom it is reported, that being naturally afraid of fire, the
shepherds are wont to carry some Coals, and lay them by her nest, and she poor
^illy Creature, keeps a fluttering with her wings, thinking thereby to
extinguish and put them out, but does inflame and kindle them; and by this
means the fire burns both her nest and self too. So for us to go to worldly
joys and pastimes, to quench the sorrow and trouble of our minds, is the ready
way, rather to increase then remove our grief.

SERMON. VIII.
1 Cor. 7 30. -- And they that buy as though they possessed not.
We now come to the third part of the Apostles direction, in these words, and
they that buy as though they possessed not. I shall spend only two or three
Sermons upon this third branch, and then come to the latter part of the
Apostles direction, and they that use this world as not abusing of it. We shall
begin with the first. If your livelihood and subsistence consists in buying and
selling, in turning and winding of money, then your duty is, to buy as if you
possessed not; whether you buy or sell, for both are included in this phrase,
whatsoever you get by buying and selling, and trading in the world, you must
have your hearts so weaned from what you have, as if you had got nothing at
all, they that buy, must be as if they possessed not, Possess your wealth, you
may, but you may not be possessed by it, rebus non me trado sed commodo, said
Seneca.

And here (beloved) being to preach in a City of trading, and to an auditory,
that live by buying and selling, and trafficking in the world; I shall a little
enlarge my self upon this point. But before I come to handle it directly, I
shall draw out such collateral Doctrines, as the words will afford. As first,
from the consideration of the scope that the Apostle aims at in bringing in of
this expression, they that buy as if they possessed not: the Apostle had all
along before, in this Chapter spoken of Marriage, and the duty of people in
that estate: and here he treats of trading, of buying and selling; from whence
I note.

That those to whom God has given a charge and a Family, he commands them more
especially to buy and sell, to be diligent in their Callings, for the
maintenance of those that belong unto them, 1 Timothy 5.8. He that provides not
for his own, and especially those of his own house, has denied the faith, and
is worse then an Infidel.

2. From the variety of the matter, the Apostle here handles, whether men are
in an afflicted and sorrowful, or in a prosperous and joyful condition,
whether they buy or sell, or what ever their condition be, here is matter of
advice for them; from whence I note, That the Scripture is large, and reaches
to the several and various Callings and conditions of men in the world. There
is not any Calling, condition, kind or sex of people in the world, but there
are either general or particular directions that the word of God affords them,
and therefore well might the Psalmist say, Thy Commandments are exceeding
broad, Psalm. 119.96.

3. From the term the Apostle here uses, they that buy: now buying you know
is a giving a valuable sum of money for a Commodity, which the seller has
profit, and advantage by; hence I may note, that the Apostle was against the
Doctrine of community, or having all things common amongst men: the very
mention of buying and selling, intimates, and denotes a propriety in what a man
has. A man has a propriety in his Estate, or whatsoever he has lawfully
gotten; and therefore the Doctrine of Court parasites who scrue up Monarchy so
high, as if the King may by power and force, take away all that a Subject has,
is false and erroneous. This is tyranny, and not Sovereignty. And hence it was,
that Ahab though he were a covetous King, yet he would not take away Naboths
Vineyard by force and violence, but would buy it of him: this therefore makes
against a community, for buying and selling argues a propriety in the seller of
what he has.

And they that buy as though they possessed not; I observe from them further,
That a man may lawfully get wealth, and lay up an Estate by his Trade and
Calling.

5. Observe further, That when a man has gotten an Estate, and much wealth and
riches by Trading, buying and selling in the world, yet they must use them with
such weaned affections from them, as if they had gotten nothing at all.

I do not intend to insist particularly upon any of these points, but shall
draw out two general Doctrines from the whole bulk and body of the Text.

They that buy, the Apostle does not only prescribe Rules about Marriage, and
to men in a conjugall estate; but likewise about buying and selling, and
negotiating in the world: from whence observe,

That Christians ought to take heed, that they do not transgress Scripture
Rules, in buying and selling.

2. And they that buy as though they possessed not; from whence observe.

That Christians ought to carry such weaned affections, to what they have
gotten by buying and selling, as if they possessed nothing at all.

I shall be but brief in this latter point, but shall expatiate, and be more
large in the former, That Christians should take heed that they do not
transgress Scripture Rules in their buying and selling.

And now beloved, will you follow me a little, and lend me your attentions in
the handling of this point. I shall this morning lay you down some Scripture
Rules which are to be observed in buying; and in the afternoon, shall give you
some Scripture Rules, which you are to take heed that you do not transgress in
selling. Several Scripture Rules and Cautions concerning buying.


1. I shall spend this hour in giving you ten particular Scripture Rules, which
you are to take heed that you do not transgress in your buying. As

1. If you would not transgress Scripture Rules in buying, then take heed that
you do not discommend those commodities, that you are about to buy, thereby to
bring down the price of the Commodity, and so to get it cheaper, and for less
then it is worth. There is a known place for this in Prove. 20.14. It is naught,
it is naught, (says the buyer) but when he is gone his way, then he boasts.
In Solomon's time, men were so wicked, that when they came to Market to buy any
thing, the buyer would say, it is naught, it is naught, though the Commodity
were very good and vendible, and the price demanded by the seller, reasonable;
but when he is gone then he boasts, that is, he boasts of what a good penyworth
he had, and what a good Bargain he had made, or the like: this then is the
first caution, in buying a Commodity, do not discommend it, thereby to have it
cheaper, when it is good and vendible.

2. Do not make Vows and Protestations that you will give no more for a
Commodity then what you have first offered, when afterward you must, and do
give more. This is a common practice among men, to come to a Shop, and bid
money for a Commodity, and the buyer to say, I will not give a penny more, and
the seller not to take a farthing less; and yet both the buyer gives more, and
the seller takes less, then what the one first bid, and the other first
proffered it for. This though frequently practiced, yet cannot be justified. It
is a very palpable lie, and a great sin, and therefore take heed of it, if once
thy promise be past, thou art bound up, thou sinnest if thou give a penny more.

3. Do not give counterfeit money for those Commodities you buy. It is said of
Abraham, whose just dealing and actions are recorded to be an example and
pattern to succeeding Generations, when he was to buy the field of Machpelah of
Ephron, the Son of Zohar the Hittite, Genesis 23.16. the Text says, he gave him
for it 400 shekells of silver, current money with the Merchant; and therefore
(beloved) you transgress Scripture Rules, in buying Commodities, if you give
brass money for silver, or counterfeit God for right, when you know it to be
so: it is no better then mere cozenage. I mention this, because there is a
world of deceit now amongst us, in paying base and counterfeit money.

4. Observe this Rule, do not give for a Commodity less then in your
Conscience you think it is worth, it is an oppression in buying, when you seek
to bring a Commodity under its due value: you ought to give for it, as much as
in conscience you think it is worth. Genesis 23 9.
And thus did Abraham, when he was to buy the Cave of Machpelah of Ephron,
says he, I will give thee the worth of it in money: and so David when he was
to buy the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, says he, give me the
floor, and I will give thee the full valne of it, 1 Chronicles. 21.22.

5. Do not long defer the time of paying for those Commodities you buy upon
trust, when thou have wherewith to pay it. This Rule you have in Prove. 3.27.28.
withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine
hand to do it: say not to thy Neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow I
will give thee, when thou have it by thee: this is spoken here in reference to
buying and selling. When a man has sold a Commodity, and is forced to go again
and again for his money, and yet cannot get it. That this is the meaning of the
phrase, appears by these words, withhold not good from them to whom it is due:
though this Text be referred to works of mercy, yet it has relation likewise
to Trading in the World, or buying of Commodities. If you owe a man money for a
Commodity you have bought of him, you ought to pay what you owe, and not let
the Creditor come day after day for his money, and yet go without it, when thou
have it by thee. This makes against Banckrupts that borrow money take up goods,
and make no conscience of paying what they owe for them: if men had but any
sparks of ingenuity and good nature in them, they could never be joviall and
jolly in the World, when they have not paid every man his own. Phocion would
not feast till he had paid C^llicles what he owed him. Elisha the Prophet was
so conscientious in this particular, that when he made the poor Widovvs oil
to increase in the 2 King. 4.7. he bid her sell it, and first pay her debts,
and then live she and her Children upon the rest,. It is laid down as a badge
of a wicked man in Scripture, not to pay what a man owes, Psalm. 37.21. the
wicked borrows and pays not again. To borrow money, or to buy a Commodity,
is all one; it is the Character of a wicked man to owe money, and not to pay
it.

Prove. 11.26. it is spoken in reference to Corn-mongers, those that had money
enough to buy great quantities of it. Says the Text, he that withholdeth
Corn, the People shall curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him
that sells it. There were at that time Corn-mongers, that when Corn was
cheap, would buy up all they could get, and keep it till it grevv dear again,
they would vvithhold their corn till it was dear, and then sell it. Now says
Solomon, he that does thus, the People shall curse him, but he that sells it
the people shall bless him, so that it is no sin in its self to engrosse a
Commodity, if you sell it cheap and at the ordinary rate, this is no sin; but
for a man to engrosse a Commodity, merely to advance and enhance the price of
it, this is such an oppression, that the people shall curse the man that does
it. Men in this case of engrossing, may be very well compared to the great Oak,
which does so spread and dilate its branches, that no little Tree can thrive
under it. So do many men so much engrosse Commodities, that poorer men cannot
live by them, which is a gross oppression, and a great wickedness.

7. If you would not transgress Scripture Rules, do not in buying a Commodity,
take any advantage of the mistake or over-fight of the seller. As suppose you
should come to a Shop, and there buy so many yards of Cloth, and the
Shopkeeper should either give you more Cloth then is your due, or take less
money of thee then is his due; you must take no advantage against him in this
particular; for if you take any thing more of him then you have bought, it is
theft, or if you give him any thing less then you bargain for, it is theft.
And this you have in Genesis 43.12. Jacob when there was a Famine in the Land, he
sent his Sons into Egypt to buy Corn; when they came there, Joseph knowing
his Brethren, what does he do but put the money they brought for their Corn
into the mouth of their Sacks again, and sent them home; where when they found
their money in their Sacks, they told their Father of it, who bid them go back
again, and carry him the money they brought away in their Sacks mouth; for
says he, peradventure it was an oversight. Here was conscienciousness, when a
man shall either give thee more then is thy due, or thou give him less then is
his due: in neither of these cases must you take advantage against him; for if
you do, the Lord looks upon it as no better then cozenage and deceit.

8. In buying Commodities, do not merchandise upon the Lords day. It is true,
in case of urgent necessities, as for the maintenance of life, either in man or
beast it is lawful; but for buying of those things of which there is no
necessity, and you may well be without them till Monday: in this case you sin,
if you buy any thing on the Lords day, that is Market day for Heaven, Nehem.
10.31. Nehemiah entered into an Oath, and the people with him, that if any of
the people of the Land bring Ware, or any Victuals on the Sabbath Day to sell,
that they would not buy it of them on the Sabbath Day. Now though some may be
ready to object, and say, that this was the Jewish Sabbath here spoken of,
wherein they were so strict; I answer, it is true, it was; but yet neither does
the Gospel give you leave to profane the Christian Sabbath, but ought now to be
kept as strictly as it was then. And therefore beloved, I cannot see but it is
a sin for men to buy either wine, or pepper, or mustard, or any other such like
trifle, that they may well be without, it must needs be unlawful and sinful,
to buy any thing that you may well be without, in that case you sin, if you buy
upon the Lords day; and therefore let me entreat you, rather to want such
trivial things, then to transgress Scripture Rules, in buying of them upon
this day.

Levit. 25.14. it is said, if thou sellest ought to thy Neighbor, or buyest
ought of thy Neighbor, ye shall not oppress one another. There is an
oppression in buying, as well as in selling, when a man does work upon the
poverty of a poor man, and will make him sell cheaper then he can afford it, or
else will not buy of him at all. O beloved, how few are there in the world,
that are conscientious in their buying in these regards.

10. If you would not transgress Scripture Rules in baying, then take heed that
ye do not buy those things that are not fit and allowable to be bought and
sold: as first, do not buy spiritual things, as the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
Church Livings, etc. for these are not things to be bought. This is called
Simony. Act. 8.20. When Simon Magus would have bought the gift of the Holy
Ghost, thy money perish with thee, said Peter, because thou have thought that
the gift of God may be purchased with money. 2. Do not buy stolen goods, they
are not meet to be bought. If thou know that the goods which are to be sold,
are stolen goods, they are not to be bought; but rather to be restored. I am
afraid that this is a sin, that many men do not make conscience of in this
City: as we use to say, the receiver is as bad as the Thief: so let me tell
you, the buyer is as bad as the Thief likewise.

3. Do not buy Monuments nor relics of Idolatry, as Crosses, Beads,
Crucifixes, Images, and the like, these ought not to be bought.

4. Do not buy men for slaves: this is that which is reproved Amos 8.6. That we
may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes. So in Deuteronomy.
27.7. If a man be found stealing of any of his Brethren of the Children of
Israel, and makes merchandise of him, or sells him, then that thief shall
die: thou must not steal a man and sell him.

And thus you see I have gone over very briefly these ten particulars. And oh
beloved, let me tell you, the fear of my heart is, that there are few of you
that keep within bounds in these particulars; but in one or other of them you
have transgressed in your buyings.

I shall only now make a short use of what has been said, I shall show you in
the afternoon, what you get by unjust practices, Prove. 23.23. Rev. 3.18.
and therefore avoid such courses; and let me exhort you in buying Commodities,
amongst all your buyings in the world, let me entreat you to buy that which
Solomon bids you buy, namely, to buy the truth and sell it not, and that which
Christ counsels you to buy, come buy of me gold that ye may be rich, and white
Raiment that you may be clothed; and buy that which the good Merchant sold all
that he had to purchase, Mat. 13.44
namely, the Pearl in the field. So do you sell all you have to buy this Pearl
of great price the Lord Jesus; but do not mistake me, when I bid you buy
spiritual things, do not think, they are to be purchased with money; but I
would have you labor and endeavor after them, Esaias 5.1. Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and
eat, yea come buy wine and milk, without money, and without price: these are
not to be bought with money, but by labors and endeavors, and earnest prayers
unto God for them: you must give the rags of your sin and corruption, for this
white raiment of Christ's righteousness. Oh let not the Market-dayes of your
souls slip over without buying something for your souls good, buy the truth
and sell it not, buy the Pearl of grace, look after spiritual things, do not
think the things of the world to be worth so much, and grace and Christ, Heaven
and happiness, and glory, worth nothing. There is nothing here below but we may
give too much for, we may buy gold too dear; but we can never buy Christ and
grace too dear, we can never give too much for them; one hours enjoyment of
Christ, will infinitely recompense all the troubles, and miseries, and losses
we undergo for him here, and therefore beloved, do not spend so much time, and
take so much pains for these transitory things here below: these complementall
and circumstantiall pieces of felicity, and spend so little time, and take so
little pains after those perfections, and essential points of happiness, the
getting an interest in Christ, in his righteousness, merits, and satisfaction.
Diogenes taxed the folly of men in his time, quod res praetiosas minimo
emerent, venderentque vilissimas plurimo: they valued the most precious things
little; and the most vile at a great rate. Woe to those that stop Religions
Trade, Luke 11.52. That take away the key of knowledge, neither entering in
themselves, nor suffering those that would.

2. If this be so, that we ought not to transgress Scripture Rules, in buying
Commodities, then let this be matter of humiliation to any of you, that the
word of God has met with this day. O beloved, go home and humble your souls
before God, and bless his name, that the word has found out your
transgressions: beloved, go home and do no more so wickedly: if you have in any
of these particulars transgressed Scripture Rules, go home and acknowledge your
sins unto the Lord, and reform your lives, lest the Lord breath a curse upon
what you have gotten, and say of your tradings, as he did of those in Ezekiel.
28.18. Thou have defiled thy sanctuari^s by the multitude of thine iniquities,
and by the iniquity of thy tra^fique: therefore will I bring forth a fire from
the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon
the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee; least the Lord say, when
thou have gotten so many baggs in thy Chest, and so much wares in thy shop,
that these are but the fruit of thy sins, and the price of thy soul, and that
thou shall have death and damnation into the bargain.

SERMON. IX.
1 Cor. 7 30. -- And they that buy as though they possessed not.
I Come now to the other particular, that you take heed you do not transgress
Scripture Rules in selling Commodities. And as the Scripture is very large in
laying down Rules concerning buying: so likewise it is not wanting in laying
down Rules and directions in reference to the selling of Commodities, I shall
name to you 9. or 10. of them.

1. If you would not transgress Scripture Rules, do not needlessly multiply
words in selling a Commodity. Scripture Rules concerning selling Commodities.
The Scripture is large in this particular. As Genesis 23.15. when Abraham was to
buy the Cave of Machpelah of Ephron, there was but one word between them,
Ephron said it was worth so much, and Abraham presently gave it him. so Zach.
11,12. If you think good, says God, give me my price, and if not, forbear.
Multiplicity of words is needless. Prove. 10.19.
In a multitude of words, says Solomon, there is sin. As in ordinary
discourse, so in commerce in a multitude of words is sin. I do not speak this
as if I would have men stupid and blockish in a shop; but they should not be
lavish and frolic, and frothy in their speeches.

2. Do not multiply words in commending and overpraysing your Commodity, when
you know in your conscience, that there is a flaw or a fault in it: this is a
vicious carriage in a seller, when he uses abundance of fine words to set off a
bad Commodity. As it is a sin in the buyer, to say it is naught, it is naught,
so in the seller, to say it is good, it is good, when it is not so.

3. Sell not your Commodities by false waights, or measures; do not keep a
deceitful balance, or a deceitful measure. Amos 5. there the Lord reproves
those that set forth wheat, making the Ephah small, and the shekell great, and
falsifying the balances by deceit; so in Prove. 10 20. diverse waights and
diverse measures, both of them are a like abomination to the Lord, that is, the
Lord hates and abhorrs those men that use, and sell by those waights and
measures that are not good; and therefore the Lord gave a special Law to all
that did follow trading in Israel, in Deuteronomy. 25.15,16. that they should use no
deceit in their waights and measures, in the 13. and 14. verses, Thou shall not
have in thy bag diverse waights, a great and a small, thou shall not have in thy
house diverse measures, a great and a small; but thou shall have a perfect and a
just weight, a perfect and a just measure shall thou have, that thy days may be
lengthned in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee; for all that do such
things, and all that do unrighteously are an abomination unto the Lord thy God,
which is not to be understood of diverse sorts of waights, as pounds, ounces,
else, yards, etc. or of many of the same sort, if of the just size; but of
diverse waights of the same sort of an unjust and unequal size. And therefore
beloved, take heed of unjust and false waights or measures, Micah 6.10. says
God there, Are there yet the Treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked? (money that is gotten by unjust waights and measures, are called the
treasures of wickedness) and the scant measure that is abominable.

4. You are to make conscience, not only that you do not speak falsely; but also
that you do not speak equivocally. It is an observatio^ that one has upon
these words, let no man defraud his Brother, says he; many Tradesmen, though
they will not lie, yet they will equivocate. Many men to put off a Commodity,
will have a partner, or some friend or other to bid them money for it, and then
the next Customer they have forit, they will tell him that but even now such a
man offered so much for it, to draw the buyer to give so much; And then they
will say it cost me so much, when it may be, they had Commodities of a higher
prise, and greater value amongst them at the same rate, and perhaps they have a
great deal of time allowed them for the payment, whereas the buyer pays ready
money; and many such like equivocations to deceive the world withal.

5. Do not in selling a Commodity, work upon the ignorance or simplicity of the
man that comes to buy that Commodity of thee. If you perceive that he is
unskilful, rather use him the better then the worse, Zeph. 1.9. God threatens
to punish the young men that leap upon the threshold, and fill their Masters
houses with violence and deceit, and so in 1. These. 4.6. says the Apostle, let
no man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any matter, for the Lord is the
avenger of all such. So in 2 Pet. 2.3. the Apostle speaking there of corrupt
teachers, says he, through covetousness shall they with fained words make
merchandise of you: thus do false Tradesmen in their Shops. It is a great sin
for a man to work upon the ignorance of the buyer thereby to advance the price
of a commodity.

6. Take heed you do not embase a commodity from its primitive and original
goodness and excellency, that so you may get the more by it. This the Scripture
condemns in Amos 8.6. They sell the refuse of the wheat. The Corn-mongers would
pick out the best grains, and then sell the refuse, which God reproves and
condemns them for. And this the Prophet alludes to in Esaias 1.22. Thy silver is
become dross, thy wine mixed with water, they mingled wine with water, and
dross with filver; the Scripture condemns the debasing a commodity from its
primitive goodness, and yet to sell it at the full price and value of the best.

7. Be not amongst the first that shall raise the Market, and enhance the price
of a commodity. This I hinted in the morning to be a very great miscarriage. In
Prove. 11.26. He that withholdeth Corn the people shall curse hin; but be that
sells it the people shall bless him. Neh. 5.2.3
It is a great oppression in a Commonwealth, for men to raise the price of
corn, or any other commodity, when there is no necessity of it.

8. Be not so eager and intent in selling your commodities, as not to content
your selves to trade upon the six days of the week; but you must sell upon the
Sabbath Day too. Be not like those in Amos 8.5. that say, when will the new
Moons be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
wheat. These greedy covetous muck-worms were so bent upon their gains, that the
six days of the week were not enough for them, but they would sell upon the
Sabbath too. Neh. 13.21. this is that which Nehemiah was so careful to reform,
when the Merchants came into Jerusalem to sell their commodities on the
Sabbath Day, he testified against them, and contested with the Nobles of Judah,
and said unto them, what evil thing is this that you do, and profane the
Sabbath Day? and he told the Merchants and sellers of all kind of wares, that
if they did so again, he would lay hands upon them: so that from that time
forth they came no more on the Sabbath. This condemns your common
tipling-houses, and small retail Trades, that make nothing of selling small
trifling things upon this day, which is a great sin.

9. When your cozenage and unjust dealings in your sellings are found out and
discovered, do not justify your selves in your deceit. Many men, if you come
and tell them, that they sell dearer then others, they will not be persuaded to
it, or if you tell them the commodity you bought of them, is not good, they
will say it is as good as can be afforded of the price, like those in Hosea
12.7. Ephraim is a Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand, he loves
to oppress, yet he says, I am become rich, I have found me out substance, and
in all my labors they shall find no iniquity in me; that were sin. Though the
balances of deceit were in his hand, yet says he, none can accuse me of sin
or iniquity in my dealings.

10. Do not sell those Commodities that are not vendible, nor fit to be sold.
As first,

1. Spiritual things they are not to be sold; Simon Magus when he would have
purchased the gift of the Holy Ghost with money, says the Apostle, go thy way,
and thy money porish with thee.

2. And so monuments of Idolatry, Crucifixes, Images, Beads, Conjuring Books,
and the like: these are not fit to be sold, Act. 19. Many of them that used
curious arts, came and brought their Books and burnt them, and the price of
them was valued to be 50000. pieces of silver. These books here spoken of were
Conjuring-books, and though they were of so great value, yet they would not
sell them, but burnt them.

3. Do not sell men for slaves, Deuteronomy. 24.7. If a man be found stealing any of
his Brethren, the Children of Israel, and makes merchandise of him, or sells
him, then that thief shall die, and you shall put away evil from you.

4. (And again) you must not sell your self as Ahab did, to work wickedness,
and thus witches sell themselves to the Devil, to be his Servants; and thus do
all licencious and loose livers. Remember beloved, you are not your own; but
are bought with a price, even with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and
therefore you must glorify God in your souls and bodies that are his.

5. You must not sell stolen goods, these are not saleable: as men should not
buy, so neither should they sell stolen goods.

And 6. You must not sell any thing that cannot be made use of, without sin, as
stuff to paint faces with, and such like: It is true, a man may sell those
things that accidentally may be sinful in the using of it; but we must not
sell such things as are only for sinful uses.

And thus I have done with these ten particulars, wherein you must not
transgress Scripture Rules in selling.

I shall now handle some cases of conscience touching trading, and commerce in
the world.

As first, Cases of Conscience concerning buying and selling.
the buyer may say, How shall I know when I buy a Commodity too cheap? and the
seller may say, How shall I know when I sell a Commodity too dear?

I answer, that though it is true, the Scripture is not express, how much you
should get, whether a penny, or two pence, or 3. or 4. more or less, in a
shilling: yet your gains ought to be no more then what is ordinarily gotten in
such Commodities, by men of your own Trade: as the Market goes, and as
ordinarily things are valued in the place where you dwell, those rates you
ought to take.

2. Sell as those men do, that are most conscientious in their ways, as far as
they go you may go.



In what cases a man may take more for a Commodity then it is worth. 2 King.
6.25.
In some extraordinary cases it is lawful: as first in this case, as suppose a
man has a quantity of goods by him, and God by his providence orders it so,
that that place where he dwells be besieged, so that those Commodities, are
very scarce, in this case he may warrantably advance his price: thus it was in
the Siege of Samaria, an Asses head, and Doves dung were sold for a great
price, whereas before they were worth nothing; but when the occasion is
removed, the Commodity must fall to its former price again.

2. If a man be solicited and importuned to sell a commodity which he is
unwilling to part withal, and cannot well spare without damage to himself;
yet being overcome with importunity, is content to let his neighbor have it,
in that case he may take more for it then it is worth; but in a usual and
ordinary way of Trade, it is a sin to take more then is the common custom of
the place to give.



Whether it be lawful to sell dearer for time, then for ready money.
Mr. Perkins in his first Volum upon the eighth Commandment determines the
case, and conceives it to be a sin to sell dearer for time, then for ready
money; but certainly, this opinion is not consistent with the Rules of reason,
and therefore I shall give you my judgment in this particular.

1. Then I conceive it no breach of equity in trading, to take the more for a
commodity if the man that buys it requires time for the payment of it, then if
he paid ready money; and my reason is this, because the parting with a Commodity
without money, is a damage and hinderance to the seller; and therefore he may
lawfully take more, as in Levit. 25.14,15. says God there, if thou buyest
ought of thy Neighbor, or sellest ought to thy Neighbor, you shall not
oppress one another; but according to the multitude of years thou shall increas
the price thereof and according to the fewness of years, thou shall diminish
the price of it. The case here is the same, if you sell your commodity for a
term of years, before you have your money, you may sell it for the more, and
if for ready money, you ought to take the less for it. Ahab would not take
away Naboths Vineyard from him; 1 King. 21.2.
but says he, if thou will let me have it, I will either give thee the worth
of it in money, or else a better Vineyard for it. Mark here, if he had taken
ready money, he should have had but the worth of it; but if he would not take
money, he was to have a better thing, a better Vineyard for it. So that I cannot
see any thing in Scripture, whereby this is inconsistent with the Rules of
equity; for a man to take a little more for a commodity then it is worth,
because he has not money in hand for it. But yet you must not work upon a poor
man's necessity in this case, and you must be sure, never to take more then what
your damage amounts to by the forbearance of your money so long.

whether a man may take a pawn or pledge to secure his debt.
Q. 3. If a man has sold a commodity, and the buyer be not able to pay him in
money, whether may the seller in that case, lawfully take a pawn or a pledge to
secure the debt?

Answ. God does allow a man to take a pledge in such a case to secure his debt,
as in Deuteronomy. 24.10,11,12. when thou do lend thy Brother any thing, thou shall
not go into his house to fetch his pledge; but the man to whom thou do lend,
shall bring out the pledge unto thee. Prove. 10.16.27.13.
It is lawful for a man to take a pledge; but he must not go into the man's
house to take it himself, but his debtor must bring it out to him, that which
he can best spare, till he can make payment of the money: but yet the Lord does
forbid the taking of a man's apparel for a pledge, Deuteronomy. 24.6. Exo. 22.26 Job
22.5.6
or the nether Millstone, if a poor man has no more Clothes but what he has
upon his back, it is cruelty to take them, or to take a Mil-stone, or any thing
whereby the man gets his living, this is a sin; but he must take that which his
debtor can best spare till he pay the money: so that pledges are lawful to be
taken by the Creditor, in case the man is able to spare it without any
prejudice to his life or livelihood.

Whether it be lawful to arrest and go to law with a man for money that is
owing him.
If a man has sold a Commodity, and his debtor make no conscience of paying him
for it, whether in such a case is it lawful to arrest that man for his money,
and go to law with him?

Answ. If a man be unable to pay what he owes, and is thus disinabled, not
through his own neglect or ill husbandry, but by the hand of God, if the man
has been laborious and industrious in his Calling, and yet through the
providence of God is fallen to decay, and declined in his estate, it is
inconsistent with equity to be rigorous with such a man, or throw him into
prison for this money; but if a man has spent his Estate prodigally, or in case
he be able to pay his debts, and yet will not, then it is lawful for a man to
arrest, Mat. 5.25.
and cast such a man into prison, and use the best means he can to procure it.
But where nothing is to be had, there must be a forbearance of the debt, like
the Creditor that Christ speaks of, Levit. 25.35.
Luke 7.42. who had two debtors, the one owed him five hundred pence, and the
other fifty, and when they had nothing to pay, he frankly for gave them both.
If a man be brought to decay in his Estate by the hand of God, and is not able
to bring the year about, or to pay any of his debts, it is cruelty to be
extreme with such a man, or throw him into prison when he is unable to pay: but
if a man be idle and does not follow his Calling, or has spent his Estate by
prodigality, and Company-keeping, or the like. Or if he have a concealed
Estate, and be able to pay, and will not, in such cases as these, it is lawful
to arrest or imprison, or take any other lawful course to regain his debt; for
if God requires and commands that men should pay their debts, certainly he does
allow that men should take any lawful course to recover what is due to them,
when they can get it by fair means; 2 King 4.7
but God does command men to pay their debts, Romans 13.8. says the Apostle, owe
nothing to any man, and therefore it is lawful for a man to use means to
recover what is due to him.

you that are Tradesmen in the world, shall be only by way of caution, to take
off a misconceit that is fastened in the minds of many of you, that if you do
conform your selves to Scripture-Rules, and do not now and then deal indirectly
in your Trades, you shall never get an Estate, and grow rich, it is a common
Proverb amongst some men, that plain dealing is good, but he that uses it
shall die a Beggar, which is a most false and diabolical speech; for plain
dealing and conscienciousness in a man's actions, is the ready way to be rich,
Prove. 10. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with
it: but the great Estates of wicked men, are purchased and possessed with a
great deal of trouble and vexation, and accusations of conscience, and many a
man may look back upon his thousands that he has gotten in a few years, and
say of these riches, that they are but the fruit of his cozenage and sin, and
the price of his soul. And therefore beloved, I beseech you in the fear of God,
take heed of oppression and deceit in your tradings; do not say plain dealing
will make you die a beggar; for it is the only way to be rich: let the word of
God be your Rule in all your actions, that having his blessing upon your
endeavors, you may purchase an estate, and have no sorrow added to it.

SERMON. X.
1 Cor. 7 30. -- And they that buy as though they possessed not.
THere is yet one point more, that this clause, (and they that buy as though
they possessed not) will afford, which is this.

Doct. That the possessing and laying up an Estate by trading, is not
disallowed by God.

An Estate and possession in the world is allowed by God, and therefore in old
time, the best men were likewise the richest men, as Abraham, and Jacob, and
David, etc. But I am unwilling to insist upon so general a Doctrine, and had
rather handle the words more particularly. And they that buy as though they
possessed not, that is, when a man has gotten an Estate by buying and selling,
he should carry such an indifferent affection toward it, as if he had gotten
nothing at all, from whence note this Doctrine.

That Christians should take a great deal of heed, that they do not place an
immoderate affection upon the Estates and possessions they have got by buying
and selling. And they that buy as though they possessed not, In Psalm. 62.10.
says David, If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. Many men do not
only possess wealth, but their wealth possesses them, and takes up all their
time and strength, and thoughts, and their hearts too, you may possess wealth,
but wealth must not possess you: If your rickes do increase, yet you must not
set your hearts upon them. Job cleares himself in this case, Job 25.31. says
he, If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten
much, let God do so and so to me.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall handle these two Queries.

Qu. When do Christians place an excessive or immoderate affection upon the
Estates and possessions they have gotten by their Trades?



First, When may Christians be said to place an immoderate affection upon their
possessions?

Answ. I shall give it you in these 5. or 6. Demonstrations. As

1. Affections to the world when excessive.
You then place an excessive affection upon your Estate in the world, when your
earnest endeavors and pursuit after worldly wealth does take you off from all
serious endeavors after spiritual things. And thus it was immoderate in those
Tradesmen mentioned in Mat. 22.5. that when a great King had invited them to a
marriage feast, and sent forth his Servants to tell those that were bidden,
that all things were ready and prepared for them, they made light of it, and
went their ways, one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise, and would not
come: when men are so bent upon their gain, and have their hearts so taken up
with the world, that they are quite taken off from all spiritual duties, when
it is with them, as with the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.12 Mat. 13.22
that when Christ told him, that if be would be perfect, he must sell all he
had, and give it to the poor, he went away sorrowful; for he had great
possessions: this is a sign their hearts are too much glewed to the things of
the world, Luke 10.42. when Martha was cumbred about many things of the world,
though these were expressions of her love to Christ, yet because she did
neglect giving attendance in hearing Ghrists voice, he told her, that she was
troubled about many things; but one thing was necessary, and Mary had chosen
the better part that should not be taken from her. When your following Trades
takes you off, that you never read the word, or pray in your Families, or
Closet, then is your affection to the world immoderate.

2. When your tradings and affairs in the world does so take up your hearts,
that you cannot take that ordinary refreshment and comfort that God allows you
in the blessings you enjoy, then you place inordinate affections upon the
things of the world, Eccles. 5.12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet; but
the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. When men are so
possessed, and taken up with the affairs of the world, that either for care of
getting, fear of losing, or hopes of increasing, they cannot eat their bread in
due season, nor take their natural rest and sleep: this is a sign their hearts
are too much glewed to the world, Eccles. 2.26. God gives to a man that is
good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner he gives
travel, to gather and heap up riches, he gives him disquietness, vexation, and
trouble of mind. The Psalmist sets out a covetous man by a lively comparison,
in Psalm. 59.14.15. he compares him to a Dog that is hungry, that at the evening
returns and makes a noise, and goes round about the City, and wanders up and
down for meat, and grudges if he be not satisfied. It is reported of the Dog,
that when he is hungry, he has a most enraged appetite, now says he, let him
run up and down like a Dog, and make a noise, for want of meat.

3. You are excessive in placing your affections upon your riches, when what
you possess in the world, fills you with security and sensuality. What, says
the rich man in the Gospel, I have goods laid up for many years, there is his
security, soul take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry; there is his sensuality.
As it is spoken of the Inhabitants of Hazor, Jer. 49.31. Go (says God to the
Babylonians) to the wealthy Nation that dwells without care. In Prove. 18.15.
says Solomon, the rich man's wealth is his strong City, and as an high-wall in
his own conceit. And thus did riches make David secure, Psalm. 30.6. In my
prosperity I said, I shall never be moved, then are your affections to the
things of the world excessive, when it breeds in your security and sensuality.

4. When your wealth proves serviceable and instrumental to your lusts, and is
as fuel to your corruptions, then is your love to it inordinate; as in Prove.
10.16. The labor of the righteous tends to life, but the revenues of the
wicked tend to sin.

1. When you make your wealth and riches fuel to feed your pride, as in Ezekiel
28.5. By thy great wisdom, and by thy traffic have thou increased thy riches,
and thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches, said God to the Prince of
Tire. If God gives you wealth, and as you grow high and rich in the world, you
grow proud in heart too: this is a sign you are immoderate in your affections
to the world; and hence it is, that the Apostle in 1 Timothy 6.17. charge those
that be rich in the world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy.

2. When your wealth breeds uncompassionateness in you, and makes you despise
and contemn the poor, Jam. 2.3. 'Twas the rich man in the Gospel, that let poor
Lazarus lie at his Gate, and gave him nothing, Luke 16.2. He that has this
worlds good, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up the bowels of his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him, says the Apostle 1
John 3.17.

3. When you do, as in Prove. 10.15. make your wealth your confidence, then are
your affections immoderate to the things of the world, when you will part with
nothing to pious and Christian uses, either for the furtherance of Gods glory,
and worship, or for the good of man, 1 John 3.17.

4. Then are your affections excessive upon the things of the world, when you
are so insatiable and eager after riches, Eccles. 5.10.
that you never think you have enough. When men enlarge their desires like
hell, and are like the grave that will never be satisfied. When you are like
those spoken of in Esaias 56.11. that were greedy Dogs that could never have
enough; such men are slaves to their wealth, and their riches possesses them
more then they it. (Beloved) when you are thus eagen in your pursuit of riches,
and so restless in your desires, after the things of the world, this shows
that your affections are too much set upon them. And thus I have done with the
first question, and have showed you when peoples affections toward their
Estates and possessions, may be said to be excessive.

Prove. 23.5.
It may be your Estate will die and decay before you die; for riches (as
Solomon says) take unto them wings, and fly away from you., which he uses as
an Argument to take off men's affections from the world. Beloved, could you
carry your wealth with you, when you go hence, and keep it to eternity, then
indeed your earnest and unwearied endeavors after it were excusable; but
seeing you must leave all behind you when you die, naked came you into the
world, and naked shall you return, you shall carry nothing with you, therefore
do not set your hearts too much upon them. In Psalm. 49.12. says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 39. Psalm. 49.10
Man being in honor abides not men heap up riches; but know not who shall
enjoy them. In Eccles. 2.18. He leaves it unto the man that shall be after him.

for it, nor yet honestly or charitably employ it. Eccles. 2.19. I hated all
the labor that I had taken under the Sun, because I should leave it to the man
that shall be after me, and who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a
fool. Shall I rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of
carefulness, and take so much pains to get an Estate, when I do not know
whether a wise man or a fool may enjoy it: You that are such covetous
muck-worms, as spend all your strength and time in getting riches, and heaping
up wealth carkingly and eagerly; yet thou do not know whether he that shall
rule over all thy labor, shall be a wise man or a fool, a good man or a bad, a
friend or a stranger, whether he shall employ it well or ill.

3 Do not place your affections excessively upon the world, because you have
better things pertaining to another world, that you should place your
affections upon, you have true lasting and durable riches to rejoice in, as
reconciliation with God, communion with Christ, the comforts of the Holy Ghost,
justification of your persons, sanctification of your natures, acceptance of
your services, etc. you have all these to rejoice in, and therefore why will
you be so much in love with Pebbles, when you may have Pearls in the room of
them; with Counters of Brass, when you may have pieces of Gold.

4. Another reason is this, because if you do place your affections too
immoderately upon the things of the world, when you come to part with them, and
it pleases God to take them away from you, the loss of them will be the more
grievous, and vexatious to you. When the Lord comes to lay you upon the D^ghill
(like Job) and strips you of all your comforts, riches, possessions, Children,
and friends in one day; how bitter and grievous will this be to you? If your
hearts be cemented and glewed to the world, and the things thereof sit as close
to you, as the skin upon your flesh, you will not part with them but with a
great deal of trouble and difficulty; but if you live with weaned affections to
the world, and the comforts of this life are but as the Gloves to your hands,
which you may easily pull off without any pain; Then when God calls for any of
your comforts, or strips you of all of them, you will be willing to part with
them, and say with Job, the Lord gave, and the Lord takes, blessed be his name
for all. Job, 1.21.
Otherwise it will be a great misery and a sad affliction to thee, to be stripped
of those possessions that have taken full possession of thy heart.

And thus I have done with the Doctrinall part of this part of the Text, and
they that buy as if they possessed not.



Is it so that Christians ought to take heed, that they do not place immoderate
affections upon the riches and possessions they get in the world? then I have
something to say

First, to those that do buy and sell, and trade in the world, and take a great
deal of pains, and yet God does not bless their endeavors with any increase;
they buy, but possess nothing, they labor and toil in the world, but get
nothing.

2. To those that buy and sell, and possess riches in the world, but do it by
dishonest gain.

3. To those that buy and sell, and get great Estates, and do it lawfully, and
by honest and commendable courses. I shall spend two Sermons in speaking to
these three sorts of people, and shall now begin with the first.

1. To you that buy and sell, and are industrious in your Callings in the
world, and yet God does not bless you with any increase; you buy, but possess
nothing, and can hardly bring the year about with all your pains, and labor
and sweat, and toil in the world, you cannot advance your Estate, nor get any
thing at the years end: Advice to such as take pains in the world, and yet are
scarce able to get a subsistence.
to such as you are I have two things to say. First, something by way of
Counsel. Secondly, something by way of comfort.


1. By way of Counsel, I would have you first to look about you, and seriously
to consider, whether your poverty be not of your own procuring, whether it be
not your own fault, that you do not grow rich and thrive in the world. Beloved,
there are many ways wherein men may follow a Calling, and yet not get riches.
As

1. Does not your poverty proceed from your own indiscretion in managing your
Calling. In Psalm. 112.5. A wise man will guide his affairs with discretion: so
in Ezekiel. 28:4. with thy wisdom and with thy understanding thou have gotten thee
riches, there is a great deal of wisdom and judgment required in the managing
a Trade, which it may be thou want, and so by thy indiscretion in buying and
selling, and trusting out thy COmmodities, thou keep thy self behind hand in
the world.

2. It may be though you follow your Calling, yet you are idle and sloathfull,
do not follow your Trade closely. Now says Solomon, Prove. 6.9. To a sloathfull
man poverty comes as one that travelleth, and want as an armed man.

3. It may be you are a Company-keeper, and what you get by your Trade you
spend in the Alehouse, what you get one way you spend another. Prove. 28.19. He
that follows after vain persons shall have poverty enough. It may be you
spend your Estate in riot and excess, Prove. 23.21. The drunkard and the glutton
shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags.

4. It may be thou do follow a Calling, and get a great deal of money, and
yet ar^ a niggard, and a close Fisted man, that wilt not pity and relieve the
necessities of the poor, and this is the way to make thee a beggar. In Prove.
11.24. says Solomon, There is that scatters, and yet increases, that man
that gives when no eye sees him, or ear hears him, he that distributes to the
poor shall increase his store; but (says he) there is that withholdeth, (that
is, withholdeth from the poor) and that tends to poverty, when God sees that
thou do improve thy talent, and employ what thou have to his glory, he will
give thee more; but if not, he will take away what thou have, and give it to
others that shall make better use of it.

2. You that buy and sell and yet get nothing, take this advice; do not grudge
at, nor envy the wealth and prosperity that other men have and enjoy in the
world, Psalm. 37.7. says David, Fret not thy self because of him that
prospers in his way. David himself slipped into this fault almost, Psalm.
73.2.3. and Jeremy reasons with God about it, Jerem. 12.1. The riches and
possessions of wicked men it is their portion, and all they are like to have,
and therefore do not envy them, but rather pity them, because their riches
will be their ruin, and they are but like unto Oxen fatted for the slaughter.
Will it grieve thee that thou go on foot, when another rides to the place of
execution?

3. You that can get nothing here below, do you labor to lay up a treasure in
Heaven: if you cannot get riches here, labor to get grace here. If you cannot
get gold, yet buy the Gold that Christ speaks of in Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee,
says he, to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich. If you
cannot get goods, get grace; if you cannot get wealth, get Christ; if you
cannot get earth, get Heaven.

And thus much by way of counsel to you that buy and sell and get nothing: but
now I have a word or two by way of comfort to you.

1. Rest contentedly satisfied with thy condition; and know, that if God denies
thee possessions and increase by thy trading in the world, he sees it is for
thy good. In Psalm. 84.11. The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Eccles. 5.13.
Now it may be the Lord sees that if he should give thee wealth and great
possessions in the world, it would be for thy hurt, thy riches would be thy
ruin, and thy wealth thy woe, and thy prosperity a snare to thee; and
therefore he keeps it from thee in a great deal of mercy. We should look upon
all the comforts that God keeps from us as so many mercies, because God keeps
that from us that would ruin us.

2. God in his dispensations of outward blessings in the world, does in his
wisdom think it best to let good men have the least share in these worldly
possessions, and wicked men to have the greatest. In Psalm. 73.3. The wicked are
not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued as other men; but their
eyes stand out with fatness, and they have more then heart can wish; they spend
their days in jollity and mirth. But now on the other side, James 2.5.
God has chosen the poor of the world to be rich in faith, and heirs of a
Kingdom: the wisdom of God is very much discovered in thus dispensing his
blessings, God does herein like to a Nobleman, that will not suffer his Son to
go from house to house, to gather in his yearly Rents; but imployes his Servant
in so mean a work, and many times the Servant has money enough when the Son
has none. In Eccles. 9.11. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet riches to men of understanding. Wicked men shall have riches, when men
of wisdom and understanding shall have none; God in his wisdom sees it meet,
that wise men shall scarce have bread to eat, when fools have abundance, that
men of understanding shall want, when wicked men have more then their hearts
can wish. Now will you murmur and complain when God sees it meet to be thus?

3. Consider for thy comfort, that God gives thee better riches then they have,
and though he give wicked men the possession of these outward comforts, yet you
have the true right and title to these possessions: now who would be so
foolish, as to count the Steward happier then the Heir? the Steward only has
it in possession; but the Heir in propriety. And consider, that if thou art one
that belongs to the election of grace, though thou be never so poor here, yet
thou have the only true and durable riches; Rev. 2.9.
thou art enriched with those treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and grace and
happiness that are at Gods right hand. And though God does not trust thee with
Pebbles, yet if he gives thee Pearls, thou have no reason to complain: though
God does not trust thee with riches, yet if he gives thee grace and Christ, and
heaven and glory, thou have no reason to murmur against him. Acorns are good
enough for Hogs, but bread is for the Children.

4. Consider, that the poorer you are in the world, the fitter you are for Gods
service. The lean Ox is fitter for service then the fatted Ox: what if God
keeps thee low and poor, seeing it is to make thee more capable of doing him
service, why should you be troubled?

5. Consider, that thou art free from the more cares and encumbrances, by how
much the less the Lord gives thee here in this world; for they that will be
rich fall into diverse snares and temptations, 1 Timothy 6.9. Now which is best,
either to go in a broad way where there is a snare laid for thee, or to go in a
narrow way where you may go with safety, and without danger. And therefore
(beloved) if God give you but a small portion here below, why then say, I have
the less cares and troubles, and snares and encumbrances that rich men are
liable and exposed to. In Genesis 13.2. it is said, Abraham was rich, the word in
the Hebrew is heavy; and so those that are encompassed with riches, the Prophet
Halbakuk expresses it by a compassing about with thick Clay; they are so
laden with worldly enjoyments, that they cannot run the race that is set
before them in the way to Heaven.

6. Consider, that it may be thou have more peace and comfort, and
contentedness in the little thou possessest, then many times wicked men have in
their great abundance, you have many times more real comfort in your scarcity
and penury, then the wicked have in all their plenty. Psalm. 37.16. A little
that the righteous man has is better then the riches of many a wicked man.
Prove. 15.6.
Beloved, those to whom God gives abundance, they have every thing neat and
necessary about them, yet they may have something or other that pinches and
troubles them; the condition of poverty, want and disgrace, may be more easy
in some respects. A Satin Suit may more gall a rich man, then a Russet Coat
that a poor man wears does trouble him. God does many times mingle care and
trouble with the riches and abundance that wicked men have; but now a poor man,
though he has but a little, yet he has the blessing of God with it, Prove.
10.22. The blessing of God makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Eccles.
4.6. Better is a bandfull with quietness, then both the hands full with travel
and vexation of spirit: A little Estate with peace and contentedness is better
then twice as much with sorrow and care. Suppose thou art a poor man, yet it
may be thou have more comfort in what thou have, then the rich have in their
affluence and confluence of all worldly things. Now consider with your selves,
is it not better for thee to wear a Russet Coat, and have a sound and healthy
body, then to be clothed in Satin and Purple, and have a Leprosy all over
thy body? Is it not better for thee to enjoy a little with the blessing of God
upon it, then to have all the riches and abundance of the wicked, and to have
their care and trouble with it?

SERMON. XI.
1 Cor. 7.30. -- And they that buy as though they possessed not.
I Come now to direct the use of this Doctrine, (that Christians ought to take
heed that they do not place an inordinate and excessive affection upon the
Estates that they have gotten by buying and selling in the world) to the second
sort of people I promised to speak to, and those are such as do buy and sell in
the world, and have gotten them Estates and possessions, and that honestly and
justly. I have three things to say to you. 1. I shall give you some cautelary
directions. 2. Some astonishing considerations. 3. Some useful admonitions in
reference to your Estates, justly and honestly gotten.


1. I shall begin with the cautelary directions.

1. You that have gotten wealth and riches in the world, Several cautelary
directions to those that have got great Estates in the world, justly.
I would have you often recollect and call to mind your former poverty in the
world, before you were rich: this the Lord commanded the Israelites to do,
Deuteronomy. 8.2. says God there to them, when you shall live and multiply, and go in
and possess the Land, which I promised to your Fathers, then thou shall
remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the
wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, and to keep thee from pride and
haughtiness of spirit. I remember what Plutark relates of Agathocles, that when
he was advansed from a Potters Son to be a Prince, he would always have his
meat served up to him in earthen Platters, to humble him in the remembrance of
his mean extraction, and to put him in mind from whence he came, that he might
not be lifted up with pride. And so beloved, you should often call to mind, and
reflect upon your former poverty and low condition: it may be some of you, when
you came to this City, had scarce Clothes to your backs, which now are clad in
Silk and Satin, you should remember from whence you came. Thus David did in
Psalm. 78.71. He chose David also his Servant, and took him from the sheep
Folds, from following the Ews great with young, be brought him to feed Jacob
his people, and Israel his inheritance. This is here mentioned by the Psalmist,
as a holy meditation to keep his heart humble, this is the first direction.

Psa. 127.2.
all will do no good, Deuteronomy. 8.17.18. Thou shall not say in thy heart, my power,
and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth; but thou shall remember
the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth. Beloved,
you must take heed of ascribing your riches to your own industry; for without
the blessing of God nothing can prosper, Hab. 1.16
take heed of sacrificing to your own nets, and burning incense to your own
draggs, because you have gotten wealth in the world.

3. Be not proud of those riches that God has given thee. In 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge them, says the Apostle, that are rich in the world, that they be not
high minded, Vermis divitia um superbia est. August. Ardua res haec est opi^us
non ^adere mores. Et cum tot (...) oesos viceris esse N^mam. Martial.
the worm of pride does often breed in rich men's hearts, it is a hard matter to
keep your heart low and humble when your Estate is high, and to keep pride
down, when God has lifted thee up above thy Brethren, Ezekiel. 28.4.5. By thy
great wisdom, and by thy traffic thou have increased thy riches, and thy heart
is lifted up. As God does lift you up in wealth, take heed that your heart be
not lifted up with pride.

4. Trust not in your possessions and riches, as if they were able to protect
you from dangers, and deliver you from troubles, etc. The rich man's wealth,
says Solomon, is his strong Tower, and as an high wall in his conceit, Mat.
10.24. How hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the Kingdom
of God? Prove 10.15
Juvenal could say, Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in Arca, tantum habet
and fidei, your silver and gold cannot shelter you from the wrath of God.

5. You that have gotten great Estates and possessions, look not on your selves
as owners, but as Stewards of the manifold blessings of God, and of the great
abundance that he affords you. Beloved, God is the owner of all that you
possess; the Cattle upon a thousand hills are his. He is the right Owner, you
are but the Stewards of your abundance; and therefore if God has blessed thee
with abundance of riches in the world, that thou art worth so many hundreds by
the year, consider, that you are no Owner, but a Steward of the blessings of
God, they are left thee but for a season of years, and therefore do not abuse
them to excess and wantonness; but improve them to the giver and owner of
them, Luke 16.11.12. If you be not faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true riches, and if you be not faithful in that
which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own: so verse 9.
make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness.

6. If God has blessed you with a great Estate, you may possess it; but let
not your wealth possess you. If riches increase, you must not set your hearts
upon them, your eye, or hand or tongue may be upon them; but you must not set
your heart upon them. Let your money come no nearer your heart, then your
hands. A Heathen could say, R^bus non me trado sed comm^ d^. Seneca.
that though he did lend himself, yet he would not give himself to his wealth.
Possessions in the world, are like a rose in a man's hand, if you use it gently,
it will preserve its savor and sent, and color a great while; but if you
crush it and handle it roughly, it will quickly lose its color and sweetness:
so if you use and employ your wealth well, you will possess it the longer; but
if you set your hearts too much upon it, you will quickly lose it. And thus I
have done with these cautelary directions, I shall now lay before you some
astonishing considerations.

1. You that have gotten great Estates in the world, Several astonishing
consideraon; to those that are rich in the world.
though never so honestly, consider, that God in the dispensations of his
grace, distributes most commonly the blessings of eeternall life, rather among
the poorer and meaner sort of people, then amongst the rich, and men of great
possessions. In 1 Cor. 1.26.27. You see your Calling Brethren, says the
Apostle, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called, (he does not say, not any, but not many) great good men like
Stars of the first magnitude, are thinly scattered in the firmament of a
Stae; but GOd has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise,
and God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty; and
base things of the world, and things that are despised has God chosen: so in
James 2.5. God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and
Heirs of a Kingdom. It is very observable, that among the seven Churches of
Asia, the best Church was the poorest, and the worst among them was the
richest,: the Church of Laodicea was the worst of all the Churches; Rev. 3.17.
for she was lukewarm, neither cold nor hot. And yet the Text says, she was
rich, and increased in goods, and needed nothing; and the Church of Smyrna,
that was one of the best Churches, Rev. 2.9. yet says Christ of her, I know
thy poverty, but thou art rich, though they were outwardly poor, yet they were
inwardly rich. God does ordinarily bestow his grace upon the poor, more then
upon the rich; and therefore this may be an astonishing consideration to you.
As heretofore God did choose mean and silly Creatures to be for sacrifices, he
did not choose the Lion and the Eagle, the Lion being the King of Beasts, and
the Eagle the King of Birds; but the Lord chose the Lamb and the Dove, poor
silly mean and harmless Creatures, not so noble, nor so well accounted of as
the Lion and Eagle. So in his elections to grace and glory, hechose the Lamb
and the Dove, that is, the poorer and meaner sort of people, rather then men of
great riches and possessions in the world.

2. Consider, that in the first and primitive preaching, and planting of the
Gospel: it was a rare thing for a rich man to embrace Christ, and be a follower
of him, Mat. 11.6. The poor receive the Gospel: these were the men that
embraced Christ. So in John 7.48. When the Officers and Soldiers that came to
apprehend Christ, heard him speak, they were convinced, and said, never man
spoke as he spoke; but says the chief Priests to them, are ye also deceived?
have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? It is worth your noting in
Mat. 27.57. it is said there, that Joseph, a rich man of Arimathea, he himself
also was one of them that did follow Christ. It is spoken as a matter of
wonder, that Joseph that was a rich man should follow Christ, Mark says, that
he went boldly to Pilate, Mark 15.43. but John says, he was Christ's Disciple
secretly for fear of the Jews. The poor and meaner sort of people, the poor
Fishermen did most of all receive the Gospel.

3. Consider, that where one man is made better by his abundance and riches in
the world, there are multitudes made worse by them. And therefore let this
consideration startle you, Eccles. 5.13. says Solomon, There is a sore evil
that I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to
their hurt. Beloved, where riches makes one man better, it makes a thousand
worse.

I remember I have read of Pius Quintus, who relates of himself, that when he
was a man of a mean and low condition in the world, then he had a very good
hope of his salvation; but afterward being advanced to be a Cardinal, then he
began very much to doubt and question it; but after that, being again promoted
higher, and made Pope, then he began quite to despair of it. His riches and
preferment in the world making him grow worse and worse.

May not some of you too truly complain when I was poor and in a low condition,
then I did continually remember to pray in my Family, to read and hear the word
of God, and frequent the Ordinances of God; but now I am grown rich, my Family
goes without prayer, and my worldly occasions interrupts and takes me off from
the worship and service of God, from reading, hearing and praying, both in
public, and privately in my Family, I am now a great deal worse, then when I
was poor, and I have evilly requited the Lord for all his mercies. Men's honors
change their manners, whiles they increase in wealth, they decrease in grace.
The people of God are usually better in a state of affliction then prosperity.
And thus you shall find, that David was a great deal better, when he was hunted
by Saul, like a Patridge upon the Mountains, then when he sat upon the Throne.
Therefore it is said, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. that Jehosaphat walked in the first ways
of David his Father; it seems his last ways were not so good: many men in
their last days, when they come to be aged and wealthy, they are then even
possessed with their riches, and they are in their hearts (it may be) when they
are not in their hands: and therefore consider seriously with your selves,
whether your first days in the world were not your best days, and now your
last and richest days, your worst days. It is observed of the Children of
Israel, that they were better under bondage in Egypt, then they were in the
Land of Canaan, where they had all things needful; for then they waxed proud
and forgot the Lord: therefore Moses gives them such a caution, Deuteronomy. 8. from
verse 7. to 15.

4. Consider this beloved, that your wealth and possessions in the world,
though they may be lawful and honestly gotten: yet they lay you under a
greater difficulty of coming to Heaven, then other men; in Mat. 19.23.24. when
Christ told the young man, that if he would be perfect, he must go sell all
that he had, and give to the poor, he went away sorrowful, for he had great
possessions. Then said Jesus to his disciples, how hardly shall a rich man
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again, I say unto you, it is easier for a
Cammel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God. Upon how hard terms can a rich man hope to go to Heaven? some
are of opinion, that the word here translated Camel, properly signifies a Cable
Rope, and Mr. Perkins is of that judgment too; and says he, though a Cable
Rope cannot go through a needles eye, as it is, yet if you untwist it, there is
a possibility of getting it through. So if men do untwist themselves from the
world, and live with weaned affections from their wealth and possessions, this
is the way for them to come to heaven. Heaven is compared to a stately palace,
with a narrow Gate, the expression shows a great deal of difficulty for rich
men to go to Heaven. Mark and Luke set it forth with a patheticall emphasis, oh
how hard, etc. but says Christ, That which is impossible with man, is possible
with God. The riches of the world are perplexing and alluring vanities, and
lays you under the greater difficulty of coming to Heaven, and it is a hundred
to one, but they do ensnare and entangle you.

5. Consider, that you to whom God has given great possessions in the world,
are exposed to more distracting and distorting and disquietting cares, then
poor men are; for they have no cause to complain of their poverty, if they have
but food and raiment, because they are free from those cares and troubles that
are incident to rich men; who would desire silken Stockins, if he must have
gouty Legs under them? and indeed the Gout is a disease that ordinarily
follows rich men? or desire a Satin Doublet, or a purple Robe, to have a
leprous and infirm body under them? so it is better for you to be poor as you
are, then to have riches, and so many troubles, and crosses and afflictions,
with them. In 1 Timothy 6.9,10. says the Apostle there, they that will be rich
fall into temptations and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction; for the love of money is the root
of all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have pierced themselves
through with many sorrows, Eccles. 5.12. The rest of a laboring man is sweet,
but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. So in Eccles. 2.26.
God gives to the sinner travel, both in gathering and heaping up of riches,
he meets with a great deal of sorrow and trouble which a poor man is without:
therefore riches are compared to thorns, you can hardly graspe them with your
hand, but they will pierce and wound you. A rich man has three vultures
continually feeding on his heart, great care in getting, fear in keeping, grief
in parting, and this hinders his quiet. It is observable, that the same word in
the Hebrew that signifies Merchandise, signifies trouble, to note unto us, that
those that do entangle themselves in the affairs of the world, will meet with a
great deal of trouble, and anguish, and vexation with it.

6. Consider, that many times your wealth and riches does stifle and interrupt
the success and power, and benefit of the word of God upon your souls. In Mat.
13.22. it is spoken of the thorny ground, that the deceitfulness of riches
choked the word, and made it altogether unfruitful. Can a crop of Corn grow
in a hedge of thorns? no more can the word thrive in a heart filled with
worldly cares.

Beloved, it may be these awakening considerations that I have laid before you
concerning riches, may make some of you go home with a resolution, never to be
rich, or endeavor after a great Estate in the world; but do not mistake me,
and conclude from hence that it is a sin to be rich, it is a danger to be rich,
but not a sin, it is a snare and temptation, and therefore you should take
care, both how you get, and how you use and employ your riches.

2. Because there is a danger in wealth, do not therefore cast away your
wealth, and spend it idly and wastfully, and throw away the blessings of God
from you. As it is reported of Crates the Thebane, Directions how to procure
Gods blessing upon our Estate, thereby to preserve and increase them.
who said of his wealth, Ego perdam te ne tu perdas me. I Will destroy thee, least
thou should destroy me. And this brings me to the 3d particular I promised to
handle, namely, to give you some useful directions and admonitions how you may
do to have Gods blessing upon your Estates, and thereby have them both
preserved and increased. And

1. Season thy possessions with grace, get grace to be mingled with thy goods,
and get the true riches to be mingled with thy worldly wealth; and this is the
way to preserve and improve them. In Psalm. 112.1.3. says the Psalmist, Blessed
is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments,
his seed shall be mighty upon the earth, wealth and riches shall be in his
house. When God bid Solomon ask what he would of him, 2 Chronicles. 1.12. he did
not ask riches, but wisdom and knowledge, and an understanding heart, and
says God to him, because this was in thy heart, and thou have not asked
riches, wealth, or honor, therefore says God, wisdom and knowledge is granted
to thee, and thou shall have riches and wealth, and honors likewise, such as
none of the Kings have had, that have been before thee, neither shall any after
thee have the like. Beloved, you should first seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and then all other things shall be added to you. The way to keep
and increase your riches, is to get grace into your hearts.

2. Employ part of your increase to pious and Christian uses, to promote and
advance Religion, and do it in your lifetime, Prove. 3.9.10. Honor the Lord
with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase, (that is)
give it to pious uses, what then? so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty,
and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. In token of thankfulness to God
for his blessing, improve part of them to his glory, for good and pious uses.

3. Give up part of thy increase to charitable uses, toward the relieving the
necessities of the poor, Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases, and there is that withholdeth more then is meet; but it tends to
poverty. A penurious withholding tends to poverty, God may blast an Estate that
is well gotten if it be ill kept, works of mercy done prudently were never a
hinderance, but rather a furtherance to men's outward Estates. As in other gifts
the good usage of them does bring an augmentation: so in these 2 Cor. 9.10. the
Apostle calls works of charity seed sown. No field so fruitful to sow in, as
the poor Members of Christ, no seed better then mercy, no Crop of Corn so
commodious as liberality will bring you. Yet Psalm. 112.5. give with discretion.
The wise man is merciful, but he orders his affairs with discretion. You
should be discreet in considering how much you ought to give according to your
ability, and no more; and when, and to whom you must give, not hand over head,
to tag and rag, to every beggar that goes up and down the streets, without any
difference; but to those poor men that follow a Calling, and if they be able,
do take pains to live in the world, and such as walk holily and religiously; if
you do thus give, I will assure you, you shall never be the poorer man at the
years end, or at least at your lives end; but to be a penurious man, is the way
to be a poor man.

As things ill gotten are soon lost, so things ill kept will not long continue.
If you would have Gods blessing upon your possessions, be of a tender and
compassionate disposition toward the poor. And do not only give to those that
come and beg of you, but do you go and find out the poor, Esa. 32.8.
and relieve them. The liberal, says the Prophet Esaias, will devise how to
give liberally: you should seek out, where is the man that I may do most good
to relieve and succor? Throw your money upon the waters and after many days
you shall find it again, it is a proverbiall speech for fruitless charges, we
use to say, I might as well have thrown my money down the River; Eccles. 11.12.
so though it may seem that you had as good cast your money into the water, yet
you shall find, that God before the years end, will bring about an increase,
and a good advantage for all that you have given away to the poor, for Christ
sake. And therefore be not reserved and niggardly toward the poor, do not only
give a morsel of bread at your door, that your Neighbor may see you, but give
in secret when no body sees you, and give to them that most need your charity,
and this is the way for God, both to bless and increase your riches.

4. And lastly, you whom God has blessed in your endeavors, and enlarged your
possessions, follow your Calling conscionably and diligently still: as God has
blessed thee hitherto, so do not now use any indirect or false ways to get
more riches, but follow thy Calling honestly stll, for the Hand of the diligent
says Solomon, makes rich, and in all labor there is profit, but the talk of
the lips tends only to penury. Prove. 10.4.14.23.


And thus I have done with these two branches: first I spoke something to those
that buy and sell, and follow a Trade in the world, and yet can scarce bring
the year about.

And now I have spoken something to those that buy and sell, and have gotten
great Estates and possessions in the world, and that justly and honestly.

And in the afternoon I shall spend an hour in speaking to those that have
gotten possessions and riches in the world; but dishonestly and fraudulently.

SERMON. XII.
1 Cor. 7.30. -- And they that buy as though they possessed not.
WE come now to speak of those that have gotten possessions in the world; but
have gotten them dishonestly and unjustly by false waights or measures, or any
other sinful or indirect courses. To such as these it will be worth the while,
especially in such a populous auditory, to spend an hour upon this last part of
the use. It may be something that may be said this day, may come near the
bosoms of some of you.

In the prosecution of this I shall do these three things. 1. Show you what
conjectures may be given of a man that has gotten an Estate unjustly. 2. I
shall give some cautelary Counsels and directions unto such. And 3. Lay before
them some terrifying considerations.


For the first, Conjectures of an Estate dishonestly gotten.
what conjectures may be given of a man that has gotten his Estate unjustly? I
shall name but three; as

1. You may conjecture that man to have come by his Estate dishonestly, that
has gotten a great Estate suddenly. When a man from a beggar shall suddenly
become a rich man. That Is a notable passage, Prove. 28.20. He that makes have to
be rich says Solomon, shall not be innocent, and therefore there is a curse
annexed to it in Prove. 20.21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the
beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed. Plutarch in the life of
Sylla mentions a notable passage that a Senator of Rome spoke to Sylla, Quo
modo vir bonus esse, cum tantas possideas opes, cum a Patre tibi nihil sit
relictum. And Menander said, a just man never grows rich on a sudden, In 1 Timothy 6.9.10. They that will be rich, that is, over eagerly and over hastily,
fall into temptations and a snare.

Prove. 22.2. with Prove. 29.13. The poor and rich, and the poor and the
deceitful. And this is a Rule that Seneca has, says he, a man that is rich
singly, it is very probable, he is rich dishonestly and unjustly.

God disallowes of, as selling false wares, by false waights, false measures,
and false lights, or by a false tongue, he that uses any of these ways in
trading, Cautelary directions to such as have go^ten Estates unjustly.
which God disallowes of, gets his Estate dishonestly. And thus much shall
serve for the first particular. I come now to the second; what cautelary Rules
and directions may be given to such men, as have gotten riches and possessions
unjustly? I shall give you three of them.

1. Take this Rule, let it not satisfy your Conscience, nor do you think it
will bear you out in your unjust gains, that what you have gotten unjustly and
irreligiously in your lifetime, you will employ religiously, and charitably at
your death.

Many men are apt to think, that when they have been unjust and deceitful
dealers all their lifetime, if they employ what they have unjustly gotten, to
good uses when they die, to give Legacies, build Hospitalls or Churches, that
they are well enough, and do therein give God satisfaction for all their
injustice; but it is not so, God will not be satisfied with such offerings. God
does not love a sacrifice that is gotten by rapine and violence. Esaias 61.8.
says God there, I love judgment, and hate robberies for burnt offerings. And
it is very observable, that in Deuteronomy. 23.18. the Lord gave an express charge,
that they should not bring to the Altar, the hire of a whore, to offer it unto
God, the Lord could not abide, that the money that was the hire of a whore, or
the price of a Dog, should be offered up to him in a sacrifice. And therefore
consider, you that employ to good uses the money gotten by oppression, violence
and deceit, the Lord will not be well pleased with it, this is the first
direction.

Zacheus, if I have taken away any thing from any man, by any false ways, I
will restore him fourfold. Sultan Selymus, when his Counselor Pyrrbus
persuaded him to bestow the great wealth he had taken from the Persian
Merchants, upon some notable Hospital for the Relief of the poor; the dying
Turk commanded it, rather to be restored to the right owners. When Henry the
third of England sent the Friar Minors a load of Freeze to cloth them, they
returned it back with this Message, that he ought not to give Alms of what he
had taken from the poor unjustly; neither would they accept of that abominable
gift. See Levit. 6.4.

3. Do not justify your self in a course of dishonest gain, when your
conscience tells you, that you have dealt unjustly. This was the great sin of
Ephraim in Hosea 12.7. Ephraim is a Merchant, the balances of deceit are in
his hand, he loves to oppress. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich, I have
found me out substance; in all my labors they shall find none iniquity in me
that were sin. He justified himself, though the balances of deceit were in his
band; but do not you do so; for though you do, yet God will not justify you:
In Mica 6.11. says God there, shall I count them pure, that have a deceitful
balance, or shall I count them honest that have a bag of deceitful waights?
no, I will not do it says God.

I now come to lay down some terrifying and astonishing Considerations. Six
terrible considerations for those that have gotten their Estates dishonestly.
All you that have gotten your Estates unjustly and dishonestly, let these six
terrible considerations lie near your hearts.

1. Confider, that an Estate ill gotten, is in the sight of God no better then
robbery, though it be gotten in a way of commerce and trading in the world. God
looks upon it as robbery, as if you had played the thief, and stole it out of a
man's house, or picked his pocket. In Psalm. 62.10. Trust not in oppressiou,
become not vain in robberies, oppression and Robbery is all one. So in Prove.
21.6.7. The getting of Treasures by a lying Tongue, is a vanity tossed to and
fro of them that seek death. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them,
because they refuse to do judgment. An Estate gotten by a lying tongue, is
called by God robbery, or a stealing with the tongue, and though we do not
account it so, yet it is no other in Gods account, then if you did rob a man,
or pick his pocket.

And therefore beloved, it is very observable, that what God required as a
restitution, for things that were stolen, in Exodus 22.1,2,3. was given by
Zacheus for those things which he had got unjustly, though he did not steal
them: Exodus 21.1. If a man did steal a sheep, the law was, that he should
restore four fold: so David judges, 2 Samuel 12.6. and Zacheus though he was not
a thief, yet says he, If I have taken any thing from any man unjustly, I will
restore him four fold, which notes to us, that things gotten by a deceitful
tongue, and riches gotten by oppression, is in the sight of God no better then
robbery: and beloved, none of you would be willing to have the brand of a thief
upon you, when indeed you are so, and no better in Gods account, if you get an
Estate dishonestly.

Ezekiel. 28.18. Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic, said God to Tyrus. Beloved, the
sins of your Trades, and of your traffic defiles your addresses to God, and
your approaches into his presence; when you come to worship before him, the
sins of your shops defiles your prayers, and pollute the Ordinances of God to
you, the Lord looks upon all your unjust gains, as if you did defile his
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 14.3.4. The word of the Lord came unto Ezekiel, saying, Son of
man, these men have set up their Idols in their heart, and put ^he stumbling
block of their iniquity before their face, should I be enquired of at all by
them? therefore speak unto them, and say, thus says the Lord God, every man of
the house of Israel, that sets up his Idols in his heart, and puts the
stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to the prophet, I
the Lord will answer him according to the multitude of his Idols.

Oh beloved, when you approach in to the solemn Assemblies, to make your
addresses to God, he knows what unjust gain is your Idol, and he himself will
answer you according to your iniquities, and will not hear your prayers. O let
this Consideration terrify you, the sin of your Shops will defile your
Sanctuary, and blast all the benefit of your prayers and services.

3. Consider, that if ever God awaken your Conscience, you cannot look upon
your unjust gains, but with abundance of disquietness and horror, and
perplexity of spirit: it may be now stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of
deceitfulness is pleasant to you; but when God comes to awaken your Conscience,
oh what horror and terror, and consternation will seize upon your spirits,
Job 20.15.18.20. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up
again, the riches that a man has gotten unjustly, shall be like meat that lies
undigested in a man's stomach, and forces him to vomit up again, and in verse
18. That which he labored for shall he restore, and shall not swallow it down,
surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, that is in his Conscience.
Those that are the great Cormorants of the world, that swallow down riches by
oppression, they shall not feel quietness in their Consciences: so Prove. 6.7.
the getting of Treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of
those that seek death, the robbery of the wicked shall destroy them. The word
here translated destroy, in the original, signifies to saw, which intimates,
that goods gotten by deceit and oppression, shall so trouble and perplex those
that get them, as a saw will trouble and torment a man to have his arm or Leg
sawed of with it. When a man comes to die and shall consider, all this wealth
that I have labored for in my life, must leave me at my death, and that your
riches are the price of your souls, and that they have been gotten by
defrauding and overreaching your Neighbor, by lying and cheating, and
oppression; How can such a man look God in the face? Esaias 33.14. who shall
dwell with the devouring fire? who shall dwell with the everlasting burnings?
he that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, and despises the gain of
oppression. None of those that use dishonest gain, and defraud their Brethren,
can look God in the face, what horror and terror of Conscience will it be to
you, when you come to die? to consider, that all your riches are purchased with
your souls blood. Thus it was with Judas, Mat. 27.3.

4 Consider, that sometimes those that have gotten great Estates unjustly, God
does so punish them, that he makes them to be objects of shame and reproach
amongst the people where they dwell. As in Habbak. 2.9,10. Woe to him that
coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high,
thou have consulted shame to thy house. When men do add house to house, and
squeeze the poor by oppression, they do consult shame to their own house, that
is not intentionally, but equentually, though they do not intend it so, yet it
falls out so, and we see it by experience, that many times your great
Cormorants and oppressors, bring shame upon their own heads in the places where
they live.

5. Consider, that sometimes God in his just judgments does blast those
Estates that are gotten dishonestly, even in this life, the oppressors Estate
dies before he dies, some times it is so; In Prove. 13.11. says Solomon, wealth
gotten by vanity shall be diminished. Ill gotten goods are called the treasures
of snow; now the property of snow is, if you hold a ball of it in your hand, it
will melt away presently, and so many times God makes riches unjustly gotten,
to melt away as Treasures of Snow: there is a notable expression in Prove.
20.21. An Inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end
thereof shall not be blessed. It is a very good observation that one has, who
takes notice, that of all the Tribes of Israel, the Tribe of Gad, Ruben, and
half the Tribe of Menasseth, were most hasty to get possession of the promised
Land. And those that were most eager to take their possessions first, the Lord
was pleased to make them lose their possessions a great while before any of the
other lost theirs, as you may see, a King. 10.33. I only mention this to let
you see, that though you be never so hasty in getting an Estate, yet God may
quickly take it from you. You have another notable Text for this purpose, Jer.
17.11. As the Partridge sits on eggs, and hatcketh them not, so he that
gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days,
and at his end shall be a fool.

Oh think of this beloved, that the curse of God waits upon wealth ill gotten,
and he will blast it, it may be before you die, Ezekiel. 22.12,13. thou have taken
usury and increase, and thou have greedily gained of thy Neighbors by
extortion, and have forgotten me says the Lord; behold therefore I have
smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain which thou have made. God will smite with
his hand, and blast all dishonest gain.

Object. But methinks I hear some rich men say, surely this is not so as you
say; for I have gotten by dishonest gains, and have dealt thus and thus, and
have gotten a great Estate, and am a rich man still, I have left all my
Children so much a year, and have thus much still left in the whole, and
therefore I do not see that this that you say is true.

Jer. 5.27. As a Cage is full of Birds, so are their houses full of deceit,
therefore they are become great, and waxen rich. God may suffer men that do
live and trade by deceit, to become great and wax rich.

2. Consider this, that you can have no true comfort, or quietness of
conscience in the wealth that you have ill gotten; though you have gotten it
unjustly, yet you cannot keep it quietly. The riches that you have swallowed
down, you shall vomit them up again, Job 20.15.18.
and surely you shall find no rest in your bellies.

3. Suppose you may keep an Estate all your lifetime, yet you will be a great
loser by the bargain, for all that; for what though you have gotten and kept
your Estate, yet you will lose your own soul by it. And says our Savior, what
will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Hab. 2.10.
Thou have by thy unjust gains, consulted shame to thy house, and sinned against
thy own soul: and thus much for the fifth Consideration.

6. Consider, that by dishonest gains thou do run the hazard of the greatest
loss in all the world; to wit, a precious and immortal soul. In that place
before quoted, Hab. 2.10. woe be to that man that gets wealth by dishonesty and
oppression, he sins against his own soul. James 5.3. woe be to you rich men,
your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you at the last day. Heb. 2.11. The stone shall cry out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber, in the house which you have gotten unjustly,
shall cry for vengeance against you another day. A Lapide has a notable Fable
to this purpose, comparing men that are unjust in their dealings to Spiders,
the righteous man to a Be. The Spider upbraded the Be for going up and down,
oh said the Be, stolidissimum est pro vita vitam evomere, provilissima re
charissimam medullam fundere, pro incerto certum expendere, pro minimo magnum
perdere.

And therefore consider oh wicked man, thou have gotten a fair Estate; but that
Estate shall cost thee thy souls blood, without repentance: oh let this
consideration lie near your hearts, that you endanger your precious souls by
your unjust gains.

And thus I have done with these three branches of the use, directed to three
sorts of people, 1. To those that buy and sell in the world, and can scarce
bring the year about. 2. To those that trade in the world, and get great
Estates, but unjustly and dishonestly. And lastly, to those that have got great
Estates and Possessions, by just and commendable courses. I shall now conclude
all with another short and practical use, and so have done.

I have already spent 4. Sermons about this business of commerce and trading in
the world, and all that I shall now say by way of use in the close of this
subject, shall be this, earnestly to exhort and beseech you in the midst of all
your buyings and sellings in the world, to drive a Trade for Heaven, and to
labor to possess grace as well as worldly goods, and to encourage you herein,
let me but offer these three things to your consideration.

1. Do not you expect some gain and increase by your Trades? there is not one
of you but think to get by your Trading. O therefore do not drive a Trade for
Heaven, and yet never labor to increase and grow better and better by it. Luke
19.5. the Lord expects that we should improve our talent, and gain by our
trading for Heaven. Do you expect to gain by your worldly Tradings? and does
not God expect, that in your Tradings for Heaven, you should gain more grace
and more knowledge, more experience, humility, holiness, heavenly mindedness,
and the like?

2. Would it not be matter of grief to you, to continue a long time, buying and
selling, and trading in the world, and yet not increase your stock, would not
this grieve you Beloved? and shall it not grieve you too, that you have been
trading for Heaven a long time, and yet from your first stepping forth to this
instant, have gotten no increase? and would it not grieve you to decline in
your Estates, after all your labor and pains, and trading in the world, and
should it not grieve you much more to be further off from Heaven now, then you
were at first?



And thus now I have gone through these three parts of the Text. And they that
weep as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced
not, and they that buy as though they possessed not.

In the next place I shall proceed to handle the fourth and last part, and they
that use this world as not abusing of it, for the fashion of this world passes
away.

SERMON. XIII.
1 Cor. 7.31. -- And they that use this world as not abusing of it, for the
fashion of this world passes away.
IN which words there are these two general parts.

1. A duty commanded. 2. The reason of it adjoined.

First, (...)
the duty commanded in these words, and they that use this world as not abusing
of it.

Secondly, the reason of it affixt, for the fashion, or the scheme of this
world passes away. The word signifies a mathematical figure, which is a mere
notion, and nothing in substance. I shall principally insist upon the first
part of the words, And they that use this world as not abusing of it; from
whence observe this point of Doctrine.

That while men use their lawful comforts in this world, they must take a
great deal of heed that they do not abuse them. This is the Doctrine I shall
spend this hour upon. You must not only take heed of things sinful; but of
some things lawful too; for though there be no sin in them, yet there may be a
snare in them.

In the prosecution of this point I shall thus proceed.

1. To give you the reasons why you must not abuse the lawful comforts of this
world.

2. I shall show you when a man may be said in the use of lawful comforts to
abuse them. And lastly, I shall give you some directions, how a Christian may
so use the lawful comforts of this life, as not to abuse them.

I shall begin with the first, and show you the reasons why you must not abuse
the lawful comforts of this life.

There are four potent reasons for it, two of them found in Scripture, and the
other two deduced from Scripture. Reasons why we should not abuse the lawful
comforts of this life.


1. Abuse nothing you use; why? because nothing that you use is your own, but
Gods, he is the true owner of all that you possess, and you know it is a part
of dishonesty to abuse other men's goods. All that you have is Gods, the Cattle
upon a thousand hills are his, your Corn and wine are Gods, and if you use any
of them to excess or drunkenness, you abuse that which is none of yours, this
is the first reason drawn from Scripture.

2. There are two reasons found in Scripture, why you should not abuse the
comforts you enjoy; the one before my Text, and the other after it. That before
my Text is this; but this I say Brethren (says the Apostle) the time is short,
it remains therefore, that whatsoever you use in the world, seeing you cannot
use them long, you should use them well: our time is short, and therefore do
not abuse the comforts you enjoy, The reason after my Text is, because all our
comforts are fleeting and fading, and running away from us, therefore use the
world as not abusing of it, for the fashion of this world passes away; they
pass away with Eagles wings, but they come to you with the wings of a Sparrow:
your comforts do vanish away like smoke, Sic transit gloria mundi.
and therefore it was a custom in Rome, when the Pope went by, there was an
Officer appointed to burn flax before him, which put him in mind, that all his
honor and riches should soon vanish and pass away like the smoke. And it was
a good meditation that one had standing by a River side; says he, the water
which I see, now runs away, and I see it no more, so the comforts of this world
are like the running River, that are still gliding and running away from us:
seeing therefore we cannot enjoy these comforts long, let us use them well,
without abusing of them.

his Table should be made a snare to him? and he that marries a wife, little
dreams that she should unsofder this conjunction with Jesus Christ, and he that
buys and sells, and trades in the world, little suspects that he is then
selling away his soul: therefore take heed that you do not abuse lawful
things, because men are naturally more apt and prone to abuse lawful things,
then to do those things, which the very doing of them is sinful and unlawful:
you may lose your selves in saving your comforts, licitis perimus omnes. Surfeit
with junkets and sweet meats has destroyed more then eating what is bitter of
taste. It is very observable, that in Luke 14.18. there were three sorts of
people that made their apology, why they would not come to the Supper of the
great King, and none of them did plead any thing that was sinful, as an excuse
of their absence; but says one, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must
needs go and see it, I pray thee have me excued; and another said, I have
bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I ^o to prove them; and another said, I have
married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. Neither of them did plead a sin
for their excuse, as that they had cheated their Neighbor of his Land, as Ahab
did Naboth of his Vineyard, or stolen Oxen, or used wanton dalliance with
Whores and Harlots, etc. but those things they pleaded as a ground of excuse,
were in themselves lawful, which does clearly demonstrate to us that the using
of lawful things abusively, is a great sin, and therefore it requires our care
and circumspection, that we do not offend in this particular.

And thus I have done with the first question, why we must not abuse the
lawful comforts of this life.

When a man may be said to abuse the lawful comforts of this life.
We come now to the second, and that is to show you, when a man may be said in
the use of lawful comforts to abuse them.

Answ. I shall give it you in these four or five particulars.

1. A man may be said to abuse the lawful comforts of this life, when they do
use them too affectionately. Many men do hug their comforts so close in their
Arms, that they spoil them, as the Ape kills her young by hugging them too
hard. Beloved, did you but gently and moderately use the things of the world,
the luster, and beauty, and comforts of them would remain longer with you; but
by crushing of them, and loving them too much, you spoil them. If riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them: it is a good observation that one has
upon that place, Job 38.22. where God challenges Job, says he, have thou
entered into the treasures of Snow, or have thou seen the treasures of the Hail.
Says he, all the comforts of this world are but like treasures of Snow. If you
take a handful of Snow, and crush it in your hand, it will melt away
presently; but if you let it lie upon the ground, it will continue a pretty
while: and so it is with the things of this world; if you take the comforts of
this life in your hands, and lay them too near your hearts in affection and
love to them, they will quickly melt and vanish away from you. But if you leave
them in their proper place, and do not set an inordinate affection upon them,
they will continue the longer with you. If you line a Garment with linen, it
does well; but if you line it with pitch or glue, that it sticks to the body,
you spoil both the Garment, and the man that wears it: so when the world is
glewed to your hearts, it spoils the comforts of the mercies you enjoy, so that
this is the first thing, wherein a man may be said to use the lawful comforts
of this life abufively, when he uses them too affectionately; for whatsoever a
man loves excessively, he makes a God of it; the covetous man makes a God of
his Gold, the ambitious man of his honor, etc. and this is a great abuse of
the Creature to make Gods of them.

2. Men abuse lawful things in their use, when they go about the things of the
world, which in themselves are lawful, too eagerly, when men do rise early,
and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefulness, and lie down in sorrow,
being intent on nothing but the world, as those James 4.13. when a man does
thus, he abuses the world in the using of it.

Obj. But when may a man be said too eagerly to use the things of this world?

etc. then you do abuse lawful things, and therein consisted Martha's abuse of
lawful things in Luke 10.40. Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and troubled
about many things, says Christ, she was troubled about the matters of the
house; but she neglected the one thing necessary, the hearing of Christ's voice.
And therefore all you that are Tradesmen, and men of great employments in the
world, take a serious survey over your own hearts, consider whether you do not
rob God of his due, and by your too eagerly pursuing the things of the world,
neglect the duties of his service.

2. When you cannot take that natural refreshment in the blessings of God,
which he allows; when you cannot eat your bread with quietness, you are so
perplexed and ingulpht in the world, that when (as Solomon says) by reason of
your abundance you cannot sleep, when you have neither time to eat by day, or
sleep by night, then you are too eager about the things of this world. And
thirdly, when a man is restless and unsatisfied with his condition, he would be
greater and richer then he is, and drive a greater Trade then he does, this is
to be too eager upon the things of the world.

3. Another thing wherein men abuse the lawful things of this world in their
use, is when they use them too dependingly; when they trust, and rely and
depend too much upon the things of this world. The comforts of this life may
well be compared to the Reeds of Egypt, that if a man lean upon them, would
not only deceive his expectations, and break under him; but pierce and run into
his hand: so if you rely too much upon the things of this world, they will
break and frustrate your hopes, and fly away from you, and pierce you through
with many sorrows. It is a good observation that one has, (says he) The
World hangs upon nothing, and therefore why should we depend upon that which
has no foundation.

4. A man uses lawful things abusively, when he uses the world too carkingly,
when a man shall be so troubled with solicitousness what shall become of him and
his Family hereafter, in his old age, that he cannot enjoy any comfort, or
quietness in what he possesses for the present, then he abuses the things of
this world. The things of this world are not durable and lasting, and therefore
we should not set our hearts upon them, or be troubled at our future Estates;
but live without care, as the Apostle says in the next verse to my Text, we
should not be too carking and sollicitous about the things of the world.





1. If you would use lawful things lawfully, use them spiritually, and then
you will not use them abusively; use earthly things with a heavenly mind. As
wicked men do use spiritual things carnally, so should you use carnal things
spiritually, that is, while you are about carnal things, you should make a
spiritual use of them. And thus our Savior did, when the people came about
him for bread, he took occasion thereby, to tell them, of the bread of life,
and of that Mannah that came down from Heaven, that a man might eat thereof and
not die. So when the Samaritan woman was bufie at the well, drawing of water,
Christ from thence took occasion to tell her of the water of life; of living
water, that if a man drinks thereof he should never thirst more. Thus did
Christ improve carnal things spiritually. A man may lawfully talk and
discourse of worldly things, of buying and selling, and trading; but still in
the close, there should be a touch of something that's spiritual and heavenly.
A man will never use the world well, till he uses it spiritually: one that
treats upon this subject, says, that as he sat once in his study, he saw a
little Robin-red-breast, pitch upon his window, chirping; and he presently made
this spiritual use of it. Says he, this poor Bird that knows not where to
abide, but to rest upon a hedge, and knows not where to have a bit of meat, or
where she shall pick up the next crum, yet she can sing and be merry, and
therefore why should I that have enough of the things of this world, be
dejected and troubled with care and solicitousness for them?

2. Use the things of this world reflexively, and then you will not use them
abusively. Reflect from the world up to God. When you are enjoying any of the
comforts of this life, and find a relish and sweetness in any of the Creatures,
then by way of reflection, consider, that if there be such a sweetness and
deliciousness in the Creature, what a sweetness is there in God the Creator?
if there be so much beauty and excellency in the Creature, how much beauty and
glory, and transcendent excellency is there in God, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ? if there be so much light and brightness in a Candle, what is the light
of the Sun, and the glory of Heaven, and the splendour of the Lord Jesus Christ,
who is ten thousand times brighter then the Sun? If you do thus use the world,
you will not abuse it. If the Creature be so full of goodness and sweentess,
how full is God? if there be such comfort in having an estate here below, what
comfort is there in having grace in our hearts, and to enjoy those treasures
that are incorruptible, and fade not away, which neither the moath nor rust can
corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal, use the world as a
Looking-glass, which casts a reflection, not as a mud-wall. O beloved, if we
could thus in the use of all creature comforts, look up to God, and reflect
upon the giver of them, we should never abuse them.

3. You must use the comforts of the world weanedly with weaned affections from
them. Thus David did, though he were the King of Israel, and sat upon the
Throne, yet he was as a weaned Child, to the things of the world, Psalm. 131.
verse 1.

Beloved, you that have great Estates in the world, should yet live with weaned
affections from the world; the Script^re does not only enjoin Christians to
crucify the flesh; but the world too, They that are Christ, have not only
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, as in Gal. 5.24. but they
are crucified to the world too: thus Paul was; says he, I am crucified to the
world, and the world is crucified to me: the world did not care a pin for Paul,
and he did not care a pin for the world; he that will use the world well, must
use it weanedly.

4. If you would not use the comforts of the world abusively, you must use them
orderly; first seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then
all other things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33. before you seek after the
world, you should seek the things of Heaven; seek the Kingdom of Heaven first
in your judgments and esteem, as the chief and supreme object of your desires
and delight, let the chief bent of your heart be after spiritual things, make
this your business, for which you were sent into the world: you may seek after
the things of the world; but when you have them, you must use them in a way of
subserviency to heavenly and spiritual things; you may follow your Calling in
obedience to Gods Command; but let your aims be thereby to be the better able
to maintain your Family, to serve God in that relation and place he has set
you, to relieve the poor, and comfort the needy, and support others that want
the help and assistance of your charity; you should have an eye upon spiritual
things, as being chiefly to be looked after, and use all your comforts as so
many steps to advance you nearer Heaven, you should be subservient to God in
whatsoever condition he has placed you, and not use the world for the worlds
sake, and follow a Calling, and buy and sell merely to get gain, and to grow
rich and great in the world, making Religion and godliness subservient to the
world; for this is a very great abuse of the world: but let all things here
below, be secondary and subservient to spiritual and heavenly things.

It is observable, that in the Lords Prayer, where there are five Petitions for
spiritual things, there is but one for temporal things, and that is, give us
this day our daily bread, to note and intimate to us, that our desires and
endeavors should be most after spiritual things. And besides, these are
petitioned for in the first place, before worldly things, to note, that the
things of the world should be subservient to spiritual things. These are four
Rules, which if you observe, you will not use the world abusively.

And thus I have gone over the Doctrinall part of this Subject; I shall only
speak a word or two by way of application, and so have done.

etc.

2. By way of exhortation: There is none of you that live in the world, but you
must some way or other make use of the world: my great request therefore is,
that you would use the world as not abusing of it, and to prevail with you
herein, I shall lay before you several Considerations, but the time being now
past, I shall reserve them to another time.

SERMON. XIV.
1 Cor. 7.31. -- And they that use this world as not abusing of it, for the
fashion of this world passes away.
THere is yet something behind by way of use from this Doctrine, That
Christians in the use of lawful things, must take heed that they do not abuse
them, which I shall finish this morning, and leave the inducement, (because the
fashion of this world passes away) till the after noon.

1. By way of caution, and 2. By way of exhortation.


1. Is it so, that Christians should be careful in the use of lawful
comforts, not to abuse them; but so to use the world, as if they used it not,
then beloved, take these few cautions along with you.

Caution 1. If you must not abuse worldly things, then much more ought you to
take heed, that you do not abuse spiritual things in your use of them. You
must be careful that your practices be answerable to your Professions, and not
profess much, and practice little. Do not make Religion a Cloak to impiety. You
use to come to Church, and frequent the Ordinances of God; but take heed that
you do not abuse this practice, and make it a Cloak to cover some secret
villainy or impiety. Do not abuse the word of God, nor use thy tongue to scoff
and jeer at the Scriptures; do not abuse your gifts, nor graces, nor contemn
and despise those that want them. If a man be careful not to abuse an Iron
tool or Instrument, he will be much more careful, that he does not abuse a
silver or a golden one; if you must not abuse things of an inferior and baser
nature, then much more should you not abuse things of a higher and more
excellent nature. If you must not abuse worldly things, then much less
spiritual things; therefore abuse not Ordinances, abuse not Sacraments, nor
Sermons, nor the means of grace, by living unfruitfully, and unprofitably under
them.

2. Take this caution, that these advices of the Apostle, to weep as if we wept
not, and to rejoice as if we rejoiced not, and to buy as if we possessed not,
are not to be extended to any spiritual performances; but only to outward
things. The Apostle does not bid you weep for sin, as if you wept not, neither
does he bid you rejoice in God, and Christ, as if you rejoiced not; nor does he
bid you use spiritual things, as if you used them not, and buy the things of
God, as if you possessed not: there are many men, that in the use of worldly
things, will rejoice as if they were made up of nothing but joy and mirth, and
as if all their bliss and happiness did consist in these outward comforts; and
many there are that can almost dissolve into tears, for outward losses,
troubles, or afflictions; but when they come to rejoice in spiritual things,
they can then rejoice as if they rejoiced not, and in mourning for sin, they
can weep as if they wept not, and use the things of God as if they used them
not. Oh how opposite and contrary do men go to the rule of the blessed Apostle
here, they can pray as if they prayed not, they do not pray, even while they
are a praying. Men should use a moderation and indifferency in the things of
the world; (...).
but you should not do so in spiritual things, but in them you must pray as if
you were praying, as it is said of Elian, James 5.17. and power forth strong
cries to God, and hear the word of God, as if you were a hearing of it, and do
every duty with your whole strength and might.

Use 2. Let me persuade you (by way of exhortation to yield to, and pat in
practice this Apostolical Rule, to use the world as not abusing of it. And the
better to set home this exhortation upon your hearts, I shall lay down before
you these ten pressing considerations by way of motive: and Beloved, in regard
of the coldness of the season, I shall very much shorten my meditations, and
give you only the heads and pith of things,

1. If you would use the world as not abusing of it, Ten considerations to
persuade men to use the world as not abusing of it.
consider, That in ab^sing the things of the world, you do pervert the end of
God in giving you the things of the world; for the end that God aims at is,
that every Creature should lead thee to the Creator, that thereby you may the
more admire his goodness, and advance his praise and glory; he looks that every
blessing he bestows upon you, should be as a Perspective-glasse, through which
you may have a clearer sight, and view of himself, though you are at a great
distance from him. In 1 Timothy 4.4. Every Creature of God is good, and to be
received with thanksgiving. As Doves every grain they pick look upward; so
should Christians; and therefore if thou do abuse any of his Creatures, thou
do pervert the end of the most High. God did ordain food for thy use, to
satisfy thy hunger, and not to feed thy gluttony. He gave thee drink to
extinguish thy thirst, and not to provoke thee to drunkenness. God gave thee
Apparel to cover thy nakedness, and to keep thee warm, and not to be an
instrument of pride in thee, and so of any other comfort: this is the first
Consideration.

Psalm. 50.10,11,12. Every beast of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a
thousand hills. I know all the fouls of the Mountains, and the wild Beasts of
the forests are mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world
is mine, and the fullness thereof. Hos. 2 8 9.
So that if you abuse the things of the world, you abuse that which is none of
your own, but Gods. And you know, it is a part of dishonesty to abuse another
man's goods. All that you have in the world, they are but borrowed blessings,
God only has a right and propriety in them He does but only lend them to us
for our use, and keeps the propriety of them to himself. If there be any thing
(amongst all those things we call our own) may be properly said to be our own,
it is our bodies, for that is nearest us, and yet this is not our own neither;
for the Apostle says, in 1 Cor. 6.19,20. What, know you not that your body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and ye are not your own, but you are bought with
a price? therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits which are
Gods. When a man borrows a thing, he that lends it prays him to use it well.
Elisha's Servant borrowing but an Axe to cut down wood, and it falling into the
water, cried, alas Master, 'twas but borrowed, 2 King. 6.5. The mercies you
have are rather lent then given you; shall I wound a man with his own Weapons?
yet thus thou do to God, when thou abusest any of his blessings.





world, they shall rise up as a witness against you at the last day. Jam. 5.3.
Deuteronomy. 4.26.
Your silver and gold shall rise up and witness against you; not as if the
unreasonable Creatures, as silver and gold, should by a vocal expression plead
against you; but when God shall condemn thee, he shall declare that he proceeds
thus against thee for the abuse of his Creatures that he has given thee, as
silver and gold, riches and possessions in the world. The very Creatures that
thou have abused, shall be a witness against thee to condemn thee. As in Hab.
2.10,11. says the Prophet there, The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it against wicked men and oppressors at the
day of judgment. Not as if the stones and timber should have a voice; but God
shall then say, the cries of the very stones and timber in my ears, which thou
have gotten by violence, does witness against thee. And Christ shall then say,
when he condemns thee, the word that has been so often preached to you in my
name, inviting and beseeching you to come in and accept of mercy and pardon,
and you would not hear nor obey, but rejected it, and cast it behind your
backs, that word does now witness against you.

6. Consider, that it is a part of the Creatures curse, and bondage to be
abused, by those that make use of them; in abusing the Creatures you make them
groan under you, I will give you a very full Text for this, in Romans 8.20.21.22.
for (says the Apostle) the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly,
but by reason of him that has subjected the same in hope, because the Creature
it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, for we know that the whole creation
groaneth and travaileth in pain until now. The great burden and bondage of the
Creatures is then, that being created by God to be instruments of his glory,
and to provoke those that use them to advance his praise, they are
notwithstanding employed by wicked men to the dishonor of God, and scandal of
Religion. Under this bondage do the Creatures groan, that although they were
made to promote their Creators glory, yet they are made to be instruments of
his dishonor, and subjected to the lusts of wicked men, and therefore consider
of it, when thou do abuse the Creatures to excess, either in drunkenness or
gluttony, or pride, if it were possible, those Creatures would sigh and groan,
that they are thus necessitated to serve thy lusts, which should be instruments
of their Creators glory.

7. Consider, that by abusing the lawful blessings you enjoy, you provoke the
Lord to take away those blessings from you. As in Hos. 2.8.9. says God there,
because I gave thee Corn and wine, and Oil and silver, and gold, and thou have
abused them, therefore will I return and take away my Corn in the time thereof,
and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given
to cover her nakedness, the abuse of mercies does many times provoke God to
strip us of them, we see by experience, that many that abuse their wealth and
Estates come to beggary before they die, and many that abuse their wits become
very fools.

8. To dissuade you from the abuse of lawful blessings, consider, that such
practices will nourish in your hearts security, and carelessness in preparing
for the coming of Christ to judgment, Mat. 24.38.
Luke 17.27. As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days
of the Son of man; they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were
given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the Ark, and the flood
came and destroyed them all, and as it was in the days of Lot, they did eat,
they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded, till it rained
fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all, even thus shall it be
in the day when the Son of man is revealed. Beloved, many of you have your
hands and heads, and hearts so full of the world, that you are secure and
heedless in preparing for the last day, at least in preparing for your last
day, the day of your death.

9. Consider, that by abusing the Creatures, you force them to do that which by
natural instinct, they have no inclination or promptitude to do, in Romans 8.19.
The Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, that is, the Creature
is employed in vain and sinful uses, not by its natural instinct, or by the
Creatures natural inclination, but unwillingly; thy hand that is employed in
any sinful action, or thy legs that carries thee to a Stage Play, or thy
tongue that is an instrument of lying, or swearing, etc. they do not do these
things willingly, or by natural instinct, they are not inclined to do it, but
rather to set forth their Creators glory. The Sun does not willingly shine to
give light to wicked men, to deceive and oppress their Neighbors in their
Shops. No Creature does give a willing consent to be employed to his Creators
dishonor, the Creatures are made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him that has subjected the same in hope (that is) in hope that
always the Creature shall not be thus subject to wicked men, and isntrumental
to their sin, and of their Creators dishonor. The Creature is subjected in
hope to be some time or other freed from this burden of being made use of by
wicked men to Gods dishonor.

10. Consider, that you cannot use the things of the world long, and therefore
you should use them well: this is the Argument in the text, It remains Brethren
(says the Apostle) the time is short, therefore let him that weeps be as if he
wept not, and he that rejoices as if he rejoiced not, and they that buy as if
they possessed not, and those that use the world as not abusing of it; why?
because your time is short, you cannot enjoy them long* and therefore you
should use them well.

And thus beloved I have done with these Apostolical Directions: there now
remains behind, only the reasons or motives why we should not use the things of
this world abusively, because the fashion of this world passes away. Why must
we weep as if we wept not, and rejoice as if we rejoiced not, and buy as if we
possessed not, and use the world as not abusing of it, why? because the fashion
of this world passes away. The fashion of this world: The word signifies a
mathematical figure (as has been noted) which is a mere notion, and nothing
in substance, such a thing is the world: all the pomp and glory and honors, or
riches and greatness of the world, they are all fading vanishing comforts, they
are continually passing away, like the gliding stream. The fashion of this
world. The word, says another Author, signifies such a fashion as is in a
Comedy, or Stage Play, where all things are but for a while to please the eye;
A man acts the part of a King that is but a Beggar: so all the comforts and
glory, and honors of the world, they are passing away, like the water of a
River, they are continually running away from you. Budaeus reads it, deceives,
as an ignis fatuus.

use the world as not abusing of it, because the fashion of this world passes
away, and fom thence you may observe.

That the serious consideration that all the comforts and blessings of this
world soon pass and fade away, should be a strong motive to Christians, not to
set their hearts upon them.



But I had rather handle the words as an entire proposition of themselves, and
then the Doctrine from them will be this, That all the comforts and conditions
of this world, are passing away from us, even while they are with us. This is
the Doctrine I shall spend an hour upon in the afternoon.

SERMON. XV.
1 Cor. 7.31. -- For the fashion of this world passes away.
THe fashion of this world passes away. The observation from these words was
this, that all the comforts and contentments of this life are passing away from
us, even while they are with us. They are of ^ansitory and fading nature.

(Beloved) that I may a little work this general point upon your affections, I
shall first show you that this is a truth, and then draw some practical
inferences from it, and so finish this Text.

That all the things of the world are posting away from us while they are with
us, I shall manifest unto you by these 3. or 4. demonstrations.

1. It appears to be so by an induction of particulars, All the comforts of
this life are passing away from us while they are with us.
if you look upon all conditions of men, whether in honors or prosperity, or
riches, etc. you shall see all these conditions in a fading and cons^ming
posture. Look upon Adams condition in innocence, his condition was in
probability like to be a firm and lasting condition, and yet Adam continued not
a night in honor, but became like unto the beast that perishes. And so if you
look upon Solomon that was the glory of the world neither before him nor after
him was there any like unto him; all the things of the earth made obeisance,
and brought presents to him, 2 Chronicles. 9.13. there is set down the total sum of
Solomon's glory, the weight of Gold that came to him in one year was 666.
Talents of Gold, and as for silver it was plentiful as stones in the street,
and nothing at all accounted of in his days, he had 4000 stalls for Horses and
Chariots, and 12000 Horsemen; he had 232 quarters of wheat every day brought
into his house, he had silver as stones and gold was of no value with him; and
yet what became of all his honor and glory? Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like the Lilly in the field, (as Christ says) and so if you look upon
the conditions of all men in honor, they stand in slippery places, and are
sliding down every day, as in Job 20.6,7,8,9. Though his excellency mount up
unto the Heavens, and his head reach unto the Clouds, yet he shall perish for
ever like his own dung, they which have seen him shall say, where is he? he
shall flee away as a dream, and shall not be found, yea he shall be chased away
as a vision of the night. So the Assyrian Monarchy passed to the Persian; the
Persian to the Grecian, and the Grecian to the Roman. The condition of honor
is a fading condition. D^v^tiae habent si nem suum cut finem tuum.
Or if it be your fortune to be rich and wealthy in the world, the condition is
fading too; thy riches will either see an end of thee, or thou will see an end
of them, 1 Timothy 6.17. Trust not in uncertain riches; so Prove. 23.5. Riches take
unto them wings and fly away: so Prove. 27.24. Ric^es are not for ever, neither
does the Crown endure to every Generation.

Pet. 3.10. The Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up.

Animantis cujusque vita est in fuga. Psalm, 14^ 4 Psalm. 39 6.
Men have here no continuing City, Heb. 13.14. In the 1 Job last, says Job,
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return: there is no
mention made of staying in the world, nothing but a coming into the world, and
a going out of it again.



The spirit of God, to note the uncertainty of all things here below, in Rev.
15. compares the world to a Sea of glass mingled with fire. It is compared to a
Sea, because of its fluctuation and variation: and to a Sea of glass, for its
brittleness and uncertainty, it is soon broken; and to a Sea of glass mingled
with fire, to note to us that the world is always in a consuming condition.
Now no man will look upon the Sea but as a very uncertain and unstable Element;
that drop of water that was here, but now, is presently gone, and cannot be
found.

2. The world is compared to a Cloud, in Job 30.15. my welfare (says Job)
passes away like a Cloud, Clouds are always posting away, and so is the
world, and all things therein. And therefore David says, Psalm. 104.3. God
makes the Clouds his Charrets, noting his volubility and celerity in his works
of mercy or judgment.

3. The World is compared to the wind in Psalm. 78.39. as a wind that passes
away and comes not again: so in Psalm. 18.10. and 104. Psalm. 3. what more
swift then the wind? how soon is a gust and a gale of wind gone by: so neither
is there any continuance in any thing here below.

4. The world is compared to grass in 1 James 10. as the flower of the grass
the rich men shall pass away; for the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning
heat, but it withers the grass, and the flower thereof fails, and the
grace of the fashion thereof perishes; so also shall the rich man fade away in
his ways. Not only to grass, but the flovver of grass.

5. They are compared to smoke, and you know the vvind scatters, and drives
that to and fro presently. In Hos. 13.13. They shall be as the morning Cloud,
and as the early dew, it passes away. (You know as soon as the Sun shines,
the dew is presently gone.) and they shall be as the chafe that is driven
with a whirlewind out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney: there
are 5. resemblances put together in one verse, so that beloved, you see these
comparisons do make it very manifest and evident, how uncertain and fading and
perishing all the glory and comforts of the world are.

I come now to that which I chiefly intended, and that is, to wind up all in a
practical application. And all that I shall do herein, shall be to draw out
seven practical instructions from this general Doctrine.

1. Is this so, Practical instructions by way of use
that all the things of this world are passing away from us, while they are
with us? why then let the consideration of this, wean your affections from all
worldly things. Why will you love that much that cannot stay with you long. It
is the advice that Solomon gives in Prove. 23.5. says he, why will thou set
thine eyes upon that which is not, (that is) though they are in being, yet not
in continuance; for riches certainly make themselves wings and fly away. This
consideration should wean our loves from all creature comforts. And though we
look upon the things of the World with our eyes, yet not with our hearts; but
let them be fixed, not upon those things that are seen; but upon those things
that are not seen: for the things that are seen are temporal; but the things
that are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. they are not worthy the looking
on, because temporary. In Sparta, a City of Greece, a man was King but one
year: afterward lived in retirement and meanness, therefore no man could
hardly be gotten to accept of it: so should the consideration of the fading
nature of all vvorldly things, cause us to withdraw our affections from them.

2. If the fashion of this world be passing away, then let this excite and
stir up your souls to look after the things of another World, which are more
permanent and lasting. Chrysostom compares the World to an Eele; and you know
the harder you hold an Eele, the sooner it will slip out of your hands; so the
things of the world, the faster you think to hold them, the sooner it will
slide from you, and therefore labor to lay hold upon Christ, and grace, and
glory, upon Heaven and happiness. In Heb. 13.14. (says the Apostle) here we
have no continuing City, therefore let us seek one to come. Because they had no
continuance here, therefore they looked for one to come, even a City whose
builder and maker was God, they looked after the things of another world, that
would not pass away as these do. As in 2 Cor. 4.18. we look not to the things
which are seen, that are temporal, but to the things which are not seen that
are eternal. You have another notable Text for this purpose, in Heb.
11.15,16,17. it is spoken of the godly Patriarks, that if they had been
mindful of the Country from whence they came out, they might have had
opportunity to have returned; but they desired a better Country, that is, an
heavenly. Because they did not look after their own Land, the Land of Canaan,
therefore they did declare that they had a better Country in their eye, which
they did look after, namely, a heavenly Kingdom. The King of Sparta that year
he was King, sent a great deal of Treasure into the place of his banishment,
that he might live well ever after: so should Christians while they are here,
lay up treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6.19,20. (Beloved) if the things of this world
be so vain and fading, and uncertain, let us look after the things of a better
world.

Col. 2.22. All these things perish with the using. No sooner are you grasping
of the world, but it goes from you. We have no more hold of these earthly
things, then of a flock of Birds, I cannot say they are mine, though they sit
in my yard: The glory of Ephraim is said to fly away like a Bird. The world
like a Nose-gay withers while you are smelling to it, as snow melts while it is
in the hands of Children. At the inthronization of Popes, one used to go before
him, burning a wad of straw, or flax, crying, sic transit gloria mundi. It is
an admirable observation that a learned man has upon the names of the two
first men that were born into the world, Cain and Abel; says he, we may learn
this Lesson from their very names. Cain here signifies possession, and Abel
here signifies vanity; to show that Adam and Eve did see nothing but vanity in
all their possessions. And oh that you that are the Sons and Daughters of Adam,
that have a great deal less of the world then Adam had, that you would not set
your hearts upon the vanities and uncertainties of this world, that are so soon
gone away from you.

4. If this be so, that all the comforts of the world are passing away, then
this shows the folly and madness of those men whose eager pursuits are after
fading vanities. O what a madness is it for men to be eager in their pursuits
of these transient and fading things, and in the mean time neglect these things
that are of a greater excellency and duration: and yet there are a world of
such fools and mad men amongst us, that seek after vanities, and neglect
durable and lasting riches. O how foolish are many men in the world, that are
eagerly employed about the mean and low businesses of the world, and in the
mean time neglect the great affairs of Heaven, like Artaxerxes, who employed
himself in making hafts for knives, and neglected the weighty affairs of his
Kingdom, or like Archimedes, who was drawing mathematical lines, and never
took care to save the City nor his own life. It is storied of Caligula, an
Emperor of Rome, (and for which he is befooled of all that ever writ of him)
that having prepared and set out a very great Navy of Ships, when his men
thought he would have done great exploits, and have conquered many Kingdoms
with them, he contrary to all their expectations, commanded them to go and load
all their Ships with Cockle shells and pibble stones, and so return again: Just
such fools are many men, that trouble themselves in purchasing Cockle shells
and pibble stones, the fading vanities of this world, and neglect the looking
after the firm and durable, and substantial riches of the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. If the things of this world be so fading, then from hence we may see the
disparity and vast difference there is between earthly things and heavenly. The
glory of this world passes away; but you cannot say so of the things of
Heaven: the former wears as your Garments, the other as the body wears not
away. Riches are a vanity used to and fro, Prove. 21.6. but grace is durable
riches, Prove. 8.18. 1 Pet. 1.24. The grass withers, and e flower thereof
fails; but the word of God, that endures for ever: by grass and the flower
of grass, is meant all the glory of this world, and these all fade and wither
away; but the word of God that endures for ever, (that is) the work of grace
wrought in your hearts by the word that shall last and endure forever; that
shall remain and continue when all the glory of the world passes away, 1 John
2.17. The world passes away and the lusts thereof; but he that does the will
of God abides for ever. (Beloved) here you see the great disparity between
heavenly things and the things of the world, as riches and honors, etc.
Suppose thou art an Heir to a Crown or Kingdom, yet these are but temporal
inheritances, and last but for a season, but an heavenly inheritance that
endures for ever, as in 1 Pet. 1.4. an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fades not away. All your comforts here below, are but momentary
comforts, riches and honors are not everlasting; but God and Christ, and grace
and Heaven, and glory is everlasting: these are comforts that ade not away, but
last for ever: your earthly parents are not fverlasting; but your Father in
Heaven is everlasting, Esa 9.6. eour livee here are not everlasting, but your
life in Heaven is everyasting, Luke 18 30. here below you rejoice one day, and
lweep another; but in Heaven your joy shall be everlasting, as in Esa 61.7.
Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; so in 2 These. 2.16. says the
Apostle, who has loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, etc. here
your comforts are but short; but in Heaven you shall have everlasting
consolation. Here your possessions are not everlasting; but there shall last
for ever in Heaven, and here you are soon forgotten, and the memory of your
names lost; but in Heaven you shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm.
112. verse. 6.

6. Are the glory and comforts of the world passing away? why then know this
for your comfort, that the crosses and troubles, and afflictions of the world
are passing away too, slight afflictions which are but for a moment, 2 Cor.
4.17. Suppose thou art a man of a mean fortune, poor and low in the world, why
yet thy poverty shall pass away: suppose thou art a man of a sickly and weak
constitution, your sickness shall pass away too: suppose thou art imprisoned
and in bondage, yet the prisoner shall shake off his fetters, and his prison
Garments, Job 11.16. thy misery shall pass away as a stream of water: Omnia
dura teleraltia quia brevia.
so in Esa 35 10. sorrow and sighing shall fly away, your miseries and sorrows
as well as your comforts are passing away. And therefore beloved, this should
support and bear up your hearts.

7. If the pleasure and comforts of this world are passing away, then we should
take a great deal of heed that we do not incur eternal punishments for
momentary pleasures: Beloved, it were something if our comforts here were
equivalent and proportionable to our punishments hereafter; Gu^a quae ad usum
diutur na esse non possunt ad supplicium diutur^m deposcent. Amb^. Divitiae
sunt cadu cae, sae^ vero perpetua.
but why should any man be so foolish as for to get an Estate that passes
away, to damn his soul, and purchase to himself a misery and torment that shall
never pass away. Riches and the outward blessings of this life quickly pass
away; but the punishment for the abuse of them that endures for ever. This is
like profane Esau, who for a mess of pottage sold his birthright. Be persuaded
therefore to choose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God for a
little season here, that so you may reign and be happy with them in Heaven to
all eternity, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season here, and thereby
incur to your selves everlasting punishments in the world to come.

And thus beloved, I have in these 15. Sermons, gone over many material points
touching this subject. It remains only now, that for the time you have yet to
live here in the world, that those that meet with crosses, and troubles, and
afflictions, do weep as if they wept not. And those that have riches, and
honors, and comforts, and enjoy an affluence and confluence of all worldly
pr^sperity, that they rejoice as though they rejoiced not. And those that buy
and sell and trade in the world, it remains that they buy as if they possessed
not. And those that any other way use this world, it remains, that they so use
it, as not abusing of it; for the fashion of this world passes away.

The TABLE.
A.
REligion should bear sway over our Affections, p. 64. We must not place an
inordinate affection upon our Estates, p. 85. When men place an immoderate
affection upon their Estates, p. 86. and seq. Reasons why we should not? p. 91.
and seq. Use directed to three sorts. p. 93. and seq. Take heed we abuse not
lawful comforts. p. 118. 126. Why we must not abuse lawful comforts? p. 119.
and seq. When a man may be said to abuse lawful comforts. p. 121. and seq. How
to use lawful comforts that we may not abuse them. p. 123. Reproof to such as
do abuse them. p. 126. Take heed of abusing spiritual things. p. 127. Motives
to use the world so as not to abuse it. p. 129.
B.
Christians must take heed they do not transgress in buying and selling. p. 68.
74. Rules to be observed in buying Commodities. p. 68. and seq. What things are
not to be bought. p. 73. Be careful to buy spiritual things. p. 74. Be humbled
if we have transgressed in buying. p. 75. Advice to such as buy and sell; yet
get nothing by it. p. 29. and seq. Comfort to such. p. 95. and seq. Advice to
those that have gotten Estates honestly by buying and selling. p. 98. and seq.
Astonishing considerations to such. p. 101. To such as have gotten Estates
unjustly. p. 110.
C.
Gods people bear crosses better at one time then at another. p. 4. Christians
should not abridg themselves of lawful comforts. p. 64 The Doctrine of
community erroneous. p. 67. Abuse not lawful comforts. See abuse.
E.
Getting an Estate by trading is not disallowed of God. p. 85 Christians must
not place an inordinate affection upon the Estates they have gotten. ibid How
to get Gods blessing on your Estates unjustly. p. 106. and seq. Conjectures of
one that has gotten an Estate. p. 109 Directions to such. p. 110 Six terrible
considerations to them. p. 111. and seq.
F.
Every one should be careful to provide for his Family. p. 67 Fashion of the
world what it imports. p. 133.
G.
Grieve not excessively for worldly crosses. See sorrow.
H.
Exhortation to drive a Trade for Heaven. p. 116
I.
Christians should not be excessive in worldly joy. p. 48 Yet are allowed to
rejoice in worldly comforts. p. 49 Religion does not extirpate, but only
regulate worldly joy. p. 49 The joy of wicked men often mixed with inward
griping. p. 50 A smaller matter will interrupt their joy, then the joy of the
godly. ibid. Men of a jolly temper exposed to sundry evils. p. 55 There may be
excess in spiritual joy. ibid. Worldly joy when excessive. p. 57. and seq.
Rules to keep worldly joy within bounds. p. 61. and seq. Run not to worldly joy
to drive away trouble of mind. p. 65 See rejoicing.
L.
Whether a man may go to Law to recover his due. p. 83
M.
A married life exposed to troubles. p. 2 We must not be overmuch cast down at
the troubles of it. p. 3 We must not mourn immoderately for worldly crosses.
See sorrow.
P.
Every one has a propriety in his Estate. p. 67 Whether it be lawful to take a
pawn. p. 82
R.
Christians allowed to rejoice in outward comforts: p. 49 See worldly joy. What
things we are not to rejoice in. p. 51. and seq. What seasons are unfit for
rejoicing. p. 54. 55. Christians should honor Religion by letting it bear sway
over their affections. p. 64 Be not prejudiced against Religion, as if it were
an enemy to your outward comforts. p. 64. Do not disparage Religion by
abridging your selves of lawful comforts. ibid.
S.
We must not be excessive in worldly sorrow. p. 3 We should be sensible of Gods
afflicting hand. ibid. Immoderate sorrow for affliction provokes God to
increase our affliction. p. 4 When our sorrows are immoderate. p. 5, 6, 7.
Why we should take heed of immoderate sorrow. p. 8 Reproof of immoderate
sorrow. p. 10. 29. 37. and seq. Sorrow more for sin. p. 11 Mistake not sorrow
for sin, when it is for outward troubles. p. 11 Twelve Considerations to allay
immoderate sorrow. p. 12. and seq. Rules to moderate worldly sorrows. p. 30.
and seq. The difference between a natural sensibleness of affliction and
immoderate ate sorrow. p. 30. and seq. How to know whether a man sorrow for his
sin or his affliction. p. 34. and seq. Reproof of those that sorrow not for
sin. p. 38 Exhortation to sorrow for sin. ibid. Sin how great an evil. ibid. A
man may sorrow immoderately for sin. p. 39 Few do so. p. 40 When sorrow for
sin is excessive. p. 40. and seq. Take heed we be not obstinate in sin. p. 42
Exhortation not to sorrow immoderately. p. 43. Motives. ibid. and seq. The
Scripture reaches to all occasions and conditions of men. p. 67 Rules to be
observed in selling. p. 76. and seq. What things are not to be sold. p. 80 At
what price we are to sell. p. 80 Whether a man may sell a commodity for more
then it is worth? p. 81 Whether he may sell dearer for time then for ready
money. ibid.
T.
Advice to such as Trade in the world. p 93. and seq See buying.
W.
When we are too eager upon worldly things. p. 122 Worldly things are passing
away from us, even while they are with us. p. 134 Four demonstrations of it. p.
135 Where to worldly things are compared in Scripture. p. 137 We should have
weaned affections from worldly things. p. 138
FINIS.

