A CHRISTIANS Duty and Safety IN Evil Times.

Delivered in several Sermons, upon four Texts of Scripture, viz.

Christ's Prayer the Saints support, on John 17 15 A Divine Balance to weigh
all Doctrines by, on 1 These. 5.21 A Christians great Enquiry, on Acts 16.30, 31
A Description of True Blessedness, on Luke 11.28
By that faithful Messenger of Jesus Christ, Mr CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Late
Minister of Laurence-jury, London

Whereunto is annexed The Saints Rest, or Their Happy Sleep in Death.

As it was delivered in a Sermon at Aldermanbury, London. Aug. 24. 1651.

By EDMUND CALAMY. B. D.

LONDON, Printed for E. Brewster and George Sawbridge, at the sign of the Bible
on Ludgate Hill, near Fleet-bridge. 1653

TO The Christian READER.
ALthough God had blessed Mr Love with great abilities, yet such was his
humility, that he judged few or none of his Sermons worthy public view, as
he often said to his friends, after he had received the Sentence of death: yet
it is admireable to consider what good entertainment all those pieces have
found, which have hitherto been published. As by this providence God puts
much honor upon the name and memory of this good man, so upon this account his
dear widow and friends are prevailed with, by importunity, to yield unto the
printing of more Sermons, though they be neither so full, nor exact, as
doubtless they would have been, if they had come abroad from the Authors own
Pen. The matter is wholesome, seasonable, and profitable, much savoring of his
gracious spirit who preached them: and manifesting unto the world, the workings
both of his heart and life, being zealously devoted unto the service of Christ,
and Christians souls: hereby this faithful Minister of Christ Jesus, though
dead, yet still speaks. And although he has finished his Testimony upon
earth, yet he is still by his works serviceable in the land of the living.

Endeavor, in good earnest, to make a spiritual improvement of these, and such
like Helps, put by divine providence, into thy hand; and let the Lord be
magnified in thy conversation, for all that soul-advantage which thou may
receive. Labor to be well rooted in the Truths of the Gospel, bear up
courageously against the evil of these declining times: and because multitudes
do shamefully disgrace their Profession, by their carnal selfe-seeking, and
apostasy, therefore do thou the rather hold forth the power of godliness, in
ways of selfedeniall, and faith, unto the honor of Christ. In him we are

Thy Friends, and Servants, SIMEON ASH. EDM: CALAMY. JER: WHITAKER.


The Contents of the following Sermons.
Text. John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the World;
But that thou should keep them from the evil.
The context opened page 1 Four things Observable in the Prayer of Christ Page
2. 1. The time when he made this Frayer page 2: Observation, It is warantable
and commendable for Ministers to pray after their preaching page 2 Observation,
Christians should then have most holy and ardent affections in their breasts,
when they are even leaving of this World page 4 Christ's practice should be our
pattern p. 5
2. The Gesture he used. page 6. 3. The Manner of his praying. page 7. 1 He
aimed at Gods glory page 7 2 He prayed to God his Father ibid 3 He prayed for
his Disciples page 8
4. The matter for what he prayed. page 9.
The words of the Text explained. page 10. Two Reasons why Christ would not
pray that his Disciples might be taken out of the World page 12 1. Doctrine, It
is not warrantable for any to wish for death because of persecutions or
afflictions which they sear, or feel. page 13. Three Reasons of the point.
1. Because our lives are great blessings page 14. 2. It is more commendable to
pray for a sanctified use of Affliction, then for deliverance from it. p. 15.
3. There is much honor to be gained by a patient bearing of affliction, p. 15.
Use, for Reprehension of such as wish for the day of their death page 16 2
Doctrine. In some cases it is lawful for a man to wish for death. p. 19. 1.
When he desires it not because of sufferings, but because of sin. page 19. 2
That he may thereby have a more full enjoyment of Christ. p. 20
3 Doctrine. It is not the desire of Jesus Christ that any of his servants
should die so long as he has any work for them to do in this Wortd. p. 21.
Three Uses.
1 For Counsel, that you would desire to live no longer then that you may serve
God, and do good to others page 22 2 For Reproof, of those who are hastening
to the grave, and yet have not begun the work for which God sent them into the
World page 26 3 For Comfort, when you have finished your work, then you shall
go to receive your wages page 31
4 Doctrine. No man dies, but God does take him away. page 33. Were our lives in
owr own hands, we should live to long: were they in our enemies hands, we
should die to soon p. 34 5 Doctrine. It may be a great comfort to the people of
God, that they have the prayer of Jesus Christ, to keep them from evil whilst
they live in the World page 35, Two questions resolved for the clearing of this
Doctrine page 36.37 The efficasy of Christ's Prayer continues for ever page 38
Six practical Inferences.
1 Christ's Prayer should not exclude our prayers. p. 40. 2 Christ is praying
for us, before the Devil is tempting of us. p. 42. 3 The remembrance of Christ's
prayer should check sinful Motions in us. page 43. 4 Christ prayer must not
lessen our care. page 44 5 There is a pronesse in our nature to be defiled with
the evil of the times. p. 45. 6 Every man by nature is unable to keep himself
p. 45
Five Directions how to accomplish the ^rayer of Christ.
1 Avoid all disputing with the Devil. page 47 2 Avoid all occasions unto sin
p. 48 3 Consider the Al-seeing eye of God. page 49. 4 Choose suffering rather
then sin, p. 50 5 Flee to Christ for refuge. p. 51

Text 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things; Hold fast that which is good.
The context opened p. 53 What is meant by prophesying p. 54 Doctrine, From
the Conrext, viz. Those that have attained unto the highest perfection of grace
and knowledge, that it is possible for men in this life to attain unto, are not
to despise or neglect the Ordinances of Jesus Christ page 57 1 Reason, Our
Sanctification is not perfect in this life page 59 2 Reason. Sin lies hidden in
the secret corners of the heart page 60 The words of the Text explained,
We must hold fast the truths of the Gospel in judgment, that we run not into
error page 63 In practice, that we run not into sin page 64 Doctrine, It is
the duty of all hearers of the Word, to try, and prove all Doctrines which they
hear page 65
Four Cautions about trying of Doctrines
1 People must not take liberty to try all Preachers page 67 2 We must not be
scepticks in Religion page 71 3 We must not bring the Scriptures to our
Opinion, but our Opinion to the Scriptures page 71 4 We must not be over
confident of our opinions page 72
Four Reasons why we should try all Doctrines.
1 Because erroneous Teachers may carry a resemblance to them that preach the
truth page 73 2 The Scripture foretells that there shall be many false Teachers
in the latter days page 74 3 False Doctrines are published very craftily page
76 4 There is an aptness in our nature to be turned aside unto error p. 79
Three general Directions about trying of Doctrines
1 The Scripture is to be the standard by which we are to try all Doctrines p.
82 2 Clear principles of truth must rather be maintained, then disputed page
84 3 We must not be consident in any opinion until we have tried it
thoroughly page 85
Nine Rules for trying of all Doctrins that we hear
1 Whatsoever the Word of God does expressly hold forth to be believed, and
received p. 85 2 Whatsoever Doctrine advances the grace of God in Christ p. 87
3 Whatsoever Doctrine does advance the Will of God p. 87 4 Whatsoever Doctrine
does advance all the attributes of God ibid 5 Whatsoever Doctrine discovers
the sinfulness of vain thoughts p. 89 6 Whatsoever Doctrine advances all
truth ibid 7 Whatsoever Doctrine tends to settle a troubled Conscience ibid 8
Whatsoever Doctrine tends to the advancement of Godliness 90 9 Whatsoever
Doctrine will abide the trial p. 91 All these Doctrines are sound and to be
embraced.
On the Contrary,
1 Whatsoever Doctrine is not to be found in Scripture p 86 2 Whatsoever
Doctrine debaseth the grace of God in Christ p. 87 3 Whatsoever Doctrine makes
the Will of God ^or obediance, and the grace of God for Salvation to be
contrary ibid 4 Whatsoever Doctrine does rob God of his glory in any of his
attributes 88 5 Whatsoever Doctrine requires only outward reformation p. 89 6.
Whatsoever Doctrine is pleasing to the corrupt nature of man p. 89. 7 Whatsoever
Doctrine leaves a distressed Conscience without any bottom to rest upon p. 90
8 Whatsoever Doctrine tends to licentiousness p. 91 9 Whatsoever Doctrine will
not endure the trial p. 92 All these Doctrines are false, and to be abhorred.

Text. Acts 16.30, 1. And said, sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they
said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.
1 Observation, Men of the most despicable condition in the world may become
the objects of Gods pardoning mercy page 97 2 Observation, God by his
providence does many times so bring it about, that afflictions shall be a
means to make men look after Salvation p. 99 3 Observation, When once men come
to make a dilligent Enquiry after Heaven, there will then appear great
alteration in their passions, and affections page 99 The words of the Text
explained Six things observed from the form of speech the Iaylor used page 102
Doctrine: Above all things in the world, this is the most needful thing, for
the sons of men to make Enquiry after, namely, what they must do to be saved
page 103 Three Cautions for the right understanding of the Doctrine
1 We must not expect to be saved by doing page 104 2 No man can be saved
without doing page 105 3 Heavenly care, does not exclude lawful worldly care
page 106
Four Reasons why we must enquire what we must do to be saved
1 Because the soul is the most excellent thing in the world page 107 2
Heavenly care is the ready way to bodily welfare page 108 3 Because the Devil
makes great enquiry how to damn the soul page 109 4 If thou loosest thy soul,
thou loosest all page 110
1 Use, For rebuke of them that Enquire after notionall Questions page 112 That
enquire only after earthly things page 113 That enquire how to damn themselves
page 114
2 Use, For examination whether we are in an estate of Salvation Page 115 This
may be known
1 By the Methods God takes with those whom he intends to save page 115.117 2
By the Impressions which he works on their hearts page 118
The second part of the Text explained
God promises to give what he commands page 121 Faith and Repentance must be
joined together page 124 Doctrine, It is the duty of all those that expect
salvation, to believe in Jesus Christ page 126 Every assent unto the word, is
not beleiving page 128 A Description of saving faith page 129 The great benefit
and privilege we have by living under a Covenant of grace page 131 The
differences betwixt the Covenant of works and Covenant of Grace page 132 There
is no possibillity of life by the Covenant of works page 133 In the Covenant of
grace there is place for repentance, and mercy for the penitent. 136

Text. Luke 11.28. But he said, yea rather blessed are they which hear the
Word of God, and keep it.
Observation, From the context, viz. good Children are a great praise and
blessing to their parents page 140 The words of the Text explained p. 141
Observation, you must take heed that you be not tickled with pride, when you
hear your selves, or yours commended. page 142 Eight Observations from the
manner or form of expression that Christ does here use page 143 to 151 What is
meant by keeping the Word of God page 150 1 A keeping it in memory page 151 2 A
keeping it in practice ibid
Doctrine, They are rather blessed that hear the Word of God, and practice what
they ^ear, then the mother of Jesus Christ was for bringing him into the World
page 152 The idolatry of the Church of Rome detected and confuted page 153 Five
Reasons why such as hear the Word of God, and keep it are blessed
1 Christ does account such to stand in a nearer relation unto him then his
natural friends page 155 2 They shall persevere when others apostastatize page
156 3 The Lord makes glorious promises unto such page 157 4 They may be
isntrumental to bring others unto blessedness page ib 5 They themselves shall
surely come to blessedness, although they should not bring others unto Heaven
page 158
Use, For lamentation, that people will not seek after blessedness, when they
may have it upon such easy terms 160 Five Considerations to set home this Use
1 If thou do not practice what thou hear, thou will but aggravate thy
condemnation 160 2 Thou art void of love to God 163 3 Thy profession is nothing
worth ib 4 Thou can have no assurance of the love of God unto thee 165 5 Thou will provoke the Lord to take away the Gospel from thee 166
Four Demonstrations that we are guilty of barrenness under the means of
grace.
1 It appears, because the Lords own people complain of their unfruitfulnesse
page 167 2 By the sad complaint of Christ's Ministers, who discern but little
success to attend their Ministry page 168 3 By comparing our times, with the
time in which the Gospel was first planted page 169 4 Because in these days
more people are perverted from the truth of the Gospel then converted thereby
page 171
Five Demonstrations that we are in danger to have the Gospel removed from us.
It appears 1 By that implacable opposition that is in the professors of the
Gospel against the Preachers thereof page 172 2 By the general wantonness and
weariness of people in living under the Gospel page 174 3 By the tolleration
of such opinions as are contrary to the Gospel p. 175 4 By the increase of
damnable errors and heresies p. 176 5 By that implacable opposition that is
against the settlement of Church government p. 177 When the Gospel goes from a
people, all goes.
1 Peace goes p. 178 2 Plenty goes ibid 3 Safety goes ibid 4 Civil liberty
goes p. 9 5 The Dignity and splendour of a Nation goes ibid.

Object. No man can keep what be hears p. 180 Answer, The Covenant of Grace
does not require a perfect but a sincere obedience page 181
Finis.
Christ's Prayer, The Saints Support.
Text. 17 John 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the World;
But that thou should keep them from the evil.
THis chapter contains in it the last, and most solemn prayer (which we find
on Record) that ever Christ made in the world, with, and for his Disciples;
when he was to remove his person from them, even then he would leave a prayer
behind him, the greatest Legacy that he could bequeath unto them.

This whole 17 chapter from the beginning to the end, is made up only of
Christ's Prayer unto his Father. And in this so sollemn a Prayer, and the last
Prayer that Christ made with his Disciples: There are four things observable.

1. The time when he made this Prayer. 2. The Gesture he used. 3. The Manner
how he prayed. 4. The Matter for what he prayed.
The time when he made this Prayer, is set down two ways.

1. Circumsta^ce of the ^ime when
1 It was immediately after he had preached a public Sermon v. 1. Hence
observe: That it is warrantable, and commendable for Ministers to pray after
their preaching. 1 Observacion.
This I name the rather, because in this age, there are a generation of men,
who judge otherwise. But it is here set down to be the practice of Jesus Christ
himself, so to do; after he had preached, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and
prayed. And it is Luthers note, That a good prayer ought for to follow a good
Sermon. Luther.
And here by the way take notice, that ye that attend upon the ministry of the
Gospel must like wise go to God in prayer, after ye have heard his Word: when
we have done preaching, then you must begin your praying. It is a good
observacion of holy Greenham, I am persuaded that one great reason why there is
so little good done by all our preaching, is, Greenha^.
because though there is much preaching in the pulpit, yet there is little or
no praying in the Closet.

The other Circumstance of time when Christ made this sollemn, 2 Circu^. of the
time when.
and affectionate prayer, is this, It was the day before he was to die, for
as soon as he had done this prayer Judas came with a band of men to betray him.
chap. 18. v. 1, 2. hence observe from Christ's example:

That Christians should then have most holy, 2 Observacion.
and ardent affections in their breasts, when they are even leaving of this
World. Jesus Christ prayed well at all times, but he prayed most
affectionately, a little before he was to die. Luke 22.4^.
That passage is observable, 22 Luke 44. And being in an agony be prayed the
more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down
to the ground. Jesus Christ when he was in an agony, and lay grovelling up. on
the ground, sweating drops of blood, prayed yet the more earnestly, (...), or
he prayed the more vehemently, drawing forth his affections to the utmost. And
the Apostle Paul speaking hereof says; Heb. 5.7.
5. Heb. 7. Who in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers and supplications
with strong cryings and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death;
and was heard, in that he feared.

Christ prayed with strong cries, alluding to that earnest Prayer which Christ
uttered in the Garden, Luke 22.19.
Luke 22.19. as appears by these words, In that he feared. viz. That bitter
Cup, those unspeakable pains, which he endured in his agony, when the whole
power of darkness set upon him: Here you see that lesus Christ prayed with most
fervent zeal and holy affection, just before he was to die; for the Apostle is
there treating of Christ's Priesthood, and offering up himself a sacrifice for
sin.

Now as it was with Jesus Christ, Christ's practice should be our paern.
so should it be with you; before you come to die, you should then have most
holy, most heavenly and ardent affections in your breasts: Let heaven at that
time especially posesse your souls, when your souls are going to posess heaven.
O beloved, in this regard you should be like the Swan, which sings the sweetest
songs before its death: let your sweetest songs be like Simeons, * Luke 2 29.
when ye come to die, then say, Lord let thy servant depart in peace.

The second Circumstance considerable in this prayer of Christ, 2 Circu^. the
gesture Christ used.
is the Gesture he used therein. He Lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said:
Father etc. It is true; Gestures are not simply necessary in any duty: It is
not simply necessary to kneel in prayer, yet Gestures may be helpful to us in
prayer; Christ lifted up his eyes, to signify, that his heart was where his
eyes were. Beloved, when ye lift up your eyes toward heaven in prayer, it
should note, that your heart is in heaven: I am sure, with Christ it was thus,
though with you it may be otherwise; It may be thine eye is toward heaven in a
prayer, when at the same time thine heart is toward thy shop, toward thine
evil company, toward thy whores, or wicked companions. Remember O Man! to keep
thine heart as well as thine eye toward heaven in prayer; let your hearts and
your eyes be both toward the same place. Christ lift up his eyes to heaven in
prayer, and his heart was there also, and so should it be with you.

The third Circumstance in this prayer of Christ, 3 Circu^ the Manner of Christ's
praying.
was the manner of praying: and that is expressed three ways in this chapter.

1 He did aim at Gods glory, 1. Christ aimed at Gods glory
as the chief End of all things he prayed for: and this should be a directory
for your prayers. John 17.1
Glorify thy Son that thy Son may also glorify thee. v. 1. The End of Christ's
Prayer, was the glorifying of his Father; so the End of our prayers should be
the glorifying of God.

Many men will cry, Lord give me glory, when they do not with pantings of heart
say, Lord let me give glory to thy name. Christ said, Hallowed be thy name,
expressing his respect to the honoring, and glorifying of the name of God,
that was the first peticion in Christ's Prayer, to show, that the glorifying of
the name of God ought to be the first, and chiefest thing in our prayers.

Christ prayed, O my father, 2. Christ prayed to God his Father.
to teach you, that you must not only pray with an awful apprehencion of God,
but also with fiducial confidence in God. Heb. 11.6.
11. Heb. 6. Without faith, it is impossible to please God, for he that comes
unto him, must believe that he is, and that be is the Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. You must never come to God, to ask doubtingly, but you
must come with fiducial confidence, as a Child to a Father.

3. 3. Christ prays for his Disciples with great enlargement
Christ prays with great enlargment for the good of his Disciples. I do not
read in above 3. or 4. verses, that Christ prayed for himself; all the rest of
the prayer was for his disciples, that God would keep them in unity and truth,
and glorify them, and all other beleivers with himself in heaven. Here then
behold the wonderful affection that Jesus Christ bears unto his Church, and
people, that when he was to die, he should pray more for the saveing of their
souls, then for the saveing of his own life, o! herein the superabundant love
of Jesus Christ is manifested, who when he was in expectation to die a painful,
shameful, accursed death, under going the wrath of God, due unto our sins, yet
that then he would remember his elect servants, in whose stead he stood, and
for whose sins he died, with such enlargement of heart in prayer.

The fourth Circumstance considerable in this prayer of Christ's is the matter,
for what he prayed: 4. Circu. The matter, for what Christ prayed.
And that is laid down 2 ways. 1. Negatively, who should not be the subject
matter of his prayer, I pray not for the world. v. 9. This is a good argument
against those that plead for universal Redemption: If Jesus Christ would not
spend his breath to pray for them, then surely he would not spend his precious
blood to purchase heaven for them. Then it is laid down Affirmatively, whom he
prayed for; I pray for them that thou have given me, for they are thine. you
that are elected, you that are regenerated, I pray for you. He makes many
requests unto his Father in the behalf of his Disciples that God would keep
them, that they might be one with him, v. 11. That God would sanctify them. v.
17. That they might come to heaven and be with Christ. v. 24. And (as in the
text) I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from the evil.

The words, you see, are set down two ways: The words explained
1 Negatively, what Christ did not pray for in the behalf of his Disciples, I
pray not that thou should. est take them out of the world. 2. Affirmatively,
what Jesus Christ did pray for: I pray that thou should keep them from the
evil of the world. Question.
It may be demanded why Christ said these words, That he would not pray that
his Disciples might be taken out of the world.

Jesus Christ knew that his end was at hand, Answer.
that his houer was comeing that he should depart out of the world 13. John 1.
Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come
that he should depart out of this world unto his Father, having loved his own
which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. when the Disciples heard
this, they thought thus with themselves, Lord if thou will leave this world,
what will become of us when thou art gone, we shall be in the world as a ship
without a Pilot as sheep without a Shepard, and therefore they prayed, that
they might die with Christ; John 11.16. Ioh. 11.16.
Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellow Disciples, Ioh.
13.37.
let us also go that we may die with him. And 13 John 37. Peter said unto him,
Lord why cannot I follow thee now, I will lay down my life for thy sake. The
Apostles were all on fire to die for Jesus Christ. Now Christ seeing them so
willing to die, therefore to check this impetuous mocion he tells them, that he
would not pray that they should now die, but says he, I will pray unto my
Father, that when I am gone, and you remain behind me in the world, he would
keep you from the evil of the World.

Now if you should ask me what especial Reason there was why Jesus Christ
would not pray that they might be taken out of the world? Reasons why Christ
would not pray that his Disciples might be taken out of the world.


I Answer: 1. If the Disciples had dyed, when Jesus Christ dyed, then peeple
would have thought, that they had bin sharers, 1. Reason
or copartners with Christ in purchaseing our Salvacion. Esa. 63.3.
Hence it is said that Christ did tread the wine press of his Fathers Wrath
alone, and that there was none with him. Christ will have the sole honor of
our Salvacion: There were two common thieves, two unworthy persons, that dyed
with Christ, that the world might see that it was Christ's death alone that
merited Salvacion for men.

A second Reason is this, 2. Reason
Christ did not pray that the Disciples might be taken out of the world,
because he had further work for them to do here in the world. As if he had
said, I have the Gospel for you to divulge and propogate, souls for you to
convert, mine Elect to gather in; therefore I will not pray the Father to take
you out of the world, but to keep you from the Evil of the world, though I
will not pray to keep you from the evil of Afflictions, and Persecutions which
for my namesake ye must expect to meet withal in the world; yet I will pray to
keep you from the evil of sin, that you fall not into sin through the
allurements or frowns of the world, the malicious temptations of Satan, the
suggestions and inclinations of your own corrupt hearts, when I am gone; I will
pray that my Father would keep you from the evil of the times and places in
which you live.

3. The words thus explained, I shall draw five Conclusions from them.

First, from Christ's refusing to pray to his father to take the Disciples out
of the world, they desireing to die with Christ for fear of persecution,
Thence observe; Doctrine
That it is not warrantable for any to wish for Death because of persecutions
and afflictions, which they do feel or fear. Jonah 4.3.
This you find was the fault of Jonah chapter 4. v. 3. Now therefore O Lord I
beseech these, take away my life from me, for it is better for me to die then to
live. This he said in a pettish humor, being displeased, and angry, that the
Ninevits were spared, thinking that therein he should be accounted a false
prophet. Because of affliction, or reproach in the world to desire death, is a
thing that the Scripture does not warrant. 1. Reason why we should not with for
death.
And the Reasons thereof, are three.

1 Because your lives are great blessings, and you do vallue them at too low a
rate, when you thus rashly wish for death. It is true, there are some men that
do vallue their lives at too high a rate; and they are such as will not lay
down their lives for the sake of Jesus Christ, his truth and peeple, when they
are called thereunto. Others there are that do vallue their lives at too low a
rate, and they are such as wish to be taken out of the world, because of
troubles, and afflictions that they meet withal in the world. Now this is a
sin, this is an undervaluing of your life, which is the greatest of all
temporal blessings.

A second Reason is this: 2 Reason
Because it is a more commendable thing to pray that God would in his due time,
remove trouble from us, then to cry out Lord remove us from trouble; to pray
that God would sanctify our hearts patiently and thankefully to bear those
crosses that he shall be pleased to exercise us withal, rather than deliver us
from trouble by taking us out of the world; for God has ten thousand ways to
free us from trouble, besides laying us in the grave, he can put an end to our
troubles, and yet lengthen out our lives.

3. There is more honor to be gained by a patient bearing of our burden then
by being delivered from it. 3 Reason
The Soldier never grows famous for his valor until he comes to bear the
brunt of the Battle in the Field: And the Christian never shines in grace,
until he comes into the fire of afflictions, especially if he suffer in
bearing witness unto the truth of Christ. Therefore we should be content yea
rejoice in our sufferings and not desire death, to be rid of the troubles of
this life.

If it be so, Use of Reprehension
that it is not warrantable for any man to desire death because of any
Affliction he fears or feels: Then hence I draw a Use of Reprehension to many
sorts of men in the world, But chiefly to you that are of such passionate and
peevish spirits, froward and distempered souls, that if God does but lay upon
you any affliction, if he does but mingle any crosses with your comforts, any
gall, and wormwood, with your pleasant things, so that it may be your estates
are taken away, your persons imprisoned, and your worldly comforts taken from
you, oh then in a peevish mood, with Jeremy you curse the day of your birth And
with Jonah you wish for the day of your death. Now this is sinful. It is true,
Good men have failed herein, as Job chap. 6. v. 8.9. Job 6, 8, 9.
O that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing I long
for, even that it would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his
hand, and cut me off. Here you see Job wishes for death, yea even longs for
death, wooes (as it were) destruction, and is an importunate and earnest suitor
for the grave; and all this was because Gods afflicting hand was sore upon him.
And we find him expressing the same distemper in the name of others. Job. 3.2.
Job 3 21. Which long for death, but it comes not, and digg for it more then
for hid treasure. There is a sharpness and bitterness in bodily death, yet
some are so afflicted in body, and so oppressed in spirit, that they account
the very bitterness of death, to be sweetness, the gall and wormwood of
Affliction makes death to such as sweet as honey, and as much longed for, as
the honey comb; And they do not only long for it, but they dig for it, and
that not in an ordinary way but they dig as for treasure, yea as for hidden
treasure, which shows the earnestness of this desire after death. This
distemper also seized upon the spirit of the Prophet Elijah: ^ Kings 19 ^.
1. Kings 19.4. He himself went a days journey into the wilderness, and came
and sa^e down under a Iumper Tree; and he requested for himself, that he might
die, and said, it is enough now, O Lord take away my life, for I am not better
then my fathers: The reason of this pettish desire in Elijah was because
Iezebel, who had slain many of the Lords prophets, did threaten also to take
away his life. It may be many of you to whom I speak have lost your estates,
your tradeing, now are in poverty, and lie under disgrace; and therefore you
are apt and ready to wish that God would take you out of the world: but know
that this is a very sinful frame of spirit, to long for death only to be freed
from the troubles of this life, to desire to lie down in the bed of the grave,
only to ease our bodies, and rest our outward man. If we think life not worth
the continuing in this world, unless we enjoy our outward comforts, ease,
plenty, and prosperity, honor, wealth, and friends; we do hereby much
undervalue the great blessing of life: This at the best is an infirmity, and
this Christ here rebuked in his Disciples.

Again, because Christ would not pray for his Disciples to be taken out of the
world, they desiring death, fearing persecution. 2d Doct. When it is lawful to
with for death.


Here it may be intimated, That in some cases it is lawful for a man to desire
to die: as

First when he desires it not because of sufferings, but because of sins; when
a man does desire to shake off a body of flesh, that he might be rid of, and
freed from a body of sin; this is commendable: This was Paul's prayer 2. Cor.
5.8. We are confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. 2. Cor. 56.
To desire death, not because it does kill thy person, and ease thy pain; but
because it does kill thy corruption, and put an end to thy sining; not as a
postern gate to let out thy temporal, but as a street door to let in eternal
life: in this case it is lawful.

2. It is lawful to desire death, that thou may thereby have a more full
enjoyment of Jesus Christ. This the Apostle sets down, Phil. 1.23
Phil. 1.23. I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to
be with Christ which is far better. For a man to desire to be dissolved, that
he may be without crosses, is a sin; but to desire to be dissolved, that he may
enjoy Jesus Christ, is a grace. Oh thou that say, I desire to die, that I
may have the enjoyment of God more perfectly and grace more completely, not
because thy winding sheet shall wipe away all tears, and afflictions, but
because thy winding sheet shall wipe away all sins, and pollutions; this is a
gracious desire. We are not to wish for death because our comforts are
lessened, but that our communion with Christ might be completed; not as a
door to let us out of troubles, but as a door to let us into heavenly
mansions.

But thus briefly passing these things; I proceed to another Observation from
these words, I pray not that you might be taken out of the world. why would not
Christ make this prayer? The chief reason was because he had more work for his
Disciples to do in the world. Hence observe:

That it is not the desire of Jesus Christ that any of his servants should die,
3d Doctrine.
so long as he has any work for them to do in this world. Not only your
days are numbered, not only is the number of your Months with God, but likewise
the work that ye are to do, which he has cut out for you. Says God to a
Minister, thou shall preach so many Sermons, convert so many souls, gather in
so many of mine Elect; and when thy work is done, thy life shall be done. Thou
godly Christian, until thou have ended thy work, thou shall not end thy days.
This may be of great comfort unto all that fear God, do not fear Death, it is
not Christ's desire to take you out of the world, until ye have done that work
for which God sent you into the world.

The Use of this is threefold; First for Counsel, Secondly for Reproof,
Thirdly for Comfort.

1. A Use of Council unto you all: 1 Use. for Counsel.
1. That you would desire to live no longer then that you might do the work
for which God has sent you into the world. Do not desire to live that you may
give the swinge to your lusts, and do that which is right in your own eyes;
But desire to live no longer then that you may serve God, and do good to
others.

2. It should teach you who may be useful in the world, that you are bound to
desire of God, that he would not as yet take you out of the world. Luther.
I remember Luther upon this text, has this note, That it is the duty of a
Minister, more especially then of any man in the world, to desire that his life
may be prolonged, that so he may convert more souls unto God. And it was the
saying of an old Minister when he lay upon his Death bed, Lord, if I may be
useful to thy people, let me live longer, I will not refuse more labor and
more pains, if thou have more work for me to do. Any of you, who may be
useful in the world, are bound to beg of God, that he would lengthen out
your days, and that you may live to do more good, in the place wherein God
has let you.

3 Hence let me Counsel you, That though you suffer much evil from the world,
yet if you can do much good in the world, let your doing of good rather
provoke you to desire life, then your suffering of evil provoke you to desire
death. We should rejoice in suffering much evil, provided that by suffering
much evil, we can do much good. Cesaar
When Caesar said, I have lived long enough, whether I respect Nature or
Honor. Tully.
Tully answers, Sir, though you have lived long enough for your self, yet you
have not lived long enough for your Country. Art thou a man that do good in
thy generation, Acts 13.36. Art thou a useful man, though thou art an old man,
and the infirmities of age abide on thee, yet let not this make thee weary of
thy life, though it may be thou have lived long enough for thy self, yet thou
have not lived long enough for others for the good of the Church or
Commonwealth in which thou live. Let this Counsel sink into your hearts,
seeing every mothers Child of you is sent into the world to do something for
God; oh Labor therefore that when your days shall end, your Consciences may
tell you, that you have done that work, which God sent you into the world for
to do. It is the commendation of David, Acts 13.36.
Acts. 13.36. That, after he had served his own generation, by the will of God
he fell a sleep, and was gathered unto his fathers. He did his work, and then
he died.

O Beloved, there is nothing in the world will be a greater solace to your
souls when you come to die (and we must all sooner or later drink of that cup)
then this, that your consciences can tell you, I have served my God in my life,
I have done my work, and the last work I have to do is to die; when it may be
thy eye-strings are fallen, thy mouth is shut, and thou can not take any
cordials to refresh thy decayed spirits, then this will be a cordial, for
Conscience to tell thee, that thou have done thy work which God sent thee into
the world for to do; and now thou have nothing to do but to die, and go to
heaven. It is an observable expression. Job 5.26. Job. 5.26.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of Corn comes in his
season. You know, that if a man should reap a shock of corn when it is green,
and but newly eared, that corn would be of no use for bread, but if he cuts
down a shock of corn when it is ripe, then it is fit for bread. Death cuts off
many men, when they are green corn, unfit, unprepared for death, unripe for
heaven, unripe for glory, Psalm. 127.6.
when they are like grass upon the house top, that withers before it is cut
down, or like the seed which fell on the stony or thorny ground, which never
came unto perfection. But now says God to the good man, thou shall go to thy
grave when thou art ripe for heaven, ripe for God, when thou have done thy
masters work, then shall thou go to thy Masters mansions; thou shall come to
thy grave, like a shock of Corn in its due season. Oh what comfort, and solace
of heart should this be to you, who have done the work for which God sent you
into the world.

The next Use shall be for Reproof. 2 Use for Reproof.
Is it so that Christ does not desire that any of his servants should die,
until they have done the work for which God sent them into the world? Then this
may reprove the wicked of the world, who come to die before they begin to do
that work for which they came into the world. Are there not many that have
lived to gray hairs, and are hastening to the grave, who never put their hands
to any work, which God sent them into the world for to do? Beloved, I would
leave with you one sad text of Scripture, and it is worthy to be engraven in
gold, Esaias 65.20. Esa. 65.20
There shall no more thence be an Infant of days, nor an old Man that has not
filled his days, for the Child shall die an hundred years old, but the siner
being an hundred years old, shall be accursed. This is the most dismal text,
that I know of, in the old Testament, to wicked men, yet comfortable to the
godly; It is a promise of the conversion, and bringing in, of the Gentiles: I
will give you the sense of it, There shall be no more an infant of days. That
is, A man that has lived to many days, to many years, and yet has no more
Knowledeg of God, has done no more service to God, then a very infant. There
were many such that lived in the time of the Prophets; that were men of days,
yet infants in understanding, and Knowledge. Nor shall there be an old man, that
has not filled his days. That is, the old man that does not act grace, that
does not serve, and glorify God, that does not fulfill the duty of every day,
that fills his days with sin, and not with righteousness; this is the man
that has not filled his days. There are many such old men in the world, whose
wrinckled faces, and grayhaires do declare them to be fourscore years of age,
yet in regard of grace, and knowledge, they are not come to the age of 14
years. Now how may this justly be for rebuke to any of you, who are infants of
days, who have done God no more service, and are no more acquainted with God,
then Children, you have lived many days, but they have bin empty days; your
hearts are full of sin, no marvel then that they are so empty of grace. Is
there not many a man and woman, who may with shame and sorrow thus reflect upon
self before God:

Have not I lived to 40.60. nay it may be 80 years, yet Lord thou know, my
days are empty days, I have not done any good all my life time. In Scripture
dialect, when good men die, they are said to die in a good old age; But an old
Drunkard, an old Adulterer, or an old Swearer, dieing in an old age, it is a
bad old age, not a good old age. When you come to d^e, then Conscience will
reflect upon you and say, I am an old man, but I have not done the work which
God sent me in to the world for to do. I have read of an old Disciple, who was
90 years of age, and being asked the question, how old he was; he said he was
45 years of age: they answered, your gray-haires discover you to be much more:
says he, if that you reckon number of years, I have lived fourscore and ten,
but if I compute how long I have lived a devoted life to God, then I am but 45,
for the other half of my time I lived a dead man. O how many are there in the
world, that have lived as dead men, all their days! There is a passage in
Eccles. 7.17. Ecles. 7.17
Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish, why should thou die
before thy time. Some Interpreters carry it this way; A man walking in
drunkenesse, excess, and riot, does, as it were, shorten his days: Others,
That he that thus lives is dead whilst he lives, before his time of death, and
when death comes he is twice dead. Indeed a man cannot die before Gods time.
Job, 14.5.
Job 14.5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass. Now though thou
can not die before Gods time, yet thou may die before thy time, that is,
when thou come to die before thou art prepared and fitted to die, before thou
have done thy work, thou art the man that do die before thy time. And that I
take to be the meaning of those words. O think of it; Though thou can not die
before Gods time, yet thou may die before thy time, before thou art fitted
for death, before thou have done the work for which God gave thee thy life. If
Jesus Christ did pray that his Disciples might not die before they had done
their work, then what blame are they worthy of, from whom (if they should live
till Doomes day) God should have no more service then now he has; and in whom
he should then see as much sin, as now he does.

The next Use, is a use of Comfort; 3 Use for Comfort.
If it be so that Jesus Christ does not desire, that his People should be taken
out of the world, until they have don their work; Then all you that are Gods
people, know that as long as God does continue you here in the world, he has
work for you to do: Suppose thou art thrown into Prison, consider that is a
part of thy work thou must do for Jesus Christ: If thou art a Minister of the
Gospel, and art under Poverty, Repoach, or cruel Persecution, for
Righteousness sake, consider that this is part of the service that thou art to
do for God; Christ will not take you away when you have half your work for to
do, but when you have finished your work, then you shall go for to receive
your wages. I remember a saying of Mr Bolton, Bolton.
when he was on his Deathbed; says he, O Lord, this is my comfort, that
though I have ended my days, yet I have done my work, before I die. This is
comfortable indeed to a godly heart, but dreadful to you that are wicked, who
when you have ended your days, have not begun your work, have not begun to
serve your God. O this will be great gauling of Conscience unto you another
day; O this will be the worm that will gnaw upon you in hell to all eternity,
to remember that God set you out your work for to do in this world, and
vouchsafed you both time and means, for the accomplishment of it; but you
trifled away your time, sinned away many heavenly opportunities of grace and
mercy, played all the day long, when you had so much work for to do: so that
when your days were at an end, you had not begun your work. As it was with
Charles the King of Sicily, Charles King of Sicily
who cried out with consternation of heart, I have not begun to live, and yet I
am now going to die. O let not this guilt lie upon your Consciences; let not
this be the worm to gnaw you in Hell, to remember that you lived long in the
world, and yet did not the work for which God sent you into the world.

Now I proceed to the fourth Observation out of these words, 4 Doctrine
I pray not that you might be taken out of the world: Hence observe, That no
man dies, but God does take him away. Were our lives in our own hands, we
should live too long, and were our lives in our enemies hands, we should not
live a day longer; but our lives are in Gods hands, and therefore we cannot
die, but God must take our lives away. And this may show a Christian his
shelter under divine protection; a wicked man cannot thrust thee out of the
World before thy time, God must take thee out of the World. It may be, enemies
may bear thee a grudge, and those that hate thee, may wish thee a thousand
deaths; yet here may be thy comfort, thou can not die before God does take
thee out of the world. In Scripture language, when men die, they are said to be
gathered unto their fathers: thou shall live until God shall think fit to
gather thee to himself, having made thee fit for glory. And thus I have opened
the first Branch of the Text, I pray not that thou should take them out of
the world.

Now I come to show what it is that Christ does pray for in the behalf of his
Disciples: But I pray that thou would keep them from the Evil; that is, I
do not pray that thou would take them out of the world, but that thou
would keep them from falling into sin, from falling finally away from thee;
here is my prayer, that thou would keep them from the Evil of the world.
Hence observe, 5 Doctrine
That it may be a great comfort to the people of God, that they have the
prayers of Jesus Christ, to keep them from the Evil whilst they live in the
world. Though Jesus Christ does not pray for you, that you should be taken out
of the world, yet he does pray for you, that you may not sin, in that manner
and at that rate as the world sins; that you may not yield ^o the Devils
temptations, in such sort as the world does; this is the great prayer of Jesus
Christ.

Now there are two Queries that I shall answer. Two Queries resolv^d


say) I do believe that Jesus Christ did pray for his eleven Apostles, that
God would keep them from the Devils temptations, and from sin in the world; but
does Christ pray for me that have lived so may hundred of years since that
time?

^ohn 17 20
John 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word. Christ does not say, I pray for all; he
should then contradict his former Assertion in the ninth verse, where he says,
I pray not for the World, but for them that thou have given me, for they are
thine. 1. All that God the Father has given to Christ, all believers are
within the compass of Christ's prayer, but not all the world. 2. Again, he
does not say, I pray for all that do believe, for then it might have been
confined to the believers of that time wherein Christ lived upon earth; but I
pray for them that shall believe; so that the prayer of Jesus Christ for
keeping from the Evil of the World, does extend to all believers to the Worlds
end. 3. Again, he does not say, I pray for all Jews that shall believe, but he
says, for all in general, whether Jew, or Gentile, Barbarian, or Sythian;
bond, or free, what or whom soever they be: I pray for all that shall believe.
This prayer of Christ is not impailed or confined to the Apostles alone, but
the Efficacy and benefit thereof is transfused to all believers to the worlds
end. It is a good Observation of Jerome, Jerome
says he, Christ does not say, I pray for all that have shed their blood for
me, then only the Martyrs should have benefit by Christ: Neither does Christ
say, I pray for all that convert souls unto me, then only Preachers should
have benefit by Christ: But I pray for you that do and shall believe in me.
And thus every Christian has a share and benefit in the prayer of Jesus Christ.



To this I answer, (...)
that the Efficacy of Christ's prayer did continue after Christ's time, as may
appear by this illustration; If Stephens prayer be came efficacious for Readiness
conversion, (...)
after Stephen was by his consent stoned to death, (for Stephen as he was
dying, (...)
prayed to God to forgive them) then shall not the prayer of Christ himself
become efficacious after his death?

Again, Christ himself says, that his Prayer on Earth should be for all those
that should believe afterward; so that this very Prayer of Christ to God the
Father, to keep them from Evil, is as efficacious in this generation, and will
be to the worlds end, as it was at the very hour when it was made.

Secondly, suppose it were true, that the Prayer of Jesus Christ was not
efficacious now, yet there is no doubt to be made, but that Christ's
intercession now in Heaven is efficacious, for he sits at God's right hand,
making intercession, Romans 8.34. Who is he that can condemn, it is Christ that
died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us. So Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into Heaven it
self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. And Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he
is able to save them to the utmost (that is, perpetually and perfectly) that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us. So
that here is thy comfort, that though it should be true, that the Efficacy of
this Prayer did not continue to this generation, yet it is undoubtedly true,
that the Efficacy of Christ's intercession now in Heaven, does continu for you
to the worlds end; Christ lives for ever to make intercession for you.

Now I shall handle 6 practical inferences which this Doctrine does afford unto
us. 6 practical inferences from this Doctrine.


Is it so, that Jesus Christ does pray for all his people, viz. Disciples then,
and Believers now, that they should be kept from Evil whilst they live in this
World: Then hence I infer,

Christ's prayer should not exclude our prayers
to keep us from Evil; Jesus Christ's Prayer for us should not exclude our own
praying for our selves: Christ did never so intend to pray to his Father to
keep us from sin, that we should be careless, and never pray to keep our
selves from sin. Although Christ prays to keep us from Evil, yet we must
also pray, for so he teaches, Math. 6.13. And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from Evil: which is the same with this in the Text. Gerard
It is an Observation of Gerard in his Harmony, says he, The prayers of
Jesus Christ were not only meritorious, but they were also exemplary, to teach
us what and how we should pray. Did Christ pray that I might be kept from
sin, from the Evil of the time and place wherein I live; should not this
then teach me to pray that God would keep me from the temptations and snares
that I may meet withal in the World, and that lie in my way to Heaven? Christ's
Prayer must not exclude thy Prayers. It is said, Luke 22.40. And when he was at
the place, be said unto them, pray that ye enter not into temptation: It was
not for them to say, Christ prays for us, therefore what need we pray for our
selves? no, says Christ, though I pray for you, yet pray for your selves also,
that ye enter not into temptation. This is my first inference, Christ's
Prayers must not exclude our Prayers.

Then let this be a comfort to your hearts, as it was to Peter's, Luke 22.31,
32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Satan has a desire to winnow thee as
Wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fayl not. It may be you have
not minded this passage, but there is much comfort in it; it is said, that
Satan did desire to winnow Peter, to tempt Peter; but at that time the Lord
Jesus was actually praying for Peter. Christ is praying before the Devil is
tempting.
Before the Devil does tempt thee to embrace a temptation, Christ does actually
pray for thee, that thou may not be overcome by the temptation: when the
Devil does but purpose to tempt, Christ does actually pray to prevent the
peril; Christ does not only pray in the fit of temptation, when the Devil
makes a strong incursion, and violent invasion on the Soul, but before the
Devil sets on thee, Christ is praying for thee: Satan desires to winnow thee,
but I have prayed for thee. Oh then think with thy self, I see the Devil is
very busy with my poor soul, soliciting and provoking of me to work
wickedness; but now reflect upon thy self, and remember, that Christ is in
Heaven praying for thee; as the Devil tempts me to yield, Christ prays that
I may not yield, through the strength which he has given me. Now this may be
a ground of wonderful comfort, to remember that Christ prays for you, that
you may not be overcome with the Evils of the World.

viz) to remember that Christ prays for thee; Christ's prayer should check
sinful motions in us
when ever the Devil solicites thee to any sin, think thus with thy self; I see
now the Devil is very busy with me, to tempt me to this way of wickedness; but
shall I dare to cross mine own prayers? nay, shall I dare to cross the prayer
of Jesus Christ: For as Christ prayed on earth, so he now in heaven is praying,
that I may not yield to this temptation; and shall I make void the prayer of my
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ? when Christ prays to his Father to give me
strength to resist temptation, shall I carelessly run my self into temptation?

Christ's Prayer must not lessen our care.
A fourth inference is this, viz. That Christ's praying to his Father to keep
you from evil, must not lessen your care to keep your selves from evil. It is a
wretched use which is made of the indulgence of God the Father, and the
intercession of Jesus Christ, when these shall make you presumptuously bold,
and securely careless, how you live. Christ (I am sure) bids you pray, that you
enter not into temptation. You and I must so watch against temptation, as if I
had no body to watch the Devil but my self, and so pray against temptation, as
if I had no body to pray against temptation but my self; yet when I have prayed
and watched, and have bin kept from the Devils temptation, I must ascribe all
to the mercy of God and prayer of Christ, and nothing to my self.

There is a proness in our nature to sin.
Then hence learn that there is a Proness in our nature to be defiled with the
Evil of the times and places wherein we live: Christ would never have prayed to
his Father for us, unless there had been a strong inclination in our nature,
and minds, to be defiled with the Evils of the world.

every man by nature is unable to keep himself. Luke 11.21
If Jesus Christ prays to his Father to keep us from the Evils of the world,
then hence learn, That every man by nature is unable to keep himself from the
Evil of the world: The Devil is a strong man armed, Luke 11.21. and thou art an
unarmed poor creature; he is stronger than thou, and thou can with as much
ease subdue and overcome an Army of an hundred thousand men, as kill one Lust
by thine own power. It is a good Note that Austin has on these words, without
me ye can do nothing; Austin in 21. tract on John.
says he, Christ does not say, without me ye can do little, but without me
you can do nothing. The least work if it be a gracious work, cannot be done
without Jesus Christ; Oh then see the feebleness and frailty of thy nature,
thou can do nothing without Christ, thou can not make a little prayer, nor
subdue the least corruption without Jesus Christ; oh this should make us see
our inabilitie, that Christ is driven to pray to his Father for us, to keep us,
because we cannot keep our selves: The mother holds the child, and the child
holds by the mother, but the strength lies not in the child, but in the mother.
Thou fliest to Christ, and laiest hold on Christ, that is well done, but the
strength does not lie here; Christ goes to his Father, and prays to his
Father, and says, Father keep such a poor soul, that when he is tempted he
may not yield, he may not fall. O therein thy strength does lie, that Christ
goes to his Father, and prays that thou may not yield to such a temptation
of the Devil, or at least that thou may not be finally overcome: as it was
with Peter, that though he was foiled, yet his Faith failed not.

In further application of the Doctrine, consider that if Jesus Christ does
pray to his Father to keep you from Evil, O then I entreat you all, to carry
your selves so in the world, as that you labor to accomplish the prayer of
Jesus Christ. If you shall ask me, how may I do that, I answer,

Set upon the practice of those things which God has sanctified unto thee, to
keep thee from Evil: Five Directions to acomplish the prayer of Christ
and for that end take these Directions;

First, 1 Avoid all disputing with the Devil
when thou art tempted to any sin, avoid all disputings with the Devil, all
reasonings with flesh and blood about the sweetness and profitablenesse of
such a sin; for thus to dispute, is the way to surprise thine own soul:
therefore when the Devil comes to tempt thee to sin, tell him, that thou art
not at leisure to hearken unto him; thou have better work to do, and a better
Rule to walk by, thou have the Spirits motion to hearken unto, and not his
injections to dally with.

2. Avoid all occasions unto sin.
Avoid all occasions unto sin; if thou art inclined unto Drunkenness, go not
into bad company, avoid the Ale-bench: if thou art inclined unto Lust, avoid
the company of lewd women, and that is the way, through the grace of God, to
keep thee from that Evil. It is said of the young Wanton, Prove. 7.8. that when
he was inveagled to uncleanness, He walked in the streets where the Harlot
dwelt. First he went to the corner of the Street, then to the Harlots door,
and then the Devil got power over him, to lead him into the house: when thou
runnest boldly and adventurously to the brink of sin, and leadest thy self
into temptation, no marvel that thou art overcome. By an inconsiderate
dallying with the occasions of sin, thou do tempt the Devil to tempt thee:
and when once the Devil feels thy pulse, he will provide a suitable temptation
for thee; whereas, if thou did dread the fire, thou should not be burnt,
if thou wast careful to avoid the beginings of sin, and occasions unto sin,
that would be a means to keep thee from evil.

3. 3 Consider the al-seeing eye of God.
Consider that the All-seeing eye of God is upon thee, where ever thou art, and
what ever thou art doing, even when thou art contriveing the most secretest way
of sin. This consideration had a powerful effect upon Job. Job, 31.1.4. I made
a Covenant with mine eyes, Job. 31.1.4
why then should I think on a Maid? does not he see my ways, and count all my
steps? God sees my heart, and sees my ways, therefore I dare not think, much
less act that which is wicked: Consider that the All-seeing eye of God is upon
thee; and this is a preservative to secure thee from sin, yea, this is the way
that God has sanctified to keep thee from the Evil of the world. If thou do
evil with the world, thou shall be punished with the world; if thou runest
with the stream, thou shall be drowned in the stream; if thou sinnest with the
wicked, thou shall be damned with the wicked.

4. 4 Choose suffering rather then sin.
To keep you from the Evil of the times, consider that it is less danger to be
under the suffering Evil of the times, then to be under the sinning Evil of the
times. If thou will not run with the stream, and walk wickedly, as the rest of
the world does, then it may be thou may be exposed to the suffering Evil of
the times: But it is better for to lie in a prison, then to sin by any
conniveing at, abetting of, or compliance with the unparaleld wickednesses that
have been of late done amongst us, and are yet a doing. Oh thou had a
thousand times better endure to the utmost extremity, all the suffering Evil
that the times may bring upon thee, then to have any hand in the sins of the
times, which are astonishing, and amazing.

5. 5 Flee to Christ for refuge.
When thou art tempted to any sin, make thy recourse to Jesus Christ, flee to
him for refuge, because thou stand by Christ's Strength, and not by thine
own. Now did thou thus reflect on thy self; Alas I have prayed, I have shed
many a tear, I have heard many a Sermon, and yet I cannot kill my lusts, nor
subdue my corruptions; But yet there is one means left for me to use, and that
is, to flee to Jesus Christ, and to call to mind his mediation for me, his
praying for me, and in my behalf. Christ does not only pray in heaven to save
thy soul, but he also prays to sanctify thine afflictions, and to enable thee
to resist temptations: not only to save thy soul, but for all other things that
are subservient unto Salvation. O it is a great comfort that thou have one
string more to thy bow, that all the world cannot break: Though thy strength
fails, thine heart fails, and all sail, yet thou have the Prayers of Jesus
Christ, which never fails. O this Prayer of Christ should be the great prop
and stay of thy soul, I pray not that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou should keep them from the Evil.

FINIS.
A Divine Balance To weigh All Doctrines by.
Text. 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things; Hold fast that which is good.
IN the later part of this chapter the Apostle lays down many practical
Conclusions to be observed, The con^e^top^^ed.
and performed by us in our Christian course, and conversation: He begins at
the 14 verse and ends at the 22. And therein you have 12 or 13 excellent
Conclusions, which are as it were an Epitomie of our whole duty both toward
God, and man; Warn them that are unruly. Comfort the feeble minded. Support
the weak. Be patient toward all men. Render not evil for good unto any man.
Ever follow that which is good both amongst your selves, and to all men.
Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks. Quench not
the spirit. Despise not Prophesyings. Prove all things; hold fast that which is
good. Abstain from all appearance of evil. Now the words of the Text are almost
the last, but they are not the least duty here prescribed.

Interpreters take pains to give, not only the sense, but the dependence of
these words, upon the former; I shall not trouble you with the connection, but
only mind you of that which goes immediately before the Text, What is meant by
Prophesiing.
viz. Despise not Prophesyings. Prophesying in this place is not taken for that
great, and extraordinary gift which the Prophets had, both in the old
Testament, and also in the new, whereby they were enabled by God to foretell
things to come by immediate revelation, and to interpret the Scripture with an
unerring Spirit. Now this extraordinary kind of Prophesying is ceased, the
Lord having fully revealed in the Scriptures whatsoever is necessary to be
known touching the state of his Church unto the worlds end. So that by
Prophesying here is meant only Preaching 1 Cor. 14.31. 1 Cor. 14.31.
Ye may all Prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted:
that is, preach one by one; for it would make a confusion in the Congregation
for many to speak at once. It is observeable to whom the Apostle gave this
injunction, not to the wicked of the world, but to the Thessalonians, who were
not weak Christians, Babes in Christ, as the Philippians were, but strong
Christians, grown Christians, who had attained to a great measure of says,
patience, and holiness, as 1 These. 1 These. 1.7
1.7. Ye were examples to all that believe in Macedonia, and in Achaia. They
were Christians of the upper form, famous for faith, and godliness, examplary
to neighbor Churches, yet the Apostle bids them, not to de spise Prophesying;
not to despise the Preaching of the Word of God. There are in our days many
vain and ignorant people, who out of a fantastical conceit of their perfection
in knowledge, and high achievements of grace, think themselves to be above all
Ordinances, above Prayer, hearing the Word, or receiving the Sacrament: they
live altogether in excel^^s, you shall never see them below the third heaven,
their common discourse is of unexpressible ravishing communion with the Lord
Jesus Christ; and hereupon they contemn all the Ordinances of the Gospel, as
beggarly Rudiments, as Childrens food. But let such consider, That if any
Church, or people in the world might have pleaded, that they were above
Ordinances, the Thessalonians might have done it, who were every way gracious,
even beyond comparison; yet the Apostle presses upon them the necessity of
attending upon a Gospel Ministry. That men that have attained unto the highest
perfection of grace and knowledge, that it is possible for men in this life, to
attain unto, are not to despise, or neglect the Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Not
only does a Child need daily food, but the strongest man in the world will
faint, and die without it. I have wondered to think how the Devil could ever get
this deceit into the hearts of men, to make them to think that they are above
Ordinances when as the Scripture speaks so expressly against this opinion. 1
Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 14.22.
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not ^o them that believe, but to them that
believe not, but Prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but for
them which believe. Here you see, the Apostle clearly asserts it, that
beleivers (nay strong beleivers) are not to despise Prophesying. And David a
great Prophet, a man after God's own heart, rich in gifts, and grace, yet
longs after God's presence in the Tabernacle, Psalm. 84.2. It was his earnest
desire, his chiefest comfort yea he accounted it the greatest happiness that
he could attain unto, in this world, to be near where the Ark of God was (the
place of his residence amongst men in those days) to behold the face of God in
his Sanctuary, to enjoy the public Ordinances of God. And says the Apostle
Heb. 5.14. Strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, even those who
by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good, and evil.
Those who are of full age, i.e. in comparison of those he before compared to
babes. By reason of use, i.e. by hearing, reading, and meditateing on the Word
of God. Have their senses, i.e. their understanding, judgment, and memory. To
discern both good and evil, i.e. to choose that which is good, and refuse that
which is evil. Now the Apostle expressly says, Ephe. 4.11, 12. 13. Ephesians. 4.11,
12, 13.
That people are to abide under the Word preached, until they come to heaven.
He gave some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teathers; for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, until we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ. The use of the Ministry is perpetual, it is to
continue so long as the Sun and Moon endure, until all the Elect of God are
brought in, until we come to be perfect men, which shall be in the World to
come. We must live under the means of grace, until we come to glory.

And the Reasons hereof are these: 1. Reason Our sanctification is not perfect.
1. Because our sanctification in this life is not perfect: the Scripture last
quoated, does intimate thus much: There is the old man, and the new man, flesh
and spirit in the best Saints, although sin has received its deadly wound, and
shall never reign as a King in the soul, yet it may tyrannize in us, and we
shall never be perfectly freed from the rebellion thereof, until we come to
Heaven. 2 Reason Sin lies hidden in the secret corners of the heart.


The heart is exceeding deceitful, deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9. The
heart of man is the greatst cheater in the world, there is not such a deceiver,
it is so wickedly wicked, so unsearchably wicked, beyond all expression, who
can know it! Wickedness lies hidden in the secret corners thereof: There is no
man (no not the most knowing and the most innocent) knows how often be
offends, Psalm. 19.12. Therefore Solomon says, Prove. 28.26. He that trusts
in his own beart is a fool. Now the preaching of the Word is an effectual
means for the unbowelling of corruption, and discovering of the secret
turnings and windings of the heart; Heb. 4.12 The Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit and of the joints and marrow; and is a discerner of
the intents and thoughts of the heart. This I thought good to name, to show you
in my passage to the Text, that whilst you live in this World, you are to wait
upon the Ministry of the Word, and not to despise Prophesying.

Now after the Apostles injunction, my Text comes fitly in; for many will
despise the Ministers Doctrine before they try it: therefore the Apostle when
he said, Despise not prophesying, subjoines, Prove all things. Try, try, and
if there be any error in what you hear, then despise it: Despise not
Preaching, only this is your work, Try all things, and hold fast that which is
good. The words of the Text explained.


In the first place I shall give you the meaning of the words; prove, the word
in the Greek (...) is a word borrowed from Goldsmiths, who when they would
try their metal whether it be current or not, bring it to the Touchstone;
so the word signifies to try, or to know by experience: and thus you are to
try by the Touchstone of the Word, all Doctrines you hear, that is the
Standard to try them by. Try or prove all things, by all things here is meant
all Doctrines preached, all Prophesyings or Preachings you hear. It is
observable, that when the Apostle Paul spoke these words, the Evangelists were
not written, nor commended to the public care of the Church of God: It is
thought that this Epistle was written thirty years or more before the
Evangelists: Now in that the Apostle does command them to try the Doctrins
preached, he therein referres them to the Scriptures of the Old Testament. It
follows, Hold fast that which is good: There is a twofold holding fast; 1 An
holding fast in judgment the Truths of the Gospel, that you do not run into
error. 2 An holding fast in practice the power of the Gospel, that ye do not
run into sin.

1. 1 Hold fast in judgment, that ye run not into error.
Hold fast in judgment the truths of the Gospel, that ye do not run into
Error: This is laid down 2 Pet. 3.17. Therefore beloved seeing ye know these
things, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall
from your own steadfastness; that is in judgment: there must be a foreknowledg
of the truths of the Gospel, before ye can attain unto steadfastness in grace;
and besides knowledge, there is required vigilance and carefulness if we would
hold fast the truths of the Gospel: Thus you are to retain in judgment the
Doctrines of the Gospel, that ye run not into erroneous Principles. It is
childish, Ephesians. 4.4
faith Saint Paul Ephesians. 4.14. to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine: to be over credulous, easy of belief, fickle and
wavering as children are.

2. 2 Hold fast in practice that ye run not into sin.
It implies an holding fast in practice, that ye run not into sin, that ye
hold on your course of holiness, settled and unaltered: and this is laid down
Phil, 2.15.16. That you may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God,
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye
shine as lights in the World, holding forth the Word of Life: that is, in a
blameless, holy, and humble conversation. A man then holds fast, when he
frames his life according to the direction of the Word of God; for knowledge is
empty and vain, and profits not, if it be not reduced unto practice; and
practice in our Christian course is difficult, up the hill, it requires heed
and watchfulness, therefore we must be solicitously careful to hold out in
our practice, that which we are convinced in our judgment is the Truth and Will
of God revealed in his Word. So that the sense of the words is this, Try all
the Doctrins of that Minister under which you live, by the Word of God, whether
they be true or false, sound or corrupt; and what ye find to be the truth, and
consonant to the Word of God, embrace it, hold it fast in your judgment, that
you run not into contrary Opinions, and in your practice, that ye run not into
any vicious courses in your lives and conversations; and what ye find to be
false and sinful, reject it. And thus you have a brief paraphrase and
explication of the words. From the first part of the words, Prove all things, I
shall draw this Observation, viz.

That it is the duty of all hearers of the Word, to try and prove all the
Doct^rines which they hear. It is the injunction that Saint John gives in his
first Epistle, chapter 4. v. 1. Beloved, 1 John 4.1
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God,
because many false Prophets are go^e out into the World: that is, Try the
Doctrines that such men preach, who pretend that they have the Spirit, and
preach by the Spirit, whether they be true or false. Erroneous Teachers will
boast of the Spirit, and therefore we must try what spirit their Doctrine comes
from; we must not with Solomon's fool, give credence to every thing that is
published under the glorious name of Truth: But we must consider that the
Church of God has always been pestered with false Teachers; in Ieremiah's
time there were such as published the Visions o^ their own Brain, for sound
Doctrine: and the Apostle Paul does often complain of false Teachers that
transformed themselves into Angels of Light: it is the Devils policy many times
to transform himself into an Angel of Light; and because his commodities will
not sell in his own Market, therefore he labors to bring them into Gods Market
(for such is the Preaching of the Word) thinking that none will suspect them
there. Have we not then great reason to try all Doctrines that we hear!

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall first give some Cautions: Secondly,
the Reasons thereof: Thirdly, lay down some Directions about trying what you
hear.

The first Caution is this, 1 Caution People must not take liberty to try all
Preachers.
When the Apostle bids you prove all things, he does not thereby intend that
people should have a liberty to hear any body, and so to try all Preachers;
as Calvin upon the place well observes: for, by this means a man may sooner
suck in an Error, than embrace the Truth. Nay, the Scripture is expressly
against it: If you can hear a man that does preach the Truth, you are not to
follow such as are known to divulge Errors: 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. 2 Timothy 4.3.4
For the time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears;
and they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be turned into
Fables. And 2 John 10.11. 2 John 10 11
If there come any unto you, and brings not this Doctrine, receive him not into
your House, neither bid him, God speed, for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds. M^th 24 3 24
And Math. 24.23, 24. If any man shall say unto you, Lo bear is Christ, or
there is Christ, believe it not, for there shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show you great Signs and Wonders; insomuch that if it were
possible they should deceive the very Elect. And verse 26. Wherefore if they
shall say unto you, behold He is in the Desert, go not forth, behold He is in
the secret Chambers, believe it not. False Prophets shall arise, and what shall
they say? Lo here is Christ; not as if Christ was there personally, but
doctrinally. Some shall say He is in the Desert, for these false Teachers used
to draw people out into desert places where they might more securely publish
their Errors and Heresies; Veritas non quaerit angulos.
whereas Truth seeks no corner. But go not out after them, says Christ: If they
shall say He is in the secret Chamber, do not believe them. Things honest
ever rejoice in being made public, Nocte latentmendae
but viciousness would be concealed; and therefore it is that they seek out
secret Chambers, Lucern^m ext^^guunt Fures
Darkness best becoming their deeds of darkness. Hence it is that in the
Scripture you have a command to take heed not only whom you hear for the
Preacher, and how you hear for the manner, but also what you hear for the
matter; so the Evangelist expresses it, Mark 4.24. Take heed what you hear.
Mark 4.24.
The Physician may be authorized to practice, and yet may prescribe dangerous
potions: the Minister may be true, as to his Office, and yet a false Teacher,
as to his Doctrine, and so to be rejected; we must not only look to the
messenger, but to the message: And if any man (whatever he be) preach any
other Gospel than this Gal. ^al. 2 ^
1.8. let him be accursed. These erroneous and seducing Doctrines are the
Devils tares, and the preaching of them is the Devils seed time; and if we
would not have these tares to grow in our field, we must not be present where
the Devil sows them; for we must know, that a Christian may be poisoned to
death, as well as starved; therefore it is the duty of Christians to take heed
what they hear, lest they swallow down poison instead of wholesome food, soul
damning opinions instead of the sincere milk of God's Word. 1 Pet. 2.2
1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, not the
fantastical Notions and Opinions of vain minded men. Will ye look to the food
of your bodies, and will ye not mind the food of your souls? will ye be
careful that that be bread, and bread indeed that ye feed upon for bodily
strength? and will ye be so careless as to feed upon husks, and poison for
your souls? Therefore take heed what ye hear, and whom ye hear, for sin
first enters in by the ear; and the Apostle says, 1 Cor 15.33
1 Cor. 15.33. Evil words corrupt good manners. So this is the first Caution,
when ye are bid to prove all things, you have not thereby a liberty given you
to hear all sorts of Preachers.

Secondly, when the Apostle says, 2 Caution we must not be scepticks in
Religion.
prove all things, he never intended that men should be unstable in
Christianity, scepticks in Religion, wandering stars, never fixed in the truths
of the Gospel, like Seekers (for so they may very well be called) who settle no
where, but are always finding out new Truths, with their new Lights, which
usually in the End prove to be nothing but old Errors. The Colossians were
called upon, to seek rooting and establishment in the faith, Col. 2.7.
Col. 2.7

Thirdly, 3 caution we musi not bring the Scripture to ^u^ opinion, but our
opinion to the Scripture.
In proveing all Doctrines that you hear, be sure you do not bring the
Scripture to your opinion, but bring your opinion to the Scripture; for the
Scripture teaches nothing but truth, and commands nothing but goodness.
Many force the Scriptures to speak that which was never intended by the
Holy Ghost, that so they may seem to countenance those erroneous opinions
which are divulged; Quicquid in Scriptura docetur, ^eritas; quicquid
praecipitur, bonitas.
they set the Scriptures as it were upon the wrack to make them confess that
which they never intended; thus it was with Heretics of old, and this also is
their practice in our days, they deal with the Scripture as he did with the
Oracle of Delphos, to make it speak what he meant. But this is the Caution that
I would give, Do not bring your sense to the Scripture, but labor to carry
away the Holy-ghosts sense from the Scripture. 4 Caution Be not over consident
of your own opinion.


Fourthly, In proving the Doctrins that you hear, Lean not too much to your own
understanding, think not your selves infallible, be not over confident of your
own opinion in matters controversial, especially if contrary to the judgment of
those who are eminent both for gifts and grace. Ponder the Scriptures
thoroughly, and seek unto God by prayer, before ye resolve in matters that are
ambiguous. Pro. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet.

Having dispatched the Cautions, I shall give the Reasons why men must try the
Doctrines that they hear:

First, 1 Reason There is a near resemblance betwixt er tonions, and true
Teachers.
Because erroneous and corrupt Teachers, may carry a very near resemblance to
them that preach the truth. I have read of two Painters Parrhasius and Zeuxis,
who contending for the mastery in that Art, the one painted Grapes so exactly,
that the birds came to pick them, thinking they had been very Grapes: And the
other painted a Curtain so exactly, that his fellow Painter came to draw it,
supposing that it had bin a real Curtain. There is such a near affinity
betwixt sound Teachers, and seducing Teachers, that it is no easy matter for a
man to discern betwixt them.

But all is not gold that glisters: 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
A notable Text you have for this, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. For such are false
Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
light. False Apostles may transform themselves so, as to be like the Apostles
of Christ; and Ministers of the Devil, factors for hell, may transform
themselves so as to be like the Ministers of Jesus Christ: Therefore there is
good reason that you should try all Doctrines that you hear, whether they be
agreeable to the Word of God, or no.

Secondly, 2 Reason the Scripture foretells that there shall be many false
Teachers.
Because the Word of God does foretell that there shall be as many (if not
more) false Teachers under the new Testament, then under the old, and more in
the later days, then were in the former ages of the world; this is plain from
that Text of Scripture, 2 Pet. 2.1.
2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. They were of old under the Law, they shall be with you under
the Gospel. Although the Pharisees are dead, who corrupted the Law, yet the
same Spirit still lives in men, and will do to the End of the World. The
Apostle gives this, as a reason why we should try such Doctrines as we hear,
because in the times of the new Testament many false Teachers will appear, 1
John 4.1. 1 John 4.1.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God, because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World. Believe not every man that
says he has the Spirit, and that the Spirit does teach him that Doctrine,
that he preaches, but try whether it be agreeable to the Word of God, or no;
and the reason he gives is, because there are many (not few) false Prophets,
and those not gone into a corner, or bound up in one part of the World; indeed
in former time, the nest of them was enclosed in one part of the World, in
Germany, and especially in Amsterdam; But now they are gone out into the whole
World: Therefore try the Spirits whether they be of God; try before ye trust,
before ye believe.

Thirdly, 3 Reason False Doctrines are published very craftily.
try all Doctrines that you hear preached, because false Doctrines and
Heresies come from the publishers of them very slily and craftily into the
minds of men: There is not more legerdemain showed by a cunning juggler, then
by these false Teachers, they are subtle and cunning to pervert the minds of
men: As the Apostle shows Ephesians. 4.14. Ephe. 4.14
That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, by the stight of men, and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. The word in the Greek is very emphatical,
(...), by men's cogging of a die: It is a word borrowed from cheating gamesters,
that can throw with a die, what way they please. These Teachers can as easily
convey errors into the minds of men, as a cunning gamster can cheat with a die.
We have had many such sly, and subtle convayances, or else the truths of God
could never have been perverted amongs us as they are. It is Observable, Rev.
9.8. That the locusts that came out of the East, Rev. 9.8.
had their faces like the faces of women. Interpreters expound them to be
Jesuits, and factors for Rome; they had women's faces, insinuating and
allureing countenances, invea gleing, enticeing, and bewitching of men with
their follies. Of such the Apostle speaks, Romans 16.18. For they that are such,
To. 16.18.
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and by good words, and
fair speches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Even as a foul faced whore,
painteth her face, so do they their damnable errors, with eloquent
insinuations; sometimes they tickle itching ears with such eloquent Notions as
may make them admired. And sometimes they suggest high priveledges, unspeakable
advantages by what they deliver; As the Devil did to our first parents, ye
shall be like unto Gods. Error must have good words to varnish it over, and
fair speeches, plausible, eloquent, and accute deliveries. By good words they
deceive the hearts of the simple. And 2 Pet. 2.1. the Apostle sets forth their
flynesse in bringing in damnable Heresies. 2 Pet. 2.1.
Had Peter lived in our age, he would have been accounted a bitter man, to call
them Heresies, yea, and damnable Heresies; but they were privily brought in,
and says he, many shall follow their pernicious ways, and through
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you: with
feigned words this must be done, under the specious pretense of Truth, and new
Light; they will mix some gold with their copper, some truths with their
falsehoods, Sunt mala mista bonis, sunt bona mista malis.
they will sweeten their baits, that they may take the sooner. For if Error was
nakedly brought in, there is scarce a man would embrace it, it would appear in
such an ugly shape, and therefore it is that they cloth it with a semblance of
truth and piety.

Fourthly, 4. Reason There is an aptness in our nature to be turned aside unto
error.
You should try all Doctrines that you hear, before you believe them, because
through the credulity that is in us, men of the most sollidest judgments are
apt to be led away with novelties and deceived with error: we are by nature
like the sand in the Sea, Est natura hominum novitatis avida.
moved with every wave, like reeds shaken with every puff of wind. A notable
text you have for this. 2. Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means as the
serpent beguiled Eve, through her subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ. The Devil would not make use of a dotish
so lish creature, but a subtle Serpent to beguile Eve, in making her to eat
of the forbidden fruit. Now says the Apostle, I am afraid lest the Devil by
his subtle temptation, should pervert your minds from the truth of the Gospel:
This shows that there was an aptness in their nature to be turned aside unto
error. And moreover, even the most holy, and most understanding in the
mysteries of God, are but in part enlightened; we see through a glass, 1 Cor.
13.12.
darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12 And though they would not willingly missend you, yet
through the remain der of ignorance and corruption that is in them, it is
possible that they may take error for truth; therefore no man's piety, or
learning, should so far blind us, as to believe whatsoever he speaks, without
bringing of it unto the Touchstone of the Word; for we must not build our faith
on humane, but on divine authority; we must imitate the noble Beraeans, and
daily search the Scriptures, whether those Doctrines that we hear, be indeed
the truth of God: They were commended for this, Acts 17.1^
Acts 17.11. O Beloved, Take nothing upon trust, upon the Authority of the
preacher, weigh all things in the Balance of the Sanctuary. You must do with
the Doctrins you hear, as you do with gold; a man will not take gold without
weighing of it, O there is as much falsehood in opinions, as in metals,
therefore weigh all things: It is not what this man says, be he Cephas or
Apollo; be he never so emminent for Learning, and Religion: But what God says
in the Scripture, for the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith, Quod de Scripturis
sacris authoritatem non habet eadam facilitate contemnitur quae probatur.
and whatsoever is not according to this Rule, reject it, as the dross of man's
corrupt brains, and do not receive it as the gold of Gods pure Word.

Now it may be said, you have given diverse Reasons why we should not believe
such Doctrins as we hear, before we have tried them: But what Rules and
Directions can you give how such a weak ignorant Christian as I am should be
able to try, and judge of such Doctrines as I hear? bic labor, hoc opus: But I
shall endeavor both in general, and in particular, to give Answer to this
great Quaerie: And I hope it will be of great use unto us in these erring
times wherein false Teachers, and false Doctrines do so much abound.

First, ^ General Rule (...) the ^^^ipture (...) the ^^andard (...) which (...)
all ^^ctrines.
take this general rule. Be sure you make the Word of God to be the Scandard
by which you try and prove all Doctrines that you hear, and if there be any
thing preached (although it should be by an Angel from Heaven) that is not
according to the Word of God, believe it not. This is the Prophets direction
Esaias 8.20. To the Law, (...). 8.20.
and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no Light in them. By the Law and Testimony, we are to understand the
Word of God, which is his Testimony, and if any speak otherwise then according
to Gods Word, it is a clear and evident sign that there is no Light, nor
Truth in them. I give you this direction because there are multitudes of vain
people in these our days, who wave the written Word of God, and run to
Inspirations, and Revelations, to try Doctrines by, which are no certain Rules:
and so by this means they entertain satanical delusions, and not heavenly
inspirations. But I would desire such seriously to mind this one Text of
Scripture, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19.
It is in 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. And this voice which came from Heaven, we heard when
we were with him in the holy mount: we have also a more sure word of Prophesy.
The written Word of God is more sure in regard of us, then if we should hear
a voice from Heaven. And that is the reason that when Dives desired that some
extraordinary course might be taken, Luke 16.
to prevent his brethrens coming to Hell, and therefore desired that Lazarus
might be sent from the grave to forewarne them, and then he thought they would
believe; Abraham sends him to Moses and the Prophets, and says, If they will
not hear them, neither would they be persuaded though one should rise from the
dead. If we should hear a voice in the air, we must not believe that voice,
but we must believe what we find on record in the Word of God. Deuteronomy, 29, ult.
Deuteronomy. 29 ult. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things
which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, that we may
do all the words of this Law. This I mention to show you, that men that pretend
so much to Revelations, and leave the written Word of God, are in the ready way
to run into Satanical delusions, and gross mistakes.

A second general Direction about trying such Doctrines as you hear, is this,
2 General Rule Rather maintain than dispure clear principles of truth.
viz. Clear principles of Truth must rather be maintained, then disputed. It is
a rule in Philosophy, that principles, against principles, are not to be
disputed; and this Rule holds good in Divinity, we must not dispute such
principles as these, viz. whether Christ be the Son of God: Or the Scripture
the Word of God: The Resurrection of the body: The Salvation of Saints: the
Damnation of Sinners: Judgment to come: or Life everlasting. Such fundamental
principles as these are to be maintained, but not disputed.

Thirdly, maintain no opinion stiffly, until you have tried it thoroughly. 3
General Rule Maintain no opiniuntill you have tried it.
Such is the instability of men's minds in this erroneous age, that one Sermon
many times shall more pervert them from the Truths of the Gospel, then twenty
Sermons shall settle them again.





though it be not to be found in Scripture, totidem verbis, in open and
express words, or whatsoever does agree with the genuine fence of any one
place of Scripture, although it may seem not to agree with the litteral fence
of another place of Scripture, or whatsoever Doctrine is agreeable to the end,
intent, and scope of the Scripture. This Doctrine is sound and to be embraced.

But on the contrary, that Doctrine which is not to be found in Scripture,
which is not bottomed upon the Scripture, which cannot be drawn rationally from
the Scripture by a necessary consequence, but is built upon the Traditions, and
Inventions of men, which ads to the Word, or detracts from the Word, which does
wrest and pervert the Scripture, or strain it to men's corrupt opinions; or
whatsoever Doctrine will not abide the trial of the Word, will not abide the
Light: That Doctrine is false, and to be abhorred.



But on the contrary, that Doctrine which debaseth the grace of God in Christ,
and advances the corrupt Will of man, and which sets Freewill against Free
grace, that Doctrine is unsound



But on the contrary, that Doctrine which cries up the Free grace of God and in
the mean time gives liberty to men to live as they list, which does make the
Will of God for obedience, and the Grace of God for salvation, to be contrary
one to the other: that Doctrine is a false Doctrine.

all the Attributes of God, the Justice of God as well as the Mercy of God, the
Holiness of God as well as the Grace of God; and approves of, and commends all
those ways and paths which God has set out in Scripture for us to walk in,
which teaches us Faith and Repentance, Piety toward God, and Charity toward
man; that Doctrine is sound and good.

But on the contrary, whatsoever Doctrine does rob God of his glory in any of
his Attributes, that makes God either unmercifull or unjust, etc. or that
sleights any one of those ways that God has chalked out in Scripture for us
to walk in; or that disjoines the two Tables of God, separating Piety from
Charity, acts of Righteousness from acts of Holiness. Let it pretend never
so much Charity to men, if it does not acknowledge Piety to God; or if it
pretend never so much Piety to God, if it directs not Charity and
Righteousness to men, that Doctrine is false and corrupt.





But on the contrary, that Doctrine which is pleasing to the corrupt nature of
man, easy to flesh and blood, that makes way for looseness and profaneness;
that Doctrine is unsound.

teaching us to bottom only upon the merits of Christ for salvation, and not
upon our own good works; that Doctrine is sound.

But that Doctrine which leaves a distressed, perplexed Conscience without any
sound bottom to rest upon, by teaching men to place the stresse of their
salvation upon the mutable Will of man; this is not only an uncomfortable, but
an unsound Doctrine.

Titus 1.1.) acknowledges the truth which is after godliness, which conduces
to the perfecting of holiness, that puts us on to diligent care to work out
our salvation with fear and trembling, that helps on the work of grace in the
soul, that tends to inform the judgment, reform the heart, and conform the
life to the whole Will of God; that Doctrine is true, and good.

But on the contrary, that Doctrine which tends to Licentiousness and
Libertinism, causing men to neglect the Ordinances of God, and to grow weary of
Congregationall Worship, Family Worship, and Closet Worship; that turns the
grace of God into Wantonness, that magnifies the Death of Christ, but
destroys the Life of Christ, that sets up the Blood of Christ, the Priestly
Office of Christ, but regards not the Commands of Christ, the Kingly Office of
Christ; that makes men confident of Mercy, but careless of Repentance; that
makes Christ merciful, but leaves them sinful, or at the best, brings them
but to a form of godliness, without the power thereof: that Doctrine is
erroneous and dangerous. Truth ever advances godliness, but erroneous
Doctrine is contrary thereunto; 2 Timothy 2.16. 2 Timothy 2.16
Shun profane and vayn bablings, for they will increase unto more
ungodliness: We find in our days the fruit of vain bablings and Disputes to
be the broaching of such damnable Opinions as these, viz That a man must not
mourn for sin, must not confess sin, must not pray for pardon of sin:
and thus three parts of Prayer are taken away. So concerning the Decree of God,
that if they be decreed to be saved, they shall be saved let them live as
they list; and if they be decreed to be damned, they shall be damned, let
them do what they can: Whereas the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation should
be a spur to stir us up in pursuit after holiness. So concerning the Law of
God, that it is of no use to believers. And many such like pernicious Doctrines
are occasioned by vain Disputes; all which tend to more ungodliness, which is
enough to prove them to be false, for truth ever advances practical godliness
in a man's Christian course.

that creeps into houses, and dares not appear in public, that seiseth upon
silly women, laden with corruption as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.6. but,
dares not encounter with a knowing Christian: 2. Tim. 3.6
And therefore it is that the Turks do forbid any man to dispute against their
Alkoran: And therefore it is that the Church of Rome will not suffer the common
people to read the Bible, but they must pin their Faith upon other men's
sleeves, and believe as the Church believes. And thus they cause their Errors
and Idolatries to be swallowed down; whereas were they brought into the light,
the weakness and sinfulness thereof would appear.

The sum of all is this; When you hear any Doctrine delivered, compare it with
the Word of God; and if you find that it does cross any part of the old or
new Testament, believe it not; for it is not Truth, but Error.

These Rules and Directions for the trying of such Doctrines as you hear, may
be of great advantage unto you in these loose and erroneous times, if the Lord
give you hearts to make a right improvement thereof.

Nay, Conscience does not tell me of any thing delivered unto you, repugnant
unto the Scripture; But trust nothing that I preach, until you have tried it;
and if you find any thing disagreeable to the written Word of God, reject it.
Prove all things; hold fast that that which is good.

FINIS.
A CHRISTIANS great Enquiry.
Text. Acts 16.30, 31. And said, sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they
said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.
THis Text is propounded by way of interrogation; the manner of its composure
intimates, that it is the Ebulition of a perplexed mind, the Quere of a
distempered, and distressed soul, and that about a business of the greatest
moment in the World. There are many critical, curious, and controversial
Questions, that men enquire after in these days: But this Question that the
poor Jailer here asked, is a Question of the greatest concernment that ever can
be made by any man; It was no less then this, what he might do to be saved?

The Question seems to be the expression of a man in great anguish, and
consternation of mind, and truly the matter the Question is about, is such as
might trouble all the World: As a grave Divine answered one that came unto him,
saying, Sir, I am troubled about my Salvation; says he, friend it is a
business that might trouble all the World. So here this poor man cries out to
Paul and Silas, what must I do to be saved?

I shall not spend time about the Explication, but shall dispatch what I have
to say, in a practical prosecution of these words. Before I come to the points
of Doctrine I intend to handle; There are 3 concurrent circumstances about the
words, from whence 3 Observations will arise.

1 From the consideration of the condition of the man that propounds this
serious Question, a Iaylor, a calling in those times especially, full of
infamy, because the followers of Christ were most of all in bonds, when
Oppressors, and men of violence escaped free; yet behold a Iaylor the object of
pardoning mercy. Hence Observe:

1 Observation From the condition of the man that propounds this Question.
That men of the most despicable condition in the World, may become the objects
of Gods pardoning mercy. Salvation is not impailed within the rank of the rich,
and honorable of the World, but sometimes men of the lowest rank, become the
objects of Gods mercy. Pardoning grace reaches sometimes to the vildest, and
most notorious sinners in the World. Christ came not to call the righteous,
Mark 2.17
but sinners to repentance.

2. From the consideration of the occasion or manner of this Jaylors
conversion, for it is said, In the night there was a great Earthquake in the
prison, and the Keeper awakened out of his sleep, and when he arose, he saw all
the prison doors open, and thinking that all the prisoners had been gone, he
was in great perplexity of mind, searing what would befall him. Now God made
this a means, to cause this man to look after Salvation, so that although he
thought the escape of the prisoners might occasion the loss of his life, yet
his care now was, what he might do to save his soul, he said, Sirs, what must
I do to be saved. Hence observe:

2 Observation. from the occasion of the Iaylors Conversion.
That God by his providence, does many times so bring it about, that affliction
shall be a means to make men look after Salvation. Had not this poor man
thought that he had lost his prisoners, God knows whether he had not lost his
soul, whether ever he would have enquired after Salvation. I have read of a
Scottish Divine, who being in a great fit of sickness, did bless God for it,
for says he, this sickness of my body, has been a means to save my soul. It
is usual with God to make afflictions of one kind, or other, instrumental to
make men enquire after Salvation.

3. The next thing to be considered is, the great alteration that this
providence made in the Jailer. The poor man before was troubled to think that
his prison doors were opened, and it is said, verse 27. That he drew his
sword, and would have killed himself. But now we find no more talk of killing
of himself: But all his care was, how to save his soul: Hence observe.

3 Observation. from the great alteration that this providenc made in him.
That when once men come to make a dilligent enquiry after Heaven, there will
then appear a great alteration in their passions, and affections. This man's
fear, and care was not now, how to get his prisoners again; But his care now
was, what he should do that he might no longer be a prisoner to Satan; not how
to keep other men in bonds, but what he should do to free himself from the
Devils bonds. Oh the wonderful change that Conversion works in the soul! It
does not only change the conversation, but the very passions, and affections
are changed.

These Observations are only transient, and not directly intended in the Text.

Now I shall come to handle both the Inquiry that the Jailer makes, and the
Resolve that the Apostle gives.

First, The Jaylors Inquiry, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

This Question, The Iaylors Inquiry arises both from fear and hope.
or perplexed Quere, does arise from a twofold spring, or from two kind of
passions, or affections in man.

1. It does arise from Fear. The man came in trembling and said, from Fear
Sirs What shall I do? Enquiries, when they are vehement, have mixtures of
fear with them. As if he should have said, I may loose my life, and my soul
too, oh but Sirs, tell me how I may save my soul, and then no matter for my
life. There was a mixture of fear in this Quere, what must I do by reason of
the Evil I have done.

2 It flowed from the affection of hope; from Hope
There would never have been Enquitie made, if there had not been some hopes of
mercy. The Question, what must I do? argues some measure of hope: After
impossibillities we make no Inquiry; we make no Inquiry how we may climb
up to Heaven, how we may fly like a bird in the air, because these things are
not possible to be done. But the things that are attainable, are the objects of
our Inquiry: Now, what must I do? argues that there was some hopes in this
man's breast.

The Text contains in it these two particulars; Two parts in the Text
1. The Quere of a perplexed soul, What must I do to be saved? 2. A full and
satisfactory Answer to this Q^aere, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved.

Now before I give you the point of Doctrine, 6 Particulars observable from the
form of speech he used.
from the Jaylors Quaere, observe these six particulars about the manner and
form of the Expresfion.

1. He does not say, what evil shall I do? he that had done so much evil
already, would not add sin, to sin: But he says, what good shall I do.

2. He does not say, what good words shall I speak? or what good profession
shall I make? But what good shall I do. It is not good words, it is not a good
profession which will bring a man to Heaven: many cried Lord, Lord, that never
entered into the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. It is not said, what may I do, as if it were indifferent whether he might
do it, or no: But he saw there was a necessity of doing somewhat, what must I
do?

4. It is not said, what must another man do? but what must I do? As I cannot
live by the food that another man ears, so I cannot go to Heaven by the grace
which another man acts.

5. It is not said, what must I know? but, what must I do? There are many
times high flowen speculations in men's minds, when there are no gracious
dispositions in their hearts. But it is not knowing, but doing that will bring
a man to Heaven. John 13.17
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. The Devils know more then
all the sons of men; they know much good, but they do much evil.

6. It is not said, what must I do to get my prisoners again? but, what must I
do to get to Heaven, to save my soul? And this indeed is the Inquiry, above
all Enquirings. Thus you have some advertizements from the form of expression
here used by the Jailer.

viz. That above all things in the World, this is the most needful thing for
the sons of men to make Enquiry after, namely, what they must do to be saved.

In the handling of this proposition, I shall first premise some Cautions,
secondly, give you some Reasons, and then Apply it.

The Cautions are three. 1 Caution No man is not saved for doing.
First, Though it be the most needful thing in the World, for the sons of men
to make Inquiry after this, viz. what they must do to be saved, yet take this
Caution, viz. That though we must Enquire what we must do, yet we must not
expect to be saved by doing. A full expression to this purpose there is in Job
7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? The
interrogation implies an absolute negation; what shall I do? that is, I can
do nothing to satisfy thy justice, to pacify thy wrath, or procure thy love,
and favor; Lord I have greivously sinned against thee, and if thou look for
reparation and satisfaction at my hands, I am no way able to make it. Job
speaks like a poor forlorn, broken debtor, to his rich and incensed Creditor,
aresting him for his debt, which he is no way able to satisfy, and therefore
he throws himself at his feet, and cries out, Sir, I confess, I owe you
much, but I have nothing to pay, I am not able to make you the least
satisfaction, for what I owe you. Thus it is with all man kind since the fall
of Adam, God entrusted Us with a great stock, but we have lost all, and are
become banckrupts deeply indebted, we owe a thousand times ten thousand
Tallents unto God; and of our selves are not able to make the least
satisfaction unto his Divine Majesty, for all the wrong and dishonor we have
done unto him by our sins; we may indeed do something to God as a payment of
our duty, but we can do nothing as a payment of our debt which we owe unto him.
Therefore though there must be Inquiry made, what must I do to be saved? yet
remember this, that no man is saved for doing. 2 Caution no man is saved with
out doing.


Though no man is saved for doing, yet Enquiry must be made, what must I do?
because no man can be saved without doing; according to that saying of Saint
Austin, Though God made thee without thy self, yet he will not save thee
without thy self. Indeed my doing is not the cause of God's saving of me, but
it is a cause without which God will not save me; God saves no man for his
doing, yet God will not save any man without his doing: God is not so
prodigal of Heaven, as to throw it into those men's laps that will take no
pains for it. Heaven is a Goal, and unless you run you shall never obtain it:
Heaven is a Crown of Life, but unless you be faithful to death, you shall
never wear it.

A third Caution is this, 3 Caution Heavenly care does not exclude lawful
worldly care
That Enquiry after Salvation, does not exclude lawful Enquiry and care after
worldly things: God did never intend that Heaven should so monopolize and
impaile your care and enquiry, as that you should look after nothing but
Heaven; you may have Heaven and the World too: You need not do as Socrates
did, Socrates
who because his Estate did hinder him from studying Philosophy, therefore he
threw it all into the Sea, and said, I will destroy thee, lest thou should
destroy me. You need not cast away your Estate, you may make Inquiry after
the things of the World and Heaven too; always provided, that your first and
chiefest care be after Heaven, and heavenly things, and your worldly care
subordinate thereunto. These are the Cautions.

Now the Reasons of the point follow.

First, 1 Reason From the Souls excellency
we should above all things make Inquiry what we must do to be saved,
because the Soul is the most excellent thing in the World: it is clothed in
Scripture with this Epethite, the precious Soul. The Body is but the shell,
the Soul is the Pearl; the Body is but the case, the Soul is the jewel:
therefore make it thy great work, how to save thy Soul, because it carries a
greater excellency with it, then all the world besides. Julius Caesar was wont
to say of Cicero, that he was negligent in things belonging to himself, but
diligent in things concerning the Commonwealth; So should we be negligent in
things concerning our Bodies in comparison of things concerning our Souls.

Secondly, 2 Reason Heavenly care is the leady way to bodily welfare
the Inquiry after the Souls safety, is the ready way to procure the welfare
of the Body: There is no man is wise for himself, if he be not wise for his
Soul: Math. 6.33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, Math. 6.33
and his Righteousness, and all these things shallbe added unto you. Make it
your great bargain, to buy Heaven, and God will cast in the world as paper and
pack-thred, over and above; as Riches and Honor were given unto Solomon, 1
King. 3.12
1 Kings 3.12. Indeed God will not always give the partiticular temporal
blessings that you crave, or think you stand in need of, for he knows what
we want better than we our selves; but though he does not always hear us
according to our will, Deus non semper audit ad voluntatem vel volupta tem, ut
esmper exaudiat ad salutem
yet he always hears us according to our wants: for says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
4.8. godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come. Of the blessings of this life conditionally, so far as they conduce to
our good; but of the life to come absolutely. It is a notable passage that we
read of Exodus 1.21. And it came to pass, Exodus 1.21
because the Midwives feared God, that He made them houses. The Midwives
feared God, and God took care for them. Do thou take care of thy Soul and God
will take care of thy Body.

Thirdly, 3 reason From the devils care to destroy the soul
make Inquiry to save thy Soul, because there is so much Inquiry made by the
Devil to destroy thy Soul, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober and vigilant, 1 Pet. 5.8.
because your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom
he may devour: in the original it is, whom he may drink up at one draft.
Satan envies our restored condition, that we should enjoy that Paradise of
Bliss which once he had, and out of which he was cast; and therefore it is
that he is become our irreconcilable Enemy, and is continually tempting and
disturbing of us, out of his infinite hatred of God and goodness: As the
Leopard bears such a natural hatred against men, that if he see but the
picture of a man, he will tear it to pecces; so the Devil if he sees but the
image of God in us, by all means seeks to destroy us. Chrysostom
Now Chrysostom says, If the Devil does watch, will thou sleep? if the
Devil does go about, will thou sit still? if the Devil does make Inquiry
what souls he may devour and damn, why then should not the sons of men make
it their work to enquire how to save their souls?

Fourthly, 4 Reason If thou Iosest thy soul, thou losest all
make this Inquiry, because if thou losest thy Soul, thou have the greatest
loss that is imaginable, there is not a loss beyond it. To lose the Soul, is
to bid farewell to God, farewell to Christ, farewell to a Kingdom, and farewell
to all society with Saints and Angels, for ever and ever: O that word ever is
the great aggravation of this loss: it is a loss not to be repaired. Lose thy
Soul, and thou losest all; it is a lasting loss, a loss that is
irrecoverable. It is a good Observation that Chrysostom has, says he,
Chrysostom
Nature has so ordered the parts of the body, that a man has two eyes, two
hands, two feet, and two ears; so that if a man does lose one eye, he can see
with the other; or lose one leg, he can go with the other; or lose one hand,
he can work with the other; or lose one ear, he can hear with the other: But
(says he) God has given thee but one Soul, and if thou losest that, thou
losest all. O that the consideration hereof, would cause you to make this
Enquiry, what must I do to save my Soul?

I now come to make some Useful Application: If it be so, 1 Use for rebuke of
3 sorts of men
that above all things in the world, you should make this your great Inquiry,
what must I do to be saved? Then this is for Rebuke to those that make
assiduous Inquiry about matters of lesser moment, First, those that enquire
only after Notionall Questions
but never make Inquiry a bout matters of Salvation. There are a multitude of
men in this age, that puzzle themselves, and trouble their minds with Notions,
and Critical Questions, but never put this Question to their Souls, Lord,
what must I do to be saved? O how justly blameworthy are they that study
curious and nice Questions about Christianity, which serve only to obscure the
clear Truth of the Gospel; and in the mean time mind not this great and
necessary Question, What I must do to get to Heaven? Truly, we live in an age
full of critical Questions, wherein all the Dogmaticall Points of Religion are
called into Question: But if God prevent it not, these trivial Questions will
joustle out this necessary Question, What must I do to be saved? Of all
Questions, there are two Questions most necessary for a people to ask, and
most comfortable for a Minister to resolve them in: The one is, What shall I
do to be saved? The other, How shall I know that I shall obtain Salvation? Of
all Questions, these are the greatest: and as Christ said (speaking of our Love
to God, and our Love to our Neighbors) This is the first, and greatest
Commandment: And the next is like to this. So say I, This is the first and
great Question, What shall I do to be saved? And the next is like to this, How
shall I know that I shall be saved? The first is the foundation of all our
happiness, and the second, of all our comfort.

2. Those that Enquire after earthly things only
It is for Rebuke to those that make Enquiry after the body, and things
pertaining to its welfare, but never make Inquiry after Salvation. There be
many men in the World, who (in the language of those sensual men Psalm. 4.6.)
cry out, Lord, Psalm. 4.6.
who will show us any good, but they never make Inquiry how they themselves
may become good. These men are like him that came to the Physician enquiring
how he might cure the whitlaw on his finger, but never asked how he might cure
the Consumption of his lungs. Many men make Inquiry after trivial things of
the World, but they Enquire not how they may get an intrest in Jesus Christ,
how they may escape Hell, Quae siultitia de iis solicitum esse quae habebis
nonsolicitus and de iis non quae non nisi solicitus.
and get to Heaven. Now what folly and madness is it for a man to be
solicitously careful for those things which he shall have without this carking
care, and to be negligent and careless about those things which he has no
promise to obtain without assiduous carefullnesse! for grace, and glory are not
to be expected without seeking, Mat. 6.33.
dilligent seeking, Math. 6.33. But outward things shall be cast in upon
seeking heavenly things.

3. 3 Those that Enquire how to damn themselves
It is for rebuke to those that make Inquiry how to damn themselves, but
Enquire not how to save themselves. The Drunkard enquires where Wine, and
strong Bear is to be had: The Adulterer (as Solomon says) enquires where the
house of the Harlot is. Thus many men Enquire how they may undo their souls:
but oh how few are there that cry out with this poor Jailer, Sirs, What must I
do to be saved?

The next Use shall be by way of trial, 2. Use For examination whether you are
in an estate of Salvation.
to put you upon search whether ye have put this Question, out of question,
whether ye have resolved this Question to your souls, that God indeed has
brought you into an estate of Salvation. Now that you may know this, consider
these particulars.

First, Has God taken those Methods with your souls, This may be known first
by the Methods God takes with such souls.
that he takes with those whom he intends to save. But you will say, what are
those Methods that God takes with a sinner whom he intends to save? I Answer,
First God enlightens that man's mind, 1 Method that God takes.
so, as that he makes him see his sins to be exceeding sinful, and himself to
be exceeding miserable; Job 33.27, 28, 29.30.
you have an admirable Text for this, Job 33.27, 29, 30. He looks upon men,
and if any man say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not; He will deliver his soul from going into the Pit, and his
life shall see the light: Lo all these things works God oftentimes with man,
to bring back his soul from the Pit, to be Enlightened with the light of the
liveing. It is Gods usual way in bringing a sinner from Hell, to represent his
sins unto him in the glass of the Law, so as to cause him to see them to be
exceeding sinful, to cause him to confess his sinfulness, how that he has
perverted that which was right. Paul said he was alive without the Law, but
when the Law came, then he saw his sin to be exceeding sinful. Romans 7.13
Romans 7.13. Was that which is good made death unto me? God forbid, but sin,
that it might appear sin, working death in me, by that which is good; that sin
by the Commandment might become exceeding sinful. Sin in its own nature is so
exceeding evil that it cannot have a worse name given unto it then its own
sinful sin Beloved, if the Lord has dealt thus with you, so as to make you see
your sins to be exceeding sinful, and your selves to be exceeding miscrable;
know, this is the method that he takes with that soul, which he intends to
bring to Heaven.

A second Method that God takes with a sinner to save his soul, is this, 2
method that God takes.
God puts him into a condition of Spiritual astonishment, so as to see himself
an undone creature, altogether unable to save himself, neither does he know
who will undertake that work for him; this is plain in the Text, Sirs, What
must I do to be saved? a Question full of astonishment and perplexity of mind.
When God once casts a man out of selfe-sufficiency, selfe-righteousnesse, and
selfe-ability, this is a good step toward Heaven.

A third Method that God takes with a sinner is this, 3 method that God takes
God does present Jesus Christ to his soul, as the most desirable object in
all the world. He sees sin to be exceeding sinful, himself to be exceeding
miserable, and then he sees Jesus Christ to be exceedingly desirable. Ye whose
souls can bear you witness, that God has taken these very Methods with you,
know for your comfort, that these are the very Methods that God does take with
that soul whom he intends to save.

Secondly, 2 by the impressions which Christ works upon the heart.
You may discern whether God has brought you into an estate of Salvation, by
those impressions which Jesus Christ will work upon the hearts of those whom
he intends to save. Now these impressions are fourfold.

First, 1 impression upon the heart.
God does cause the Authority, and Majesty of the Word, at some time or
other, to fall on the Conscience of that man with great conviction, 1 Cor. 1.18
whom he intends to save. 1 Cor. 1.18. For the preaching of the Cross is to
them that perish foolishness, but unto us that are saved, it is the power of
God. The power of God in his Word, shall be felt on the conscience of that man,
whom God brings into a saving estate: Therefore the Apostle says expressly 1
These. 2.13. 1 These. 2.13.
For this cause also, thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received
the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men,
but as it is in truth, the Word of God, which effectually works also in you
that believe. The Word of God has an effectual Work, and Majestic Authority
on them that shall be Saved. It is mighty in operation in them that believe,
transforming them into the very image of it self; it works what it
prescribes, it enables the soul to come up unto every duty, be it never so
difficult to flesh and blood, to hate every sin, be it never so pleasant, or
profitable. It is Active, Heb. 4.12.
and Opperative, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4.12. Sharper then a two-edged
sword, it effectually binds the Conscience, rectifies the Judgment, subdues
the Will, the sinner cannot stand out against it.

The second impression that God makes on the heart of that man who shall be
saved, 2 Impression upon the heart.
is this, he is brought into an obediential frame to obey the Commands of God;
the Law of God is not burdensome but pleasing, and delightful unto him, he has
a universal respect unto all Gods Commands, as David speaks, Heb. 5.9.
Psalm. 119. And says the Apostle Heb. 5.9. Being made perfect, he became the
Author of Eternal Salvation unto all that obey him.

Thirdly, If God brings thee into a saving condition, 3 Impression upon the
heart.
he makes this impression on thy heart, that thou art become as industrious to
have thy nature sanctified, Titus 3.3.
as thy soul to be saved. Titus 3.3. Not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holyghast. And John 3.3. Unless a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of Heaven.

The last impression is this, 4 Impression upon^ the heart.
If God saves thy soul, he will bring thee into a beleiveing estate, he will
cause thee to lay hold on Christ by faith: And this leads me unto the second
point, Second part of the Text opened.
which is the Resolve that the Apostle gives to this poor man crying out, what
he should do to be saved, viz. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved.

At the first blush one would think that the Apostles Resolve should nothing at
all quiet the heart of this distempered man. Paul and Silas bid the man
believe: Object. A man can not believe by his own power.
Might not he have replied, I can as well make a World, I can as well work
Miracles, and overturn Mountains, as believe by mine own power; therefore why
bid ye me to believe?

To this I Answer, Answer God promises to give what he commands
Though it be true, that every command of God is alike difficult to flesh, and
blood: A man can as well make a World, as make a prayer aright; A man can as
well subdue an Army of men, as subdue one lust. Yet know for your comfort, that
this is the tenure of the Gospel, that when the Lord does call for any thing
at the hand of his Elect Children, he does with that command convay a power
into their souls to enable them to fulfill that command. If God bids a man
believe, and gives him power to believe, the work will soon be done. Ezekel 36.
In the 36 of Ezekiel. the Lord commands to make a new heart; Now a man is no more
able to make a new heart, then to make a new World: Therefore in the same
place, he promises to give a new heart. And in another place it is said, Col.
3.5.
Mortify your lusts: Now this a man cannot do of himself, but the same God
that bids thee kill thy lusts, will kill them for thee, micha 7.18 19.
As Micah 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage; he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy, he will turn again, he
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast
all their sins into the depth of the Sea. Again, God bids thee repent, but thou
art no more able to repent, or to shead one tear for sin, then a Rock is to
give out water: But God will give thee a repenting heart, he has promised to
give Repentance, and Remission of sin. I beseech you observe this, that
commands in Scripture do not show what the Creature can do, or what he should
do by his own natural power: But such commands in Scripture are charged on the
Creature to let him know what God will do for his Elect. If we put forth the
sanctifying abillities that God gives us, God will add assisting grace, to
enable us to do what of our selves we cannot do. Therefore we should pray
with St. Augustine, Lord give what thou command, Da quod ju bes, and jube
quod vis.
and then command what thou please.

In the next place, observe the difference that is betwixt the Resolve that
Paul and Silas gives to this Question, and the Resolve that Peter gives to the
same Question in Acts 2.38. Acts 2.38.
Then Peter said unto him, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost. Paul and Silas give this Answer, Believe, and be Saved.
Peter gives this Answer, Repent, and be Saved. There is much of Gods mind in
this, that different answers, are given by the Holy Ghost to one and the same
Question. Both their answers are true: Peter says, Repent and be Saved, to
show that that Faith which is not joined with Repentance, is but a presumptuous
confidence. Paul says, Believe and be Saved, Faith and Repentane must be
joined together.
to let you know that that Repentance, which is not joined with Faith, is but a
legal sorrow. Therefore one says believe, the other says repent, to show that
ye must join both together. Had only this answer bin given, Believe and be
saved, Men would then have said, that it is but a short cut to Heaven; it is
but beleiving. Peter says, Repent and be Saved, to show that both must come
into the Christians practice, that Faith and Repentance must go hand in hand
together, if ye do expect Salvation. Now this I note the rather, because there
are some men that are all for beleiving on Jesus Christ, and not at all for
repentance, and mourning for sin. These make Peter's answer, to be no answer at
all. Then there are others, that are all for repentance, they are troubled in
spirit, and distressed in mind, they wish their heads were water, and their
eyes a fountain of tears, they think by their sorrow for sin, to make an
atonement with God; but they do not at all rest on Jesus Christ, by faith. Now
these men make Paul's answer, to be no answer at all. But remember you must
Repent and be Saved, with Peter, and you must Believe and be Saved with Paul.

But I shall only briefly speak to the answer which Paul and Silas here give:
That it is the duty of all those that expect Salvation, to believe in Jesus
Christ.

But me thinks I hear some say, If this be so, surely then Salvation may be had
on very easy terms; for, do not all believe on Jesus Christ. God forbid that
any should be so wicked, as not to believe on their Savior. I answer, Indeed
there are many that have a kind of belief, an historical, notional, common
dead faith, such a faith as Simon Magus had, as the stony ground had, as the
Devils have who believe and tremble. This faith a man may have, and go to Hell.

But there are few in the World who have a lively precious unfeigned faith,
which the Scripture does indeed account beleiving in Christ, and which
whosoever has shall never perish but have everlasting life. Few there are that
are willing to receive Christ as he is tendered in the Gospel, to receive Christ
as a King to rule them, as well as a Jesus to save them: Few that are willing
to receive a naked Christ, Christ with his Cross as well as Christ with his
Crown: Few that are as ready to give up themselves to Christ for
Sanctification, as to take Christ for justification. Most people love the
Preistly office of Christ, to purchase Salvation for them, but they do not
love the Kingly office of Christ, to conquer Corruption in them; they would be
willing to have Christ receive them into Heaven, but they are not willing to
receive Christ into their hearts. In the day of their callamitie when they lie
upon their sick beds, and the terrors of death take hold upon them, then none
but Christ, none but Christ: But in the day of their prosperity, when the World
smiles upon them, and Riches and Health surrounds them, then Christ is
disesteemed by them, they see no beauty in him, why they should desire him. For
there is no wicked man in the World will take Christ upon Gospel terms in the
time of his health, and outward prosperity. And moreover, most people think
that it is the easiest matter in the World, for to believe, that it is but
Beleiving, that it is in their power to believe at any time, when they will,
and that they can believe time enough when they lie upon their Deathbeds. Not
considering, God puts forth the same almighty power when he works faith in the
soul, as he did when he raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, as the Apostle
shows, 1 Ephe. 19.20.
Ephesians. 1.19.20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead. It is as impossible for a man, by his
own power, to make himself to believe, as to create a world, or give a being
to himself. And here consider, that every assent unto the Word is not
beleiving; Bellarmine indeed says that beleiving is only a bare assent to the
Word, but if saving faith did only consist in a bare assent to Scripture truth,
then there would be multitudes of believers in the World; but such beleivers
God will never own.

2 Consider that Faith is not a presumptuous confidence: the nature of Faith
does consist in this, It is a grace of God wrought in the heart of an humbled
sinner, What Saving ^aith ^^.
who does discern his sins to be enough to Damn him, and all his own
Righteousness to be too little to Save him; therefore he goes out of
himself and rests and relies, wholly on the Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
expecting Salvation only by him.

Now should we take a Survay of all the sons of men, where should we find
them that do thus believe on Jesus Christ: How few are there in the World, that
feel their sins pressing fore upon them, that see all their Righteousness and
Religious performances to be things of no vallue in point of justification?
that find in their souls longing desires after Jesus Christ, that they may be
found in Christ, not having their own righteousness? that roll their burdened
souls upon Jesus Christ, resolving that if they perish, there they will perish?
Certainly Beloved, should men try their hearts by this description of Faith,
there would be found but few beleivers in the World.

Sirs, what must I do to be Saved?

Sardanapalus.
who would be Spining and Carding amongst the women, when he should have bin
Ruling, and Governing his Kingdom. There are many men that are of this base,
and ignoble temper, they spend their time, their strength, and labor, in base
and sordid employments, and in the mean time neglect the great and important
affairs of an heavenly Kingdom.

Math. 19. to ask this Question, Math. 19
what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal Life? that never with
the Jailer enquired, What must I do to be saved? Oh beloved, if the most of
the World do never make Inquiry after Heaven, then how few in the World shall
come to Heaven!

Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, rest on Christ for thy Salvation, on his
Merits, on his Blood, and on his Righteousness: Hence learn, what a great
benefit and privilege the children of men have by liveing under a Covenant of
Grace, for although they cannot be saved by what they can do themselves, yet
they may be saved by what Jesus Christ has done for them. Thou can not be
saved by all thy doing, but thou may be saved by believing, by resting and
relying on Jesus Christ, expecting salvation by what he has done and suffered
in thy stead, in thy behalf. Had we layn under a Covenant of Works, then it
had been, Do this, and live; but a Covenant of Grace says, Believe, and live.
The condition of the Covenant of Works is, That we should give an exact and
perfect Righteousness of our own unto God, the Righteousness of another will
not serve the turn: And in this Covenant, little will not be accepted for much,
the will for the deed; the Sentence of Absolution shall be pronounced, if ye be
found without spot or blemish, completely righteous; but the Sentence of
Condemnation, if ye be found unrighteous in the least tittle. This Covenant
speaks not one word of Hope or Help, Mercy or Peace, to the poor lost sinner,
but pronounces him accursed for the least transgression, for the least
deviation from the righteous Law of God; and there is no place left for
Repentance, no place left for Mercy, upon the breach of the Covenant: Adam by
one sin, made all his posterity miserable, and the Apostle says, Gal. 3.10
Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law, to do them. So that there is no possibility of
life by the Covenant of Works, because in our lapsed estate, in our estate of
corruption, the Covenant of Works is impossible to be fulfilled by us: since
the day that sin came into the world, that Adam eat the forbidden fruit, never
did any man fulfill the Covenant of Works, for there is no man that sineth
not, 1 Kings 8.46. 2 Chronicles 6 36
2 Chronicles 6.36. There is not a just man upon the Earth, that does good, and
sineth not, Eccle. 7.21
Eccl. 7.20. In many things we off end all, James 3.2. James 3.2
O then what cause have we to admire the infinite unspeakable mercy and
goodness of God, in making this Covenant of Grace with man a sinner, this new
Covenant when the former was violated, which is as it were a plank after a
shipwreck; that when man had voluntarily transgressed the righteous Law of
God, and thereby justly deprived both himself and his posterity of that life
and blessedness which was promised in that Covenant, and was fallen under the
Death and Curse which God had threatened for the breaking and transgressing of
that Covenant; yet notwithstanding that such should be the infinite Mercy of
God, that he should not insist upon the forfeiture, that he should not bind us
up to the Covenant of Works, but take us out of the hand of his justice, and
put us into the hand of his Mercy, not dealing with us according to our
deserts, but according to the exceeding riches of his Grace, in his
unsearchable Wisdom (when Men and Angels were at a loss) finding out a Remedy
to help and relieve a poor forlorn lost sinner that is cast by the Covenant of
Works, not sparing his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ the righteous, the
Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.29
Heb. 12.24. who has satisfied Gods justice, slain that enmity which was
betwixt God and us, and made peace for us: For, in this Covenant of Grace, the
righteousness of Christ, and satisfaction made by Christ, is held forth and
tendered unto the justice of God, the Surety is punished, and the Debtor is
spared, Esa. 53.6.5
Esaiah 53.6.3. the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquity, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
And the Apostle says, 1 John 2.1.2. 1 John 2 1.2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, he is the propitiation for our sins: So that here mercy may be found
to help and relieve a poor sinner, which is lost in the Covenant of Works.
^in this Covenant of Grace, God accepts of the Will for the Deed, he does not
stand so strictly upon it, as to cast the sinner out of favor for every
transgression, but as a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them
that fear him, Psa. 103.13
Psalm. 103.13. that is, those that are faithful with God in Covenant, those
that strive to do the Will of the Lord, and fly to his grace for pardon and
acceptance; those that repent of their transgressions, and promise and perform
upright obedience. For, in this Covenant here is place for Repentance, and
mercy for the penitent: Acts 3.19
Acts 3.19. repent, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And Proverbs 28.13. Prove
28.13
whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy. But under a
Covenant of Works, there is no place left for Repentance, nor mercy for the
penitent. Here then we see the inestimable, the unspeakable benefit we have
by a Covenant of Grace: for now by laying hold on Jesus Christ by a true and
lively faith, by resting and relying on what he has done and suffered in our
stead, and in our behalf, we may lay a rightful and infallible claim unto the
Kingdom of Heaven. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.

FINIS.
A DESCRIPTION OF True Blessedness.
Text. Luke 11.28. But he said, yea rather blessed are they which bear the
Word of God, and keep it.
IN the obscure humanity of Jesus Christ, there did break forth such a glorious
luster of his Divinity, that though, as to his person, he was deemed
despicable, and contemptible, yet the words that he spoke, and the works that
he did, declared him to be no less then the Son of God. The words he spoke
declared it, his enemies themselves being judges, John 7.46. John 7.46.
The Officers answered, never man spoke like this man. And for the works he
did, the miracles he wrought, of them it is said, That it was never done thus
from the beginning of the World. As upon his healing of the man born blind, say
they, John 9.32.
It was never heard that a man born blind, could afterward see.

His miracles wrought admiration in the hearts even of those men, The coherence
of the words
in whom it wrought envy. The miracle he wrought in this chapter, which was the
disposessing of the Devil, out of a man that was dumb, caused the fame of
Christ to have great renown through many parts of the World. And though for all
this, his enemies would not acknowledge the Divinity of Christ, yet a certain
young woman (as may be gathered from the history) came, and lifted up her
voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that
thou have sucked. Now Christ instead of giving her thanks for applauding of
him, does rather give her a rebuke, a check, and said, I will tell thee who are
blessed, Rather blessed are they that bear the Word of God, and keep it. Thus
you have the coherence of the words.

This speech of the woman, was a proverbial speech amongst the Jews, when any
person did an acheivement that was praise worthy, they would cry out, and say,
Blessed is the womb that bare thee. And from this proverbial speech, I would
note thus much, viz. That good children are a great praise, and blessing to
their parents. This woman could bless the mother of Christ, who bare such a
son as he was. Solomon says, A wise son makes a glad father: Pro. 15.20.
And in many other places you read what great blessing, Pro 15.20.
and honor does accrue to parents whom the Lord has blessed with wise, and
godly children. And on the contrary, the Scripture marks those parents with a
brand of reproach, that bring forth wicked children into the World, children to
increase the number of the damned, to fill Hell, and to pollute the Earth;
therefore it is that you so often read in Scripture, Pro 10.1.5
That a wicked child is a shame to his parents. Pro. 10.1.5.



Thus much from the woman's speech who said, The words of the text opened.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck. But
Christ said, Rather blessed are they which bear the Word of God, and keep it.
Christ said, Rather blessed: He does not say, that his mother was not blessed,
but that the woman might not too much dote on his mother, to think that she was
so greatly blessed, only for bearing him in her womb; therefore he said, I
will tell thee who indeed is the blessed man, and woman, even they that bear
the Word of God and keep it. Christ would not give way to her applause, but he
gives her a mild, and loving rebuke. Hence observe: That you must take heed
that you be not tickled with pride, when you hear your selves, or yours
commended. Christ would give no way to the woman's commendation. She thought
that the virgin Mary was the happiest woman in all the World, yet Christ puts a
Rather on them that make conscience of hearing the Word of God, and keeping of
it. A beleiver hearing, and obeying Jesus Christ, is Rather blessed in so
doing, then the virgin Mary was mearly for bringing Christ into the World,
although it was the happiest birth that ever was brought forth. Oh how should
this be a spur unto you, to hear, and to practice what you hear, seeing that
by so doing you are thus blessed.

hear the Word of God; for there are many sorts of hearers who come short of
blessedness: but blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and Keep it, that
incorporate it into their souls, and become transformed into the Image of it.
There are four forts of hearers spoken of Mat. 13. Mat. 13.
and three of them fell short of blessedness. All hearers, although it be the
Word of God which they hear, do not attain unto blessedness; It is not
hearing, but keeping, and observing the Word of God, which makes men blessed.

believe; although it be indeed a truth, that all true beleivers are blessed,
yet it is not so said, lest men should think that a naked beleiving is enough
to make them blessed; or lest they should think that they are above hearing,
praying, or receiving, which are the proud aspiring vanities of many in this
age.

hear, and keep. Many men pretend to a great perfection of life, and
conversation, in keeping what Christ commands: but it is with a disjunction
from hearing, they leave off hearing the Word. But those only are blessed in
the esteem of Jesus Christ, who hear and keep the Word of God.

shall ye be that hear, and keep the Word of God; but Blessed are ye: To show
that ye shall not only be Blessed when ye come to Heaven, but that ye are
blessed, in so doing, whilst ye are here on earth. Romans 6.22. Romans 6.22.
But now being made free from sin, and become servants unto God, you have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Thou have thy fruit, O man,
if thou art an holy man, even before thou come to everlasting Life.

Word of God, and keep it. Thou may hear men that preach, damnable errors,
and keep them fast in thine heart; but in this case, thou art nearer a cursing,
then a blessing. Men may be followers of Sermons, but if those Sermons which
they hear, and practice be not agreeable to the Word of God, be not grounded
upon the Scriptures, they are under a curse and not a blessing, by what they
bear. Therefore the Holy Ghost here faith, Blessed are they that hear the Word
of God, and keep it. This should teach men how they hear, whom they hear, and
what they hear: that they hear nothing but the Word of God, and then keep what
they hear: We read of Teachers, who shall bring in Damnable Heresies, and that
many shall follow their pernicious ways. ^ Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets also amongst the people, even
as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even to deny the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction; and many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of, and through covetousness shall
they with fained words make merchandise of you; whose judgment now of a long
time lingereth not. Now they are not blessed that hear men that bring in such
damnable Heresies. The Scripture does not entaile blessing on all hearing, but
on hearing the Word of God, and keeping of it.

rather: Christ does not say, my mother is a blessed woman, and they also are
blessed that hear the Word of God, and keep it: But Christ comes in with a
Rather, as if he should have said, I account those men and women, Rather
blessed, then mine own Mother, mearly for being instrumental in bringing me
into the World. Oh how should the consideration hereof inflame your hearts, and
provoke you to a dilligent hearing of Gods Word, and conscientious practifing
of what you hear! There is not the like phrase in all the Bible.

Rather Blessed are they that hear my words, and my sayings; it is so said in
some other places: but here it is said, they that hear Gods Word. For had
Christ said, rather blessed are they that hear my word, then people might have
thought that Christ did impute blessedness only to his own preaching, and to
those that heard him personally preach. Therefore Christ faith, rather blessed
are they that hear Gods Word, be it preached by Peter, Paul, or Apollo; by any
Disciples, now living, or by any Minister of the Gospel that shall live
afterward to the Worlds end. Whosoever shall hear the Word of God contained
in the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, and keep it, they are rather
blessed then my mother was, if she be considered only, as isntrumental to the
bringing of me into the World. And in this expression there is a secret Glory
or Honor put upon the Ministers of the Gospel, by Jesus Christ, who would not
limit the blessing to his own preaching, but extends it to the Word of God in
any Ministers mouth. And that is the reason (as many think) of that saying in
Scripture, viz. He that beleiveth shall do greater works then Christ did. It
is not meant of the works of Redemption, but of the ministerial works; that a
faithful Minister shall convert more souls then Christ by his Ministry did
convert. Christ indeed could have converted all that heard him, but he did it
not, lest men should have thought that they must have heard none but Christ. We
do not read of many that were converted by Christ's preaching, there were more
converted by Peter, and other Apostles, then by Christ himself; this Christ did
that people might not despise any of his ordinary Ministers. If Christ had
converted more then all the Disciples, people then would have slighted the
Disciples, and followed only Christ. This distemper began to grow in the
Apostles days. 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 1.12
1.12. Now this I say, That every one of you says; I am of paul, I am of
Apollo, I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ. The Apostle blames them that they
should say, I am of Christ. The meaning is not, as though men were blame-wothy,
for following, and loving of Christ, God forbid; it is our highest duty so to
do: But there were some in the Church of Corinth who were ready to say, I care
not for hearing of Paul, or Apollo, but I am only for hearing of Jesus Christ.
This was a vain, and sinful crying up of Christ. Thus for men to cry up
Christ, to preach Christ, and in the mean time to cry down the Ministry, this
is sinful, and Christ will never own this to be a preaching of him: For
Christ faith, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it, Let it
be preached by any faithful Minister whatsoever.

for hearing, and for keeping: but Blessed are they that hear, and that keep.
Blessedness does never come with a for, but with an if or a that. The Lord does
not bless thee for thy hearing, although thou hear as many Sermons, as there
are days in the year; but he blesses them that hear, in obedience to his
Command, and practice what they here. Thus you have eight Notes from the form
of speech which Christ here used. What is meant by keeping the Word of God.


Now I shall come to show what is meant by Keeping of the Word of God which we
hear. And there is a double keeping of the Word of God. 1 A keeping it in our
memory Luke 2.19,


First, There is a keeping of it in your memory, Luke 2.19. Mary kept all these
things, and pondered them in her heart. She kept them in memory. Out memories
should be as the Arc wherein the pot of Manna was kept. The pot of Manna is
Divine Truths, these should be kept safe in our memories: But this is not the
keeping here spoken of, for there are many men that have good memories to keep
what they hear, and yet have neither good hearts, nor good lives, and
therefore not blessed, by their keeping.

Secondly, 2 A keeping of the Word in our practis
There is a keeping of the Word in your practice; and that is done when there
is a conscionable ear to square your lives and conversations, answerable to
what you hear, or know. Now Blessed are you that hear the Word of God, and thus
keep it. And thus I have opened all the difficulties that may appear in the
words. viz. That they are rather blessed that hear the Word of God, and
practice what they hear, then the Mother of Jesus Christ was for bringing him
into the World. It is a point I confess which does well deserve a scanning,
and if it had not been in the Bible, it would have been incredible, that Christ
should put a rather on thee O man, or woman, in every age of the World, that
shall hear the Word of God, and keep it.

It is worthy your notice, what a different Dialect is used by the woman in the
Text, and Elizabeth, that was kinswoman to the Virgin Mary. The woman in the
Text faith, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that thou have
sucked. Luke 1.45
But Elizabeth cried out, Luke 1.45 Blessed is she that Beleiveth. Upon which
words a Learned Author has a very good note; faith he, If the Virgin Mary had
not born Christ in her heart by faith as well as in her womb, she had not been
blessed: for Elizabeth here declares wherein the blessedness of the Virgin
Mary, and of all the Elect consists.

Now how may this confute the dotage of the Church of Rome, Use for
Reprehension.
that does so excessively cry up the Virgin Mary. I have a little viewed over
some Popish Authors, and I find that for one tract of the Dignity, and Glory
of Christ, they have written many, of the Dignity of the Virgin Mary. And they
relate strange stories, and fooleries concerning her, The idola try of the
Church of Rome detected.
such as were never heard of in former times, idolatrously to advance her fame,
as that she was free from original sin; whereas the Scripture says expressly,
that all that descend from Adam, are polluted with original corruption, and
therefore the Virgin Mary also, being a daughter of Adam. The Papists speak
more honorably of the Virginity, Dignity, and Holiness of the Virgin Mary,
the mother, then they do of the Righteousness, Grace, and Merits of Christ the
son. And therefore they hold justification by works, and not by faith, in the
righteousness of Christ: Yea they so dote on the Virgin Mary that they make her
the great Mediatoress to God the Father. A man would think it unnecessary to
treat against the popish Doctrine, but Ministers never had more reason for it,
then now: for there never was more likelihood of popery its spreading then in
these days, wherein under the notion of a cursed Toleration, Priests, and
Jesuits do publish their blasphemous, and idolatrous Tenants, and drive on
their Jesuitical Designs: and God knows, how soon you that will not lay your
neck under Christ's yoke, may be brought under the popish yoke. This I can say
upon mine own experience, That I never found so many to stagger toward popery,
as I have done of late. They who have professed the Protestant Religion, are
staggering, and apostatizing, from their former profession, and solemn
Covenants, and God knows how soon they will prefer the Virgin Mary before Jesus
Christ. But I hope better things of you. Therefore I shall pass this, and come
to the Reasons of the point, which are these.

First, 1 Reason From the near relation they stand in to Christ.
They are rather blessed that hear, and keep the Word of God, then the Virgin
Mary was for bringing Christ into the Word; Because Christ does account such to
stand in more manifold near Relations unto him, then his own natural friends
were. Luke 8.21. And he answered, and said unto them, my Mother, Luke 8.21
and my Brethren are these, which hear the Word of God, and do it. Lo here is
the right way of being brought into a near Relation unto Christ, of becoming
akin to Jesus Christ, to be accounted the brother, sister, and mother of Jesus
Christ; and that is by hearing, and obeying the will of Christ. 2 Reason They
only shall persevere.


2 Your blessedness appears in this, because if you hear, and practice, you
shall presevere unto the end, when others shall apostatize, Math. 7.24.10 28.
and sall back from the Faith. Mat. 7.24 to 28. Therefore whosoever hears
these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, which
built his house upon a rock, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded
upon a rock: And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand, and
the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house, and it fell, and great was the fall thereof. Those only that hear the
Word of God, and keep it, do presevere, they only have their souls built upon a
rock, and stand unmovable in the time of persecution: Indeed fall they may, and
foully too (as David, Peter, and many other precious Saints have done) through
the violence of Satan's temptations, and remainder of corruption that is in
them, but finally and irrecoverably they shall never fall, because they are
builded upon a rock which can never be removed, and that rock is Christ, who is
both the author and finisher of their says, Heb. 12.2. And he has prayed
that their faiths fail not utterly, Luke 22.2. And this he has procured, and
therefore though the storms and waves arise, they can never fall
irrecoverably. Others fall off, and fall away, when winds, and storms arise.

3 The Lord does make glorious promises to such as hear the Word of God, and
keep it. 3 Reason The Lord makes glorious promiles unto such.
Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophesy, and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at
hand. Here you see those that hear the Word of God, and keep it, that is, lay
it up in their hearts, and express the power of it in their lives, they are
blessed. 4 Reason Ye may be instrumental to bring others unto blessedness


4 By practizing what you hear in the Word, you may bring others unto
blessedness: And happy are ye that are instrumental to bring others to Heaven.
1 Pet. 3.1.
1 Pet. 3.1. Likewise ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, that
if any obey not the Word, they may also without the Word, 1 Pet. 2.12.
be won by the conversation of their wives. so 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your
conversations honest amongst the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you
as evil doers, they may by your good works-which they shall behold, glorify
God in the day of visitation. Their godly conversation might be a means to
bring others to Heaven.

5. 5 Reason Ye shall surely obtain Salvation.
If ye make conscience to practice what you hear, ye are blessed, because
(although ye should not bring others unto Heaven) you your selves shall surely
come to Heaven, shall surely come to blessedness. Rev. 14.12, 13.
Rev. 14.12.13. Here is the patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. I heard a voice from Heaven
saying unto me, write, blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea, says the Spirit that they may rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. O you that make conscience to keep the Commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus, you shall surely go to Heaven, although you
bring none with you, but your selves. It was a notable saying of one of the
Fathers, viz. That when a Gospel life does go before, an Angels life shall
follow after. O therefore make conscience to practice what you hear, and know.

Now I come to the Applycation, and the Use shall be two fold.

1 For Lamentation. If it be so, Use for Lamentation.
that they that hear, and keep the Word of God, are rather blessed then the
Virgin Mary was mearly for bringing Christ into the World, should not this then
be for a lamentation that men will not seek after blessedness when they may
have it upon such easy terms? Had God said, I will bless thee, if thou
removest Mountains, if thou fulfillest my Law in every jot, and tittle thereof:
These indeed had been works impossible to be done. But says God, blessed art
thou if thou hear the Word of God, and keep it; therefore if thou will not
practice what thou hear, thou do refuse thine own mercy: The Devil could
not damn thee, if thou would not damn thy self. Thou O man that have an
obstinate heart, that (let the Preacher say what he will) wilt do what thou
listest, stat pro ratione voluntas.
who make little conscience to hear, and less conscience to practice what
thou hear, thou art inexcuseable. Now to set home this Use, take these five
Considerations.

1. Thou will but aggravate thy condemnation.
Thy hearing, if thou do not practice what thou hear, will but aggravate
thy condemnation another day. John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. The fault
admits of some extenuation, Miner erat culpa, ubi erat culpae ignorantia.
where there is no knowledge of the fault; it is a far greater sin to contemn
the known Law of God, then to be ignorant of the Law of God; they that sin
against knowledge, have no cloak nor excuse for their sin. Luke 12.47.
That servant which knew his Lords Will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his Will, shall be beaten with many stripes. In Esaias 13. we read
of many Nations and People, against whom the Lord commands the Prophet, to
denounce a burdensome Prophesy. But in Esaias 22 we read of the burden of the
valley of visions, that is, of Jerusalem, and it is observed that that burden
was the heaviest of all others, none so burdensome as the burden of the valley
of visions: It was a place where knowledge was, where preaching was, therefore
that burden was heavier then against Babylon, Tire, Damascus, and all the rest.
Though other men that live in the American parts of the World, shall go to
Hell, for their disobedience: Yet remember, thou that live in England, where
the Gospel is professed and preached, shall go to Hell with an heavier load on
thy Conscience, then those that have not the Gospel; thou shall be damned
with a witness, that hear the Word of God, and make no Conscience to
practice what thou hear, and what thou know. It would make one stand
amazed to read that passage Ier. 10.35. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen,
that know thee not. Now if the fury of the Lord shall be poured out upon poor
ignorant Heathens that know not God, that have not the means of knowledge, that
hear not of the Gospel of Christ! what wrath shall then be poured out upon the
Christians that know not God? but above all, what unexpressible fury and
vengeance shall be poured out upon those Christians that sin against the
Knowledge of God, that sin against Light shining clearly before their eyes, that
sin against an awakened, and convinced Conscience? If any place in Hell be
hotter then other, it shall be for them, for it is a far greater sin to
contemn the known Law of God, then to be ignorant of the Law of God; they that
sin against Knowledge, have no cloak nor excuse for their sin.

2 Consider, Thou art void of love to God.
thou art void of love to God, if thou do not practice what thou hear, 1
John 2.5. Who so keeps his Word, 1 John 2.5
in him verily is the love of God perfected.

3. Consder, Thy profession is nothing worth.
God does look upon thy profession as nothing worth, unless thou practisest
what thou hear. In Arithmetic, put never so many Ciphers together, and they
make no sum, but put one Figure there unto, and then it makes a great sum:
So make never so many prayers, and hear never so many Sermons, yet all stands
but for Ciphers, unless thou joynest therewith a conscionable course of life,
answerable to what thou hear, and what thou prayest. Consider, would thou
(who have been thus long a Professor) have God to look upon thee, as if thou
had been a profane man all thy life? God looks on thee as such, if thou do
not practice what thou hear, 1 Samuel 2.12
and know. 1 Samuel 2.12. Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, they knew
not the Lord. They knew not God, surely that they did, by their education they
had a speculative knowledge of God and his Law, for they were Priests of the
Lord, and God would not choose ignorant men for his Priests. But they had no
practical, efficatious, and saving Knowledge of God, for they were men of
wicked lives and conversations, and therefore God looked upon their Knowledge,
as no Knowledge, and upon their Profession, as no Profession: Ier. 2.8.
so Ier. 2.8. The Priests said not, where is the Lord; and they that handled
the Law, knew me not; the Pastors also transgressed against me, and the
Prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit. They
knew me not, God did not regard the Knowledge they had of him, because they
transgressed against him. Remember, God will account thy hearing, as no
hearing; thy praying, as no praying; thy receiving the Sacraments, as no
receiving, if thou do not make conscience to obey what thou hear.

4. Thou can have no good persuasion, nor discovery, thou can have ^o
assurance of the love of God unto thee.
in thy soul of the love of God unto thee, unless thou make conscience to
keep what thou hear. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. John 14.16. And
therefore you find in Scripture that the love of God, is often subjoyned to
keeping the Commandments of God, Exodus 20.6. Exodus 20.
Showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.
They are both put together to show, that where there is a love of God, there
will be a keeping of his Commandments.

5 If we do not make Conscience to practice what we hear, God will take away
the Word from us.
we shall provoke the Lord to take away the Gospel from us, Amos 8.9. And it
shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord God, that I will cause the Sun
to go down at noon; and I will darken the Earth in the clear day. verse 11. I
will send a Famine, not of Bread and Water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord.
Remember it, God will take away the Word, for our not profiting by what we
hear. Mat. 21.43. Therefore I say unto you, the kingdom of Heaven shall be
taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. By the
Kingdom of God, we are to understand the Gospel, the Word of God, and Ministry
thereof, this shall be taken from you, and given to others, if ye do not bring
forth the fruits thereof.

And here we may read both our sin, and judgment; for if ever any people in
the World were guilty of barrenness, and unfruitfulnesse under the means of
grace, we of this Nation are, we have been lifted up to Heaven, and therefore
we may justly expect to be cast down to Hell.

Now to awaken your Consciences, I shall in the first place lay down some
Demonstrations, that we are extremely guilty of barrenness under the means of
grace. And that therefore in the second place we are in great danger to have
the Gospel removed from us, and given to a Nation that will bring forth the
fruits thereof. That we are guilty of unfruitfullness under Gospel Ordinances
may appear:

First, 1 Demonstration of our unfruitfulnes under the Gospel.
By the sad complaints that the most fruitful stocks and plants in Gods
Vineyard do make, they with grief and sighing of heart, complain of their
unfruitfulnesse under Gospel Ordinances: Now if the trees of righteousness of
the Lords planting, in the Lords Vineyard complain, that they bear not fruit,
surely then the trees of the Forest are barren: If the trees of Gods garden
bring not forth fruit, what can the trees of the wilderness do? If the people
of the Lord sit down and lament because no answerable fruit is to be found in
them, what cause then have the wicked of the World to complain, whose hearts
remain as hard as the nether millstone, notwithstanding all the heavenly dew
which from time to time descends upon them?

Secondly, 2 Demonstration,
It appears by the sad complaints of Gods husbandmen, the Ministers of Jesus
Christ, who discern but little fruit to appear after all their labor, little
success to attend their Gospel Ministry; therefore they lie down upon their
beds in sorrow, and with sadness of spirit complain, as Peter did, that they
have fished all night, but catched nothing, that they plow upon the rocks, and
break their instruments, but cannot break the hearts of men, that they wear
out their own lives, consume their own lungs, but cannot consume peoples lusts.
And thus they complain with the Prophet (in the person of Christ) * Esa. 44.4.
I have labored in vain.

Mat. 11.12. Mat. 11.12.
From the days of John Baptist, until now, the kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence and the violent take it by force. In those days men did use an holy
violence in the ways of Religion, but where is that violence now to be found?
when the seventy Disciples had a commission from Christ to preach the Gospel,
it was said of them Luke 10.18. Luke 10.18
That they went forth preaching the Word, and what follows? God was with
them, and many were converted, and the Devil like lightening did fall from
Heaven. Their Ministry had a most glorious success. And it is said Esaias 44.2.
Esaias 44 2.
(which is a Prophesy of the first times of the Gospels preaching) Enlarge thy
tents, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitation. As if there
was not room enough for the converted men; Therefore enlarge thy Tents, which
is referred to the Gentiles, upon their first conversion. And says the
Apostle, Gal. 4.27. Rejoice thou barren that bear not, Gal. 4.27.
break ^orth, and cry thou that travelest not, for the desolate has many more
children then she which has an busband. And it is said, Acts 11.21. The hand
of God was upon them, Acts 11.21
and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. Yea three thousand were
converted by one Sermon of Peter's, whereas now three thousand Sermons will
hardly convert one soul to Christ. And says the Prophet, Psalm. 110.3. Thy
people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3
in the beauties of holiness; from the womb of the morning, thou have the dew
of thy youth. The meaning of these words, from the womb of the morning, thou
have the dew of thy youth, is this, that the converts upon the first preaching
of the Gospel should be as numerous as the drops of dew upon the grass in the
morning; But now-a days, the converting of souls, the bringing in of men to
Jesus Christ, is not as numerous as the drops of dew, but as rare as Pearls and
Diamonds.



Now this being so, I shall in the next place give some Demonstrations that
we are in danger to have the kingdom of God, the Gospel of Jesus Christ
removed from us, therefore let us not be secure, for there is great danger the
Gospel shall be removed, if not from the Nation, yet from particular places.

That the Gospel is in danger to be removed fromus.
First, It may appear from that implacable opposition that is in the professors
of the Gospel against the preachers of the Gospel: those very people that did
esteem the feet of their Ministers to be very beautiful, do now say that the
Mark of the Beast is upon their forehead: those people that would have pulled
out their eyes to do their Ministers good would now pull out their Ministers
eyes, those very people that looked upon us as the servants of Christ, and
stewards of the Mystery of Salvation do now account us the limbs of
Antichrist, and perverters of Religion Now there is no way more likely to drive
away the Gospel from us, then to spurn at and oppose the Gospel, and the
Ministers thereof; this will be the great inlet (if the Lord prevent it not)
to our utter confusion, and an outlet to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I would
have such men, who had rather see godly Ministers in prison, then in the
Pulpit, to consider, that if God should take them away, ye would have worse in
their room. The Sectaries were weary of godly and learned Iunius, therefore God
suffered Arminius that pestilent enemy to the Gospel of Christ, to rise up
after him. God may justly send us unable, and seducing Teachers, for our
sleighting of those learned, and godly Ministers that are amongst us; when Paul
and Barnab as were slighted and opposed by the unbeleiving Jews, say they,
Acts 13.46. Seeing ye put away the Word of God from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting Life, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. They lost the
Gospel by it.

Gospel should be removed from us, by the general wantonness and weariness
of people in liveing under it. When children are wanton with bread in their
hand, the parent takes it from them, and makes them fast; we have dealt with
the Gospel, as children deal with bread, when their bellies are full, we are
grown wanton, and are become weary of it, so that now if a Minister preach of
Faith, Repentance, Mortification, Zeal, Self-denial, and Heavenly
mindedness; these are accounted threadbare Doctrines. Now when the Lord shall
see a people grow weary of, and wanton with the Gospel, he will cut them short,
he will make them know the worth of the Gospel, by the want of the Gospel:
When the Israelites once loathed Manna, God quickly suffered them to be
hunger-bitten. He that runs, may read our sin, and danger, in this particular;
for those very people that did with delight wait upon the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, oh how are they become weary of Ordinances! those people that accounted
the six days tedious, and thought it long before the Sabbath came, now do not
care for sanctifying of a Sabbath all the year long! those people that could
not live a day without the Gospel, can now live not only without, but above
the Gospel! like those we read of 1 Cor. 1.12. who were so high flown, that
they scorned Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, and cried up only Christ. Now when once
a people grow weary of the Gospel, it will not be long before the Gospel
grow weary of them, and depart from them.

Gospel is in danger to be removed from us, by reason of the great increase of
such Opinions as are contrary to the Gospel, as are destructive to the power
and purity of it: When once men shall use strong endeavors to bring in a
Toleration of all Religions, that is the way to bring us to no Religion at all.
Ezekiel. 43, 8
Ezekiel 43.8. When the people had set their Threshold by Gods Threshold, and
their Post by Gods Post; that is, when they added their Traditions, their own
Inventions to Gods Precepts, then there was a wall bevreixt God and them: this
their wickedness was as a wall of Separation, God was departing from them.
Those that plead for a licentious Toleration of all Opinions, do as much as in
them lies to put a wall of separation between God, and England.

Rome, but mearly corruption in Doctrine; Rev. 12.15. when the woman was flying
into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.15
it is said, The Dragon out of his mouth poured out a flood of water to drown
the woman. This flood of water, was a flood of Herefies, and peculiarly the
Heresy of Arianisme. If the Lord should suffer the Dragon to pour out a flood
of Heresies to overflow the Land, we may then justly fear the removal of the
Gospel from us.

Luthers saying, (at his first declining from the Church of Rome) that the
Gospel did get more prejudice by seven years suspension of a well ordered
Government, then it could recover in forty seven years afterward, and the Lord
grant it prove not thus with us.

Now by all this it may appear that we are in great danger to have the Gospel
taken away from us, oh how careful then should we be to improve the means of
grace, whilst we do enjoy them, for if the Gospel is gone, all is gone, we had
better loose the light of the Sun, then the light of the Gospel: for,

1 If the Gospel goes from a people, peace goes from a people; the remove of
the Gospel of peace, will cause the going away of your peace.

2 If the Gospel goes, plenty goes as well as peace.

3 If the Gospel goes, if the worship of God be taken away, our safety is
gone. The Ark was the Israelites safety, when the Ark was taken away, their
strength, and safety was taken away. When the Jews did reject the Gospel, so
that it was translated to the Gentiles, then the Romans came, and took away
both their place, and Nation.

4 When the Gospel goes, our civil Liberty goes; when the Jews once slighted
the Gospel, they lived no longer free men, but became slaves and tributary to
the Romans.

5 The dignity, and splendour of a Nation goes, when the Gospel goes, as old
Eli said, when the Ark was taken, The glory is departed from Israel. And it is
said Math. 26. Math. 26.
That Bethelem was not the least amongst all the Princes of Judah; Micah 5.2
yet Micah says chap. 5. v. 2. That Bethelem was the least, that is, the least
in regard of its situation, and small number of inhabitants: But not the
least, as Matthew speaks, because the Messiah was there borne, and the Gospel
there preached: The Gospel of Christ made Bethelem more then it was, and
therefore it is that Capernaum is said to be lifted up to Heaven, because the
glad tidings of the Gospel was there published. Now if God should take away the
Gospel from us, he would leave us as Bethelem, the least of a thousand Cities.
We should not measure the greatness of a City, by the great trade, and great
number of people therein, but by the flourishing of the Gospel there in: London
will be the least City of a thousand if the Gospel be removed from it. Oh then
what cause have we to know and consider in this our day the things that
concern our peaoe, least hereafter they be hid from our eyes: And not content
our selves with a bare hearing of the Word, but be doers of it, expressing the
power, and authority thereof in our lives and conversations.

No man can keep what he hears.
If they only are blessed, that hear the Word of God, and keep it, that
practice what they hear, then where is a blessed man to be found? for where is
that man alive that can keep, that can live answerable to what he hears? I hear
many a sin reproved which I cannot forbear, I hear many a duty pressed, which I
cannot perform, I hear many a grace persuaded unto, which I cannot act: Now how
can any man be blessed, seeing he cannot keep what he hears?

Under the Covenant of Grace God accepts of the Will for the Deed.
thou could never be a blessed man, because thou can never keep what thou
hear, according to that exactness which a Covenant of works requires, for
that commands a man to keep the whole Law, to keep it perfectly, and to keep it
personally. But for thy comfort know that thou art under a Covenant of Grace,
which does not require a perfect, but a sincere obedience to the Law of God,
which accepts of the Will for the deed. O remember that thou art not under a
Covenant of works, but a Covenant of Grace, which accepts of what Christ has
done and suffered for thee (if thou art a beleiver) as if done in thine own
person. Though indeed that is true which Christ said to the young man, Math.
19.17. If thou will enter in to Life, keep the Commandments. Yet you must
know, that Christ spoke this unto him, because he knew him to be of a
Pharisaicall temper, and that he thought to be saved by his good works. But if
Christ should say thus unto any of us, thou shall go to Heaven, if thou
keep every Command, thou shall never go to Heaven if thou breakest any one
Command: The Lord have mercy on us, we should then all perish to eternity. But
Christ says, Believe and live. Now promise (not work) is the object of Faith,
V^nl^m tanquam ex fide, non ex debito sper^mus.
Romans 4.16. Therefore Ambrose was wont to say, let us hope for pardon as of
faith, not of debt. In a word, make conscience to keep what thou hear,
bewail thine inabillity to fullf^ill the Law of God, do what thou can, mourn
that thou can do no better, and then God will say, though thou can not
keep the Law completely, yet my Son has kept it for thee, I accept of his
obedience, as thy obedience, and his righteousness, as thy righteousness. O
what grace, and mercy is here! how may this cheer up your hearts in the midst
of all discouragments that lie upon you? Again for thy comfort know, that if in
sincerity of heart thou endeavourest to keep what thou hear, in divine
acceptance it is all one, as if thou had perfectly kept all that thou
hear. If it be the desire and labor of thy soul, to obey Gods Will, and
observe his Commands, in divine acceptance, it is looked upon, as if it were
actually done by thee. It is worthy your notice, what is said, Heb. 11.17. By
faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac, and he that had received
the promise, offered up his only begotten Son. Abraham did not actually do it:
But because Abraham did it in the purpose of his heart, because the desire and
resolution of his soul was to obey Gods Command, therefore the Scripture
accounts it as done. O take this for thy comfort, thou that art a son of
Abraham, that walk in the steps, and faith of Abraham, the very desires, and
purposes of thine heart are looked upon as if they were really, and actually
done; If thou would pray better, hear better, and practice more then thou
do, in divine account this is looked upon, as if thou had already done it.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS REST OR, Their happy Sleep in DEATH.

As it was delivered in A SERMON At Aldermanbury, London, Aug. 24. 1651, being
the next Lords Day after Mr LOVE was put to death.

By EDMUND CALAMY B. D.

John 11.11 Our friend Lazarus sleeps. Psalm 116.15 Precious in the sight of
the Lord is the Death of his Saints LONDON, Printed for E: Brewster and G:
Sawbridge, at the sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill, near Fleetbridge, 1653

THE Saints Rest; OR Their happy sleep in Death.
Text. Acts 7.60. the later part. And when he had said this, he fell asleep
THese words contain in them the happy closure and upshot of Stephens life;
wherein we have three particulars,

1. The Person that fell asleep.

2. The Speech that he made when he fell asleep.

3. What he did when he had finished his Speech.

First, We have the Person that fell asleep, and that was Stephen: He was a man
full of faith, and full of the Holy Ghost, as you may see Acts 6.5. He was the
first Martyr that ever suffered for the cause of Christ; hence I might gather
this Doctrine, viz.

That the best of men are subject to violent and unnatural deaths. Stephen that
was full of the Holy Ghost, was stoned to death; and John the Baptist that was
full of the Holy Ghost from the very womb, was beheaded; Peter was crucified,
and so was Andrew; Isaiah was sawed asunder; Jeremiah was stoned, and Zacharias
was slain between the Temple and the Altar. But I shall pass this.

The second part of the Text, is the Speech that Stephen made when he fell
asleep, Hoc dicto obdormivit, that is, when he had finished his prayer, He
fell asleep. Hence observe,

That it is an excellent way to close up our lips with prayer. To die praying
is a most Christian way of dying. They stoned Stephen calling upon God. After
this manner Christ died, he prayed, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit,
and having thus said he gave up the ghost. This he did that it might be a
pattern to all Christians.

Prayer is a necessary duty at all times, but especially when we are adying;
and that for these three Reasons.

1. Because when we are to die, we have most need of Gods help, for then the
Devil is most busy, and we most weak.

2 Because when we are to die, we are to beg the greatest boon of God, that
is, that he would receive us into his heavenly Kingdom. Now prayer is the
chief means to obtain this mercy, for it is Porta Coeli, Clavis Paradisi, the
Gate of Heaven, a Key to let us into Paradise. Therefore we have great reason
to die praying.

3. Because when a Saint of God is dying, he is then to take his last fare well
of prayer. In Heaven there is no praying, but all thanksgiving; there is no
need in Heaven, therefore no prayer in Heaven. Now a Saint of God, being to
take his leave of prayer, when he is to die, therefore it is fit he should die
praying.

I beseech you remember this pattern in the Text, St Stephen died caling upon
the Lord. Let us die praying, as that Emper or said, Oportet Imperatorem
stantem mori: so may I say, Oportet Christianum mort praecantem, it behooves a
Christian to die praying.

Quest. But what was the substance of Stephens prayer?

Answ. He prayed for himself, and he prayed for his persecutors.

1 He prayed for himself, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, verse 59.

2 He prayed for his persecutors, Lord lay not this to their charge, v. 60.

I will not enter upon this part of the Text, for it would swallow up all my
time. Therefore I shall wave it, and come to the third part, which is that
which (by Gods assistance) I purpose to speak unto, viz. What Stephen did, when
he had finished his prayer. When he had said this, he fell asleep, that is, he
died.

Behold here, the magnanimity, the piety, and the Christian courage of Stephen.
The people were stoning of him, and gnashing their teeth upon. him, and the
good man dies with as much quietness of mind, as if he had died in his bed;
he fell asleep, while they were stoning of him. When he died, he prayed, and
while he prayed he died.

But what made Stephen die thus quietly? Read the 55 verse, and you shall see
the reason of it: Being full of the Holy Ghost, he looked steadfastly into
Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
Behold (says he) I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man slanding at the
right hand of God. This made him die with such a sweet, quiet, and calm temper;
he saw Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God, ready to receive his
Soul, and that made him die with such an extraordinary quietness of mind.

Death in Scripture, (especially the death of Gods children) is often compared
to a sleep. It is said of David, that he slept with his fathers. And it is
said, 1 These. 4.13. I would not have you ignorant concerning them which are
asleep; that is, concerning them which are dead. And 1 Cor. 11.30 For this
cause many are weakly and sickly among you, and many sleep; that is, many die.
This expression is a metaphorical expression, and will afford us many rare and
precious instructions about Death. And therefore (the grace of God assisting me)
I desire to spend the rest of the time in the opening of this Metaphor.

That when a child of God dies, though his death be never so unnatural and
violent, yet it is nothing else but a falling asleep: Or, The death of a child
of God, though stoned to death, though burnt to ashes, though it be never so
violent and unnatural, is nothing else but a falling asleep. When he had said
this, he fell asleep.

Somnus est mortis imago, Sleep is the image of Death: There are many notable
resemblances betwixt Sleep and Death, some of which I shall speak to at this
time.

1 Sleep is common to all men; there is no man that can live without sleep: a
man may live long without meat, but no man can live long without sleep. So it
is true of death, death is common to all, it is appointed for all men once to
die: and therefore David said, he was to go the way of all flesh: Statutum est
omnibus semel mort, Omnibus est calcanda semel lethi via; All men must sleep
the sleep of death, or else be changed, which is a metaphorical death.

2 As sleep arises from the vapors that ascend from the stomach to the head,
and tie the senses, and hinder their operations; so death came into the world
by Adams eating the forbidden Fruit, and by the poisonfull vapor of sin, that
brought death upon him, and all his posterity. By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned, Romans 5.12. Had Adam never sinned, Adam should never have died: but in
illo die, said God, in that day thou eatest the forbidden fruit, thou shall die
the death. Sin brings omnimodam mortem, all kinds of death; it brings death
temporal, death spiritual, and death eternal. Now because all men are
poisoned with the poison of sin, therefore all men must sleep the sleep of
death; it is sin that has poisoned all mankind.

3 As a man when he goes to sleep puts off his clothes, and goes naked into
bed: so it is with us when we come to die; We came naked into the world, and
we must go naked out of the world: As we brought nothing with us into the
world, so we must carry nothing with us out of the world: And therefore Death
in Scripture is called nothing else but an uncloathing of our selves, 2 Cor.
5.4. Death to a child of God, is nothing else, but the putting off of his
clothes. The body of man is animae (...) and vestimentum, it is the souls
clothing; and death is nothing else but the unclothing of the soul; it is just
like a man going to bed, and putting off his clothes; St Peter calls it, The
putting off our earthly tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.14. Our bodies are the souls
tabernacle, and death is the putting off of this tabernacle.

Beloved, when we come to die, we shall be stripped naked of three things,

1. We shall be stripped naked of all our worldly honor, riches, and greatness.

2. We shall be stripped naked of our bodies. And,

3. Which is above all, we shall be stripped naked of our sins. And that is the
happiness of a child of God, he shall put off, not only his mortal body, but
the body of sin.

4. In the fourth place observe, As no man knows the time when he falls
asleep, a man falls asleep before he is aware: So no man can tell the certain
time when he must die. There is nothing so certain as that we must die,
nothing so uncertain as the time when we shall die; Death comes suddenly even
as sleep comes upon a man before he is aware.

5. Observe, As children and infants, because they do not know the benefit of
sleep, are very loath to go to sleep, many times the mother is fain to whip the
child to bed; even so it is with most of Gods people, because they do not study
the benefit of death, that death puts an end to all our miseries and sins, and
opens a door to let us in unto everlasting happiness, and that we shall never
see God or Christ before we die; I say, because Gods people do not study the
benefit of death, therefore they are like to little children, loath to die, loath
to go to bed. And therefore death is called The King of terrors. Death is
terrible to many of Gods children, because they are but infants in grace, and
because they do not know the benefit of death.

6 Observe, As when a man is fast asleep he is free from cares, and free from
troubles; Let it thunder (as it thundered not long since, as you know) yet a man
that is fast asleep, while he is asleep he hears it not; Let the house be on
fire, while the man is asleep, he sees it not, neither is be troubled at it. So
it is with the death of Gods children, when Gods children sleep the sleep of
death, they are free from the thunders of this world, they are free from all
cares, from all troubles, they go to their graves as to their beds, and rest
in quietness, and are not sensible of any troubles that are in the world, For
Abraham knew us not, Isa. 63.16. So 2 King. 22.20. Thou shall be gathered into
thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will
bring upon this place. When a child of God sleeps the sleep of death, he does
not feel nor is he sensible of any of the calamities or sad providence of God
upon the Earth.

7. When a man goes to sleep, he goes to sleep but for a certain time, in the
morning he awakes out of sleep. So it is with the sleep of death; and therefore
death is called a sleep, because we must all awake in the morning of the
resurrection. We are in the grave, as in our bed, and when the trumpet of God,
and the voice of the Archangel shall sound, we shall all rise out of our
grave, as out of our beds. Death is but a sleep for a certain time.

8. Sleep is a great refreshing to those that are weary and sick, and when the
sick man awakes, he is more lively and cheerful then he was before he fell
asleep; and therefore sleep is called Medicus laborum, redintegratio virium,
recreator corporum, The great Physician of the sick body, the redintegration of
man's spirits, the reviver of the weary body. And so it is with death, when Gods
people awake out of the sleep of death, they shall be more active for God,
then ever they were before; when you lie down in the grave, you lie down with
mortal bodies; It is sown a mortal body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43.
but ^t shall rise up an immortal body; it is sown in dishonor, but it shall
rise up in honor it is sown a natural body, but it shall rise up a spiritual
body.

9. As in the morning when we arise out of our beds, we then put on our
clothes. So in the morning of the resurrection, we shall put on a glorious
body, like to the glorious body of Jesus Christ, we shall put on Stolam
immortalitatis, the garment of immortality.

10. As no man when he lays him down to sleep, knows the direct time when
he shall awake. So no man can tell when the resurrection shall be. They do but
cozen you, who say that the general resurrection shall be such or such a year;
for, as no man can know the minute when he shall awake out of his natural
sleep, no more can any man know when we shall arise from the sleep of death.

11. As it is a very easy thing to awake a man out of sleep, it is but jogging
of him, and you will quickly awake him. So it is with the sleep of death, it is
as easy for Jesus Christ to awake us out of the sleep of death, as it is for
me, or you to awake a man out of sleep in bed. Nemo nostrum tam facile excitat
dormientem de lecto, quam Christus jacentem in sepulchro.

12 As when a man arises in the morning, though he has slept many hours;
nay, suppose he could sleep twenty years together, yet notwithstanding, when
he awaketh, these twenty years will seem to be but as one hour unto him. So
it will be at the day of judgment, all those that are in their graves, when
they awake, it will be tanquam somnus unius horae, but as the sleep of one
hour unto them.

13 Lastly, and most especially, As sleep seizes only upon the body and
outward senses, but does not seize upon the soul, the foul of man is many times
most busy when the man is asleep; and God has heretofore revealed most
glorious things to his children in Dreams, when they have been asleep: God
appeared unto Abraham and many others in Dreams; the body sleeps, but the soul
wakes. So it is with the sleep of Death, the body, that dies, but the soul does
not die. There are some men that are not afraid to teach you, That the soul
sleeps as well as the body, and that when the body dies and falls asleep, the
soul likewise continues in a dull Lethargy veternoso somno correptus, neither
capable of joy nor sorrow, until the resurrection.

Beloved, This is a very uncomfortable, and a very false Doctrine. They
endeavor to prove it from my Text, they say, That Stephen when he died fell
asleep; It is true in regard of his body, he fell asleep, but his soul did not
fall a sleep, that which was stoned fell asleep, which was his body only; for
when he was stoning, he saw Jesus Christ standing ready to receive his soul
into Heaven; Lord Jesus, says he, receive my spirit. Stephens soul could not
be stoned, though his body was stoned. So when Jesus Christ was crucified, his
soul was not crucified, I mean, when his body was killed, his soul was not
killed; indeed he did endure torments in his soul, which made him cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But yet his soul did not die. So when
Stephen died, his soul went to Christ. It is true, when a child of God dies,
the soul goes to sleep, How is that? The soul goes to sleep in a Scripture
sense, that is, it goes to rest in Abraham's bosom (O blessed sleep!) it goes to
rest in the embraces of God, it goes into the arms of its Redeemer, it goes
into the heavenly Paradise, it goes to be always present with the Lord. But
take heed of that wicked opinion, to say, that the soul sleeps, in an
Anabaptistical sense, that is, That itlies in a strange kind of Lethargy,
neither dead, nor alive, neither capable of joy nor forrow, until the
resurrection. Though Stephens body fell asleep, yet his soul did not fall
asleep, but immediately went unto Jesus Christ in heaven. Thus I have given the
Explication of the words.

Now give me leave to make some Application of all unto our selves.

etc. Here is a message of rich consolation, which as a Minister of Christ I
hold out unto you this day, viz. That the death of a child of God, let it be
after what manner soever it will, it is nothing else but a falling a sleep, he
goes to his grave as to his bed; and therefore our burying places are called
(...), dormitoria, our sleeping houses. A child of God, when he dies, he
lies down in peace, and enters into his rest. And, as a man, when he is asleep,
is free from all the cares and troubles that he has in the day time; So the
people of God, when they are fallen asleep, they are free from all the
miseries, crosses, losses and afflictions that we are troubled withal; There
fore give me leave to say to you, as Christ did to the women that followed him
to the Cross, bewailing and lamenting of him, O daughters of Jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children. So say I, O weep
not for those that are dead in the Lord, that are fallen asleep in Jesus
Christ, they are at their rests, they do not know the troubles that we are
troubled withal, Abraham remembers us not; they are not sensible of our
miseries and afflictions let us weep for our selves, and for the miseries that
are coming upon us; and let us know, that when Gods children die, they do but
lie in their beds until the morning of the resurrection, and then they shall
put on Stolam immortalitatis, the garment of immortality, and their bodies
shall be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ. And know one thing
more, which is all in all, viz. That when the body of a child of God falls
asleep, his soul immediately goes into the arms of Christ, and there lives for
ever in the embraces of Jesus Christ; though the body falls asleep, yet the
soul is received into Abraham's bosom. I beseech you, comfort one another with
these words.

to a man out of Christ but to you that are in Christ, the sting of death is
taken away, death is nothing else but a quiet and placid sleep, a putting off
of our clothes, and a going to bed till we awake in the morning of the
resurrection. Death to a child of God is nothing else but a putting off his
earthly tabernacle, a going from an earthly prison into an heavenly palace, a
hoising up sail for Heaven, the letting of the soul out of prison, as a bird
out of the cage, that it may flee to Heaven, a change from a temporary hell to
an eternal heaven, a going out of Egypt into Canaan, and therefore called (...)
2 Pet. 1.15. It is not mors hominis, but mors peccati, not the death of the
man, but the death of his sins. It is Sepultura vitiorum. It is the pilgrims
journeys end, the seamans haven; an absence from the body, and a presence with
the Lord. Let all Gods people look upon death through Scripture-spectacles, and
consider it as it is sweetly represented in this Text! Remember blessed Stephen
stoned to death, and yet falling asleep. And remember also that excellent
saying of Austin, That a child of God should be as willing to die as to put
off his clothes, because death is nothing else to him but a sleep, and a
departure from misery to everlasting happiness.



First, When you are putting off your clothes, remember that you must shortly
put off your bodies. And,

Secondly, When you go into your beds, remember that it will not be long
before you must go down into your graves. And

Thirdly, When you close your eyes to sleep, remember that it will not be long
before death must close your eyes. And,

Fourthly, When you awake in the morning, remember that at the resurrection you
must all arise out of the grave, and that the just shall arise to everlasting
happiness, but the wicked to everlasting misery.

It is a saying of an Heathen man, That the whole Life of a man should be
nothing else but meditatio Mortis, but a meditation of Death. And it is the
saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that men were wise, that they understood this,
that they would consider their later end. Beloved, it is the greatest part of
wisdom, every day to remember our later end. That man is the only wise man, and
happy man in Life and Death, that is ever mindful of his Death.

Whether the death of the wicked be not in Scripture compared to a sleep, as
well as the death of the godly?

1 Kings 1^ ^. 28.
It is said of idolatrous Jeroboam, that he slept with his fathers: of Baasha
and Omri, those wicked Kings that they slept with their fathers.

But then the Question will be, In what respect is the death of the wicked
compared to a sleep?

Even as a man which is asleep, sometimes has no benefit, rest, nor ease
thereby: when the sick man awakes, he is many times more sick then he was
before he went to sleep: Some men are much disquieted in their sleeps by
hideous and fearful dreams; Nebuchadnezzar when he was asleep, had a most
scaring dream, and when he awoke, he was amazed therewith: So it is with a
wicked man; Death to a wicked man is a sleep, but it is a terrifying sleep, the
soul that goes immediately to hell, where it is burned with fire that never
shall be quenched, and where the worm that never dies is always gnawing upon
it. The body, that indeed lies in the grave asleep, but how? even as a
malefactor that sleeps in prison the night before he is executed, but when he
awakes he is hurried and dragged to execution; so the wicked man falls asleep in
death, but when he awakes, he awakes to everlasting damnation. But a child of
God, when he sleeps the sleep of death, he sleeps in his Fathers house, and
when he awakes, he awakes to everlasting happiness.



How shall I do this?

I shall give you five helps for this,

to sleep in lesus Christ; It is said, 1 Cor. 15.18. Then they also which are
fallen asleep in Christ. And 1 These. 4 14. If we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.
What is it to sleep in Jesus? To sleep in Jesus, is to die in the faith of
Jesus Christ.

2. To sleep in Jesus, is to die with an interest in Jesus Christ, to die as a
member of Christ united to him, as our head. For you must know, that the dust
of a Saint is part of that man who is a member of Jesus Christ, and every
believer when he sleeps in the dust, he sleeps in Jesus Christ, that is, he
lies in the grave, and his dust is part of Christ mystical, and Christ as an
head will raise it up, and cannot be complete without it. Now then, if ever
you would sleep an happy sleep, labor to get a real interest in Christ, labor
to live in Christ while you live. And then, when you fall asleep, you shall be
sure to sleep in Jesus. There are many would have Christ to receive their souls
at death, and that say with dying Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: But if
ever you would have Christ to receive your souls when you die, you must be sure
to receive him into your souls whilst you live; if ever you would have him to
receive you into Heaven, you must receive him into your hearts. No man makes a
will, but he says, Imprimis, I bequeath my soul unto Jesus Christ my Redeemer.
But how do thou know that Jesus Christ will accept of this Legacy? If thy
soul has not Christ's Image upon it, if it be not regenerated and renewed.
Jesus Christ will never own it; Thou may bequeath it unto Christ, but the
Devil will claim it; if thy soul has the Devils image upon it, if it be a
swinish, polluted, unbeleiving, unregenerate soul thou may bestow it upon
God, but the Devil will recover it out of Gods hands, pardon this expression,
it is not mine, but St Austins. Beloved, if ever you would reign with Christ
when you die, he must reign in you whilst you live: and if ever you would sleep
an happy sleep, you must live in Jesus that you may sleep in Jesus.

Secondly. In the second place, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep at
death, then you must take heed of overcharging your selves with worldly cares.
A man that is full of cares cannot sleep, therefore when men would sleep, they
lay (as the Proverb is) all their cares under their pillow, they labor to shut
all cares out of their mind: O take heed that you do not murder your souls by
the cares of the world; Beloved, a man that eats out his heart with worldly
cares, will never sleep an happy sleep, the cares of the world will choke all
the good seed of the Word of God; and therefore, as men when they sleep lay
aside all worldly thoughts; so if ever you would sleep an happy sleep, take
heed of overmuch carking and careing for the things of this world; and remember
what you have heard this day, and that will regulate and moderate all cares,
Naked you came into the world, and naked you must go out of the world; Why
should we take care for that we know not who shall enjoy after us?

Thirdly, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you die, you must take
heed of sucking too much of the pleasures of this life: A man that eats a full
supper will sleep very disquietly, therefore they that would sleep quietly, use
to eat but light suppers; for when a man's stomach is overcharged, it takes
away his sweet sleep from him. So if ever you would sleep a happy sleep when
you come to die, O take heed of sucking too much of the plesures of this Life;
take heed of eating too large a meal of worldly delights, and of creature
comforts; these worldly pleasures will make the sleep of death unquiet unto
you. Oh let not Dalilah's lap deprive you of Abraham's bosom! remember that
David by Bathsheba's embraces, lost the embraces of God, I mean the sense of
the embraces of God, the joy and comfort of them.

Fourthly, if ever you would sleep a happy sleep in death, then labor to work
hard for Heaven while you live. O how delightful is sleep to a weary man! when
a man has taken pains all the day, as the Traveller that has traveled all
the day, or the Ploughman that has been at work all the day, how quietly, how
soundly does he sleep in the night! O beloved, if if ever you would sleep a
happy sleep at death, then labor to work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling, and give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: the
more you labor for Heaven, the better, the sweeter will your sleep be when you
come to die. And remember this, that as much sleeping in the day time, will
hinder a man's sleep at night, so you that idle away the time of your providing
for Heaven in this your day, you that sleep away the minute upon which Eternity
does depend, oh you will have a sad sleep when Death seizes upon you. Take
heed therefore of sleeping while you live, that so your sleep in the night of
death may be comfortable unto you.

Fifthly and lastly, if ever you would sleep a happy sleep when you die, then
take heed of the sleep of sin. Sin in Scripture is compared to a sleep, awake
thou that sleep, that is, thou that sinnest. Sin is such a sleep as brings
the sleep of death; sin brings the first death, and sin brings the second
death: all miseries whatsoever are the daughters of sin. If you would sleep a
happy sleep, and have a happy awakening, at the Resurrection, then take heed
of the sleep of sin. Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead, and Jesus
Christ shall give thee life, Ephesians. 5.14. So Romans 13.11, 12, 13. with which I
will conclude, and I pray you mark it well, for it was a Text that converted
Saint Augustine, Knowing the time, Beloved, that now it is high time to awake
out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed: The night
is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light; Let us walk honestly as in
the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not
in strife and envying; but put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

FINIS.

