THE SOULS CORDIAL In two TREATISES. I. Teaching how to be eased of the guilt
of Sin. II. Discovering advantages by Christ's ascension.


By that faithful Labourer in the Lords Vineyard Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Pastor
of Lawrence Jury, London.

The third Volum.

Job 33.27, 28. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not:

He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the
light.

Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is
God that justifies.

Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1653.

J: Cross Sculpsit


To the Reader.
READER,
THou art here presented with two Treatises of the late pious, and faithful
Minister of the Gospel Mr. Christopher Love: They come to thy view in an
unpolished style, as they were taken from the mouth of the reverend Author,
whose endeavor it was to pierce the conscience, rather then to please the
ear; A garish dress is unbefitting a chaste Matrone; if thou expect here what
may be pleasing to a wanton appetite, stay at the threshold, thou will lose thy
labor; if thy stomach be for wholesome Food, and Doctrine according to
Godliness, enter in, this diet is for hungry souls. The first part will show
thee how thou must proceed to obtain, and assure thy heart of pardon of sin,
viz. by a sound Confession; this duty is much decried in these days of
Libertinisme, but by such as decry the power of Godliness, and are loath to have
a check put upon their licentiousness; but do thou remember he that hides
his sin shall not prosper, he that confesses, and forsakes it, shall find
mercy: If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and make God a lier;
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive them; pardon of
sin is the purchase of the blood of Christ, but intailed upon the Confession
of sin. The latter will show thee thy great advantage by Christ's ascension,
intercession, and return to judgment; this is a subject most suitable for the
last times, times of peril, and temptation, to quiet, comfort, and encourage,
to keep the heart in the love of God, in the patient waiting for Christ, and
unspotted in the world: We have much talk in the World that Christ's person
shall reign for 1000. years upon earth: he that can see this in Scripture,
has a clearer sight then I; but what ever becomes of this opinion, we are sure
of and stay our souls upon this, That our blessed Savior is now at the right
hand of God in glory, pleading the cause of his despised servants, waiting till
his enemies be made his footstool, from whence we expect him at that great day
to transform our vile bodies into the similitude of his glorious body, to take
us into these mansions prepared for us, that we may see his glory, and be for
ever with the Lord. These meditations if they were often in our minds, would
engage us to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, because our labor is not in vain in the Lord.

One thing more I advertise thee, that in the perusing of these little
Treatises thou will meet with many typographicall errors, for these the Printer
craves thy pardon. Farewell.

J. Cranford Pastor of Christophers le Stocks.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Nathaniel Brook, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Gornehill.
1. TImes Treasury, or Academy for Gentry; excellent grounds both Divine and
Humane for their accomplishment in arguments of discourse, habit, fashion; with
a Ladies love Lecture, and Truths triumph summing up all in a character of
Honor, by Ri. Braithwait Esquire 2. Morton of the Sacrament, folio. 3.
Physiognomy, and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetricall proportions, and
signal Moles of the body, the subject of Dreams, to which is added the art of
Memory, by Ri. Sanders Student: folio. 4. Theatrum chemicum Britanicum,
tontaining several poetical pieces of our famous English Philosophers, which
have written the Hermitque mysteries in their ancient Language, by Elias
Ashmole Esquire 5. Chiromancy or the art of Divining, by the lines engraven in the
hand of man by dame Nature, Theologically practically in 19. Genitures, with a
leraned discourse of the soul of the World, and universal spirit thereof, by
Geo. Wharton Esquire 6. Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture,
Counsels and ancient Fathers, Modern writers, hoth ecclesiastical and
civil, by Ed. Chisenhall Esquire 7. Planometria, or the whole art of Survey of
Land, showing the use of all Instruments, but especially the plain Table;
whereunto is added an Appendix to measure regular Solides, as Timber, Stone,
useful for all that intend either to sell or purchase, by Ol. Wallingby. 8. 8.
An Arithmetic in number and species, in two Books: 1 Teaching by precept and
example the operation in Numbers, whole and broken by Decimals, and use of the
Logarithms, Napyers bones. 2 The great Rule of Algebra in Species, resolving
all Arithmeticall questions by supposition, with a Canon of the powers of
numbers, fitted to the meanest capacity, by Jonas Moore late of Durham. 8. 9.
Tactometrica, or the Geomety of Regulars, after a new, exact, and expeditious
manner in Solids, with sundry useful experiments: Practical Geometry of
Regular-like Solids, and of a Cylinder body, for liquid vessel measure, with
sundry new experiments never before extant; for gauging, a work very useful
for all that are employed in the art Metricall, by John Wiberd, Doctor in
Physic. 10. An Astrologicall discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations,
proving the powerful and harmonicall influence of the Planets and fixed Stars
upon Elementary Bodies, in justification of the Validity of Astrology, by Sir
Christopher Heydon, Knight. 11. Magic and Astrology vindicated, in which is
contained the true definitions of the said Arts, and the justification of their
practice, proved by the authority of Scripture, and the experience of ancient
and modern Authors, by H. Warren. 12. An Astrologicall judgment of Diseases
from the Decumbiture of the sick: also the way of finding out the cause, change
and end of a disease: also whether the sick be likely to live or die, by N.
Culpeper. 13. Catastrophe Magnatum, or the down fall of Monarchy, by N.
Culpeper. 14. Ephemerides for the year 1652. being a year of wonders, by N.
Culpeper. 15. Lux veritatis, or Christian Judicial Astrology vindicated, and
Daemonology confured; in answer to Nath. Holmes, Dr. D. By W. Ramsey, Gent. 16.
The History of the Golden Ass. 17. The Painting of the Ancients, the beginning,
progress, and Consummating of that noble Art; and how those ancient Artificers
attained to their still so much admired excellency.

Isreal's redemption, or the prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
earth, by Robert Ma^ton of Exon College in Oxon. 8.

18. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
original of the Soul, at a Dispute held in the School at Cambridg at the
Commencement, March 3. 1646, by Charles Hotham, Fellow of Peter house. 12. 19.
Teratologia, or a discovery of Gods wonders, manifested in the former and
modern times by bloody rain and waters, by I. S. 20. Fons Lachrymarum, or a
fountain of Tears, from whence does flow Englands complaint, Jeremiahs
Lamentations, with an Elegy upon that Son of Valor Sir Charles Lucas, by John
Quarles. ^. 21. Oedipus, or a resolver, being a Clew that leads to the chief
Secrets, and true resolution of Amorous, natural, moral and political
Problems, by G. M. 22. The celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul
from the depth of everlasting Darkness to the height of eternal Light, by
Tho. Fettisplace. 23. Nocturnall Lucubrations, or Meditations divine and
moral, with Epigrams and Epitaphs, by Robers Chamberlain. 24. The Unfortunate
Mother, a Tragedy by Tho. Nabs. 25. The Rebellion a Comedy, by T.R. 26. The
Tragedy of Messatina, by Not. Richards. ^. 27. The remedy of Coffeehouse, or
a Treatise of contentation in whatsoever condition, fit for these sad and
troublesome times, by Joseph Hall late B. of Exon and Norwich. 12. 28. The
Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the farced Cup from the
Laity at the Lords Table, by the late revend, Daniel Featly, D. D. 4. 29. The
cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, Atheism and profaneness, or a most
hopeful way to Grace and Salvation, by R. Young. 8. 30. A bridle for the
Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the Wavering, to stay the
Wandering, to strengthen the fainting, by John Brinsley Minister of Gods Word at
Yarmouth. 31. Comforts against the fear of Death, wherein are several
evidences of the the work of Grace, by John Collins of Norwich. 32. Jacobs
seed, or the excellency of seeking God by prayer, by Jeremiah Buroughs,
Minister of the Gospel to the two greatest Congregations about London, Stepney
and Criplegate, 17. 33. The Zealous Magistrate, a Sermon, by Tho. Threscot. 34.
Britannia Rediviva, or a Soverain Remedy to cure a sick Commonwealth, preached
in the Minister at York before the Judges, August 9. 1649. by J. Shaw Minist.
of Hull. 35. The Princses Royal, preached in the Minster in York before the
Judges, March 24. 1650. by John Shaw, Minister of Hull. 36. Anatomy of
Mortality, divided into eight Heads. 1. The Certainty of Death. 2. Meditations
of Death. 3. Preparations for Death. 4. The right behavior in Death. 5. The
comfort in our own Death. 6. The bomfort against the Death of Friends. 7. The
Cases whrein its lawful or unlawful to desire death. 8. The glorious estate
of Gods children after death, by George Stronde. 37. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon
for the Society of Astrologers, August, 1651.
SERMON, I.
Text, PSALM 32. latter part of the 5. verse. I said, I will confess my
transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.
THis Psalm treats of the blessedness of a justified, of a pardoned sinner,
touching which, several particulars are handled. First, the Psalmist handles,
wherein the forgiveness of sin consists, that he mentions under two
expressions, Verse 1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose
sin is covered: the forgiveness of sin consists, covering of sin, the
covering of sin not from god, but by god, so it is explained by god himself,
Psalm. 85. verse. 2. Psalm. 85 2
Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, Thou have covered all their
sin.

It is sin in us to hide our sins, as it is sin to hide our talents, so
it is sin to hide our sin; therefore when the Psalmist says the
forgiveness of sin consists in the covering of sin, this covering by God
is understood.

Secondly, This forgiveness is set out by not imputing of sin, verse. 2.
Sin shall not be imputed unto a justified person, though still it shall be
inherent in him.

Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no guile.

When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long:
yet for all this David calls him blessed, though Gods hand was heavy upon him,
yet his heart was still toward him, yet a blessed man, though an afflicted man.

I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Thus I have brought you by the hand to the Text. I shall
give you a short paraphrase of the words: I said, this word implies in
Scripture phrase three things: First, it notes a deliberation or consideration
of the mind, Psalm. 14. verse. 1. Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: (that is) he has thought so
in his mind, Psalm. 30.6
that there is no God. Psalm. 30. verse. 6. And in my prosperity I said, I shall
never be moved: that is, I thought so. Saying, is not always an act of the
tongne, but sometimes of the mind: I said I will confess my sin, that is, I
have bethought my self, and considered in my mind, that it is meet for me to
get pardon and to confess my sin to God. I said, It notes secondly the
purpose and the resolution of the will; so you have it, Psalm. 119. verse 57.
Psalm. 119.57.
Thou art my portion O Lord, I have said, that I would keep thy words. There
saying, is explained to be purposing or resolving of the will.

Thirdly, I said, it implies the execution, or practice of what the mind
resolves upon, Psalm. 39 verse. 1. Psalm. 39.1.
I said I will take heed to my ways, etc.

I am put upon the practice of taking care unto my steps and to my ways: the
meaning of the phrase is this, I said I will confess my transgression, I have
bethought it so in my mind, that it is good and meet so to do, I have purposed
and resolved in my will and am actually put on the practice of it, I said I
will confess my transgression. It is worth your notice, that sin is expressed
by three words in this Text; first, transgression, secondly, iniquity, and
thirdly, sin; I will confess my transgression, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. There are but four places in the Scripture wherein these
three words are joined together in one verse, Transgression, Iniquity, and
Sin. Exodus 34. Exodus 34.7.
verse. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and
sin.

Micah 7. Mic. 7.18.
verse. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger
for ever, because he delights in mercy.

Levit. Levit. 16.21.
16. verse. 21. And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live
Goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and
all their transgressions in all their sins, etc.

And it is likewise used in Job 13. Job 13.23.
verse. 23. How many are mine iniquities and sins, make me to know my
transgression and my sin.

In these four places the words are used in Scripture and in my Text, but not
else as: I remember throughout the word of God: and because these three words
are here used; Interpreters take much pains to find out some material
direction between them: here is Transgression, Sin, and Iniquity; I have
consulted with many, and the truest account I can give you is this; (...)
Transgression signifies in the Hebrew Rebellion, say interpreters, it notes
sin with all extensions and aggravations, sin increased to a great height.
Scondly, (...) Sin signifies in the Hebrew, evils that are of the lesser
degree; that are not so heinous, and so notes only by sin evils of infirmity
and common incursion. Thirdly, (...) Iniquity signifies sin of nature, that
pravity of nature wherein a man was born. But Grammarians in the Latin do
distinguish these words otherwise, Iniquity, they make to be that which is done
against another man: Sin, that which is done against a man's self: and
Transgression, that which is done immediately against God. But beloved, the
Scripture in many places, makes them all one. Therefore we need not make
further curious enquiry after the distinction of these words, And thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. The iniquity of my sin; There is some
disagreement about the sense of these words, what it is for God to forgive the
iniquity of sin: By the iniquity of sin, some do understand the punishment that
sin deserves: the Hebrew word (...) that signifies Iniquity, signifies
Punishment; the same word here is spoken of Cain, My punishment is greater then
I can bear, there is the same word (...): therefore in some translations it is
read thus, Thou forgavest the punishment of my sin. Secondly, others here do
understand by the iniquity of sin, (with whom I do concur) sin with all its
aggravations, with all its heinous circumstances, sin with all its malignity,
Thou do forgive the iniquity of all my sins: most Interpreters go this way,
and so make the phrase to be very emphaticall, Thou have forgiven me my sin;
that is, all heinous circumstances that might greaten my sin, thou have
forgiven them all. I shall only make a short entrance at this time into the
first part of my Text, I said I will confess my transgression to the Lord:
These words contain in them a holy purpose in the Psalmist to set on the
practice of a necessary and Christian duty, to wit, secret confession of sin to
God? in them five parts paets are observable. First, the duty it self,
Confession. Secondly, a deliberate purpose to set on the practice of this duty,
I said. Thirdly, the subject matter of this duty, Transgression, and
Transgression with a propriety, my Transgression, not of other men's sins but my
sins, I said I will confess my transgressions. I remember Ainsworth he says
it should be translated thus more agreeable to the Hebrew, (...) I will
confess adversum me against my self my transgression to the Lord. Many men
that confess sin, but they do confess sin as against God, that is, they do
confess sin as if God were the author of sin, that charge him to be the patron
of their impiety and of their wickedness, I said I will confess my
transgressions against my self. Fourthly, The object of this duty, I will
confess my transgression to the Lord: and this beloved takes off Auricular
confession, used and stood on much in the Church of Rome. Confession that God
calls for, and the Scripture calls for, is in secret between God and your own
souls; when conscience shall suggest guilt to you in reference to your former
misdoings, when you can pour out your soul in complaint to God, I said, I will
confess my transgression unto the Lord. Fifthly and lastly, The issue and
event of this duty, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: observe the
connection, here is a connective particle, and thou forgavest: he does not come
with an Ergo or a Quare, not with a causall, but with an et, a copulative, and
thou forgavest; not I confess sin, therefore I am forgiven; but I confess
sin, (...) and thou have forgiven me. Forgiveness of sin is not laid down as
an effect flowing from a cause, but as a consequent flowing from an antecedent;
indeed the Papists plead much for merit, because sometimes causall particles
are used, but this is beyond my Text: thus much for the explaining of the
words. At this time I shall only raise a Doctrine from the first part of this
Text. I said, I will confess my transgression unto the Lord.

And here the confession I speak of, is a private confession of our evils to
God, between God and our own souls, and no otherwise: and beloved, though it be
but a familiar subject; yet as God shall enable me, I shall labor to make it
useful and profitable for your edification in a Christian course, in a holy
confession of sin before your God.

There are many Queres to be dispatched in the handling of this point.

The first Quere is, What are the reasons why persons justified and pardoned,
are yet bound to make confession of sin unto God in private? The Reasons are
six.

indulged, makes heart-quakes in the conscience, and contracts a great deal of
horror and terror, Psalm. 32. verse. 3. Psalm. 32.3.
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long.

Meaning, when I kept close my sin; he roared by reason of horror, when he
did not pour out his soul in confession to God; but when a man shall with an
ingenuous clearness confess his evils unto God, this does alleviate his
mind, and lighten his burdens, and ease his conscience, and quiet his spirit.
Origin does call confession of sin to God, the souls spiritual vomit. Now you
know vomiting does give ease to a burdened stomach, when the stomach is pained
and burdened, and oppressed. A man is sick at the heart when meat does not
digest, the vomiting of the load off of the stomach does ease the stomach: so
says Origin, That when the conscience is burdened, when a man's spirit is
troubled, pouring out of complaints and confession to God does ease the mind:
A sinner is like a vessel of new wine filled and stopped up close, till it has
vent it is ready to burst; so is a godly man filled with sin, till he can
vent by confession to God, ready to burst. Psalm. 119.25.
Psalm. 119. verse. 25. My soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me according
to thy word.

Verse. 26. I have declared my ways, and thou heardst me, teach me thy Statutes.

As if he should have said, My soul cleaves to the dust, I am in a very low and
sad condition, but I have declared my ways, I have confessed my sins, then God
heard me, then I had peace, then I had quiet, then I had comfort: that is the
first Reason, secret confession to God, it does give a great deal of ease and
holy quiet to the mind.

Jer. 31. Jer. 31.18.
verse. 18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. (that is)
confessing his sin unto God.

Cant. 2. verse. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the
secret places of the stairs; let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice,
for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. God delights to see and
hear the complaints and the confessions of his servants unto him: God had
rather see men come with ropes about their necks, and with sackcloth about
their loins by a humble confession, then to see ornaments about their necks by
a self-justification; Christ loves to hear and see the mourning condition of a
justified person.

Psalm. 32. verse. 6. Psalm. 32.6.
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou
may be found, surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh
unto him.

Confession quickens supplication, Dan. 9.20.
in Dan. 9. verse. 20. And whiles I was speaking and praying, and confessing my
sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the
Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God.

Confession is to the soul as the whetstone is to the knife, that sharpens it
and puts an edge upon it; so does confession of sin, confessing thy evils to
God does sharpen and put an edge on thy supplications: that man will pray but
faintly, that does confess sin but slightly. Solemn and secret confessions of
thy evils unto God, does greatly help to quicken strong supplications in thy
heart unto God.

Psalm. 38.18.
Psalm. 38. verse. 18. For I will declare mine iniquities, I will be sorry for my
sin.

Declaration does work compunction; confession of sin, is but the causing of
sin to recoyle on the conscience, which causes blushing and shame of face, and
grief of heart.

Josh. 7. verse. 19. And Joshua said unto Achan, Josh. 7.19.
My son, give I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession
unto him, and tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from me: It is a
giving glory unto God.

Christ; the stronger desires that a sinner has after Jesus Christ, the more
he does inhaunce the price of Jesus Christ. And thus much for the first Quere,
to wit, the Reasons of the point.

The second Quere it, But when is a man in the best plight to have freedom of
spirit to make secret confession of sin unto God? I will name but three
Seasons: As,

Gregory, Sins do blind the eyes of men when they sin, yet those eyes come to
be opened by the punishment, the punishment opens those eyes which the fact
has shut. As you read of Joseph's brethren, they did remain 20 years without
having conscience recoyle on themselves to confess their evils in selling
their brother Joseph, but when Joseph laid them in a prison, then they confessed
their evil, Genesis 42.21. And they said one to another, Genesis 42.21.
we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress
come upon us.

It may be now thou art in health, thou do not now confess thy uncleanness,
and thy drunkenness, and thy pride, and thy profaneness; but what will thou
do when God brings thee on a deathbed? when God hedges in thy ways with
thernes, the conscience will reflect on thee, and suggest guilt to thee, and
draw out confession from thee, it is a fit season; when God does bring a man
under any outward affliction, then he is in good plight to confess sin. It is
worth your notice in the 38. Psalm. 38.
Psalm, it was made when David lay on his sickbed, as he thought his
deathbed: you shall find it is a complaint of a very strong disease David lay
under, in the 3. verse. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine
anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin. My wounds stink
and are corrupt, Verse. 7. For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease,
and there is no soundness in my flesh. Here he was lying on a sick bed; and
Interpreters say that he made this Psalm when he was sick. It is worth your
notice of the title that David gives this Psalm, A Psalm of David to bring to
remembrance. David when he was on his deathbed as he thought, he he said it
shall be a Psalm of remembrance, to bring sin to remembrance, to confess to
God my uncleanness! with Bathsheba, to bring to my remembrance the evils of my
life; it was a good plight David was in when he lay on a sick bed, he would
make this title of the Psalm, A Psalm to call to remembrance: men are in a fit
plight to make confession to God when they lie under any bodily sickness; call
to remembrance thy pride, call to thy remembrance thy passion, call to
remembrance thy vain dalliance, what ever thy sin be, it may be I may not hit
of it: but when ever God brings thee under affliction, thou art then in a fit
plight for to confess fin to God, and call to remembrance thy sins. As it was
with Jonah, chap. 1. Jer. 2. verse. 24. Jor. 2.24.
A wild Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her
pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her will
not weary themselves, in her month they shall find her.

The men of Israel are there compared to an Ass, an unruly creature that runs
up and down the wilderness and kicks up the heel: but says God, Though men
weary themselves to take her, yet in her month they shall take her: that is,
when she brings forth young, then they shall take her, referring it to the
people of Israel; they in their prosperity would not be ruled, but when they
were in their month, in their captivity, in their sufferings, then they should
take them, and they would then come to be more pliant in confessing their guilt
more to God then in former time.

good plight to confess sin is, when the conscience of a man is set in office
by God to pursue him with clear and with strong accusations. When God puts the
conscience of a man in office to pursue him with strong accusations touching
evils he has committed; then that man is in a fit plight, if he will take hold
of it. Even Judas himself when conscience awakened him, went and confessed to
the High Priest and the Scribes; and said, I have sinned in betraying innocent
blood. If Judas took advantage so much upon the awakening of conscience to
confess finne, then a believer has much more help. Beloved, the main use of
conscience in man, is to bring him upon his knees, to make him humble in the
confession of his ways; conscience serves to excuse me when I do well, but the
main use of conscience is to accuse me when I do ill, and so to put me on
confession to God, therefore mark, says David, I roared all the day; there was
the noise of David's conscience for his Adultery, then I said I will confess my
transgressions: when conscience roars by accusation, then let the heart
confess to God: I do earnestly beg you to take these fit Seasons: you are in a
good plight to confess sin when God does lay you under afflictions, when God
does make conscience accuse you, that you do deceive in your trades, that are
ingulphed under lust; O then pursue these accusations of conscience, then you
are in a fit plight to confess fin to God.

David, in 2 Samuel 12.13. And David said unto Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13.
I have sinned against the Lord; Says Nathan to David, thou art the man.

The reproof of Nathans Ministry did so prevail on David's heart, that David
said, I have sinned and have done very foolishly. Could you go home after
every Sermon you hear, when ever you hear your sins reproved, and pursue that
reproof, and bless God that the Word has checked you, that the Word has met
you, that the word has found you out as an enemy; could you go home and pursue
a Ministerial reproof with confession, your hearts would then be in a good
plight to confess sin unto God.

The Application:

highest Believer is not above the confession of sin; because not above the
practice of sin. As long as men continue acting of sin, men must never leave
confessing of sin; as long as sin leaks into thy soul, thou must so long be
pumping by confession to the soul as a pump to the ship. O, what leaks into thy
heart by heedlesnesse and carelessness, pump out by confession. Till thou art
above the actings of sin, thou art not above the confessing of sin: as long as
the body natural does gather corrupt humors, so long there must be Purges and
Vomits: if the body should still be gathering corrupt humors, nature would be
stifled by these humors; thou art gathering sin to sin, thou art adding
iniquity to iniquity: confession is a spiritual Purge, it does cleanse and
purge the heart; see therefore the great need that pardoned men have to
confess their faults.

Lorinus observes out of Bernard on these words, I confess my transgressions.
Saul made the same confession that David made when Nathan reproved David; says
David, I have sinned: when Samuel reproved Saul, says Saul, I have sinned:
here is the same confession, but here was not the same event: David said, I
have sinned, and Nathan said, the Lord has taken away thy iniquity: but Saul
said, I have sinned too, but Samuel told him, the Lord has taken away thy
Kingdom from thee: Saul confessed sin, yet had his Kingdom taken away; but David
confessed sin, and had his sin taken away. Beloved, thou may confess sin with
Saul, yet not have thy sin taken away; thou may lose thy soul, as he lost
his Kingdom though he confessed his sin.

The third Quere is this, What Theological rules may be given to guide you in
your confession of sin unto God. Answ. There are seven Rules which I shall lay
down to you.

Judge. 10.10. And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served
Baalim. We have sinned, there is a general complaint: but we have also served
Baalim; they singled out their idolatry more especially. 1 Samuel 12.19.
1 Samuel 12.19. And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto
the Lord thy God, that we dye not, for we have added unto all our sins this
evil, to ask us a King.

They were not contented with their old government, but they would alter and
change it: that sin being their particular sin they were guilty of, they would
single out that sin. 1 Chronicles. 21.17.
Thus in 1 Chronicles. 21.17. And David said unto God, Is it not I, that commanded
the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned, and done evil in
deed, but as for these sheep, what have they done, etc.

He singles out a particular sin that he then lay under the guilt of. I may say
to you as the King of Assyria said to the 32 Captains, Fight neither against
small nor great, but against the King of Israel; so bend your confession not
against small or great only, but against thy kingly lusts, against thy captain
lusts that do most tend to thy constitution; single out them, and combat
against them, and bend most of thy confessions and complaints against them: do
as men in a garrison, though they watch all the Battlements, and guard every
passage; yet to that place, where the breach is made widest, and where the
storm is most hot, they will bend most of their strength: do thou thus, watch
every sin, and watch every failing of thy life, but bend most of thy confession
to God against those lusts that do most enslave and subject thee.

Psalm. 90.8. Psalm. 90.8.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance.

Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 19.12.
Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

David did not only confess his murder of Vriah, his adultery with Bathsheba,
but he confessed smaller sins: David's heart smote him for cutting off the lap of
Saul's garment; it was only the appearance of revenge, he had his knife near his
throat: that which had the appearance of a sin, David's heart smote him for.

Conscientious men do not only bewail and confess open and grosser evils; but
the secret, and the smallest corruptions of the heart they bewail to God: they
confess their secret pride, their secret worldliness, and secret murmurings
against God, they confess their secret and smaller evils.

Indeed wicked men fall short of this: wicked men confess their gross and
their open sins, but do not take notice of their lesser and secret evils: there
are two instances for this, one is in Cain, Cain confessed his murder, his sin
was greater then it could be forgiven, speaking of the murder of his brother
Abel, Genesis 4.13.
Genesis 4.13. And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater then I can
bear. He did not confess his enmity that made him murder his brother: he
confessed his gross sin, but did not confess more sly and secret evils. Thus
you read likewise of Judas, Judas confessed his betraying of Christ, (a gross
sin) but he never confessed his covetousness, a secret sin that made him betray
Jesus Christ; says he, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood: he that did
bewail and confess his murder in betraying Christ, did not confess and bewail
his covetousness and hypocrisy, that were more lurking and secret evils. That
is a second Rule, make conscience to confess small and secret evils, as well
as open and grosser sins.

God, labor to greaten your sins with all the heinous circumstances and
heart-humbling aggravations you can imagine. Thus the servants of God used to
do, when they confessed sin unto God, they would confess sin with all the
heinous circumstances: 1 King. 8.47. Saying, We have sinned, and have done
perversely, we have committed wickedness. Says Lorinus, Mark what a heap of
words a heart-humbled soul will lay together in confessing of sin; We have
sinned, there is one word; we have done wickedly, there is a second; and we
have done perversely, there is a third. A notable instance you have of Paul in
Act. 26.10, 11. Act 26.10.11.
Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints did I shut up in
prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were
put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished them often in every
Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad against
them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities.

Here Paul comes to aggravate his sin, there are eight aggravations that here
Paul does lay down of his sin, whereby he would greaten sin unto himself that
he might be the more humble:

Saints, and to wrong them is a Sacrilege, the Saints have I cast into prison.

but many I have cast into prison, why? for professing the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, merely for professing Christ.

many of the Saints did I cast into prison.

shut them in up in prison, and kept them close prisoners.

he gave his voice against them to put them to death. Nay,

he compelled them to blaspheme God.

and I was exce^dingly mad against them: he was mad with rage, mad with passion
and with fury against the Saints of God.

I did persecute them to strange Cities; them I did not kill, I made them leave
their wives and children, and made them run and shift for their lives into
strange corners. This is the nature of a true penitent, not to confess sin
slightly and carelessy, but in confession of sin to cloth his sins with all
the aggravations that can be, and this is a good Rule if you well follow it.
You have the like instance in the book of Daniel chap. 9. verse. 5. Dan. 9.5.
We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. Verse.
6. Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy
Name to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and to all the people of the
Land. There are seven circumstances that Daniel uses in confessing of his sin,
to aggravate his sin, how does Daniel cloth his confession. First, We have
sinned, there is one. Secondly, We have committed iniquity. Thirdly, We have
done wickedly. Fourthly, We have rebelled against thee. Fifthly, We have
departed from thy precepts. Sixthly, We have not hearkened unto thy servants.
Seventhly, Nor we nor our Princes, nor all the people of the land: there are
seven aggravations which Daniel reckons up to his confession: that is a third
Rule about confession.

converted men do confess sin to God as a father; whilst you have an eye of
sorrow upon sin, you are to have an eye of hope upon pardon, thus Gods people
did in their confessions. To confess sin to God as a Judge, is to howl like
dogs because you shall be beaten; but to confess sin to God as an angry
Father, is child-like with a fiduciall confidence of pardon. Dan. 9.9. Dan. 9.9.
To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him. And thus Shechaniah confesses sin unto God, Ezra 10.2.
Ezra 10.2. And Shechar^ah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Ellam,
answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, etc.

And thus the Prodigal in Luke 18.18. Luke 18.18.
I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven and before thee.

Though he was a prodigal, yet he would go to God as to a father. In
confession you are to go to God hopefully as to a displeased father:
confessions when they come to God as a Judge, create fear, horror, and
amazement on the conscience, but when confessions are mingled with hope, and
come to God as a father, they work a holy brokennesse of heart, a holy
tenderness and remorse on the conscience.

God is this, Content not your selves with slight and superficial confessions
of sin unto God, but leave not confession till you find sorrow for sin. Psalm.
38.18. Psalm. 38.18.
For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. Dan. 9.8. O Lord
to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our
fathers, because we have sinned against thee, we blush and are not ashamed to
look up.

Leave not confessing of sin, until shame has filled your face, and sorrow
has filled your heart: it is a great fault in many people, if they confess
their sin in crying God mercy in a general way, they think they have made God
a compensation for all the injuries they have done him, though they never have
any godly sorrow for their sins: but beloved you are not to content your selves
with such confession.

recollect old sins, when new sins do not come to remembrance, and be humbled
for them: Psalm. 51.3
thus David did, in Psalm. 51.3. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin
is ever before me. It was meant his old sin of adultery, that was his sin that
he would now call to remembrance: so when he found his heart, he says, Lord,
remember not the sins of my youth; he would go so far back as his youth. I
prescribe this rule, not that a godly man, who is under trouble of mind should
take this course to recollect old sins, this may lead him to despair; but in
case of barrenness, if any man wants matter in respect of present sins, and
finds his heart hard and very insensible in secret prayer unto God, in that
case he is bound to let conscience recoyle upon himself, and recollect sins of
past years; go back as far as his youth and see what conscience will bring in
to provoke him to make humble confession unto God in his secret retirements.

sins of his life before men. Zach. 12.12. Zach. 12.12.
And the Land shall mourn every family apart, the family of the house of David
apart, and their wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan apart, and
their wives apart, etc. They are to go to God and confess their sins apart.
Thou art a poor professor, that do confess what thou confessest in public
only, and never in private, thou art but a barren professor. Again confider
this, that though we read of wicked men that have made great confessions of sin
unto God, yet we never read in the Scripture that wicked men ever made
conscience to confess sin to God in secret. Pharaoh (you know the story)
confessed his sin to Moses and unto Aaron, Exodus 9.27.
but we never read that Pharaoh confessed his sin unto God. Exodus 9.27. And
Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned
this time, etc.

Saul confessed his sin unto Samuel, but we never read of his confessing sin unto
God. 1 Samuel 15.24.30.
1 Samuel 15.24. And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned, for I have
transgressed the Commandment of the Lord, etc. Verse. 30. Then he said. I have
sinned, etc.

Judas confessed his sin, but to whom was it? to the High Priest and to the
Pharisees, but Judas never went into a corner and in secret to bewail
bloodshed: wicked men have made public confessions of sin, but in secret
between God and their own souls they never made acknowledgement, and confession
of their evils unto God: thus much for the third Quere.

The fourth Quere is this, Wherein appears the difference of a godly man's
making confession of sin unto God, and between those confessions of sin in
wicked men: and there are these eight differences.

Job 7.20.
Job 7.20. I have sinned, What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
etc. I have sinned, there is his confession: Lord what shall I do? there is his
industry. Thus the Jews they were convinced by Peter of their great sin,
insomuch as they cried out, What shall we do to be saved? But false confession
leaves men idle, and careless: confess they do, but they are not inquisitive
how to get pardon for those sins they do confess.

God in godly men, is attended with remorse of conscience, and with grief of
heart. Psalm. 38.18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my
sin: there is confession and sorrow joined together. Hos. 12.4.
Hos. 12.4. Yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and made
supplication unto him. Whilst confessions are in the mouth, there will be
either tears in the eye, or sorrow in the heart, if confession be true.

The wicked confess sin, but they never grieve for the sins they have
committed, they are not ashamed, neither can they blush, in the Prophets
language.

I have poured out my soul before God, says the Psalmist: confession of sin is
a pouring out the soul before God; he that can pour forth complaints against
sin in secret more then in public, is a gracious man.

The wicked are only for confession of sin before men, and not before God.

are freely willing to part with their lusts, therefore they confess them to
God, Job 32.18, 19, 20.
Job 32, 18. For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constrains me.
Verse. 19. Behold my belly is as wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst
like new bottles. Verse. 20. I will speak that I may be refreshed, I will open
my lips, and answer. Thus a godly man in confessing sin his belly is as it were
burst with new wine, he must needs have vent, else he is broken, he must needs
confess sin, his sin drives him to God. But confession is extorted and wrested
from wicked men. It was the plagues of Egypt upon Pharaoh that wrung confession
from him: before these he would say, Who is the Lord? It was pangs and horror
of conscience in Judas, that forced him to acknowledge he had sinned in
betraying innocent blood. Mariners cast over their goods, not that they hate
them, but as they are forced to do it to escape drowning; when there is a
storm and a tempest in their consciences, then men are forced to confess sin,
it is by compulsion, it is not voluntary.

David confessed his pride and carnal confidence in numbering the people, as well
as his adultery with Bathsheba: David confessed the cutting off the lap of Saul's
garment, as well as spilling the blood of Vriah. But hypocrites confess their
gross sins, but not their small sins. Cain confessed his murder, but not his
envy, Cain confessed his murder, but not his bad offering: they confess their
gross sins but not their smaller. Pharaoh confessed his oppression of the
children of Israel, but he did not confess the secret hardness of his heart.
But godly men though they have not so many gross and open evils, yet small and
secret evils pinch their consciences, and troubles their spirit. Those evils
which will not break a wicked man's sleep, will break their hearts: what though
they have not uncleanness in the flesh? what though they have escaped the
pollutions of the world? yet they know they have secret and inward defilements
on the spirit: and these they bewail, and these they acknowledge to God.

A sixth difference is this, that godly men are distinct and clear to confess
these particular special evils that have most predominancy over them. Beloved,
observe this; Wicked men in their confessions are confused, and only run in
general that they are sinners; Just like Ahimaaz when he would bring tidings
to David, touching the issue of the battle with Joab and Absalom, says he, I
saw a tumult, and I heard a noise, but I know nothing. Wicked men will tell you
that their sins do make a noise within them, but they can tell you nothing
distinctly, and nothing particularly, but only go at random. Wicked men in
confessing sin are like Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.
Dan. 2. He dreamt something but he could not tell what it was: Wicked men
dream of sins and think of them as confusedly as a man in a dream; but when,
how, and where, and with what aggravating circumstances they know not: they
have not a distinct and clear view of their corruptions. Thus Bellarmine did
show his wickedness in saying he was not wicked, when he was on his deathbed;
and his Confessor came to him to have him confess his sin to him, says
Bellarmine, I do not know any sin in my self to confess. This was not the
holiness of the man, but heedlesnesse that he did not observe his ways.
Donatus the great ringleader of the Donatists, says, O Lord I have nothing
that thou should pardon me. Beloved, this does arise from stupidity that men
see not sin; it does not arise from holiness, but from heedlesnesse and
carelessness. It is an observation that one has on Job, says Job, I have
sinned, and cause me know mine iniquity, and my transgression and my sin.
Whilst Job made this complaint that he had finned, God says, in all this Job
sinned not: that is, not absolutely, but meaning comparatively. Beloved, to be
free in complaints, and to be full in confession of sins, does not argue that
you have more sin then other men have; but it argues that you have more sight
then other men have, and the less sin you have in you.

Psalm. 51. says David, Against thee, thee only have I sinned: it was against
Vriah that he had sinned, but against thee, thee only have I sinned, for thou
wast dishonored by my sin. When the Apostle speaks of repentance, he calls it
repentance toward God, Act. 20.21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. To
note, That where sorrow and confession of sin is true, it is more out of a
sense of sin, as it is against God, then as it is against self. But wicked men
never confess sin as it is a dishonor to God, but as it contracts a guilt and
a shame on themselvea.

occasion of that sin which they have confessed; thus you read Act. 19.18. And
many that believed came, and confessed and showed their deeds. Verse. 19. Many
also of them which used curious arts, brought their books together, and burned
them before all men, etc. He speaks of their sorcery and witchcraft; they would
burn their books, that there should not be an occasion of committing again that
sin which they confessed unto God. Beloved this is holy confession; when thou
shall come to God on thy knees in secret, and there bewail a lust: and thy
confession leaves a holy awe and dread on thy soul to take heed on that sin
thou have confessed.

A godly man may commit a sin which he has confessed, but yet he retains a fear
and awe upon his heart, that it shall not prevail over him in his practice.

Wicked men confess sin they have committed, yet they are bold and adventurous
to commit the same sin again which they have confessed.

And thus the Harlot did, Prove. 7.14. I have peace offerings with me, this day
I have paid my vows. Paying the vow, is a confession that I am in debt to God
for my sin; and I owe God homage and service: yet she made the confession of
sin to be a means to provoke her to be more bold and adventurous in her
wickedness. To confess drunkenness, and afterward to be drunk; to confess
profaneness, and afterward to profane; this is the bold adventurousnesse of
wicked men: thus Pharaoh in Exodus 9. confessed his sin, and afterward when the
plagues were over, runs into the same sin he did confess: and this is the
badge and portraiture of a wicked man. And thus I have done with this fourth
particular.

I now come to the use.



Antinomists, who account it a legal and a servile work, for believers to be
bemoaning themselves unto God, and confessing sin unto God. And therefore in
their prayers, (when you may be cast to hear them in public) all their
expressions in prayer, are either extolling the majesty of God, the excellency
of Christ, the glory of Heaven, the riches of Grace, but not a word of laying
low the creature in prayer; but raptures in prayer, and the extolling of divine
Majesty: these are all the dialects of expressions which they use in prayer.

Now to overthrow this:

First, Confession of sin to God has been practiced by all the godly under the
Old Testament; and therefore why should it not be used under the New?

Dan. 9. He made a prayer to God, and it consisted of 16. verses, and 14. of
them verses were spent in confessing of sin.

And thus the godly in Nehemiah's days made a prayer to God, and the whole
prayer consisted of 32. verses, and 31. of them verses were spent in confession
of sin. Nehem. 1.6. Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that
thou may hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee now day and
night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the
children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee, both I and my fathers
house have sinned.

Thus David, 2 Samuel 24.10. And David's heart smote him, after that he had
numbered the people: and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that
I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant, for I have done very foolishly. That is one thing to confute this
practice.

Secondly, Not only Believers under the Old Testament, but also Converts under
the New Testament, did make conscience of confessing of sin unto God, Joh. 3.6.
And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. Act. 19.18. And many
that believed came, and confessed, and showed their deeds. Luke 15.17. And when
he cameto himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father have bread
enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger? Verse. 18. I will arise, and go
to my father, and will say unto him, Father I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee. It is an emblem of a Convert, if so be it be a parable: In the
instance of the Publican, that Christ declares was justified rather then the
Pharisee, Luke 18.13. And the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so
much as his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful
to me a sinner, verse. 14. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified
rather then the other, etc.

Now beloved when you have instances in the Old Testament, and many examples in
the New, why then should we blot out so useful a part of Gods worship as this,
of confession to God in secret?

Thirdly, God does command confession of sin unto him. Jer. 3.12. Go and
proclaim these words toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding
Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I
am mereifull, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy
God, etc.

Fourthly, God, both in the Old Testament and in the New, has annexed many
gracious promises to a sincere confession of sin unto him: in the Old
Testament, Lev. 26.40. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity
of their fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me, Verse. 41. And that I also have
walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their
enemies: if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, etc they then accept of
the punishment of their iniquity, Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob,
etc. If they confess their iniquity, I will remember them. Prove. 28.13. He
that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes
them shall have mercy. Job 33.27. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, etc. And in
the New Testament, in 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Now
beloved put all these four together; the godly have practiced this under the
Old Testament, Converts under the New, God has commanded it, and he has
recompensed it; therefore those that account confession of sin to be but a
legal and servile work deserve reproof.

A second reproof, is to those of the Popish Religion, who in stead of secret
confession of sin to God in prayer, do press vehemently Auricular confession
in the ear of the Priest. Touching this Auricular confession, they spend many
volumes for to make good the divine right of it; the Council of Trent do lay
an Anathema on any that shall not count Auricular confession to be necessary to
salvation. There are these several mistakes and errors in the Popish Doctrine
of Auricular confession.

First, They urge the necessity of it, that you must not expect salvation
without it.

Secondly, Confession against whom, against what you did it, all the
circumstances of your sins you must acknowledge to the Priest.

Thirdly, That the Priest upon your confession, has power from Christ to give
you pardon, to give you absolution; these go current with them about Auricular
confession.

That you might see this is blameworthy, and worthy of reproof; I shall
confute it by these Considerations.

First Consideration of the time when Auricular confession came first in use in
the Church: Ecclesiastical Historians tell us that for 800. years after Christ
there was no such practice in the Church of God: And that the Law of Auricular
confession was not enacted until Pope Innocent the Third, which was about 1200
years after Christ: and the first Council that did establish Auricular
confession, was the Laterane Council; and after that, the Council of Trent.
The Church of God in the Primitive times having no such practice, it may be
exploded from being now in the Church of God.

Secondly, Why did the Popes invent Auricular confession? One does demonstrate
this;

First there is this reason: It is a notable invention to discover the secrets
of men's thoughts both in Church and State.

Secondly, It is a means to get money for the Pope: for according as the sin
confessed, is more capital and notorious; so the more money must be given for
indulgence and pardon; thus a reverent Divine calls it, the picklock of
Sacramental confession: this being enacted merely out of State policy to know
men's secret thoughts and temper; and likewise to bring in profit and revenues
to the Sea of Rome, which does show the practice to be unjustifiable.

Thirdly, Consider what the Scripture does press concerning confession unto
men, mark the text, Jam. 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray
one for another, that ye may be healed. The Scripture does not tie us to a
Priest as the Popish Religion ties them: but it ties us, that in anguish of
conscience and trouble of mind we confess to any who are able to give us
wholesome counsel from the Lord.

A good note our Protestant Interpreters have against the Papists: the Apostle
bids, if a man be sick call for the Elders of the Church, and they were to pray
for him; but he does not bid them confess sin to the Elders, but confess sin
one to another; which does no way tie to confess sin to a Priest. But this is
a point of controversy, and blessed be God this Church not tainted with this
error; therefore I shall leave it: this is the second sort that is to be
reproved; to wit, those of the Popish Religion, who in stead of confession of
sin unto God, bring in Auricular confession to the Priest.

fin unto God, but to confess sin unto men: but before I handle this, take
these two Cautions.

Chrysostom, that we should go to men to reveal our shame, but go to God;
unless the case be very urgent, that by all the means ye can use, ye cannot
ease your selves, then are ye to confess to men in that case.

and confess his sin to every body, it may be some would jear and reproach
him: Chrysostom in his Homily on Dives and Lazarus, has this expression, If
thou confess thy sin in some men's ears, they will cast thy sins in thy face in
a way of scorn: some men would deal with you as the Pharisees did with Judas;
Judas when he was smitten in conscience for sin, came to the Pharisees and said
to them, Here is your money again, for I have sinned in betraying innocent
blood: say they, What is that to us? look you to it, for what you have done:
so, men will express no pity, and will give no counsel: therefore there must
be wisdom in revealing of your sins to other men. Thus you have the Cautions
prescribed unto you.

Now in what Cases is it meet that men should confess their sins to men as
well as unto God? I shall resolve this to you in four Cases.

David fell into the sin of adultery, and the sin was known among all the
Gentiles, insomuch that the enemies of God spoke ill of Religion, and spoke ill
of God: what does David do to recompense the wrong done to the Church? he makes
the 51. Psalm which was not for his private use only, but for public use;
mark the Title which he does give it. To the chiefmusician, A Psalm of David,
when Nathan the Prophet came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba. This
Psalm was permitted to be sung in the Sanctuary, and in the Temple; that so the
Church of God being scandalized by David's sin, should be satisfied by David's
public confession and repentance: Beloved, this is equitable, because the
Communicants of a Congregation, of a Church, are offended by thy scandal, and
whilst thy sin is notorious they are scrupled: therefore there must be a
public repentance. And besides, public scandal given by any member of the
Church may bring Gods wrath on the Congregation, if the offender does not
confess his sin. Josh. 22.20. Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a
trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of
Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity. Achan sinned alone,
but did not perish alone, the wrath of God fell upon all the Congregation.
Therefore for the good of the Congregation and Church, whereof thou art a
member; if thy sin becomes notorious and known, thou art bound to confess it;
not that every private sin must be confessed to the Church, but in case of
public scandal, thou art then to compensate to the congregation to manifest
thy confession.

Mat. 5.23, 24. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee: leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. If thy brother can say thou have done him wrong, then
go first to thy brother and be reconciled to him. Christ directs that in case
of private and personal wrongs I am bound to make confession, and give all
just satisfaction to the man whom I have wronged. And this Christ advises
further, in Luke 17.3, 4. Take heed to your selves: if thy brother trespass
against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass
against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee,
saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him. Christ does here intimate, that we
are to confess sin to our brother whom we have wronged; to private men,
against whom we have done private injuries; not only to God, but to them. That
is a second Case wherein confession of sin is required to men as well as to God.

Jam. 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that
ye may be healed. That is, when you are in extreme anguish and perplexity of
conscience, thou art troubled for sin, then confess thy sin to other men and
desire them to pray for thee. And in confessing to men, you are not to confess
all your sins, but only that particular sin that most troubles conscience: when
you go to a Physician, you will discover no more to him then where the sore
lies; you are to confess no more to men then that particular evil that
conscience troubles you most for.

Jam. 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, that is, that those that have
been partners together in sin, they should go one to another to confess their
sins: if you have been a drunkard, go to thy companion, and tell him thy
conscience smites thee for thy sin; you that have been unclean together, if
God has troubled thy conscience for thy uncleanness, why go to thy partner in
sin, and tell her God has troubled thy conscience for thy lust, and it may be
this may awaken her conscience too. I remember what I have read of Austine when
God had converted him from frolique russian-like companions; he went to his
companions and told them, Sirs, I have often been drunken with you, I have been
unchaste with you, I have been as bad as you, nay worse then you; therefore I
beseech you leave your wickedness. And it did grieve him, that a woman with
whom he had been unclean, dyed before he was converted, so that he did never
tell her how his conscience smote him for his uncleanness.

Eusebius relates, that John the Evangelist riding a journey, was met by a
company of thieves; amongst whom was a young man their Captain, whom John did
convert, and the story says, that this young man now converted by John's
wholesome counsel, went to all his fellow thieves, and advised them in the name
of Jesus Christ, that they would not walk in that way of wickedness; he was
troubled in conscience, and therefore gave them earnest counsel, that as they
loved their souls, they would not walk in that way of wickedness; and by that
means many of these great robbers became great Converts. In like manner do ye
to those that know of your drunkenness, of your adultery, etc. confess your
sins, as Demosthenes said to the Harlot, I am not the same man I was: and it
may be, that so their consciences may be awakened, and they startled for it,
and bethink themselves of their wicked courses, and God may work a change in
them, as he has done in you.

There is one use more of this point, and that is for lamentation; to humble
you in the presence of God, that seeing God calls you to confess sin to him,
you have so many palpable and manifest defects in secret confessing of your
sins to God.

Now beloved, there are ten usual defects,

Hildersham has a good note descanting on them words in 1 John 1.8. If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Says
he, If we say that we have no sin, there is no man so gross to say that he
has no sin, for his own practice will belie his tongue: but it is when we come
to God, we do as in effect say so, when we do not know what sin to confess to
God; we are so confused, and heedlesse in observing our own ways, that we do
not know what to confess in prayer unto God, and that the Apostle condemns.

This was the fault of Bellarmine, when his Confessor came unto him, Bellarmine
did protest unto him, that he did not know one sin that he was guilty of to
confess unto the Priest: this was heedlesnesse in him, for if he had observed
his own ways, he would have found sins enough to have confessed: many are
heedlesse that they do not take notice of their own evils. Beloved, this is a
common and an ordinary Defect; there are many when they come to prayer though
they have manifold sins in them, yet they are so confused, so indistinct in the
knowledge of their own ways, that they have only general confessions, Lord we
have sinned, Lord we have done evil in thy sight, but cannot call to mind any
particular sin they have done; Was it never thus with you, that ye did not know
what to bewail to God, and what to lament of in his presence? this is a Defect
that godly men are often plunged into.

Moses, though a good man, yet was faulty in this regard; God commanded him to
go to Egypt to deliver his people, but says Moses, I am not eloquent, I am of
a slow speech; he did complain of a natural defect, but he did not complain of
a spiritual defect, but God did answer all his pleas in Exodus 4.19. And the
Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead
which sought thy life. Verse. 20. And Moses took his wife, and his sons, and set
them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt. So that here God put
his finger upon the sore: Moses complained of the peoples incredulity, of his
own natural infirmity, but Moses did not complain of his slavish fear, that if
he should go to Egypt there were men that would kill him; till God did assure
Moses that those men that sought to kill him were dead, Moses would not go:
here a good man would not confess his slavish fear, that he did fear death;
therefore he would not go on Gods command. Beloved, this is a Defect that does
many times cleave to godly men to leave out their predominant sins and to
confess sins but of an ordinary incussion.

Austin does ingenuously acknowledge this of himself, says he, I did often beg
strength of God against the sin of incontinency, yet had often an
unwillingnesse in my heart that God should hear my prayers, lest I should leave
my sins. Indeed conviction of conscience does force to a confession of sin, yet
the strength of thy depraved affection does make thee hanker after the sin, and
cause a lothnesse to leave it.

of your life, but not the sins of your nature: many men will be large in
confessing the sins of their life, but seldom or never bewail the sins of
nature, that vicious inclination in the heart to sin; very few but David in the
Old Testament, and Paul in the New, who did sufficiently confess original
sin, David in the Old Testament, Psalm. 51. there he begins to bewail the root
of those sins which he was guilty of. So Paul in Romans 7. bewails the body of
sin: many men bewail actual sin, but not habitual sin, but not original sin:
many men bewail bad actions, but never confess unto God their vicious
inclination. This Defect good men many times are guilty of.

Prove. 7.2. Keep my Commandments and live, and my Law as the apple of thine
eye. Now you know, a man that keeps his eye will not only keep his eye from
great blows, but will keep it from small motes, which may put out the eye as
well as a great blow; men should not only take heed of great blows, great
transgressions, but they should take heed of lesser motes, small sins. Now
beloved, good men many times commit those sins that are infamous, that the
natural light of conscience can control them for, why those evils are
complained of, and confessed; but secret evils, wandering thoughts in duties,
vanity of mind, the deadness of the heart, empty of spiritual meditations,
inward distrust; these evils are seldom bewailed and confessed: this is many
times a Defect found in good men, good men are not so apt to confess omission
of good, as commission of evil.



Greenham does take notice of in men's confession of sin; thou will confess thy
pride to God: but if a man should say that thou art proud, thou would be
angry with him; thou will confess thy ways to God, but if men should tell
thee of thy sins, thou would be angry with them: this shows there is much
Defect in your confession.

Pharaoh, Exodus 9.27. And Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said
unto them, I have sinned this time, the Lord is righteous, and I and my people
are wicked. Verse. 34. And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the
thunder were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants.

particular sins, there is a tumult in the conscience; some noise they make in
a prayer, but they know nothing distinctly; but like Nebuchadnezzar in a dream,
he knew he dreamt, but he forgot what his dream was: many men do confess sin,
but they know not what they do confess. You are to be humbled for these
Defects that may be found in you in your confessing sin to God.



Me thinks I hear you ask me, But seeing these Defects are found amongst us,
then in confession of sin unto God, what should we do to be helped against these
Defects? For answer, that ye may not be guilty of these Defects in confession
of sin,

Law, that it may discover sin to you, by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans
3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight: for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Jam. 1.23. For if any be a
hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his
natural face in a glass. Verse. 24. For he beholds himself, and goes his
way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he was. The looking-glass
will show you the blemishes in the face, which the eye cannot else discern:
beloved, get a knowledge of the spiritualnesse of Gods Law, of the extent of
Gods Law, that the Law does reach the inward man, that Gods Law reaches to
those very first motions of the soul, those very inclinations to sin that are
in thine heart, be acquainted with the Law, and by that thou will come to the
knowledge of sin. Physicians have used this remedy to their Patients: In a
Convulsion Fit, they would wish them at that time, to look their face in a
glass, that when the Patient does see what an ugly countenance he has, and
what an ugly posture he is in at that time, he might strive the more against
it: So do you; look your face in a looking-glass to see those deformities that
are within you, this will make you confess, and this will bring you on your
knees.

Prove. 4.25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight
before thee. Verse. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
stablished. Look right before you and ponder the ways of your feet, and that
is the way to have you established and keep you from falling, keep a distinct
knowledge over your hearts and ways.

For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. He means
the sin of Adultery. When David came to prayer, he would put before his eyes
the sin of adultery: now set thy sin before thee, Art thou a drunkard? set thy
drunkenness before thee: art thou an adulterer? set thy uncleanness before
thee: art thou an extortioner? then set thy oppression before thee; set sin
before thine eyes when thou come to prayer, and that is the way to feed thy
spirits with confessions to God in a prayer.

David did when he found his heart dull and sluggish, he would call to mind the
sins of his youth,, Psalm 19. When you see that your hearts grow barren of
spiritual matter through heedlesnesse, go then and ransack your old ways,
what did you 20 years ago, let conscience gawle you for that, that so you may
have matter enough to confess unto God. This rule does not appertain to
Christians under trouble of conscience but only to those Christians that are
sluggish and barren of any spiritual complaints and confessions in Gods
presence.

A word of Use further for direction.

If it be so, that Justified persons are bound to make secret confessions unto
God: then,

First, Christians keep a heedfulnesse over your hearts, that you may not let
sin go unconfest; make conscience and be heedfull that sin committed by you may
not be unconfest: a sin unconfest as to the apprehension may be unpardoned; a
sin unconfest cannot be mourned for, cannot be actually repented of. Observe,
that a less sin unrepented of, may damn a man, when a greater sin that is
confessed to God may be pardoned: if you compare Saul and David together, 1 Samuel
15.9. But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep and of the
oxen, and of the fatlings, and of the lambs, and all that was good, and would
not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile, and refuse, that they
destroyed utterly. Saul did there commit a far less sin then David's was, to
wit, adultery, Saul did only for his private use spare the fattest of his sheep
and oxen, it was little or nothing in comparison of David's sin, yet behold
David was pardoned and Saul damned, David had his sin pardoned and Saul not;
why? David did confess sin, and Saul not: Saul did delude the reproof of
Samuel, and told him the people did it, and not I; Saul's sin unconfest ruined
him: therefore take heed of letting sin go unconfest, a less sin unconfest may
damn a man, when a greater sin that is confessed may not damn him.

A second Direction is this, Depend not upon the most in larged and the most
sensible confessions that ever you have made to God, suppose thou have poured
out thy soul to God, thou art never the better: thou O man when thou do
confess sin, thou do but like a beggar show God thy sores, thy botches, and
scabs, do not depend upon your confessions; as you must not depend on your
righteousness, so not upon confession of your sinfulness. It is worth your
observation, Saul pursuing David like a Partridge over the mountains, David cut
off the lap of his garment; says David, well, I have sinned; and Saul, thou
art more righteous then I: when Nathan came to David, David said, I have
sinned, and Nathan told him, the Lord has taken away thy iniquity: Saul said,
I have sinned, yet the Prophet Samuel told him, the Lord has taken away thy
Kingdom: here is not the same result, for David had his sin taken away, and
Saul had his Kingdom taken away, therefore do not depend on your confessions.

Thirdly, Take this Direction, that when you confess sin to God and are the
most vile in your own eyes, you are then most amiable in Gods eye: Cant. 1.6.
Look not upon me because I am black, because the sun has looked upon me. The
Church there confessed to Christ I am black and not comely, she was sunburned as
she thought. I, but in verse. 8. My Love, my Dove, thou art the fairest among
women: Christ looked on her as the fairest among women: so likewise in Cant.
2.14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of
the stairs: let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is
thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. When the poor Dove the Church lay in
a hole under the stairs bewailing and mourning like a Dove for her sinfulness,
O says Christ to her, let me see thy face, and let me hear thy voice. Christ
does love to hear the moan-makings of his people, Jer. 31.18. I have surely
heard Ephraim, bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; thou art the Lord my God. It is worth your notice, Job when he was
afflicted by God in having botches and boyles all over his body, it is said,
Job made his complaint to God, chap. 7. verse. 20. I have sinned, what shall I
do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? I have sinned says Job, but what does
God say of Job? in all this Job sinned not, Job 1.22. In all this Job sinned
not, nor charged God foolishly. It was not spoken absolutely he sinned not, but
the meaning is he sinned not so as other men sinned. The more you bewail,
condole, and confess sin to God, and are by reason thereof vile in your own
eyes, the more amiable you are in Gods eyes. And thus I have done with the
first part of the Text, I said I will confess my transgression unto the Lord.

I have been all this while in these Sermons on David's Act, I said I will
confess my transgression unto the Lord: I am now come to Gods Act, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Thou forgavest, etc. that is, not only my
sin, but the malignity of it, with all its aggravations, all its heinous
circumstances: Now here touching Gods Act, two things are to be observed.

First, The manner of bringing in this Act of God, the Psalmist does not bring
it in thus, with an Ergo, I said I will confess my transgression to the Lord,
therefore he forgave the iniquity of my sin, but it is with an et, a
conjunctive particle, and not a causall, I confess, (...) and thou forgavest.

Secondly, Observe this further, the manner of the expression, the confession
was in purpose and intention, but the forgiveness is actual: observe from
hence this note, That God does recompense the very gracious purposes as well as
performances of his own servants; God forgave, but David did but purpose to
confess; I said I will confess, and thou forgavest. O beloved, what a God do
ye serve! your masters are not pleased with your purposes to work, if you do
not labor with your hands; you serve a God which takes will for work; God
takes purposes if they be real, for performances. The Lord does recompense not
only gracious performances, but also gracious purposes in his own servants.

The Use or corollary from hence is this:

That wicked men look to it, God will not only punish their wicked practices,
but their wicked purposes: Did thou ever purpose to be unclean, and it may be
thou wast interrupted, that thou could not have secrecy and opportunity? why,
God will punish thee for thy purpose, though thou never do act it. Beloved,
it is not only what evil thou have done, but what evil thou would have
done: Would not thou have been an oppressor, if the world would not have
cried shame on thee? would not thou have been a drunkard, if the world would
not brand thee with infamy? God will punish wicked men for evil purposes.

Further to godly men, Thou can not mourn, but would thou mourn? thou can
not confess sin, but would thou confess sin? thou can not break thy
heart, but would thou break thy heart? God looks on your purposes with
approbation, as well as your practices.

Thirdly, God does not only look on wicked men's purposes to punish them for
them, and good men's purposes to reward them for them; but God does look on the
purposes of devils to do hurt, for to prevent them: A notable passage, Luke 21.
Peter, Peter, says Christ, Satan has desired to winnow thee like wheat, I
have (actually) prayed: the hurt was only the devils purpose, and the devils
desire; but when the temptation was but in the desire, then says Christ, I
have actually prayed for thee. O fall down and admire the condescension of
Christ, he does crown your purposes and endeavors, and desires: I said I will
confess my transgression, and thou have forgiven the iniquity of my sin.

I confessed, and God forgave. You have frequent testimonies that inculcate
this on your thoughts, Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not
prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. Job 33.27.
He looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which
was right, and it profited me not, Verse. 28. He will deliver his soul from
going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

In the handling of this point, there are these particulars which I shall
dispatch.

First, What is meant by forgiving sin; To explicate this, there are three
things which are needful to be spoken to.



Isaiah 38.17. Behold for Peace I had great bitterness, but thou have in love
to my soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast all my
sins behind thy back. In Scripture to cast a thing behind the back, signifies
to forget and disregard it; so wicked men cast Gods Covenant behind their
backs; that is, they do not mind it, they will not obey it: so when God is
said to cast sin behind his back, he will take no notice of it so as to
punish it.

Micah 7.17. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will
subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea.
It is an allusion unto Gods great Judgment on Pharaoh and the Egyptian Host,
when they pursued the Israelites, they came to the Red Sea, and thinking to go
through as the Israelites did, the Sea fell in upon them, and they were drowned
in the bottom of the Sea: so says God, I will deal with sin as I dealt with
Pharaoh you shall never be troubled more with them, not unto condemnation, you
need not fear the rising of sin again, against you; sin is not like unto light
weeds in the Sea, that will swim of themselves, but Lead that is cast into the
Sea, the allusion holds here, Exodus 15.10. Thou did blow with the wind, the
Sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters. God when he pardons
sins he casts them into the bottom of the Sea, it lies like lead, it can never
rise of it self in a way of condemnation to a justified man, to a pardoned
sinner.

Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, etc. Isa. 43.25, I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake. This is a metaphor taken from men, when a
man is not able to pay his debt, the Creditor does cancel the Bond, blots out
the writing and breaks the Seal, that nothing shall prevail in Law against this
poor man. So the Lord does cancel the bond, and blots out the writing, that
neither sin, nor the Devil shall have any process against him in a way of
condemnation.

Job 10.14. If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou will not, or, acquit me
(not set me free) from mine iniquity. Acquitting is equivalent to a term of
Law, giving you a discharge and dismission of the Court; the Lord in pardoning
of sin, gives a man a legal discharge, that no proceedings of heaven shall go
against him.

Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered. Beloved, if pardon of sin had consisted in the removing of sin, we had
been undone, pardon of sin does not consist in the removal of all sin out of a
man, but in the covering of sin; God will hide sin, that the fierceness of his
wrath, and the Eye of his indignation shall not look on it to condemnation. It
is the same word that refers to garments, (...). If a man has a Mole or Wenne
on his body which his garment covers, these infirmities are not seen by men.
Beloved, God covers sin as with a garment, to wit, with the long robe of
Christ's righteousness, sin is covered in thee by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

Psalm. 51.2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin;
he means there in reference to justification, not Sanctification; That pardon
of sin presents a man to God without spot, or wrinckle, or blemish, or any such
thing, that though you have many spots in regard of your sanctification, yet
you have no spot in regard of your justification.

Jer. 31.34. For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin
no more. It is an allusion to the Scapegoat, which was to bear the sins of the
people on his head to carry them into the land of forgetfulness; Thus the Lord
that remembers all things, that God is said graciously not to remember the sins
of his people, not to remember them so, as to damn them for them, he will
forget your iniquities and remember them no more.

Romans 4.8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. It is a
word drawn from Merchants, when they have a friend that owes them money that
they care not whether they receive or no, they do not put it down in their
Book. God will not impute sin, he will not set sin on the score, he will not
put sin to thine account, though sin be in thee, yet it is not imputed to thee.
Thus these names or expressions do something illustrate the nature of
forgiveness.

In the next place, to enquire how many ways a sin may be said to be forgiven.

First, in regard of Gods decree, and so sin is forgiven, before all Worlds,
because God intended to deliver the Elect, that such a remnant and number of
men should have sin pardoned.

Secondly, Sin is said to be forgiven when the Lord does manifest forgiveness
of sin.

Thirdly and chiefly, Sin is said to be forgiven, when the eternal guilt and
condemnation due for that sin is taken away, when God does expiate or take off
the guilt of sin, in that properly lies the nature of forgiveness.

In the third place what is considered in sin, when God is said to forgive it;
this is worth your understanding.

Three things are to be considered in sin.

First, the blot and pollution of sin; and this cannot be taken away by pardon,
the sin is a sin, though it be pardoned, the pollution of sin is not taken away
by pardon, the blot remains.

Secondly, There is considered the desert of sin, it deserves damnation, and
the wrath of God; though it be pardoned, this is not taken away.

Third thing considered is this, the Ordination or appointment of a sinner to
eternal punishment; and this is fully taken away by pardon, when God does give
remission of sin, he does take away all obligation to wrath, death, hell, and
damnation; and this is properly the nature of forgiveness of sin, it is a
gracious and a free act of God, whereby he acquits a sinner from eternal guilt
and eternal punishment, that is due to all his sins in an eternal punishment,
God does not acquit a pardoned man from external punishments, God may pardon
thy sin, yet he may punish thee externally for thy sins, but not eternally;
And thus much for the first particular.

I confessed and thou forgavest.

For answer in the general, it is not every kind of confession that carries a
connection of pardon, Saul confessed his sin, but God did not take away his sin,
but took away his kingdom. It is not every kind of confession that has a
connection with forgiveness of sin, but that confession which has connection
with pardon of sin, it has six concomitants joined with it.

Psa. 32.21. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes notiniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guil; Guile is not there taken largely in opposition
to hypocrisy, but for a sinful reserve of sin, when a man will not be free
and open in confessing his sin unto God; David would freely and fully open
himself and confess his evils unto God; that confession that is a free and
ingenuous confession, it has pardon of sin annexed to it the confessions of
them that roll sin under the tongue, as a sweet morsel that they would not
part with, have not justification entailed on them; those confessions only are
connected with forgiveness that are ingenuous and free.

Psalm. 38.18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin:
True confession of sin is rather a voice of mourning, then a voice of words, it
has ever a sorrow and grief of heart joined with it; That prescription, that
God gave to the Leper in the Law, that he should be cleansed from his leprosy,
and in Levit. 13.45. And the Leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be
rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
shall cry Unclean, unclean, is worth your notice, he was to cry twice, I am
unclean, I am unclean; there was his confession, but what was joined with his
confession before he could be cleansed? Two things he must do, First, he must
rent his clothes, to note, that God must have brokennesse of heart, and sorrow
of heart joined with confession of sin. Secondly, he must cover his lip, to
note shame that must be mingled with his sorrow, to show, that to us that have
an unclean leprosy of sin in us, the crying I am unclean, unclean, is not
enough; but there must be the renting of the heart, and shame of face; these
must be mingled with those confessions that have a connection with forgiveness.

Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sin shall not prosper, but who so confesses
and forsakes them shall have mercy. Confession is there joined with a
forsaking of sin, in case mercy be obtained. One calls confession a spiritual
vomit, you know a man that is burdned in the stomach, would be willingly rid of
that load on his stomach that does oppress nature; a man that does confess
sin truly would as willingly be rid of sin on his Conscience, as a man that is
sick at his Stomach would be rid of that burden which does oppress it, such a
confession has pardon annexed with it.

Ezra 9. Neh. 9.

Psalm. 38.18. compared with Ps. 39.1. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will
be sorry for my sin. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with
my tongue. David's confessing sin did work in him a holy awe, and a holy care
to take heed of those sins he had confessed, to confess sin, and to be bold and
adventurous to run into sin, has not such a connection with pardon.

David confessed sin, and his confession quickened Prayer, Daniel confessed sin,
and confession quickened supplication; Daniel 9.20. And while I was speaking,
and praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, etc.
Beloved, when confessions of sin are to prayer, as the whetstone to the knife;
when you sharpen your affections and put a keen edge on your hearts in prayer:
this is an evident token that such a confession has a connection with
forgiveness of sin. So much for the second particular.







First, In regard of the commmand, God does command us to confess sin; Now no
command of God that he would have us do, can derogate from his free grace,
therefore surely this command can no way eclipse the freeness of grace in what
he will do.

Secondly, In regard of means as a way to get pardon: God is the efficient
cause, and Christ is the meritorious cause of pardon; but yet confession of sin
is that cause which Logicians call (Causa sine qua non) without which pardon of
sin shall never be obtained, Causa sine qua non.
I confessed and thou forgavest.

Repent that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3. No blotting out of sin
without repentance; there must be a sorrow and a bewailing of sin before it can
be pardoned; that Christ was broken from sin, it will no ways exempt you from
being broken for sin; though Christ was a man of sorrows, and all in a way of
satisfaction, yet you must shed tears for sin in a way of contrition and
humiliation.

much for the third particular, that there is a connection between Gods act of
forgiving sin and our confessing sin.

I now come to answer the Objections.









But Positively, though God does know our sins, yet we are bound to coonfesse
our sins upon many solid grounds; As,



Psalm. 38. verse. 18.

Bernard, is enjoined by God for this reason; that thou might magnify the
greatness of grace, and see the greatness of sin; if a man should never see
his sin, he could never magnify Gods grace and pardoning mercy.

never prize Christ, nor put an estimate on his merits and blood, when a man
can confess his evil, with all its heinous circumstances, this does greaten
the merits of Christ.

Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear
when thou judge: it confesses Gods Mercy, and this Paul does, 1 Timothy 1.13.
who was before a Blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I obtained
mercy, etc. He confessed his sin that so he might greaten the abundance of Gods
grace and love.

Job 32.18. For I am full of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me,
verse. 19. Behold, my Belly is as Wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst
like new bottles: verse. 20. I will speak that I may be refreshed, I will open
my lips and answer. A godly man is full of matter, of confession to God, and
like a vessel ready to burst til he can vent himself by confession in Gods
presence; this is the answer to the first Objection.

Elihu did in Job 5.37. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what
receives he of thine hand? verse. 8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man. Therefore if God
receives no injury by my sin, what need I confess sin to God? Beloved, this is
an objection that the Antinomians make: For answer,

lies to take all glory from God, to pull God out of heaven, it is no thanks
to thee that God is never the worse for thy sin.





I now come to the Use, which is for trial, to put you on a diligent enquiry,
how you may know whether God has brought you into a pardoned estate, and has
forgiven the iniquity of your sin; how may it be known whether God has
forgiven you your iniquities? There are ten ways to discover this, I shall
divide them into this order, there are six Concomitants, that do attend a
person in a pardoned estate, and four characters laid down in Scripture of a
man whose sin is forgiven him. First, the Concomitants or those things in the
Scripture which do attend or accompany a person whose sin is forgiven.

Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and
will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it.

Interpreters do give this sense of that promise, you read of two things, a
white Stone, and a new name written in that stone, the white stone, it is an
expression, borrowed from the practice of the Gentiles, who in their Judicature
did use a white stone; If a malefactor was condemned, and had the sentence of
death past upon him, the^e was given him a black stone in token of
condemnation; but if a man had a white stone given him, it was a token of
absolution or pardon. In allusion to this, Christ does hoar promise pardon of
sin, which is meant by the white stone; but what must be written on this stone?
there must be written on this white stone, a new Name, that is, renovation, the
renewing of the heart: so that if so be, the nature of a man be not renewed,
the sin of a man is not pardoned; therefore do not boast of having your white
stone, if there be a blank on that stone, if there be nothing written on that
stone, if holiness be not written on that stone, pardon of sin has renewing
of nature to attend it.

Luke 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are many are forgiven,
for she loved much. It is a Concomitant that did attend her pardon, much was
forgiven her, therefore she loved much.

I adknowledged my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Mat 18.35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your
heart forgive not every one his brother their trespasses: It is in the Lords
prayer annexed, forgive us our trespasses, Mat. 6. So that forgiving of other
men is in Scripture as an Attendant or Concomitant of Gods forgiving us, Put on
as the Elect of God, says the Apostle, bowels of mercy, forbearing and
forgiving one another.

Act. 5.^1. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. There they
are linckt together, to give repentance and remission of sin. It is a Question
among the Schoolmen, Whether God by his absolute power can forgive a man his
sin, if a man does not repent him of his sin. There are few of them that do
incline to the affirmative, because God has expressly tied himself in the Word,
that pardon must have repentance for sin.

Sixthly, Forgiveness of sin, is accompanied with holy endeavors for the
mortification of sin: he that has the guilt of sin pardoned, labors to have
the power of sin destroyed; therefore in Scripture pardoning mercy and subduing
grace, they are both joined together, Mic. 7.19. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the Sea: there is subduing grace as well as
pardoning mercy. Beloved, if God pardon sin, there are real endeavors in a
soul to have the power of sin taken away. Indeed many men in the world do lay
claim to pardon, who never have endeavors and holy pursuits after
mortification: many have counterfeit mortification, who play with their sins
like Fencers; which it may be give them a touch, a slight blow, but do not
fight like warriers, either to kill or be killed: but godly men do not play
with their sins, but do with their lusts as a warrier, they do conflict with
lusts on these terms, that either we must kill them, or they will kill us. Many
counterfeit Christians who do lay claim to real pardon, have but counterfeit
mortifications: I may sitly resemble such men as these to the Persians, who had
one Festival annually where they used this custom, that they labored to
find out all their venomous creatures, as Snakes, Serpents, and the like: and
one day in the year they would kill all which they found, but afterward they
let them increase. Many men in some solemn performances to God, will make great
ado of killing their lusts, but afterward they let them increase and live
again. And thus much for the six Concomitants that do attend a person in a
pardoned state.

The next is, the Characters to be given of a pardoned man, of a man whose sin
is forgiven; I will name but four Characters of a pardoned sinner.

Micah, the Prophet brings in the Churches crying out in the extolling of God,
Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin! a
pardoned man admires God, because his grace is free, and his bounty is great:
and a pardoned man abaseth self, because he sees sin exceeding sinful, Nehem.
9.

it cost Christ much blood to expiate the guilt of that sin; it cost him many
tears to destroy the power of that sin; now that sin which he has smarted for,
and Christ has suffered for, he will not easily commit. Psalm. 38. when the
Psalmist said, he would declare his iniquity: then in Psalm. 39. he says, I
will take heed to my ways, as if he should have said, I am sorry for my sin,
and the Lord has forgiven me mine iniquity: but here is the result of it, I
will take heed to my ways, and of my sinning another time: there is no man
that knows his sin to be pardoned, that can easily run into the commission of
it again. It is an excellent expression in the book of Job 10.14. If I sin,
then thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine iniquity. If I sin,
it is not here spoken absolutely and simply; for what man is he that lives and
sins not? but if I sin as I am charged, that I should sin murmuringly and
maliciously against God, and I will persist in my sin, says Job, If I sin as
they charge me, what follows? then God will not take away mine iniquity, he
will not pardon my sin: as Job said of himself, you may say of your selves; if
I sin obstinately, and pertinaciously, God will not pardon: thou have been
wiccked, and thou will be so; thou have been profane, and thou will be so;
This is inconsistent with a pardoned state.



Psalm. 32. some do take guile in a particular sense, others extend it more
largely, as a comprehensive word equivalent to sincerity; he is a man in whose
spirit is no guile, an upright man. Thus much for the use of Trial.

I now come to answer the Objections.



I shall resolve this Objection in these four particulars.







First, There is a judicious sorrow, and this consists in an apprehension in
the Judgment, that sin is the greatest evil in the world, and most to be
lamented, branded, opposed, and resisted: Divines do place more strength and
height of grace in having an indignation stirred up in the understanding
against sin, touching the evil of sin; this is more then to shed a few tears
for sin. Now if thou have a judicious sorrow to apprehend sin to be a great
evil, though it has not vent at the eye, yet this is godly sorrow for sin. A
man that has the Toothache, he will cry out and complain more, and shed more
tears happily for the exquisite pain of the Toothache, then he will do in the
burning Fever; yet ask him which he had rather have, he will tell you the
Toothache: the reason is, because the pestilentiall Fever is more hazard ous
to life: so had you rather lose your children, then lose the sense of Gods
favor. Which had you rather have, afflictions in the world, or willingly
commit sin against God?

The judgment of a man, if he be a regenerate man, tells him he had rather a
thousand times lose the dearest relation, then the manifestation of Gods love
unto his soul; he had rather endure the greatest affliction, then to venture
willingly on the least sin.

David's sorrow, he had no rest in his bones by reason of his sin: yet mark,
when David lost Absalom, O what a fit of sorrow was he in, crying out, O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my
son, my son. We do not read of such cries, O my soul, my soul, O what shall I
do for thee my soul! because the sorrow was sensitive, the loss was sensitive.

Now beloved, Gods people do express more sensitive sorrow for outward crosses
then for inward corruptions. A late Author does quote an instance out of
Jerome, a godly woman lost her children, and she wept even to death, yet she
could not weep so for her sin: the reason is, because things of sense do more
affect a man then things of faith; though there be more evil in one sin then
in a thousand afflictions.

And thus much for the relief of a troubled sinner in answer to the first
Objection.



Micah 7.18. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will
subdue our iniquities etc. the promise follows, I will subdue thine iniquity,
says God, be not troubled, I have pardoned thee.

take mortification to be that which it is not: as first it may be a godly
Christian does extend mortification beyond its bounds, as thus, it may be thou
do extend mortification not to a gracious suppression of sin, but to a
total extirpation of sin, and think that because sin is not removed, it is
not subdued. Now this is a mistake: mortification does not extend so far, but
it extends to an abolition of the dominion of sin; not of the being of sin:
sin will be in the heart. As the tree in Dan. 4.14. He cried aloud, and said
thus: Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and
scatter his fruit; let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from
his branches; nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth: So sin
in the heart, the branches are cut off by mortification, the luxuriant
buddings, and blossomings, and breakings forth of sin, they are cut off; but
the stump, the root of the original sin, from which all sin flows and grows
that remains. Dan 7.12. As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their
dominion taken away; yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time:
Though thou be a mortified man, yet mortification does only take away the
dominion of sin, and not the life of it; for it is prolonged for a season.

Again, thou do mistake the nature of mortification, when thou do account,
that because of the irritations of sin, therefore thou have not the
mortifications of sin. Beloved, lusts may be irritated and stirred up in a
mortified heart.





I answer, That it is an evident token that Christ has dispossessed the soul of
the power of sin, or taken away the power of sin, seeing the Devil does labor
to possess you so often with the guilt of sin in a way of temptation. Observe,
if a man did lie under the power of sin, the Devil would not suggest to that
man the guilt of sin; because then it would awaken a man's conscience, and make
a poor sinner look after Jesus Christ, and after heaven, and pardon. Therefore
a sinner under the power and dominion of sin, shall not be troubled under the
Devil about the guilt of sin. The Devil had rather play at small game then
not to game: if he cannot damn a man by keeping him under the power of sin, he
will terrify him by troubling him with the guilt of sin.

Deuteronomy. 22.23. If a Damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and
a man find her in the City and lie with her, Verse. 24. Then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of the City, and ye shall stone them with stones
that they dye: the damsel because she cried not being in the City, and the
man, because he has humbled his neighbors wife: so shall thou put away evil
from among you. Verse. 25. But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field,
and a man force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her
shall dye. All the prevalency of sin over thee which is unwilling, God will
charge that on the Devil, and account thee guiltless, when it has not thy
consent; when thou labourest to suppress vicious corruptions of the heart, God
does hold thee guiltless, though the Devil may labor to commit a spiritual
rape upon thee. It is a text that I have made use of in the 11. chapter of
Leviticus, Divines make great use of it for the comforting of troubled
consciences, in the 33. verse. And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them
falls, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean: and ye shall break it. Verse. 36.
Nevertheless, a fountain or pit wherein there is plenty of water, shall be
clean: but that which touches their carcass shall be unclean. The
significancy of this Law was this, that if sin do fall upon a pit of water,
into a standing pool, because it has no motion, it cannot purge it self from
the filth cast into it, that is unclean: but if an unclean thing be cast into
the fountain of water, that cannot be unclean, for it has a principle in it to
purge and free it self from these unclean things that are cast into it, to
show, if sin be in your heart as an unclean thing in a fountain of water, that
by reason of your continual motion unto God, your running unto God, you have a
principle in you to empty your selves, and to purge your selves, and clear your
selves from those things which the Devil does defile you with, now you are not
unclean, and this should greatly comfort you.



For answer, First in the general, know your case is dangerous, but yet it is
not desperate.

Paul, Act. 26.9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. Paul sinned, and he had his doubts
before conversion, even as after conversion: yet this sin troubled him not, he
thought he was bound to do many things, etc. so may thy conscience be so far
disordered, as to think thou do well when thou do ill, Jonah 4.9. And God
said to Jonah, do thou well to be angry for the Gourd? and he said, I do
well to be angry, even unto death. Could Jonah's conscience smite him for his
anger when he said he did well? Lord how far will a godly man go toward the
suburbs of hell if God shall let him alone! I do well, says Jonah, to be
angry, even unto death.

see sin, he can never mourn for it; he may live and dye in a sin that his
judgment is not convinced of to be a sin: thus the godly in the Old Testament
lived in the sin of Polygamie, marrying of many wives, they knew not it was a
sin, had they took liberty to take as many wives as they would. A godly man
that holds an error, conscience may never smite him for it, because his
judgment is mistaken; his judgment thinks he holds the truth, and therefore
conscience cannot smite him for holding an error.

David could not be so ignorant of Gods Law that lying with another man's wife
was a sin, yet David did continue nine months at least without remorse for it;
when Nathan came and reproved him, then said he, I have sinned, I have sinned.
O beloved, if God does but let a sinners conscience alone, though he be a good
man, yet he may continue for a long time under a known sin, and conscience not
work remorse or trouble in him.

David, at one time his heart smote him for but the appearance of an evil, yet
at another time, his conscience did not smite him for murdering Vriah. Again at
another time David's conscience smote him but for vainglory in numbering the
people: it was only vainglory that he would please himself in a mustered Army;
yet at another time David's conscience did not smite him for adultery. O
beloved, how will a man's conscience lie asleep, and not trouble him for an
evil if God lets him alone!

his wits a work to hide his sin, then his conscience on work to check him for
sin. To give you an instance for this, it is plain in the case of David, David
committed adultery with Bathsheba, but he did not put his conscience on work to
check him for his sin, but he did put his wits on work to hide the sin. Four
projects David had to hide the sin:

First, He sent for Vriah Bathsheba's husband, that so Vriah might come and lie
with his wife, that so he might hide David's uncleanness, 2 Samuel 11.

Secondly, He made Vriah drunk, and so thought that surely when he was drunk,
that drunkenness would provoke him with a desire to go to his own house.

Thirdly, He did plot Vriah's death, that so there might be no clamor on his
part for the defilement of his wife.

Lastly, David would have fathered his plot on providence, for David himself
had plotted the death of Vriah; mark David's project: a good man did put his
wits on work and made shifts to hide his sin; yet all this while did not put
conscience on work to check him for his sin. O how near the suburbs of hell may
a godly man go, and yet go to heaven!

may not smite him for those very sins that a heathen man by the light of a
natural conscience may be ashamed of, and this is clear in the case of
Abraham. Genesis 20.9. Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What have
thou done unto us, and what have I offended thee, that thou have brought on me,
and on my kingdom a great sin? thou have done deeds unto me, that ought not to
be done. For this falsehood Abraham's conscience never smote him, yet a Heathen
by the light of a natural conscience rebuked Abraham for it. Abimelech, a
Heathen, did tell Abraham, Thou have done deeds that ought not to be done.

And thus I have gone very far in answering this Objection. And I have done
it for to stay the troubles of a perplexed conscience; not to make any man
presumptuous: these six steps are near going down to the shambles of death, yet
it is possible that a pardoned sinner may have his conscience thus deluded and
out of office.

Me thinks I hear many a presumptuous heart allege, if this be true, that you
say a pardoned sinner may go thus near hell, and yet come to heaven: if good
men may sin a sin, and yet conscience never trouble them, then I hope that I
may have my sin pardoned as well as the best.



Lev. 13.10. And the Priest shall see him, and be hold, if the rising be white
in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick raw flesh in
the rising, etc. Here were two symptoms of the plague of Leprosy, the growing
of white hair in the s^re, then, raw flesh in the rising: the Hebrew Rabbis do
understand two things by this Law,

First, The turning of the hair white in the sore, they note to be continuance
in sin, living from youth to old age in sin, till the hair be white and gray.

Secondly, There was to be quick and raw flesh in the rising, they understand
it to be adventurousnesse in a sinner to commit sin against a raw, and a
gawled, and a rebuked conscience. Another man might have scabs all over his
flesh, yet he was not to be unclean. Verse. 13. Then the Priest shall consider:
and behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him
clean that has the plague, it is all turned white: he is clean. Yet if a man
had rawnesse in the sore, he was to be unclean: to note, that a man may have
many sins, yet not be unclean in Gods sight: but if he sin against the very
dictates of conscience, and be bold and adventurous against the gawlings of a
perplexed conscience he shall be unclean.

Saul did 1 Samuel 16.14. But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. Verse. 17. And Saul said unto his
servants, Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me. When an
evil spirit troubled him, that was his conscience, Saul called for music to
still the voice of conscience.

Thirdly, Good men care not for jocond company, Mar. 16.18. For John had said
unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. Verse. 21. And
when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his
lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee, etc. Good men dare not
avoid a reproving, a searching ministry: as Felix did, Act. 24.25. And as he
reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled,
and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have convenient season I will
call for thee.

He could not endure to lie under a gawling Ministry, godly men do not thus; if
a man be pardoned, though he has sin, yet he is glad when the Ministry does
arowse and awaken his conscience.

Fourthly, A pardoned sinner dares not content himself under a dawbing and a
flattering Ministry, that will sew pillowes under his elbowes, and say peace
when there is none, Jer. 23.13. And I have seen folly in the Prophets of
Samaria, they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err. Verse.
14. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem, an horrible thing; they
commit adultery, and walk in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto me
as Sodom, and the inhabitants of them as Gomorrah. Chap. 8.11. For they have
healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace,
when there is no peace.

Fifthly, They dare not run into the crowd of employments, that so they might
forget the gawlings of conscience, as Cain did, Genesis 4. Cain to put off the
troubles of his conscience, would fall to buying, building, and drowning
himself in the world, that so he might hear no more. A pardoned sinner does not
thus, but if conscience suggests guilt, he prays to God that conscience might
speak thoroughly, and home to the heart.

Sixthly, A godly man does not wallow and continue in a custom of sin, that so
custom in his sin, might take away conscience of his sin. Ephesians. 4.19. Who
being past feeling, have given themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. Wicked men give themselves over to a custom in
sin, that so they might not have conscience to smite them for sin. They are
like a Smiths dog, a strange dog that comes to a Smiths forge, cannot abide to
have the sparkles of fire fly about him; but that dog that has always been
accustomed to the shop, can sleep still on, and it never troubles him: wicked
men are like Smiths dogs used to the shop, though flashes of hell fire are cast
about them, yet they sleep still and are not awakened; but godly men do not
make use of custom in sin to lull them asleep in their sweet lusts.

Peter weep, he went out and wept bitterly, a rebuke to David from the Prophet,
made him cry out, Lord I have sinned. A reprobate conscience is not so easily
put into office, it does not reprove him, there must be much ado and great
labor taken before his dead conscience will hear the rebukes of the Word,
there is more a do with a wicked man to have his conscience in office then
with a godly man.

Ahaz was troubled by affliction from God, yet conscience never troubled him,
for he did yet more wickedly against God.

heaven cannot make him startle.

And thus I have run hastily over the answering of this third Objection, I have
done it merely for a relief of a perplexed Conscience, thus I have done with
this doctrine, I confessed, and thou forgavest, Thou for gave, to forgive says
Museulus, is a word of favor or grace, not merit, or sanctification; thou
forgavest, It notes pardon of sin is not vouchsafed to men by way of debt, but
of gift; I confessed and thou forgavest, thou forgavest what? Thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin, the sin of my sin, Interpreters have various
apprehensions touching the meaning of these words, what it is for God to
forgive the iniquity of my sin. I will bring it to a two fold channel: Some
there are that by iniquity, understand the punishment of sin; I acknowledged my
sin, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin; That is, thou forgavest the
punishment of my sin, the reason of that interpretation is because in the
Hebrew language the same word (...) that signifies iniquity, signifies
punishment, and therefore they understand the iniquity of sin, the punishment
of sin; but Interpreters generally go against this interpretation, for usually
the word is taken for sin it self; Again, the whole scope of the Psalm is not
in seeking the outward punishment to be forgiven; but the forgiveness of sin
is referred to eternal guilt.

Thirdly, Here is in the Text a Selah, which is a note of attention, a note of
admiration annexed to this expression, Thou have forgiven, etc. surely that
would be no wonder to God to pass by an external punishment, for that he
might do to men whose sins were never pardoned: What is it for God to forgive
the iniquity of sin? I answer, the iniquity of sin is meant, that God out of
his free grace does not only simply forgive a sin committed, but he forgives
the iniquity of that sin, all the malignity of that sin, all the heinous
aggravated circumstances, that may any ways make it great. A learned Author
having a whole Tract upon this Psalm, has these words, the Psalmist uses this
kind of speech, To forgive the iniquity of sin, that he might teach us,
that it was no light fault that was pardoned, it was sin, and it was the
iniquity of sin, sin upon sin, and sin greatned by many heinous circumstances.
Yet, Behold! the great mercy of God, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin;
thus much for the explaining of the words.

The Observation is this; That such are the riches of Gods pardoning grace,
that he forgives his people not only sin in the general, but their great
sins, such as are clothed with many aggravated and heinous crying
circumstances. Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

In the handling of this point I shall proceed in this method:

First, To prove the point to you by an Induction of particular instances; then
the application of it by several uses. It is a point full of comfort, and
indeed I know not such a Text in all the Bible that speaks of Gods grace in
pardoning aggravated sins sins, more clearly then this Text does.

First of all, I shall give you an induction of instances, that God does not
only forgive his people a bare sin convicted, but God does out of the riches of
his Grace forgive his people those sins that you may call the iniquity of sin,
sins clothed with many heinous aggravated circumstances. The instance of
David, that speaks the words, an instance of Peter, another of Paul, many men
that have sinned against light and love, sinned against cheks of conscience,
and against mercies, are these sins forgiven? Yes, that is my work to prove,
that Gods grace does forgive sins that are clothed with many heinous and
aggravated circumstances to make them great.

First, David.
I begin with David, because it is the instance in hand, will you consider
David's sin, the sin of Adultery, and ransack the bowels of it? you shall find
David's sin clothed with great heinous and aggravated circumstances to make it
great and grievous; and yet for all this that sin forgiven him.

David's sin, if you consider the quality of it, the kind of it. What sin was
it? it was the sin of Adultery, now of all sins, the sin of adultery is an
aggravated sin; there are five circumstances.

1. He that commits adultery, he sins against his own body.

2. It is a wrong to the body of the woman, he is unclean with.

3. It is a wrong to his own wife.

4. It is a wrong to Bathshebas husband.

5. It is a wrong to the child that is illegitimately begotten in adultery,
that an ignominy should be on him when he is born: and therefore that David
should fall to that sin, it was one great sin to aggravate David's sin.

David's person that did commit this sin, He was a King; Now the greater the
person is that sins, the sin is the greater.

Nathan tells him, 2 Samuel 12.8.

David had a wife of his own; nay many wives of his own; that did greaten
David's sin, and so Nathan told him; for says Nathan, There was a poor man who
had but one Lamb, and a rich man that had many Lambs, which killed the poor
man's lamb; his meaning was, that David should commit Adultery with the wife of
that man that had but one wife, when he had many of his own.

David committed this sin, it was when David's Armies, were lying in the fields,
this was done then, which was enough to provoke God to make them turn their
backs upon their enemies.

Vriah.

David should commit many sins to hide that one sin, that was an aggravating
Circumstance, David did commit six sins to hide that one sin of Adultery.

1. He sent for Vriah Bathshebas husband to leave the Army, when they were
storming a place, this might have endangered the whole Army.

2. The Text says that David made Vriah drunk, thinking thereby to make him
go in to his wife.

3. He used a means for Vriah to Father his bastard that he had gotten in
uncleanness.

4. When that plot would not take David did conspire, and consult how to kill
Vriah.

5. David sent a letter by Vriah, wherein Vriah was a messenger of his own
death, unknown to him.

6. When Vriah was dead, the text says, that David said, The sword makes no
difference, for the sword destroys one man as well as another; he laid Vriahs
death on Gods providence only, when it was he himself did plot how he should
be slain: O where was David's conscience all this while, where was David's
conscience, that should thus fall to commit those sins to hide one sin? you
account that a heinous aggravation of sin, when servants have done an ill turn,
if they shall do many ill turns to hide one: this iniquity was found in David
to hide one sin, he fell to commit many.

David's sin, was this, that David should marry Vriahs wife, first killed the
husband, then married the wife.

David continued under this sin with all these aggravations for nine months
together without repentance or remorse of conscience. I do not name this to
boulster any man in sin; I only mention this for a distressed conscience, that
though thy sin be an aggravated and a great sin, clothed with many hideous
and heinous circumstances; yet God did forgive such a sin as that, and
therefore well may David say, The Lord forgave the iniquity of my sin, not
only sin, but the iniquity of sin.

A second instance is of Peter, you all know the story, but it may be you have
not looked narrowly into the circumstances that made Peter's sin to be great. In
Peter's sin,

Peter should deny Christ, when he did make more confident professions that he
would cleave to Christ, then all the other eleven Disciples: when Christ told
them, You shall be offended because of me this night, says Peter, Though all
men should forsake thee, yet will not I, yet none forsaked Christ but Judas and
he, in so shameful a manner as they; this was a great aggravation.

Peter did deny himself to be Peter, Joh. 18.25. And Simon Peter stood and
warmed himself, they said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his
Disciples? He denied, and said, I am not.

Luke 22.57. And he denied him saying, Woman I know him not.

Christ to the Maid, and before all the people, there was an open denial of
Christ. Matthew. 26.69. Now Peter sat without in the Palace, and a Damosel came
unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee, verse. 70. But he denied
before them all, saying, I know not what thou say.

When another Damsel came, and she said, Verily thou art one of them, and a
follower of Jesus Christ, he said a second time, Woman I do not know the man,
Luke 22.

Matthew says he denied with an Oath, Matthew. 26.72. And again he denied with
an oath, I do not know the man; to swear to a lie is abominable.

Peter about an hour after, and says, Of a truth thou art Peter, and to the
man says he, I do not know him.

Peter did not only speak a falsehood, not only swear a lie, but Peter did
curse himself if so be he knew Jesus Christ, the text says he began to curse
as well as to swear, Mar. 14.71. But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I
know not this man of whom ye speak, he wished some direful judgment to befall him
if he knew Jesus Christ: some Interp. think that he did not only curse himself,
but he cursed Jesus Christ to make the people think, that he did not care for
Jesus Christ, therefore did use some execration to curse Jesus Christ. And O
that pardoning grace should reach such a heinous sinner as this was!

A third instance was in Paul, you shall see many circumstances to aggravate
and greaten Paul's sin, Act. 9.10, 11. I verily thought with my self, that I
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which thing
I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, having
received authority from the chief Priests, and when they were put to death, I
gave my voice against them. And I punished them often in every Synagogue, and
compelled them to blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad against them, I
persecuted them even unto strange cities. There are no less then ten
aggravating circumstances to greaten Paul's sin.



many of the Saints.

them into prison.

shut them into prison.

Paul should have learnt to know better things, for there the Apostles were,
and taught the Doctrine of Christ and of Christianity.

Paul's malice, says he, When they were put to death, I gave my voice against
them, Paul's vote was against the Christians to put them to death.

Paul's rage did go against their souls as well as their bodies, for says he,
I did compel them to blaspheme Christ, he labored to damn their souls, as
well as destroy their bodies.

I was exceeding mad against them, he was even mad with rage, and exceeding mad
with rage.

I drove them into strange Cities.

Paul do this to the Saints? says he, I thought with my self to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, there was the person he aimed
at; yet Paul, a man forgiven for all this; for he says, when he aggravates his
sin, in 1 Timothy 11, 12, 13. According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God
which was committed to my trust. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has
enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry,
Who was before a Blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious. But I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantlyin unbeleif. Thus I have done with the
Doctrinall part of my, text, laying down to you an induction of instances; I am
the larger in this, because I know perplexed consciences in trouble of mind
are apt but to greaten their own sins, but can you aggravate it worse then
David, Paul, or Peter could do? yet behold those sins and those aggravated
sins were forgiven by Jesus Christ.

I have four words to say in this Sermon by way of Application, there may be in
such an assembly as this is, whom God might suffer either before conversion or
after conversion, to be unclean with David, to deny Christ with Peter, it may
be to swear to a lie, to swear to a falsehood, nay, it may be engage to a lie,
to a falsehood, O take heed of false Oaths, it may be to persecute the Saints of
Christ with Paul.

Four consolations.

Sabian, a learned Interpreter, gives to my hand which is his instance, Lord my
fault is great, but thy mercies are greater; Beloved, I may say to you, though
thy sin be great, yet the mercy of God is greater then thy sin, and thou can
not have so many circumstances to greaten thy sin, as can be produced in God to
greaten his own mercy: you shall read what he says of himself in Isai. 44.22.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy
sins, return unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Suppose thy sin be not only a
little cloud; but suppose it be a great cloud, a thick cloud says God, I do
not only blot sins out like a little cloud: but I will blot out transgressions
that are like a thick cloud; great sins as well as small does the mercies of
God cover. The Sea can as well cover great rocks as little peble stones, high
mountains as well as mole-hils: Gods mercy is an Ocean that can cover great
enormities as well as lesser infirmities. The glorious body of the Sun in the
heavens, can scatter the greatest mist as well as the thinnest vapor: great
sins as well as small are pardoned by mercy. It is worthy your notice what
Moses speaks of the Mercy-seat, It covered the whole Arc wherein the Law was
kept. To note, says a Divine, though thou art a man or a woman guilty of all
the Laws breach; not only of one command, but of all the commands, yet the
Mercy-Seat Seat covered all the commands; to teach you this, that the mercy of
God can pardon the greatest violation of the Law, therefore that wherein the
Law was kept was all covered by the Mercy Seat.

the blood of Christ says the Apostle cleanses us from all sin, the red Sea
did with as much ease drown Pharaoh and all his host, as it could do a single
man; the red Sea of Christ's blood can drown a whole host and a huge multitude
of sins, as well as a small lust. Though thou have need to shed more tears for
sin in a way of contrition; yet Christ need not shed more blood for sin in a
way of redemption, for he has saved them to the utmost that come unto God by
him: the Apostle triumphing in the 5. of the Romans, he means there, that
there is not so much evil in sin to damn us, as there is good in the gift, in
Christ, for to save, because thy sin is the guilt of a creature, and Christ's
satisfaction is the satisfaction of a God; thy sin, the sin of a finite
creature, and his sufferings, the sufferings of an infinite Mediator.

Mary Magdalen she was a notorious whore, every one that saw her knew she was
a common harlot; there was a woman that was a sinner, the meaning was, she was
an infamous notorious harlot; What is done when Christ converted this woman?
Verily, I say unto you, that where ever the Gospel is preached, it shall be
spoken what this woman has done, throughout the whole world, Christ did wipe
away the infamy of harlotry, he would have renowned the love of that woman to
Christ, he would have it spoken of where ever the Gospel was preached, Luke
7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are many are forgiven, for
she loved much. Christ did delight to wipe away the ignominy of her harlotry in
her after life. It is worthy observation, that four women are reckoned in the
Genealogy of Christ; what women were they? they were women that were infamous,
the best of them did fall into much scandal, and gave much offense, there you
find mention of Thamar, Rachab, Ruth, and Bathsheba, no more in the Genealogy
but these; what were al these women? they were converted women; Begin with
Thamar, she committed uncleanness with her Father in law, an infamous woman,
as you have the story in Genesis 38.18. And he said, What pledge shall I give
thee? and she said, thy Signet, and thy Bracelets and thy Staff, that is in
thine hand; and he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.
Then you read of Rachab, a common harlot, in Heb. 11.31. By faith the Harlot
Rachab perished not with them that believed not when she had received the spies
with peace, Matthew. 1.5. And Salmon begat Boos of Rachab, etc. A third woman
mentioned in the Genealogy is Ruth, what was she? she was not so infamous as
the rest were, yet she ran into a grievous scandal, Ruth came of Moab, whom
Lot begat of his own daughter, you have the story in the Book of Genesis 19.36.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father. verse. 37. And
the first born bare a son, and called his name Moab. What was she? for her
person she was a good woman; but as all Divines observe of her, she did an
action that had appearance of evil, what did she? read the story in the 3 of
Ruth, beginning at the 5. verse, etc. the story says, that she came alone at
midnight to Bouz, there was an action full of infamy, which was a shameful
thing that a woman should come to a man lying alone. Secondly, she came and lay
by him in the night season, but it is true, the Scripture clears her for any
thing following, verse. 14. And she lay at his feet until morning, and she rose
up before one could know another: there was no vanity, no folly, and no evil,
yet it was a grievous scandal for a woman to be with a man, and Boaz did fear
the scandal of it too; yet such a woman as this is reckoned in the Genealogy
of Christ. The fourth woman is Bathsheba, she was unclean with David. What is
the Mystery of this? truly all Interpreters give this; There are but four
women named in the Genealogy, all of them infamous, and it is recorded that
Christ came from these four, to take off the ignominy and infamy of your sins
that you have fallen into before Conversion: Suppose God should suffer thee to
fall into execrable villainies, real and sound conversion to God takes off the
reproach and ignominy; therefore Christ to take off the ignominy and reproach
from these women would honor them so far, as to reckon them in his own
Genealogy.

The point was this, That such are the riches of Gods pardoning grace, that he
forgives his people the great sins that are clothed with many heinous and
aggravated circumstances. Now lest any might abuse this Doctrine, and suck
poison from these flowers that are most sweetly scattered up and down the
Scripture, I shall labor so to handle the matter, as to keep off presumptuous
men that they be not emboldned in a wicked course of sin. Therefore my use
shall be to two sorts of men.

David's sin was, as Peter's sin was, and Paul's sins were, Five considerations
concerning lesser sins.
then I have great hopes of pardon; mine are but sins of an ordinary incursion,
therefore I have hopes my sins are pardoned, because they have not been crying
great sins.



First, Of the neglect of Moses to circumcise his son; one would think that for
forbearing the circumcising of a child when a man was in a journey and had
urgent business lying upon him, his business should have been a plea to
excuse him: yet for the bare omission of that on the eight day, the Lord met
him, and would have killed him, Exodus 4.24. And it came to pass by the way in
the Inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. Another time the
Psalmist tells us of Moses sin in the wilderness, Moses spoke unadvisedly with
his lips, only a rash word; and what was the issue of that sin? the Lord would
never suffer Moses to enter into the land of Canaan.

Another instance of Vzzah, one would think it but a small thing for Vzzah to
put his hand to uphold the falling Arc, it was out of a good intention, that
the Arc should not fall; yet, you know how the hand of God smote Vzzah for it.

So likewise of David, you would think it but a small matter for a King to
number his people; yet you know how many thousands in Israel God did take away
by the Plague for that very sin: so that beloved, suppose thou have not fallen
into hideous and heinous wickednesses, yet thou see little sins displease God
as well as great; because sin, though little, yet is against a great God, and
little sins displease as well as great.

sin, and a sin in thought too, not of act; yet you know that for that sin, God
did tumble the Angels out of heaven. Indeed gross sins carry a greater infamy,
but little small sins may carry as great a guilt.

Adams sin, and David's sin.

First, Adams sin, you would account it a small matter to eat an apple or some
other fruit; but yet that small fact of eating the forbidden fruit, was so
clothed with many circumstances, which made it a great and grievous sin: for,

First, If you consider the state of Adam, he was not as we are; but Adam was a
perfect and an innocent creature: and it is a greater evil for a perfect
creature to sin then for us that are imperfect.

Secondly, Consider the place where Adam was, it was in Paradise, and yet there
to sin.

Thirdly, Consider the publicknesse of his person, he did not sin for himself;
but in his sin we all sinned: for a private man to sin is an evil, but for a
public person representing other men, his sin is other men's sin.

Fourthly, How many aggravations were in the bowels of Adams sin: there are six:

First, There was unbeleif in his sin, God did not tell them with an if, or an
and, but told them peremptorily they should dye.

Secondly, There was this aggravation, that Adam did believe the Devil, before
God.

Thirdly, There was pride in this sin; for says the Devil, Ye shall be as
gods, and that pleased them; it was not enough to be man and woman, but they
must be gods.

Fourthly, There was curiosity in that sin, You shall be as gods knowing good
and evil; now out of mere curiosity to know more then they did know, though
they knew enough to make them happy and blessed, did they plunge themselves
into this sin.

Fifthly, They were not contented with their condition.

Adam killed himself and all his posterity; For by one man sin entered into the
world and death by sin, so that in him all have sinned, and so all dyed:
therefore Adams sin was so clothed with heinous aggravations, that made it
very great.

Look on David's sin in numbering the people, it was a very small sin, and indeed
interpreters justify the fact, in it self it was no sin for a King to number
his Army; yet there were some circumstances with which this fact was clothed,
that made David's fact very notorious: there were six heinous aggravations in
that fact of David's numbering the people.

First of all, there was pride and vainglory: this Tostaius says, that the sin
of pride and vain glory was David's sin.

Secondly, There was carnal dependence in his sin, he would number his people,
that seeing how strong he was, he might depend on the multitude, that says
Zanchius was David's sin too.

Thirdly, There was covetousness in the sin too, Zanchius says this was
David's sin. It is observable that when in Israel the soldiers were mustered,
and the subjects numbered, there was a tax by pole, that every one should pay to
the King this was David's sin that he would needlessly number the people for this
same sake.

Fourthly, There was curiosity, for David did a needless act; for what need
David know every particular man in his kingdom in so vast a confine as Judah
was? I Chron 23. As if he should have said, If there were civil wars among
you, or rebelling in thy kingdom, then to know the number of thy subjects it
were something: but now what need we? we are all true and loyal to thee: yet
vain curiosity made David do it.

Fifthly, There was the sin of sacrilege, this Zanchius notes: for when the
people were numbered, there was to be given for the use of the Sanctuary, half a
shekel, as you have the story, Exodus 30.12. When thou take the sum of the
children of Israel, after their number, then shall they give every man a
ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numbrest them, that there be no
plague amongst them, when thou numbrest them. Verse. 13. This they shall give,
every one that passes among them that are numbered: half a shekel after the
shekel of the Sanctuary: compare this with Exodus 38.25. And the silver of them
that were numbered of the Congregation, was an hundred talents, and a thousand
seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels after the shekel of the
Sanctuary, etc. David did defraud the Sanctuary of that money.

Sixthly, In this sin, there was an express breach of Gods Law: this Deodat
says: for his Law was, the people should not be numbered that were under 20
years, but onthose above 20; now David did number those that were under 20.
years. Exodus 30.14. Every one that passes among them that are numbered, from 20
years old and above, shall give an offering unto the Lord. Numb. 1.3. From 20
years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: Now
David numbering those that were under those years, did transgress the command
of God. That is a third consideration to you that say you never run into
scandalous sins: yet consider, that little sins may be so aggravated by
circumstances as that they become grievous: suppose thy sin be secret lust, and
secret passion, and secret pride: beloved, thy sins may have such
circumstances, as to make them great: suppose thy sins be against checks of
conscience they are great sins, because they are against Gods officer in man;
Conscience is Gods officer in thee, and Gods Register, and Vicegerent in man;
and for thee to control thine own conscience against the accusations, and
against the convictions and checks of thy conscience, though the sin be but a
small trifle, yet is it very great; He that doubts, is damned if he eats. The
Apostle says it is no sin to eat meat, but if thou think it is a sin to eat
meat, and do it, thou sinnest against conscience. If thy conscience tells
thee that it is unlawful to do this or that, and yet thou will venture on it,
the Apostle says, He that doubts is damned, if he eats. If thou do any
thing against the rebukes of conscience, it is a great crime; because
conscience is Gods Officer in thee: to eat meat, is but a trifle; the Question
was, whether they might eat meat offered to an idol, the Apostle says they
might do it. I, but suppose conscience in a man might say, I am persuaded that
if I should eat this meat that was offered to an idol, I should approve of
Idolatry, then, says the Apostle, thou art damned if thou eat: to show, that
if in so small a thing as eating flesh, then in other matters also; if thy
conscience tells thee, that thou sinnest if thou do it, and yet do it,
thy little sin is become a great sin.

Secondly, The smallest sin may be aggravated, if there be a complacency in thy
heart to a small sin. Beloved, a small sin that is indulged, is a more
aggravating sin then a greater sin thou do fall into with resistance. It is
very observable in Lev. 13.12. And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin,
and the leprosy cover all the skin of him that has the plague, from his head
even unto his foot, wheresoever the Priest looks. Ainsworth admires and
wonders what God intends by this Law: the meaning is, the Leprosy betokens
sin. Now if the leprosy, or the plague, or the small pox; if it comes out
into a scab, and comes into the flesh, and strikes outward, there is no disease
within; but then there is danger when sores strike inward, and do not come out
in the flesh: this Law has this use in it, if the leprosy were only on the
skin, the man was not unclean, though there was sin in his life, yet sin was
not in his heart: I, but says God, if the scab be in sight deeper then the
skins then pronounce him unclean, to show, if sin be in thy heart and in thy
life too, though it be but a small sin, yet it is a sin that will damn thee: If
I regard iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66.18. the Lord will not hear me.
Therefore you that are moral men, that say, you thank God, that you have not
broke out into gross sins: consider, though sin be small, yet your small sins
may have such circumstances, as may make them very great: sinning against your
consciences, or else sin seizing upon the heart.



First, of the Pharisee, in Luke 18. I thank God, says he, I am no
extortioner, no drunkard, no adulterer; I am not this nor that: the Pharisee
was a man that never broke out into scandalous sins; what was the conclusion?
says Christ, that he that justified himself, was not justified; but the
Publican was justified rather then the Pharisee: the Publican that had fallen
into extortion, his office did expose him unto much extortion, which was in
allusion to our Custom House, he was a wicked liver, and yet went away
justified. O! a civil honest Pharisee, a Pharisee that never brake out into
scandal, yet was not justified: a Publican that was a known and infamous
sinner, went away justified.

The prodigal son that ran away from his father, spent all his substance,
that is, his gifts, and went to live among hogs and swine, in this world, that
is, wicked men, yet this man a pardoned man. The young man who tells you that he
kept all Gods Commands from his youth, an unjustified man: yet the Prodigal
that was riotous from his youth, became to be a justified man. I am persuaded,
the very intent of these Scriptures, is for this end; that civil moral men
should not presume on pardon, merely on their civil morality.

damn thee, then a few greater sins: I may make use of that pertinent
Scripture, in Jer. 5.6. Wherefore a Lion out of the forest shall slay them, and
a Wolf of the evenings shall spoil them; a Leopard shall watch over their
cities, every one that goes out hence shall be torn in pieces, because their
transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased. Verse. 7. How
shall I pardon thee for this? etc. Because their transgressions were many,
therefore God comes with a question, How shall I pardon? Beloved, suppose thy
sins be not great, yet if they be many small sins, God may put this question to
you, How shall I pardon you? Let me tell you a paradox, That small sins are as
hardly, yea, more hardly pardoned, then greater sins are. And the reason is,
because a man is not so apt to repent for small sins, as he will be for great,
because they are not so visible, and therefore conscience not so apt to do its
office to put a man upon repentance; that is the reason of Christ's speech,
Verily I say unto you, that Publicans and harlots shall go to heaven before
them, why? because the Pharisees did depend upon their righteousness, and did
not see their little small sins: a Publican, a harlot, that could not but by
the light of nature see their extortion, their wickedness, and harlotry, they
should go to heaven before them, that Christ should tell them of their sins and
they repent of them. Therefore though your sins be but small, yet they may be
many, and that will greaten your sins: a many small sins may run thee into
deeper arrearages unto God, then a few grosser evils. O then let me persuade
you, that none of you would presume on pardon, because you have not fallen into
greater and grosser evils. Thus much for the first branch of the Use.

David did, thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Considerations concerning
gross sins.
sins clothed with many hideous and heinous circumstances.

First, something by way of astonishment.



The Leper in the Law was commanded to be shut up out of his own house, yet he
had a right to his own house; thou may have a right to heaven, a right to
salvation, yet God may shut thee up that thou may not have the
manifestations of a reconciled God toward thee: this is astonishment to thee.

into gross sins, may cause woeful commotions, and dismal horrors in thy
conscience. Consider, is not this grievous, thou pardoned sinner, to think
though this gross sin may not damn my soul, yet before I dye it will torture
my conscience? If I do speak to a troubled conscience, there is none in the
world will say, that the sweetness and pleasure of sin, can compensate the
anguishand torture of conscience which smarteth for sin.

David did pour out a river of tears before God did pour in a drop of the oil
of joy and gladness into his heart; David brake Gods Law, God broke his bones;
therefore he prayed, Lord restore to me the joy of thy salvation, that the
bones which thou have broken may rejoice. It is worthy observation of what you
read of Mary Magdalen, a notorious strumpet, there was a woman which was a
sinner, that is, a known harlot, a known strumpet, says Christ, her sins
which are many are forgiven her: but did Christ tell these words to Mary? no,
Christ spoke these words to Simon, in whose house Christ was at supper: mark
the method, Divines make much use of this. Mary fell into a gross sin, but
Mary must not know her own pardon; Mary was weeping for her sin, and it was
revealed unto another that she was pardoned; to show, that when men fall into
gross sins, God does many times hide comforts from them, other men shall have
good hope of their pardon, more then they have of themselves: let this be
astonishment and a check to you to take heed of falling into gross evils; for
God may keep you long without manifestation of pardon.

Directions to great sinners.


I now come to give you something by way of direction: Have thou been a man
that God has left to thine own hearts lust? thou have not only sin, but the
iniquity of sin, sin aggravated, then,



Peter, Simon Peter love thou me? but goes higher, Peter do thou love me
more then these? there was this reason why Christ should ask him this
Question, because Peter had finned against Christ more then all the disciples
had, therefore Peter must love Christ more.

Do I speak to any that have been taller by the head in sin, then any of their
neighbors have been? O! if thou have sinned much, love much; the greater the
sin, the greater the pardon must be, and therefore on thy part the greater must
thy love be to Jesus Christ; this is held out plain in that familiar parable
that Christ uses, Luke 7.41. There was a certain creditor, which had two
debtors, the one ought five hundred pence, and the other fifty. Verse. 42. And
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both; Tell me therefore,
which of them will love him most. Verse. 43. Simon answered and said, I suppose
that he to whom he forgave most: And he said unto him, Thou have rightly
judged. The meaning of this is, the two debtors are two sorts of sinners, he
that owed a little sum he could not pay his debt: though thou have but few
little sins, yet thou can not satisfy for it. He that owed much was a great
sinner, as Mary Magdalen: It may be God has forgiven thee thy hundred of sins,
and thy five hundred of sins: O make good this Parable, that he that has most
forgiven him, love most; the greater thy sin has been, the greater thy love
must be. It is thus with Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee,
Her sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much. Her love does
hold equipage and proportion to her pardon; much pardon on Christ's part, and
much love on her part. O beloved let me here inculcate this on your thoughts:
have any of you been great sinners? have you been guilty of aggravated and
heinous circumstances? now find that your love does carry some proportion to
your pardon.

David, Manasses, and Peter, these all sinned greatly, and their sorrow and
lamentation did carry proportion to their sin, in some measure; Manasses sinned
greatly, and the scripture says of him, that he humbled himself greatly before
the Lord. Peter did deny Christ shamefully, and Peter went out and wept
bitterly. You know David sinned notoriously, and he mourned exceedingly, rivers
of tears ran from his eyes, he watered his couch with tears: all this teaches
you, that the greater thy sin has been, the greater thy humiliation should
be. An observable Law, that you read of in Levit. 11.24, 25. And for these ye
shall be unclean, whosoever touches the carcass of them, shall be unclean
until the Even. And whosoever bears ought of the carcass of them shall wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the Even. Beloved, touching an unclean
thing, a man was unclean all night; but if a man carried an unclean thing any
length of time, then says God he shall be unclean till Even, and he shall wash
his clothes. This law shows, that touching an unclean sin, requires a
humiliation; but if thou have touched a sin, born a sin, and hugged a sin in
thine arms, then there is greater work required of thee, he was to wash his
clothes, O thou must wash thy heart by humiliation, thou must take more pains
with thy heart, that have fallen into a gross evil, then other men should do.

of two men that were famous this way, It is reported of Eusebius a holy and a
tender conscientious man, when he came to confess sin, he used these words,
Lord there is none have sinned, as I have sinned, the Devil sinned, Judas
sinned grievously, but none sinned as I: The Devil indeed sinned, but Christ
never dyed for the Devil as he dyed for me, therefore my sin is a greater sin
then the Devils; Judas sinned greatly, but Judas never had the pardon I had;
Achan sinned too, but I sinned further then he. O labor to find out what
aggravations there are that thy evils are capable of, that so thou might
come to magnify and grraten the grace of God in thy esteem. A famous story of
Austin, Aug. in his confession^
when God converted him, and smote his conscience for the vanity of his youth;
how does he aggravate his sin when he was a boy for robing of an Orchard! he
does aggravate that sin with many circumstances. First, I robed an Orchard
merely out of vanity, not out of need, to steal for need is more tolerable,
though not justifiable; but when he had enough, that was vanity; then it was
not for the goodness of the fruit, but merely for the lust of the eye: then I
did not rob the Orchard alone, but I got others with me; then, it was an
unseasonable time of night; then, he went to rob the Orchard after he had spent
all the day in vain sport, then, what they could not eat they gave to the hogs;
then, says he, I wronged and injured an honest neighbor that never did me
wrong: O see how he clothed that sin with many heinous crimes and
circumstances, can not thou cloth thy ununcleannesse, thy oppression, thy
extortion, thy unjust dealing, with heinous circumstances? Let me direct you a
little in this rule.

First, To aggravate thy sin, consider all sins against the manifestation of
Gods love are great, when God speaks peace to thee, if thou should then
war against God, Psalm. 58. this greatens sin, it was an aggravation of
Solomon's sin, that he sinned against the Lord after God had revealed himself
twice to him, 1 King 11.9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his
heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to him twice.

Secondly, It aggravates sin, when you commit a sin upon a slight temptation,
for a man to sin when he has little or no provocation, that greatens sin; What
made the sin of the devil so great? it was this, that the Angels had no Devils
to tempt them: for thee to follow the stews, for thee to follow thy lust when
the devil does not tempt thee to do it, when the provocation is merely from
thine own heart, this greatens a man's sin; and thus in the Prophet Micah, That
men should sell the righteous for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes. O
when thou shall recollect and say, How have I dishonored God, how have I run
the hazard of an immortal soul, when the Devil has laid no temptation to me,
this greatens sin exceedingly.





Fifthly, Complacency of heart in sin, when sin is not only the sin of thy
practice, and of thy life, but thou delightest in sin; if sin be riveted and
rooted in thy heart, thou art unclean: Can thou go to God, and say, Lord
what grace is here! and what mercy is here! that thou have pardoned great
transgressions, and those sins that I can aggravate by many heinous
circumstances; I have read my pardon, and yet I have now blotted my pardon:
can thou say, I have sinned, and upon a very trivial occasion, and on a
small temptation, I am a drudge to the Devil on an easy temptation; when the
Devil can draw thee by a silken thread to a sin; O it is a great aggravation,
when Conscience arrests thee for sin, and thou will still be stifling the cries
of Conscience: Would you greaten sin, you are in a ready way to greaten mercy,
and pardoning grace, that is a fourth direction.

Lot of Zoar, Is not this a little one? do not say of wilful enormities as
Jacob did, Peradventure it was an oversight, do not mince the matter and do
not lessen sin, but greaten sin. The reason why thou should not do it,
consider first by extenuating sin and making it small and little in your eye,
you will lessen the greatness of gods pardoning grace: who will value the skill
and physic of a kitchen woman? that Physician is valued that can cure a deadly
and and dangerous disease; when a man's spirits are gone, and strength is
consumed, he is prized: thou by lessening thy sin do lessen pardoning grace.

2. By the extenuating thy sin, thou do lessen the value of Christ's blood.

3. Thou will lessen thine own repentance and humiliation; for what man will
labor after great humiliation for small transgressions? therefore there is a
world of wrong done to thine own soul, when God has pardoned great
transgressions, if thou should extenuate and lessen the greatness of thy
evils.

Lewis the eleventh King of France, when he did an evil against his
Conscience, he pulled off his hat and took his Crucifixe and cried God mercy
for what he had done; so many men, if they can but cry God mercy in ordinary
and general terms, they think they have made a Compensation to Divine
Justice. And thus I have done with the second branch of the use in these six
particulars.

Consolations against great sins.
to troubled and perplexed Consciences, that by reason of their falling into
aggravated and heinous sins, do entertain doubtful thoughts of their own
pardon: five Consolations I shall lay down to you from the Scripture.

God, wipes off the ignominy and the infamy of thy former miscarriages; suppose
thou past been an ignominious notorious foul creature; yet repentance puts a
vail over thy ignominious lusts.

Peter, Peter did sin more then all the Disciples, unless Judas that was the
castaway, after Peter did humble himself and repent of his denial, Christ did
show more love to Peter then to all the other Disciples.

First, Christ appeared to Peter after his Resurrection, before he appeared to
any other, so Paul tells you in 1 Cor. 15.5. And that he was seen of Cephas, and
then of the twelve, there was love in Christ, Peter did deny him but three
days before, and Peter must first see him.

Again, When Christ was risen from the dead, he sent a messenger to Peter
particularly by name, Go tell my Disciples in general, and tell Peter that I
am risen. Mark. 16.7. But go your ways, tell his Disciples and Peter. Peter
was crying, weeping and bewayling that he should deny his Master, and says
Christ, Go tell Peter that I am risen.

3. Christ does single out Peter after he rose from the dead, Christ has more
discourse with Peter then he has with all his Disciples else, Joh. 21. Thus
you see that Jesus Christ manifests love to those sinners that sinned foully,
after they have repented and are sufficiently humbled for their sin. Thus it is
with Mary Magdalen after she repented, what expressions of love does Christ
show to her? First, we read that he cast out of her seven Devils, Luke 8.2. And
certain women which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary
called Magdalen, out of whom went seven Devils. Then he appeared first to Mary,
she was the first that saw him when he was risen: Mark. 16.9. Now when Jesus
was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen.
Again, Christ wept to see Mary, John 11.33. When Jesus therefore saw her
weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in the
spirit, and was troubled. Again, Christ commanded, that where ever the Gospel
came to be preached, the fame of Mary should be made known, Matthew. 26.13. Verily
I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world,
there shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of
her; What a great honor was this to Mary Magdalen? Thus it appears that God
does manifest to those persons that have sinned the grossest sins, if afterward
they shall have the more serious, and through humiliation, the clearest
evidences, and the strongest comforts.

Thus much for the two consolations.

All sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven, but the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the world to come. It
is not that there is not more merit in Christ to save then there is guilt in
that sin; but it is because that man cannot repent of the sin; Therefore that
sin cannot be forgiven, because he cannot repent. Suppose thy sin be blasphemy,
this does not exempt from pardon. It is not the greatness of thy sin, but the
Judicial hardness and final impenitency of thy heart, that can exempt thee
from pardon. When Peter preached to the Jews that had a hand in crucifying the
Son of God; yet says he, Repent, and your sins shall he blotted out, O
what sin could be greater then their embrewing their hands in the blood of
Christ, yet do but repent and your sins shall be blotted out. It is not for
want of great mercy on Gods part, and great merits on Christ's part that men are
unpardoned; but it is want of repentance on thine own part.





First, Sometimes God does so order that the falling of a godly man into sin,
shall abate pride in his heart; men of great parts are apt to be proud, God
many times will let strong lusts attend strong gifts, the more to abate and
keep under the exaltation of spirit, therefore says Paul, I have the
messengers of Satan to buffet me, that I might not be exalted above measure,
God does many times to keep under pride, let a temptation loose on a man, and
so God does him good that way. Austin says, I am not afraid to say, that it is
profitable sometimes for good men to fall into sin.

Secondly, It will prevent many other sins; here is Gods great mercy, the
putting of a man to pain takes away pain; Beloved, God sometimes suffers a man
to sin, that that sin might keep out another sin; one sin may be so ordered by
God to keep out another sin.

Thirdly, Falling into sin sometimes does renew the work of repentance, the
Lord sometimes lets them sleep, that so he might awaken them by a greater
humiliation, and to taste the more of the bitterness and the fruit of sin;
here then is Gods goodness to a sinner, that by letting him fall into a sin
he does thee good, and makes thee to renew repentance, and greatens
humiliation in thy heart.

Now for the finishing of this subject, Cases of conscience.
there are 7. Cases of Conscience that in this Doctrine are needful to be
resolved.

David had sin forgiven him, and David did know it, I acknowledge, and thou
forgavest: but whether may a man have sin forgiven him, and yet not know he is
pardoned? I answer, in the affirmative, that a man may have sin forgiven him,
and yet not know that his sin is pardoned; though David did know his pardon in
this Psalm, yet he did not know his pardon in other Psalms, Psalm. 51. Restore
unto me the joy of thy Salvation. God broke David's bones for his Adultery, and
David was driven to shed a River of tears before God did pour in one drop of
joy: Job, 33.10. Behold, he finds occasions against me, he counts me for
his enemy. Job thought that God was an enemy unto him: and you have not only
the confession of one man, but the doubts and fears of the Church in general,
Lament. 3.42. We have transgressed and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned,
we have rebelled, etc. Yet God had pardoned, and God had forgiven them; yet
here was their fear and their doubt, they lay under suspense of pardon; God may
pardon a sin unto the Elect, and yet they not know that they are pardoned, and
in the manifold Wisdom of God there are diverse reasons for it, first by keeping
them under a suspense of pardon, they may sympathize with, and carry more
tenderness of compassion toward them that are troubled in mind, it was one
end of Christ's sufferings, his Soul was in an agony and under a desertion,
crying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? what was the end of it? it
was for this, that Christ might carry more compassion, and more bowels of
tenderness toward persons that are under deep desertions; Let a scholar that
studies many things, read in a Book the Art of Navigation, and where are rocks
and shelves, and sands; yet by all he reads he cannot pity men in a storm, if
he have never been in a storm himself; lot one read what the Scripture mentions
of the pangs of a woman in travel, she cannot so compassionate a woman in
travel, unless she have had the pangs herself; so in Divine things, it is
experience that makes men have compassion.

Secondly, It is for this reason, to raise up in men's hearts a higher esteem of
pardoning grace; things highly come by, are highly set by; What is the reason
that birds do chirp and sing more sweetly in the spring then in any other part
of the year? it is for this, because after the vanishing away of a long and
tedious winter the refreshing Spring comes in: Beloved, The Lord makes his
people chirp and sing in the sense of pardoning grace, rejoicing in that the
more, the longer the winter of desertion has be: when God lets them have long
desertion, then they do the more rejoice and sing when pardons are attained:
Men do then prize the Land, when they have been tossed by a tempest on the sea.
Those that have been tossed on the waves of spiritual trouble, that have had a
storm and a tempest in their consciences, they will prize pardoning grace most.

Thirdly, God does sometimes pardon a man's sin, yet not tell him of it; and it
is for rebuke to him, because he has not lived in the exercise of grace: thou
keep back obedience from God, and God keeps back comfort from thee: this is
a main reason why sometimes God pardons a sinner, and yet does not tell him of
it in his own conscience. It is done in heaven, the pardon is written there;
but it is not done in the conscience, it is not written here: It is to give
thee a rebuke, a check in thine own heart; surely I have not exercised grace,
therefore surely God will not give me the comforting work of his Spirit: when
thou art not much in grace, then thou shall be but little in peace, it is just
with God so to do.

Fourthly, The Lord pardons a sin when he does not tell that it is pardoned; it
is to make the repentance of men more visible and satisfactory to the world
that has been offended by their sin. The Lord will make the world see that if
men will sin notoriously they shall smart bitterly, to make the world see that
repentance is no slight work, and to make peace with God, is not easy.

Fifthly, To make men to taste the evils and bitterness of sin: should a man
that is notoriously wicked, presently attain the sense of pardon, it may be he
would not taste the bitterness of sin.

Another reason is this, to teach doubting Christians that assurance is not
essential to pardon, it is separable from pardon, it is separable from faith,
therefore from pardon. A man may believe, yet know not that he does believe:
the Lord does it for that end, to teach doubting Christians, that though they
have not assurance, yet they may have faith; though they want the sense of
pardon, they may be pardoned: there cannot be fruit, but there must be a tree;
yet there may be a tree, when there is no fruit; there may be grace in the
heart, when there is no peace in the conscience; to have peace is additionall
to grace: now the Lord for these holy ends does sometimes pardon a sin in
heaven, when the pardon is not sealed to the conscience. Thus much for the
first Case.

Antinomians say that a pardoned sinner is never afflicted for sin; and say
they, to say that a man whose sin is forgiven is afflicted for sin, does
derogate from the satisfaction and sufferings of Christ. Then the Papists say,
that men are afflicted and punished for sin, and that these punishments are for
satisfaction to Divine Justice, and they are meritorious: and on this ground
they bottom Purgatory, That after a man is dead, he must for some years lie in
Purgatory, to satisfy for some notorious gross sin done in his life.

Now beloved to keep you from swerving either way, I shall lay down the true
genuine state of this Question, and resolve it to you.

First consider this, That God does not afflict any man, but where sin is, that
is my first position. God does not cruciate an innocent creature: indeed the
Schoolmen have a question, whether God by his sovereignty may torment an
innocent creature; but that is but a nicety; but this is most certain, that God
in the dispensation of his Judgments does punish no man, but where sin is, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin.

Secondly, Though God afflicts none sinlesse, yet sometimes it may be for
trial and not for sin; so was Jobs affliction, it was not for sin, but for
trial, to try Jobs grace.

Thirdly and chiefly, It is apparent from the Scriptures, that pardoned sinners
may be punished for their sins. Would not this be partial for a father to beat
the servant for a fault, yet not beat the child for a worse fault? Now
beloved, the Lord will not leave such a plea as this in any wicked man's heart.
In all the kingdoms of the world, where sword, where pestilence, where famine,
and where plagues have been, the good have fallen with the bad; the righteous
have fallen by the sword, as well as the wicked: the reason is, that the world
shall not say that he is a partial God. Now to satisfy and to establish your
thoughts in this point, I shall give you two express testimonies in the
Scripture, that God does punish his people for sin, though their sins be
pardoned. The one is of David, 2 Samuel 12.14. Howbeit, because by this deed thou
have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child
also that is born unto thee, shall surely dye. I will punish thee in thy child,
I will pardon thy sin, yet I will punish thy sin: so likewise in 2 Samuel 7.14,
15. I will be his father, and he shall be my son: If he commit iniquity, I will
chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men.
But my mercy shall not depart away from him, etc. A promise to Solomon, I will
be his father, and he shall be my son: but, if he commit iniquity, I will
chasten him with rods. And the Psalmist, when he quotes this expression,
referres it to all the godly, Psalm. 89.31, 32. If they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes. It was not only true of Solomon, but it is
spoken of all the Church, If they commit iniquity, I will chastise them with
rods. O beloved, here a Solomon may be chastned with rods if he commits
iniquity: nay, not only one man, but all the Church, Amos 3.2. You only have I
known of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all
your inquities. If God be severe, it is with his own people to make them smart
for sin: he may spare wicked men, and not punish them here, because he has his
hell for them hereafter: but this shall be all the hell of a godly man, and all
their punishment. I, but this is Old Testament, and thus the Antinomians take
off, and evade this Scripture: but does God so in the New Testament? Yes, in
the New Testament, Romans 8.10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because
of sin. He speaks of the believing Romans, that death on their bodies was
because of sin. And then the Apostle speaks to the godly Corinthians, 1 Cor.
11.29, 30. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. For this cause many are
weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep. Many godly men were sick and weak
for their profaning the Lords Supper: and this is under the New Testament,
that the Apostle says, as approving the righteous judgment of God, let not us
commit fornication, as some of them committed 1 Cor. 10. Let not us fall as
they fell, and many of them among the 23 thousand were good men: the Apostle
approves of Gods Judgment to be righteous in that Act.

Only one Objection against this.

Does not the Scripture say, in Isai. 53. That the chastisements of our peace
are laid on Christ? now if all those chastisements that were due to us for sin,
were laid on Christ, does not this derogate from Christ's sufferings, that he
must suffer for sin, and that we must suffer too? does not this intimate that
Christ's sufferings were not satisfactory?

The Answer is easy.

That when we say, we suffer for sin, and are punished for sin, understand
this, there is a great deal of difference between our suffering for sin and
Christ's; we do not suffer for sin as Christ did, because our punishments for
sin are not by way of satisfaction to Divine Justice, but only by way of
castigation from Divine Justice: when God does punish a pardoned man with some
outward Judgment for sin, it is no satisfaction, no compensation: when the
text says, that our chastisements are laid upon Christ: the meaning is, Christ
suffers for sin by way of satisfaction, he appeaseth Gods wrath, he satisfies
Gods Justice for the sins that we have done: should we lose our blood for a
sin, should we give the fruit of our body for the sins of our soul, yet this
cannot make a compensation for sin: therefore it may well consist that God
punished Christ for our sins by way of satisfaction to his Justice, and may
punish us by way of castigation.

Now to ratify and satisfy your thoughts the more in this: that though God
does pardon a sin, yet he will punish for a sin: take some Reasons for it.

First this, Because wicked men that are punished for sin, would accuse God of
partiality and in justice, should he punish them and not his own people for the
same sin: wicked men would account God partial: but the wicked shall say, I
see Gods own people are punished in this life more severely then I am: the Lord
does it to vindicate the impartiality of his Justice, that he will not spare
sin where ever he finds it.

A second Reason is, Because God does command Magistrates to execute
punishments in this life for sin even upon good men: therefore if he commands a
Magistrate to punish a good man for his sin, surely he does approve of it.
Suppose a good man should commit adultery, he was to dye for it: suppose he
should commit murder, he was to dye for it; if God did command that poenall
punishment should be inflicted on good men in this life, then surely he might
do it much more himself.



There are many Books in Print, made by several Antinomians that plead for
this, that a man is pardoned from all eternity, that before a man believes and
repents, he is pardoned: which is a falsehood, for to a believer the Apostle
does confine pardon. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth ^o be a propitiation,
through faith in his blood to declare his righteousness, for the remission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. For sins that are past,
those sins you have committed and have repented of, he gives you pardon for all
them. He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy; and he that
does not so, shall not find mercy.

I answer affirmatively, That God does pardon sin after a man repents and
believes, not before: and to give you a proof for this: First I shall give you
the grounds from the Scripture: then absurdities that would follow if this were
not so.

First from the Scripture, Observe, that the Scripture does limit and confine
pardon to a repenting state, Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out. No blotting out of sin without repentance,
repent that your sins may be blotted out. Act. 26.18. To open their eyes, and
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith that is in me. So that till thou be turned from
darkness to light, until thou be turned from Satan to God, thou have not
received forgiveness of sins: mark the antecedent words, he opens their eyes,
etc. therefore God expressly does tie forgiveness of sin to repentance: and s^
in Joh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. There is is first a
confession, which takes in repentance before forgiveness.

Secondly, There is no promise in all the Scripture, that God will pardon a sin
before men's repentance for sin: but there are many promises that God will
pardon when they do repent, Prove. 23.14. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and
shall deliver his soul from hell. Jer. 23.8. And I will cleanse them from all
their iniquity whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against
me. Many promises, that when men repent of sin they shall have sin pardoned:
but there is never a promise that has any show, that before a man repents he
shall have pardon.

Thirdly, The Scripture does lay them under a state of wrath and condemnation,
till they believe and repent: unless ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.
Luke 13.5. I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we had our conversation in times post, in the lusts
of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were
by nature the children of wrath, even as others, Verse. 12. That at that time ye
were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world. No hope of heaven, no hope of pardon in an unconverted estate. Now by
the sufferings of Christ, we receive pardon; a man unrepenting, is a man
without Christ, therefore surely without pardon. Therefore the Antinomians do
bolster men in profaneness: saying to a drunkard, go on in drunkenness, for
God has pardoned thee from all eternity: but I say, Repent therefore, that
your sins may be blotted out. There are not only these express testimonies in
Scripture, and reasons grounded thereupon; but manifold and gross absurdities
that would follow if you should deny this truth. This would follow then, that
there is no difference between a converted man, and a man unconverted: and is
not this gross to say so much comfort to a man before he is converted, as one
may say to him after he is converted?

Secondly, If a man is pardoned before he believes and repents, then this
destroys Justification by faith: the Scripture says, being justified by faith
we have peace with God. Now justification is nothing else but a pardoning of
sin in Gods gracious act not imputing sin unto you; when the Scripture says, I
am justified by faith, and the Antinomian says, I am justified without faith,
where lies the error? Now then to say that a man is pardoned before he believes
and repents, is in express terms to contradict the Scripture, when the
Scripture says, he is justified by faith.

The Antinomians have this evasion, say they, A man is pardoned before he
believes he is actually pardoned; but when he believes, then he has
manifestation of pardon. On this evasion, a gross error will follow; for by
this reason says is no more isntrumental to justification, then as it is
declarative to a man that he is justified: whereas the Scripture says there is
more use of says, for says is an instrument actually to lay hold on Christ
for pardon; the grace of love to Christ, the grace of humility, the grace of
selfdeniall, and the grace of mortification; these do evidence and declare a
pardoned state as well as says: this is to destroy the use of faith, that
says is of little or no use in justification.

Again, another absurdity will follow, to say that a man before he repents is
pardoned, it is as much as to say, before a man be in Christ, he is pardoned:
this is false, for without Christ there is no pardon. I might run over many
absurdities that would follow in denying this orthodox point.

There is one strong Objection, which is this:

Does not God love a man from all eternity? and does not the Scripture say,
that we were chosen in Christ before the foundations of the world were laid?
now God electing of us, or loving of us, is Gods pardoning of us; if God does
love a man before he was born, then sure God does pardon a man from eternity.
To argue from Gods love to actual pardon, is as great an absurdity, as to
argue that God did purpose from all eternity to create the world, therefore the
world was created. God decrees to pardon from all eternity, God executes this
decree when thou art converted, God does manifest this, that he has pardoned
thee, when he does give thee the assurance of his love. Antinomians make only
the decree and the manifestation, and leave out the execution of it.

Secondly, observe this, That when we say that God does love a man from all
eternity, you must understand it, that it is a love in purpose; and Divines do
give this solid and useful distinction in it, that there is a twofold love in
God, there is a love of purpose, and a love of complacency or delight: the love
of purpose is in God toward elect men from all eternity, that is, a love where
God has a purpose in time to do a soul good: but a love of complacency and
delight in God, is not in God till that object be converted: before conversion,
God has not in thee a love of delight; for there is nothing in thee that God
should take delight in: At that time ye were children of wrath: God does not
love an elect man with the love of complacency, till he be converted, until he
does repent and believe.

Another Objection is this:

Does not God pardon a man before he believes, then what say ye of young
Infants which cannot repent, you will not be so cruel to say that all Infants
go to hell.

I answer, I am far from thinking that all Infants go to hell: I believe that
heaven is as full of Infants as any other rank of years in the world; yet this
plea will make nothing for those that plead for justification before repenting
and believing.

First, consider, that there is a great difference between the state of an
Infant, and of men grown to years: the Scripture tells you, that faith comes by
hearing, that is, in men grown to years they must get their faith in an
ordinary way by hearing the Word preached: but this rule holds not for young
Infants, because they are not capable of understanding, they wanting the use of
reason, and God expects no more from them then he gives ability: faith comes by
hearing, says the Scripture: but says the Antinomians what need I hear, what
need I pray, for a man may have pardon without all? But consider, that though
children cannot exercise faith, yet children may have habitual faith, as
Divines say, children may have grace seminarily, though they cannot have the
exercise of grace. Thou can not tell, says Solomon, how the bones of a
child grow in the womb, therefore much more how God by a strange and a
powerful manner can implant and impresse grace in the heart of a sucking babe,
yet there is grace in elect children: in an elect child there is seminall
grace, and habitual grace. As there is sin seminall in a childs nature, that
before a child can act sin, it has sin; so by the same reason, you that will
deny grace in children, will fall into the Pelagian error, that a child has
no sin: but a child has a depraved nature, a nature enclining to sin;
therefore when it comes to years, though it should never see a sin committed,
yet would it sin: a child cannot act grace, cannot act faith and repentance,
that is true, but a child may have grace habitual; therefore Christ took
children in his arms and blessed them, surely they must be gracious children;
therefore children in a sense are pardoned if they believe: we know not how to
express their faith, but they do believe, they have an habitual faith. And
thus much for the answering of that third case of conscience.



First, by way of comfort.

First answer is this, That it is clear by an induction of particular instances
in Scripture, that pardoned men have fallen often into the same sin, this is
most clear.

First, if you refer it to spiritual evils, to evils that are of daily
incursion, evils that are inward and spiritual, spiritual pride, distempered
passion, remission in duties; a pardoned man may many times fall into such sins
as these.

Further it is clear by induction of instances in Scripture, that a pardoned
man may fall into gross sins, oftentimes into the same sin: some instances,
one is of Joseph, it was a gross sin for Joseph to swear an heath enish Oath,
by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42.15.15. Hereby ye shall be proved, by the life
of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come
hither. Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept
in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or
else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies. Yet the Jews were so well
instructed, and had such prohibitions against swearing, one should think that
they should not be guilty of so gross an evil; yet Joseph being in Pharaohs
court among heathens, he swore twice by the life of Pharaoh. And thus you read
of Jehosaphat, he fell twice into the same sin, he made a league with Ahaliah
King of Israel, he loved them that were enemies to God, 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 36, 37.
And after this did Jehosaphat King of Judah join himself with Ahaziah King of
Israel, who did very wickedly: And he joined himself with him to make ships to
go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Ezion-Geber. Then Eliezer the son of
Dodanah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou have
joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord has broken thy works: and the ships
were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarship. Twice he ran into the
same sin. And then you have it in the case of Solomon, he fell into Idolatry,
and the Text says, that he sinned against God after God appeared twice to him.
1 King. 11.9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned
from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice. He fell to
Idolatry after God appeared twice to him; so that it notes Solomon fell
oftentimes into the same sin. Thus you read of Sampson, that Divines call a
very compound of vices, Judge. 16. If there were no more spoken of Samps^n in
the New Testament, then in the old, it were questionable whether he was a good
man or no: but what read you of Sampson? You read of him first of all that he
married a heathenish woman, which was against Gods command. Nay he fell to the
same sin when the Philistims killed her, then he married a whore, chap. 16.1.
Then went Sampson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her. Nay
again, you shall find him fall three times into the same sin. First of all, he
did three times tell a lie, one after another; when Dalilah came to inveagle
him on the instigation of the Philistims that she should learn where Sampsons
strength lay: first says Sampson, If they bind me with seven green withs,
that were never dried; then shall I be weak, and be as another man. But when he
was bound, he broke the withs as one would break the thread a two when it
touches the fire: then says she, why have thou deceived me and told me a
lie? then he told her again, If thou will bind me with new ropes that were
never used, then I shall be weak like another man: but he broke the ropes. Nay
he tells her a third lie, he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of
my head with the web, then my strength will go from me, and this she did also,
and his strength remained. But the fourth time he told her truth, says he, If
I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be
like another man: and she caused the seven locks upon his head to be shaved
off, and his strength went from him. I speak this to a perplexed conscience;
that good men may be so overborn that they may frequently act over the same sin
again and again.

Then Peter that did lie thrice as Sampson did, Peter did deny Christ three
times with an oath and a cursing.

Another instance, that is in the case of the Israelites Numb. 14.22. Because
all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt,
and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not
hearkened to my voice. Therefore this should be something to stay the heart,
that not only sins of an unavoidable infirmity, secret spiritual sins, but
also sins that are more obnoxious to infamy and scandal, goodmen have fallen
into, and yet been pardoned.

Another answer, That Jesus Christ bids us to forgive our brother that sins
against us in one day seventy times seven: if Jesus Christ calls for this at our
hands, who have not hardly a drop of bowels, surely God that has a sea and a
vast Ocean of mercies, can forgive a sin, and will forgive a sin, though it be
often reiterated.

Thus much for answer to that question.

Now by way of Caution, that this comfort the Scripture gives be not abused.

First Caution is this, That though it be possible a man may fall often into
the same sin; yet it is not usually recorded in Scripture, it is a Note that
Hildersham has on Psalm. 51. touching David's foul sin. I do not read of any
express example in all the Scriptures of a godly man falling often into the same
gross sins after repentance, and after humiliation for that sin. Observe this
further, that though it be possible, yet it is but very rare, and though there
be instances that some men have done so, yet there are more plentiful
instances that good men have not done so, I will give you a few instances.
Jehosaphat entered into a sinful league with Ahaziah but when the Prophet
rebuked him, read the story, 1 King. 22. He had sinned once with his father,
but he would not sin a second time with him, so that, here you see a good man
would not a second time join with an Ahaziah; So likewise you have the instance
in Judah, that was father in law to Thamar, Genesis 38.26. And Judah acknowledged
them, and said; She has been more righteous then I, because that I gave her
not to Shelah my son, and he knew her again no more. It was not again done, he
knew her again no more, so as Divines do usually urge it; Noah was drunk, but
never but once, and that before he knew the strength of the grape. David was
adulterous, but never but once: This therefore shall be one caution.

Secondly, Take this Caution, that you might not be emboldned to run often into
the same sin; if a man does often commit the same gross sin, it argues a
greater strength and prevalency that that sin has over him then all other
sins, Physicians say, that a disease that a man does often relapse into, argues
the strength of these peccant humors that feed the disease; if thou often
fallest into lusts, it argues the prevalency of a lustful temper.

In the third place, Relapses into the same gross sin, are very dangerous and
deadly symptoms of a man in a lost condition, I do not say, they are such
symptoms that infallibly conclude a man to be an unpardoned man; I may say as
Physicians say of a relapse into the same disease; the second time is more
dangerous then the first disease, the reason is, because the first sickness
feeds on the ill humors; but relapse into the same ficknesse feeds on the
vital spirits: Beloved, the falling and relapsing into the same sin is a
dangerous symptom, it is a clear symptom of the prevalency of that sin. It is
worth your notice what symptoms the Lord does give of the plague of leprosy
for the Priest to judge that disease by, Levit. 13. the first symptom was when
the hair was turned white in the sore; Divines accommodate that to a
continuance in sin to old age, that argues you are unclean Lepers. Another
symptom was, when there was raw flesh in the scab; Divines accommodate that
unto a man being adventurous to sin against a raw, a troubled, and a wounded
Conscience. A third sign of the plague of leprosy was, when after the sore was
healed there should a new scab arise in the place thereof: thus when after thou
have healed a fin, by vows, by fasting and prayer, by holy purposes in Christ's
strength, and after the healing the same sore breaks out, and the same lust
breaks in upon thee, this is a dangerous symptom.

Fourthly, That you might not be adventurous on this comfort, consider, that
falling often into the same sin, does more harden the heart then any thing in
the world, habituating and indulging a man's self into the same road of
wickedness; there is nothing in the world does more harden the heart then when
the same sin has the same inroad into thy conscience and life, then all
tenderness and remorse of conscience will be taken away; I speak merely on
this ground, that seeing you have instances that men may fall often into the
same gross evils, yet let these four considerations keep you from abusing this
comfortable point. I, but you will say, if I do fall often into the same sin,
what may be to stay my heart up that I may be in a pardoned estate for all
this? I say this to you, though thou do fall often into the same sin; yet if
thy conscience bears thee witness thou do exercise the same grace often in
opposition to the same sin, thou may have a great deal of comfort that thou
art in a state of pardon.

The fifth case follows,

But whether may a godly man that is pardoned pray for pardon of sin?
Antinomians account this to be needless; they account all prayer for pardon to
be only in this sense, to wit, for a sense of pardon, and a manifestation of
pardon. Answ.

First, Though it be true, that God does not call a man to pray for those
things that are perfectly done so as never to be done again, yet God does
command us to pray for those things that are but imperfectly done. I am not to
pray to God to create the world, it is perfectly done, I am not to pray for
Election, it is so done as never to be done more. I am not to pray for the
incarnation of Christ, Christ is come into the flesh, but though I am not to
pray for these things that are so fully and perfectly done; yet I am to pray
for those things that are imperfectly done, pardon of sin is an act of God that
is still in doing, therefore the Apostle refers pardon, Romans 3.24, 25. Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, though Faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. And as sin is remitted and repented of, it is pardoned;
therefore that Reason is not valid to take off men from praying for pardon of
sin, the Scripture does express it, I acknowledge my transgression and thou
forgavest, Matthew. 6.12. And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.
That Platform according to which we are to model our prayers, the Antinomians
would evade the Text and pretend, that in that Text and such Scriptures we
only pray for a sense and manifestation of pardon in the Conscience, and not
for actual exhibition of pardon in regard of God.

To take off this, first, The next words in the Petition, are to be taken for a
real forgiveness, not for a forgiveness in sense and feeling; for consider
the whole Petition, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us; there can be no reason showed why the first part of the
Petition should be taken for sense and feeling of forgiveness, and the other
should be taken so.

Secondly, Consider this, that in the same sense you must understand a sin to
be forgiven, as in Scripture language it is spoken not to be forgiven; a sin is
said not to be forgiven when there is an actual guilt lies upon a man; a guilt
redounding upon the person of a wicked man that is taken away, Matthew. 12.32.
And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him, but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him neither in this world, neither in the world to come. They that understand
forgiving only in sense and feeling, must understand this clause, not
forgiving only in sense and feeling, and so no real guilt to lie upon the man.

Thirdly, It is against the nature of forgiveness to be only forgiving sin
in a man's own conscience.

A sixth case is this, Whether when a man is suing for pardon, he ought to make
any difference between great sins and small sin. The Stoics say all sins are
alike, and there is no difference; It is true, in regard of the object, all
sins are against God; yet when you come to beg pardon for sin, according as
your sins are greatned, you are accordingly to behave your selves in seeking
for pardon: God can pardon great sins as well as small, in regard of God there
is no difference, nor in regard of the merits of Christ; but yet in your
behavior in seeking for pardon of sin you are to make a great difference
between the greatness and the smallness of your evils: For Beloved, First,
Consider the Scripture makes a difference between sins; therefore we must do
so, the Scripture compares some sins to Camels, and some to Gnats, the
Scripture compares some sins to beams, and some to motes, some sins as talents,
and others but as pence, and in Amos there is mention made of mighty sins, Amos
5. in John of greater sins, Joh. 19.11. Jesus answered, Thou could have no
power at all against me, except it were given thee from above, therefore he
that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin. It is true, every sin
deserves hell, yet there is more of the punishment of hell inflicted on some
sinners then others; the reason why I speak of this case, is to let you know,
that as God has suffered any of you to fall into aggravated and heinous evils,
so he requires more of you then of other men. First consider, that God requires
of you more humiliation then he requires of other men; In the Law you read that
if a man touched the unclean thing, he was unclean till Evening, but if a man
bare an unclean thing he was to wash his clothes, to show that the touch of sin
requires humiliation; but the bearing of a sin in thy bosom, thy continuing in
sin requires more work then merely the touch of sin; Peter wept bitterly for
his denial, he did more for that sin then for an ordinary sin. So that you are
to consider, that though in regard of Christ there is no difference between a
great sin and a small; as the red Sea could drown Pharaoh and his host as well
as a single man; so Christ's blood can drown a huge host of sins; but yet you
must increase your humiliation on the aggravation of your guilt; thus much for
the fixth case of Conscience.

The seventh is this;

What are those great and heinous circumstances that do greaten sin; that so I
may see whether I have aggravated my sin or not; here are two circumstances
which do aggravate and greaten sin.

First, Sinning against the frequent manifestation of Gods love to thy soul,
this greatly aggravates sin; this did aggravate Solomon's sin, 1 King. 11.
Solomon was the Beloved of the Lord, yet he provoked him to anger.

Secondly, To sin against the rebukes and checks of thine own Conscience, does
greaten sin, Jam. 4.17. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it
not, to him it is sin. It is sin to another man that does not know it; but to
him that knows it, it is a greater sin; this Christ refers to and speaks of
Judas that would betray him; and yet knew that he was the Son of God; What, my
Disciples to betray me! his sin was the greater, Conscience is Gods officer in
man; it is a greater fault to strike a Constable then an ordinary man out of
office; for thee to sin against the rebukes and checks of Conscience aggravates
sin.

Thirdly, To sin against Gods judgments upon other men is an aggravated evil;
for thee to sin when God has given thee warning of sin from other men's blood;
this did aggravate Belshazzars sin, Dan. 5.22, 23. And thou his son, O
Belshazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou knew all this. But
have lifted up thy self against the Lord of heaven, etc. Thou that know how
a man is plagued for his uncleanness; thou that know how a man is plagued
for riotous living; yet thou will live riotous, and thou will live adulterous;
O thou man thy sin is the greater, thou sinnest against the monument of the
eye, as well as against the warning of the ear.

Fourthly, Sin against Gods judgments upon our selves does weigh ten sin; this
did aggravate Ahaz sin, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. And in the time of his distress he did
trespass yet more against the Lord.

Fifthly, To sin against mercies is an aggravation of sin, 2 Samuel 12. I
delivered thee out of Saul's hand, I gave thee thy Masters house, I gave thee
the house of Israel, and if all this had been too litttle for thee, I would
have moreover given thee such and such things, Wherefore have thou despised,
etc? What thou sin David? and have been loadned with a heap of mercies? this
greatens thy sin.

Sixthly, It greatens sin, when the sin is immediately against God, 1 Samuel
2.25. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? If a man sins against God, O
who shall plead for him?

Seaventhly, To sin against the motions of Gods Spirit, aggravates sin, when
the Spirit of God shall in thy Conscience persuade thee that thou would not
follow such wicked ways as thou art walking in; when the Spirit of God shall
come and woo thee to be reconciled, to alter thy course and to walk in better
paths; when not only the voice of Conscience, but the motions of Gods Spirit
shall be stifled; this aggravates sin: Hence it is that Scripture in setting
out the wronging and withstanding the Spirits motion, whether to good, or from
evil, does ascend by gradations: sometimes it is called quenching the Spirit;
Queuch not the Spirit; a higher degree, there is a grieving the Spirit, when
there are frequent acts to withstand Divine motions, that is a grieving the
Spirit.

Thirdly, There is an higher aggravation then this, that is, resisting the
Spirit, Act. 7.51. Ye stiff neeked and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye
do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye: This is
caused by pertinaciousnesse in withstanding the Spirits motion.

Fourthly, The Scripture speaks of vexing the Spirit, Isa. 63.10. But they
rebellect and vexed his Holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their
enemy, and fought against them: This is not only by one single act; but when
continually throughout thy course, thou have a wilful and a gainsaying heart
against all the motions of Gods Spirit within thee: Must not this be a great
evil in thee, when thou do quench, grieve, resist, and vex the Spirit? all
these circumstances must needs aggravate and greaten thy sin.

Eighthly, Sin is aggravated when thou do frequently fall into the same sin.

Ninethly, Sin is aggravated when it is done in a way of complacency, that it
is not only acted by thee, but loved by thee, the acting of a sin, is not so
much as a loving of sin.

Tenthly, sin is aggravated when it is done by eminent and public persons,
whose example draw other men to sin, and this did aggravate Jereboams sin, 2
King. 17.21. For he rent Israel from the house of David, and they made Jeroboam
the Son of Nebat King, and Jeroboam drove Israel from following the Lord, and
made them sin a great sin. Thou that have sinned a sin, and art a public
person, thy sins are other men's sins, thine is a greater sin then another man's
sin is; for every act that thou have done will be an imboldning and
encouragement of other to do the like.

Eleventhly, It aggravates sin, when God does punish other men for thy sin,
this makes the sins of Rulers to be great sins, because for their sins God may
punish the people, as for David's sin in numbering the people, there did
thousands of Israel dye of the plague; when thou sinnest in thy family, God may
punish all the house for that sin; this you shall find an aggravation of
Abraham's sin, Genesis 20.9. Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What
have thou done unto us, and what have I offended thee, that thou have brought
on m^e and on my Kingdom a great sin? thou have done deeds unto me that ought
not to be done.

Twelfthly, Sin is an aggravated sin when it is done by a man that lives under
much means of grace; where the Gospel is preached, where sin is reproved, there
to live in a way of wickedness, greatens thy sin, that made a woe to be
pronounced by Christ, against Chorazin and against Bethsaida, because they had
the Gospel, it should be worse with them then with Sodom and Gomorrah.

In the thirteenth place, Sin is aggravated, when they are against many vows,
purposes, and prayers, and many holy resolutions, thou addest perjury to thine
iniquity, and that aggravates thy sin.

The Use; Such are the riches of Gods pardoning grace, that he forgives sins
clothed with many aggravated circumstances; O then what remains? there are two
things to be done by you: First, if of any you find that you are under these
thirteen aggravations, that you can call your sins the iniquity of sin; O then
you should admire and magnify the multitude of Gods mercy, that great sins
cannot outvie Gods mercy, but Gods mercy outvie thy great sins, Magnify
pardoning grace the more; Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a blasphemer,
and a persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy, etc. O do thou say so,
I have been thus vile and thus wicked, I have thus clothed my sin, yet through
the abundance of grace and love, I have obtained mercy. O let this inhance the
value of Christ's blood.

Secondly, Labor to greaten thine own graces; have thou been notorious in
sin? why should not thou be great in humiliation, great in repentance?

And thus I have by the good hand of God in these twelve Sermons, handled two
Doctrines to you, the one touching David's penitential act confessing sin, and
the other of Gods gracious act, The Lord forgave him the iniquity of his sin.
So much for this Text.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS Advantage, BY CHRIST'S Ascension.
JOHN 14 3. And if I go, and prepare a place for you. I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.
THis Chapter out of which my Text is taken, is counted famous by most
Interpreters, because in it, begins the Legacy that Christ gives, and the last
Will and Testament that Christ made when he was to leave the World, and this
Will and Testament of Christ's begins in the 14th Chap. and continues to the 18
Chapter of this Book. The scope and drift of this Chapter, it is to comfort his
Disciples both against their fears of persecution in the World, as also
against their sorrows, upon this Consideration that Christ was shortly to
leave this World, and Christ does here mention many comfortable considerations
before them, that they were to be left without a guide, that Christ was shortly
to leave this World and go to his Father; ^t much troubled them; It went ill
with them when Christ was with them, and they thought it would have been worse
with them when he was gone, and he does encourage them by these Arguments.

First, he says, I am but going to my Fathers House, and the 28 verse. of this
Chapter he says, ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come
again unto you, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go
unto the Father, for my Father is greater then I.

Again secondly, he would not have them troubled, because of his departure;
because says he, I do not intend to go to my F^^her alone, but intend for to
have all you with me, though you shall not go with me now. Though you shall not
die with me now, though you shall not go to Heaven with me now, yet you shall
be with me mother day, In my Fathers house are many Mansions, I do not intend
to go to heaven done, for there is room for you as well is for me, and room
for every Believer in the World. Heaven first is a Mansion, a place which notes
a duration of Saints in Heaven, Heaven is not a moveable place, but a Mansion
an abiding place.

Again, there are many Mansions in Heaven, there is room enough for Christ,
for his eleven Apostles, and room enough for all the Believers in the World,
it notes the lastingnesse of Heaven. Hebrews 11. and 12 verse. Therefore sprang
there even that one, and him as good as dead, so many as the Stars of the
Sky in multitude, and as the Sand which is by the Seashore innumerable. And
besides the innumerable company of Angels, there is a great Multitude in
Heaven which no man can number, so that here, Heaven is a Mansion, and there
are many Mansions.

Thirdly, but they may say, these may be Superbolicall expressions, that there
is more spoken then is, but says Christ in the second verse. In my Fathers
house are many Mansions, If it were not so, I would have told you. To doubt
that Jesus Christ does speak more then there is, if there had been no such
thing as having a Mansion in Heaven with Christ, says Christ, if there were
not such I would have told you, I do not love to tell you of a fools Paradise,
as the Devil does, but I tell you, in Heaven there are many Mansions, I will
not tell you of a vain hope.

Fourthly, say the Disciples, but Lord, thou art going to thy Fathers house,
and what shall become of us? therefore Christ comforts them and says, I go to
prepare a place for you. As if he should have said, I go to Heaven, to make
ready Heaven for you against you die, as Grossius observes, that the phrase is
borrowed from a company of Travelers which send one man before as a Harbinger
to provide the Inn, and take up rooms and make provision ready for them
against they come to their Inn, so Jesus Christ is gone to Heaven, that so he
might be as a Harbinger to take up Heaven for you, to take up room for you in
Heaven.

Again, he comforts them by his coming again, to receive them to himself;
As if he should say, though I leave you for a season, yet I will not leave you
for ever.

I shall explain the Phrases when I come to handle them as they lie in order.

This Text contains in it, the most material and Fundamental points of all
the Doctrinalls of Christianity, as,

If I go.

I go to prepare a place for you.

but I come again.

but Christ shall come to receive them again from the Dead, and all the Elect
with them.

shall have with Christ in Heaven, that where I am, there ye may be also.

The first clause, If I go, a good note that Calvin has on these words, this
conditional Particle ought to be resolved into an Adverbe of time, If I go,
It is not a note of dubitation, if Christ should go to Heaven or no, or a
supposition, peradventure he may go to Heaven, peradventure not, but it serves
for limitation of time when Christ does go to Heaven. A like phrase you have,
John 12.32. verse. And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men
unto me. This he spoke of what death he should die, if he be lifted on the
Cross, he should save many by his death, and be bettered by his death. The
word if, does not note a dubitation or a supposition, it may be, or it may not
be, but it notes an adverbe of time, when I am lifted up, and so in my Text,
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. There is no difficulty
in the first expression, If I go and prepare a place for you, from which words
there are two Observations, If I go.

First, that Christ's Ascension or going up to Heaven is a ground of great
comfort and great advantage to all his people while they dwell here upon the
Earth.

The second observation, is, from the end and benefit of his going up to
Heaven, If I go, I go to prepare a place for you, That the great one of Jesus
Christ's going bodily to Heaven, is to prepare Heaven for all the Elect.



First, by the Types that were before the Law, Enoch was translated and taken
up bodily into Heaven, where now he is. Genesis 5.24. verse. And Enoch walked
with God, and he was not, for God took him, this is affirmed by the Apostle,
Hebrews 11.5. v. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death,
and was not found, because God had translated him, for before his translation
he had this Testimony, That he pleased God. And under the Law, Eliah was taken
up to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, 2 Kings 2.11. v. And it came to pass, as they
still went on and talked, that behold, there appeared a Chariot of fire, and
Horses of fire, and parted them both asunder, and Eliah went up by a whirle
wind into Heaven. So Christ makes (...) third under the Gospel taken up to
Heaven also.

Second Argument to prove this Doctrine, is by prophecies in the old Testament
that Jesus Christ was to be taken up into heaven bodily, three prophecies, one
in the 68. Psalm, there David prophesied of Christ in the 18 verse. Thou have
Ascended on high, etc. Now we should not have known so full that this had
reference to Jesus Christ's Ascension, if Paul had not expounded this, in Heb.
4. and the 14 verse. Seeing then that we have a great high Priest that is passed
into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. The
Prophecies that were long before Christ was borne did declare this, that Jesus
Christ should ascend up into Heaven, and in the 110 Psalm the 7. verse. He
shall drink of the Brook in the way, therefore shall be lift up the head;
what is that? It is spoken of Christ, I will see him upon my right hand, first
he shall drink o^ the brook by the way, he shall cry, (...) thirst upon the
Cross, he shall die and b^ crucified, then afterward he shall lift up his
head, he shall rise again and ascend up into Heaven, a full prophecy in Daniel
7.13* 14. verse. I saw in the night Visions, and behold, One like the Son of
man, came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him. And there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People Nations and Languages should serve him his Dominion
is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom, that
which shall not be destroyed. This cannot be spoken of Christ's coming to
judgment, but then the Text says, he shall deliver them to his Father, 1 Cor.
15. But the coming of Christ in the Clouds here, is Christ's going up into
Heaven, as it is in the Acts 1. verse. 9. And when he had spoken these things,
while they beheld, he was taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their
sight. And thus you have it by Prophcies confirmed.

Thirdly, the Doctrine of Christ's going up to Heaven, is confirmed to you by
Christ's promises, Christ upon the Earth did promise that he would go up to
Heaven, John 6 62. What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where
he was before? In John 20.17. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not
yet ascended to my Father, but go to my Brethren and say unto them, I ascend
unto my Father, and to your Father, and to my God, and your God. Christ did
promise that he would ascend, John 16.5, 7. But now I go my way to him that
sent me, and none of you asked me, whither go thou? Nevertheless, I tell
you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto
you. John 16.16. A little while, and ye shall not see me, and again a little
while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father. I could quote you
many Scriptures, that Christ promised he would go away.

Fourthly, the Doctrine of Christ's going up to Heaven is confirmed by the
Testimony of the Apostles, who were Eyewitnesses of Christ's Ascension. Gerrard
notes, says he, Jesus Christ did rise invisible, none saw him Rise, the
Scripture tells you that the Soldiers that watched were asleep, yet Christ
gathers all his eleven Apostles that they might be Eye witnesses of his
Ascension that they saw him ascend to Heaven, Acts 1.9, 10. And when he had
spoken these things, while they beheld he was taken up, and a Cloud received
him out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he
went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel, and so the Apostle
Peter, in the 1 Peter 3.22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right Hand
of God, Angels and Authority, and Powers, being subject unto him. So Paul
tells you in Ephesians 4.10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended
up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things. So in Hebrews 9.
the Author of that Book tells you that Jesus Christ is not gone into the holy
place, but is gone into the Heaven it self, In verse. 24. For Christ is not
entered into the Holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true,
but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. 1 Timothy
3.16. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into glory. And in Mark.
16.19. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into
Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. I take the more pains to prove
this, because of what Ancient Heresies there have been to overthrow this great
comfortable Doctrine of Christ's going bodily into Heaven, having our flesh in
Heaven this very day.

Fifthly, it may be proved by the Concurrent Testimonies of the Angels, who
were witnesses of this truth. Acts 1.10. ve. And while they looked steadfastly
toward Heaven, as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel.
These two men were Angels, the Angels did give in their concurrent Testimonies
that Jesus Christ did go into Heaven, and the same Jesus Christ that did go
shall come again. Beloved I know not any one point in all the Bible that is so
proved and strengthened as Christ's personal and Bodily going up to Heaven, and
thus much for the strengthening of you in the proof of the point, I lay that
for the Foundation, because if the proof of it be not well grounded, then the
fruit of it will not be well regarded.

Secondly, what is the reason that Christ must have his Body go up to Heaven,
and not his Soul, as other men's?

First Christ in his bodily presence must go to Heaven, lest his Disciples
should be taken too much with his bodily presence, and never look after the
Communication of his Spirit. Therefore they ask Christ, Lord when will thou
restore the Kingdom to Israel? they expected that Christ would take away the
Roman Emperor which was a heathen, and expected that he would be King
himself, Acts 1.6. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him
saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? It
is for this reason say Interpreters, because the Disciples should not dote on
Jesus Christ as to look on him as a temporal King, and look on him for a
temporal Kingdom, so that was one reason why he would not leave his body
with them, but that they might look after the Kingdom where he is, therefore
Paul has a passage in 2 Cor. 5.16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after
the flesh, yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth, know we him no more. As if he should say, it may be those that
lived in Christ's time, that knew him according to the flesh as a lovely person,
but says Paul, we know him in a spiritual way, to look after Heaven by
Christ, to look after Salvation by Christ.

Secondly, Christ must be taken up into Heaven in his body to make a
compensation and a recompense to himself, for his sufferings in his Body, to
make a compensation to him for his bodily sufferings, he must go to Heaven,
Phil. 2.8.9. And being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and
because obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name.
Therefore God did exalt Christ and raise him from the dead and bring him to
Heaven, because he obeyed the death of the Cross, and took on him the form
of a servant, Psalm. 110. last Verse. He shall drink of the brook in thy way,
therefore shall he lift up the Head. Because thou dyedst and sufferedst,
therefore thou shall lift up thy head, therefore thou shall ascend up to
Heaven, Heb. 2.9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the
Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by
the grace of God should taste death for every man. For suffering of Death, he
was crowned with Glory and Honor to translate him bodily into heaven, that is
a second Argument.

Thirdly, Christ was taken up bodily to heaven, it was to manifest to the World
that Christ was God as well as man, to manifest the God head of Jesus Christ
therefore taken up bodily to heaven, Ephesians. 4.9, 10. Now that he ascended, what
is it, but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the Earth? He
that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that
he might fill all things. There the Apostle proves that Christ's going up to
heaven, it was an argument that Christ came down from heaven, So in John 6.62.
What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? That
shows that Christ was in heaven before, therefore must be God Coequall and
Coeternall with God the Father, and thus you have the second point dispatched
to you, showing the reasons why Jesus Christ must go bodily into heaven.

The third point is, I but what benefit and comfort is that to us that Jesus
Christ is now bodily in heaven, what comfort was this to the Disciples that
Jesus Christ should leave them, that he must go from them, unto his Fathers
house? There are seven particulars that it is great ground of comfort to all
the people of God that Jesus Christ is gone bodily to heaven.

The first ground of comfort is this, Christ's going to heaven bodily, it
assures you of Christ's full Triumph and complete conquest over all your
spiritual Enemies; This the Apostle lays down as a ground of comfort upon
Christ's Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. That is, the Devil and Sin
that carried you captive, and Christ by his going up to heaven has led them
captive, that is, has led your spiritual enemies that carried you captive:
led them captive, Christ alluded to the custom among the Romans, when the
Roman Conqueror was to come to the Cardinal of Rome to rejoice in his victory
over his enemies, the Conqueror did use to tie his Captives to the
Chariot-wheeles; So Christ did carry his Captives by his wheels as it were,
he led captivity captive; Colos. 2.15. And having spoiled Principalities and
Powers he made a show of them openly, Triumphing over them in it. So that
Beloved here is one great comfort that Christ by going up to heaven does
manifest and declare to all the World that he has overcome the Grave, Death,
Devil and Sin; for neither could they hold Christ in the chains thereof.

Secondly, Christ's going bodily to heaven, It is a pledge to you that Christ
will one day bring your bodies to heaven, I go to heaven that I may receive
you to my self, that you may be bodily in heaven where Christ is, In John
14.19. Yet a little while, and the World sees me no more, but ye see me,
because I live, ye shall live also. As if he should say, well, I must leave
you, and I must go to heaven before you, but because I live in heaven, and live
there bodily, you shall also live with me in heaven with your bodies.
Tertullian does make this use of it to comfort the Christians in his days,
says he, Jesus Christ did carry our flesh into heaven with him, and he is of
our flesh and of our bone; Now says Tertullian, Jesus Christ has carried
flesh into heaven and this is a good pledge unto us that our flesh shall be in
heaven where Christ's is also. Therefore O flesh and blood do thou rejoice,
thou have possessed heaven in Christ already. And Christ would be imperfect in
heaven, should not the bodies of Believers come there also, because he lives in
heaven, you shall live there also.

Thirdly, Christ's going bodily to heaven, it is a ground of comfort to you in
this, because Christ is gone bodily into heaven to perform and accomplish his
Sacerdotall Office, that is, as a high Priest, he is now in heaven to perform
the Office of a high Priest to make intercession to God his Father in your
behalf, that your sins might be pardoned, that your Souls might be saved,
that your bodies might be raised, and received into heaven with him in Glory,
Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which
are the Figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. Christ is entered into the very heavens that he might
appear before God for us, so in Heb. 7.26. For such an high Priest became us
who is holy, harmless, undefiled separate from sinners, and made higher then
the heavens. It became us to have a high Priest in Heaven. Therefore observe,
though it was a great benefit to the Disciples to have Christ's Bodily presence,
yet Jesus Christ could never have fulfilled the office of the Priesthood to
make intercession for all the Elect, if Christ had not gone bodily into heaven.
Will you observe one Text in Heb. 8.4. For if he were on Earth, he should not
be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests that offer-gifts according to the
Law. Christ must go to heaven, and there he is a Priest; Now if he were upon
the Earth he could not be a Priest for us, therefore we have great advantage
by CHRIST'S going into heaven. O beloved then look on this as a great comfort,
that our Lord Jesus Christ is now in heaven in his Body, Flesh and Blood.
appearing before God, making Intercession for all his people; This was typed
out under the Law, Exodus 28.9, 10, 11 and 12. verses. And thou shall take two
Onix Stones, and grave on them the Names of the Children of Israel. Six of
their Names on one stone, and the other six Names of the rest on the other
stone, according to their Birth. With the work of an ingraver in stone, like
the ingravings of a signet shall thou ingrave the two stones, with the names of
the Children of Israel, thou shall make them to be set in Ouches of gold. And
thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulders of the Ephod, for stones of
memorial unto the Children of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names before
the Lord, upon his two shoulders for a memorial. This is a Type of Jesus
Christ our high Priest, who is gone not into the holy of holiest, but in it
self the holy of holiest, and there he has not only the names of all the
Elect of God throughout the world on his Breast, but he has them in his heart,
and there he makes intercession for them to his Father. This is a Third ground
of Comfort, that you have of Christ's going bodily into Heaven, which assures
you that Christ is now in Heaven.

Ephesians. 4. ver. 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. It is an illusion to the Roman
custom, that when the Conqueror rode in Triumph toward the Capitol; he did
not only lead the Prisoners by the Charet wheels, but likewise scattered
money to the Spectators that saw him ride along in triumph: so the Lord Jesus
Christ having by his Ascension spoiled death and the Devil, this Jesus Christ
does cast his gifts unto men, dispenses his graces in a greater measure into
the hearts of his people, not that we are to run into the Socinian error,
because of this text they gather that before Christ's Ascension into heaven
there was no saving gifts of the spirit, and they ground it on that text, Joh.
7. ver. 38, 39. He that believes on me as the Scripture has said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this spoke he of the spirit, which
they that believe on him, should receive, for the holy Ghost was not yet given,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified. The holy Ghost was not yet given,
because that Jesus Christ was not yet glorified, but this Text is not to be
taken simply, then it will follow that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had not the
spirit, and they could not be in Heaven, but the meaning is, that the gifts of
the Holy Ghost in that Abundant measure was not given, because Christ was yet
ascended, Christ did reserve the full giving of the Holy Ghost to the time of
his Ascension, and until he was glorified; Therefore the Apostles soon after
his Ascension they received the Holy Ghost in a greater measure then was given
to the people of old, and beloved not only gifts by Christ to bring you to
Heaven, but also Ministerial gifts, to qualify men fit for the Ministry, you
are to look on this as the fruit of Christ's Ascension, Ephesians 4.10, 11, 12.
verse. He that descended, is the same also that Ascended up far above all
heavens that he might fill all things. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. So that you are to look upon not only your own Christian
gifts, whereby God brings you to Heaven, but all Ministerial gifts are the
fruits of Christ's giving to Heaven.

Heb. 4.14, 16. Seeing then that we have a great high Priest, that is passed
into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. Let
us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy,
and find grace to help in time of need. Jesus Christ being in Heaven it
should work a holy bodnesse in us to keep out fear and distrust when thou
prayest; because we have an High Priest that is past into the highest Heavens
Jesus the Son of God. Who would not come boldly to the Court when he knows
that the Kings Eldest Son is his friend, and is assured of his love, that he
will intercede for him to his Father? Jesus Christ is the King of Heaven the
eldest Son, and he is bound by Office to represent all our supplications and
make Intercessions for us.

Heb. 2.11. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all
of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren. Though Christ
was crowned with glory and gone up to Heaven, yet he was not ashamed to call
Believers Brethren; Now in Heaven Christ is thy God there, and Christ is thy
Father there, Christ is thy Prince there, and Christ is thy friend there, and
this may administer much comfort to thee that Jesus Christ retains the same
relation now he is in heaven, that he had with thee in the world; Therefore Job
could speak in a vision, says Job, I know that my Redeemer lives, I know my
Kinsman lives, (for so theword signifies) I know my kinsman lives. Christ
did only call his Disciples Brothers when he was in the flesh, and so he
calls them Brothers now is in heaven. Suppose thou art a poor woman that do
marry a man that is mean and poor in the world, why suppose this man should
come to the dignity of a King, it would be a great comfort to thee that thou
that wast but a beggar art now become a Kings Wife; so, though thou art mean in
the world, yet Jesus Christ does prefer thee to be his Brother.

Heb. 6 20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Christ is our forerunner, gone
to Heaven before us, and gone to Heaven for us, Christ did not only dye for
us, but Christ did go to heaven for us, all was for us, Heb. 10.19.20. Having
therefore Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus.
By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us, through the veil,
that is to say, his flesh; That is, having hopes to come to enter into Heaven
by the blood of Christ, through Christ's flesh as dying on the Cross. And thus
much be spoken for the Doctrinall part of this point, the point was this; That
Christ's Ascension or going up bodily to Heaven is a ground of great comfort to
Gods people whilst they live here upon the Earth.

I shall now draw out some instructions from some circumstances in Christ's
going to Heaven. There are five circumstances from which you may gather some
instruction.



Acts 1.12. Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the Mount called Olivet
which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath days Journey. Luke says, it was from
Bethany. Luke 24.50.51. And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he
lifted up his hands and blessed them. And it came to pass while he blessed
them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven. It was all one, but
there is much of Gods mind in this, of all places in the World Christ did make
choice of Bethany by Mount Olivet to go up to Heaven: Beloved the reason was,
because that was the place that Christ was taken in when Judas came with the
Scribes and Pharisees to apprehend him, from that place he was taken to be
crucified, and seeing it was from that place, he would make choice of that
place, that from thence he would take his rise to go up to Heaven, (...) of
(...) Bethany in Hebrew, signifies a house of affliction, so that Christ made
that which was the house of his affliction, Christ made that Bethany to be the
place of the translation of him into glory, I would give you thence to note
that God does oftentimes make our sufferings to be Inlets to our glory. So it
was with Christ, from Bethany he was taken a Prisoner, and from that place he
would ascend up into Heaven, so if you suffer with him, you shall also be
glorified with him, you may be carried to Heaven sometime in ways of sharp
afflictions, therefore do not be danted at persecution, for the Lord makes
Bethanies, the houses of our afflictions to have a trap-doore in them to let us
into our Fathers Mansion.

Acts 1.9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight; Whilst he was blessing
of his Disciples, and whilst he was speaking to them, things appertaining to
the Kingdom of God, he was taken away. I would give you this note from
thence, that when you come toward the time of your departure out of this
World, make Christ your example, Christ as he was going away he spoke of
things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, so let your hearts be full fraught
with Divine contemplation, do you leave good counsel behind you when you come
to die, that so some body may say, these are the last words of a dying Friend.
I might extend this Example of Christ before his departure out of the World,
unto masters of Families, that when you come toward your end, leave good
council behind you; Let not your speech be filled about worldly affairs, but
let that be settled before, but leave good council with your children. Jacob
when he was to die, he called all his children about him and gave good
council unto them and blessed them. Likewise of David, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou
Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all Hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts, if thou seek him, he will
be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. And
thus we see in the instances of Isaac and many other Servants of God, Moses to
Joshua when he was to die, I but take Christ's Example so far, that when you
are to leave the World, that you may have your minds possessed with nothing
else but with things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, as Christ was.

Acts 1.9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. They saw him by degrees
ascend into Heaven, this must not pass our Meditation, that a cloud should
take Jesus Christ out of our sight, it is for a relief to your Meditations,
that when you see the clouds, that these cloud^ that I see hover in the Heaven
they are Christ's Chariot that did once carry him to Heaven, and they are the
chariots that shall carry Jesus Christ to judge the World; O labor to have
your Meditations on Divine things, he went up in a cloud, therefore the clouds
are called Gods Chariots.

Acts 1. And an Interpreter does think that there was an hundred and twenty
with Jesus Christ, when he ascended up into Heaven, and he gathered it from,
Acts 1.15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and
said, The number of Names together, were about an hundred and twenty. Now
learned men do think that there was an hundred and twenty that did see Jesus
Christ ascend up into Heaven, it is clear that there were the eleven Apostles
there, and if this be so that Christ gathered about him, his Friends, when he
was to leave the World, I gather thence, that when you are drawing toward your
end and departing out of the World; Labor to have your Friends about you that
you might give them the advice of a dying Friend, and it is a great blessing
for to die amongst your Friends, Christ before that he would go up to Heaven
and leave the World, he would have his Friends about him, and then he was
taken up from them.

I now come to draw out more practical application of this point. If it be so
that Christ's going up bodily into Heaven be a ground of such great comfort unto
the people of God upon Earth, the use that I shall draw, it shall be to deduce
four Doctrinall and four practical inferences from this point.

Selucians and Herliani that hold that Christ's Body is not in Heaven, but that
it is in the beautiful and splendent body of the Sun, and they say, that is
the reason the Sun does cast such a glorious light, over that the Moon does,
and truly this old Heresy is again revived amongst us, and I have seen it in
a book called Divine Light, when indeed it is nothing but darkness, but
Christ is above the Sun, Christ is above all the visible Heavens: Christ sits
in the third Heaven as Paul calls it; therefore if Christ's Body be gone into
Heaven, they are in an error.

Germany held that they were the very Christ, and thus in King Henry the Eights
days, there was one held that he was the Christ, and his side was pearc't, and
there was Nails seen in his hand, etc. I but if men say, lo here is Christ,
and there is Christ believe them not, for Christ was never on the Earth since
his Ascension.

Transubstantiation is hereby confuted, Christ's Body cannot be in Heaven, and
on the Earth both at one time.

Carpocraciani that hold, that only his soul did go to Heaven, and his body
perished as others; And this cannot be, for the Disciples said, that they saw
Christ ascend, and this must be his Body, for they could not see his soul, for
the soul is a spirit. Now you see the reason why I spent so much time in the
morning in giving you many Texts of Scripture to prove this point: because
there are so many Heretics that do oppugn this Doctrine of CHRIST'S
Ascension. I now come to give you three or four practical deductions.

Genesis 45.25.27. And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the Land of
Canaan, unto Jacob their Father. And they told him all the words of Joseph
which he had said unto them, and when he saw the Wagons which Joseph had
sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their Father revived. Did Jacob rejoice
to see a Wagon or a Chariot that would carry him into Egypt to see his Son
Joseph, and wilt not thou rejoice to think that death is a chariot to carry
thee to Jesus Christ, to carry thee to Heaven? O therefore let not thy heart be
troubled to die, because death is but a chariot to carry thee to Heaven; Is
Christ gone into heaven?

Then secondly, labor thou whilst thou live on the Earth to ascend to Christ
in Divine and holy Ejaculations and Meditations; Is Christ in Heaven? then why
should not thy heart be where thy head is, why should thou be grovelling on
the Earth seeing thy Christ is now in Heaven? It is a speech of Christ,
Canticles 3.6. Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness like Pillars of
smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Franckincense, with all powders of the
Merchant? Thou should ascend up to Christ though thou be in trouble in the
Wilderness of this World; O ascend up to Christ in holy Meditations, the use
the Apostle makes of it, Colos. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right Hand of God.
The argument is, where Christ sits at the right Hand of God, set your
affections there: and so in the Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in Heaven,
from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is in
Heaven, therefore our conversation must be where our head is. It is a notable
Text, Mat. 24.28. For wheresoever the Carkeise is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together. That Christ being in Heaven it should make you ascend in
your hearts heavenward; It is true, there are some that wrest these words, and
give this sense of them, that they make the carkeise to be the Jews, and the
Eagles to be the Romans, because the Romans diduse the Eagle in their Banner
and Ensign of War, therefore they say where the Jews were the Romans should
come, though this was a truth, yet not the scope of the Text, it is generally
overthrown by most Interpreters; But where the carkeise is, thither will the
Eagles resort, Gerrard does chiefly refer it to the day of judgment, where
the carkeise is thither will the Eagles resort, that is, where Jesus Christ is
in Heaven, as the Eagles do follow after the carkeise to feed upon that, so
the people of God as Eagles are gathered about a carkeise, the people of God
shall be gathered about Jesus Christ, and this I do confess is the chief
scope of the place, and do believe it is the chief intendment of the holy
Ghost, but Gerrard he makes another use of it too, and referres it to the
power and efficacy of the Gospel in this Life; Christ is now in Heaven, says
Gerrard, that the Gospel shall be as powerful on men in the World, that it
shall make men as eager to come after Christ into Heaven as the Eagle is after
the prey, so your Souls shall be as eager after the Lord Jesus Christ in
heaven as the Eagle is after her prey.

labor to feel in your own hearts the efficacy of Christ's Death and
Ascension, every man applies the Benefit of Christ's Death, and Resurrection,
and Christ's Ascension before they find the efficacy of his Death, and the
efficacy of his Resurrection; It is the Apostles word, says he, I labor to
find the power of his Resurrection, so do you labor to find the power of his
Death and the power of his Ascension, before you find the comfort of it; It is
to make thee less Earthly minded, more passionately eager, and importunely
earnest after the Lord Jesus Christ: do thou feel the power of his Ascension
to make thee more heavenly minded, and less earthly minded? O labor to feel
the efficacy and power of it, else I might say to you as Jacob said to his
Mother in Genesis 27.12. My Father peradventure will feel me, and I shall
seem to him as a deceiver, and I shall bring a curse upon me and not a
blessing. Nay without a peradventure God will feel and try whether you are men
or no that have right to a blessing: that shall have any real advantage by the
benefit of Christ's Death, of Christ's Resurrection and Ascension. God will try
whether you do not seek to deceive your own Souls and deceive God himself;
if so, you will rather have a curse then a blessing, if you seek to apply the
comfort of Christ's Ascension, before you feel the efficacy of it on your own
hearts.

For those that hold Christ's Ascension with us, yet they do vary about some
properties, about the manner of Christ's going away; which I give it to you in
these properties.

Acts 1. It was no transcient glance of the Eye, but they steadfastly beheld
Jesus Christ, they saw him when he went away. Again,





Elias had a fiery chariot to carry him to heaven, but Christ had none, for he
went to heaven by his own strength.

Lastly, Christ went to Heaven, though not singly yet he went to heaven
bodily. There are three bodies in Heaven, there is the body of Enoch, the body
of Elias, and the body of Christ, all in heaven else are only Spirits, Saints
and Angels, Enoch went to heaven bodily as a Type of Christ's Ascension before
the Law, and Elias under the Law, and Christ under the Gospel. Divines say,
that this shows there was Salvation by Christ before the Law, and there was
Salvation by Christ under the Law, and Salvation by Christ in the time of the
Gospel, but there is a difference between their going to heaven.

Enoch and Elias went to heaven, but they did not die and rise from the dead,
and then ascend into heaven, but first Christ dyed, and then Christ was raised
out of the Grave, and then within forty days he did ascend into heaven, there
was one difference. Again, they did not ascend to heaven by their own
strength, but by the power of God, they did ascend into heaven, but we have
got no good by their Ascension, no benefit or merit accrues unto us by their
being in heaven, but there is great benefit redounding to us by Christ's being
in heaven, for says Christ, I go to Heaven to prepare a place for you.

Again, Enoch went to heaven, but he could not give the Spirit, so Elias went
to heaven but he could not give the Spirit; I but our Lord Jesus Christ he is
gone bodily into heaven, he has Ascended up on high, and has given gifts
unto men.

Again, they went to heaven, says Polanus, only as Citizens of heaven; but
Christ went to heaven as the Lord of heaven, who is there in his body and in
his person, and these are the short and transcient hints that I have given you
on the first part of the Text.

I now come to the second thing in the Text, to the benefit that Believers have
by Christ's going bodily into heaven; I go and prepare a place for you.

I go and prepare a place for you. Now in the handling of this Doctrine there
are three particulars.



that by Christ's Ascension Heaven is prepared for us, when other Scriptures
say, that Heaven was prepared for us from the beginning of the World.

the Church of Rome gather from this Text, that before Christ went to heaven,
there were none went into heaven, but all went into a place called Limbus
Patrum.



Jesus Christ is gone to heaven representing the persons of all the Elect of
God upon the Earth. Hence it is that you have a passage, Ephesians. 2.6. And has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. We are not in heavenly places, we are in earthly places, but we do
sit in heaven: because Christ is now in heaven, he being gone to heaven as a
common and a public person, a Representer of all the elect, Heb. 6.20.
Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high Priest for
ever after the Order of Melchisedec. He did not go there for himself, but
for us. Christ did dye as a public person representing all the Elect of God,
and Christ did go to heaven as a public person, and has taken possession of
heaven in our stead; Christ keeps our inheritance there, says Grossius,
Christ is said to prepare a place for us in heaven, just as a company of
Travelers, when they are going a journey; they send one man before to be their
harbinger to take up lodging in the Inn, and make provision for them against
they come to the Inn, our Lord Jesus Christ is gone to heaven before to
prepare a place for the Elect there.

Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us. That as the Priest under the Law when he went to
the holy places, he had the Names of all the Tribes on his breast, so the Lord
Jesus Christ our great high Priest having the Names of all the Elect not only
on his breast but in his heart, praying to his Father that we might come
there, and by virtue of his Intercession, that in another way that heaven is
prepared.

heaven, and this is the sense that Austin gives of these words, Jesus Christ
prepares a Mansion for us in heaven, when he prepares us the Inhabitants for
Heaven, here is the great evidence for Heaven, are your hearts prepared? then
you may be assured that Heaven is prepared for you, Col. 1.12, 13, 14 Giving
thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in Light. Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. In
whom we have Redemption, through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.
An unconverted man is not a meet man for Heaven, now when Christ makes you
meet for Heaven, he then prepares a place for thee, 1 Peter 1.3, 4, 5.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus from the Dead. To an Inheritance, Incorruptible and undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you; Who are kept by the power of
God through Faith and Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. So that
beloved if you be kept for Heaven, and made meet for Heaven, that is a
demonstration that Heaven is prepared for you.

I now come to the second Quere, which is this, I but how can this Scripture
say that by Christ's Ascension Heaven is prepared for us, when other Scriptures
say that heaven was prepared for us from the beginning of the World? Mat. 25.34
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World:
Now if a Kingdom was prepared for them from the beginning of the World, how
does this Scripture appropriate a preparing of the Kingdom of Heaven, but from
the Ascension of Christ? Divines do answer, That you must distinguish between
the decrees of God, and between the clear manifestation and full execution of
those decrees. Now if you respect the decrees of God, then the Scripture is
true, that the Kingdom of heaven is prepared from the beginning of the World,
for the decree and purpose of God was, before the World was, that the Elect
should have Heaven as an Inheritance, but if you expect the clear
manifestation of it, then it was not till Jesus Christ Ascended, and this
distinction the Scripture allows of it, especially of the point of
Justification, in this point the Scripture does clear this distinction, Heb.
9.8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all, was
not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. The
meaning is this, that the way to Heaven it was not manifest to the Jews whilst
their Tabernacle stood, that is, whilst their Leviticall Ceremonies were in
use, the way to Heaven was not manifest, the godly went to Heaven before
Christ's time, but it was not manifested, for the common sort of the Jews did
not understand that by Jesus Christ's Passion and Ascension they must come to
Heaven; therefore the Apostle says, the way to the holiest of all was not yet
manifested whilst their first Tabernacle stood; So my Text is true that Heaven
was prepared for Believers by the Lord Jesus Christ by his Ascension.

The third Quere is this, I but you will say, if Christ by his Ascension into
Heaven did prepare Heaven for Believers; then what became of all the people of
God, and holy men of God under the old Testament? Whither went they that if
this be true that Christ did prepare Heaven by his Ascension?

The Jesuits raise this difficulty from this Text. They say that before Christ
Ascended none did go to Heaven, therefore they make Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
all the Patriarks and all the holy men of God, they make them to be in the
place called Limbus Patrum, which was for the good men till Christ's Ascension;
Then there is Limbus Infantum, a place of receipt of Infants. Then there is
Purgatory for men guilty of gross sins, Heaven and Hell they concur in to be
a truth; Limbus Patrum, say they, was the place to receive all the good men
till Christ's Ascension, and then Christ took them all into Heaven, Protestant
Divines do take a great deal of pains to vindicate this Text.

If you will ask me what is become of the Patriarks and all the good men of
old before Christ's going into Heaven, how can they come to Heaven if Heaven be
prepared by Christ's Ascension?

Gerrard does of Christ's Passion; The Death of Christ it was availeable before
it was in being, so I may say of Christ's Ascension, that Christ's Ascension was
availeable before it was in being; Gerrard he has another passage, that the
benefits we have by Christ, they are not only to be restrained to ages that
are to come after Christ, but to look backward to all ages before Christ,
Revel. 5.9. And they sung a new Song, saying; Thou art worthy to take the
Book, and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation. Not only the Lamb slain decretively in Gods Decree, not only the
Lamb slain Typically in the ceremonial Sacrifices, but virtually, that there
was virtue in Jesus Christ, that all the godly Jews had virtue by CHRIST'S
Death, there is my first Answer.

Heb. 9.8. The holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of
all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing.
The Grecians do observe that Christ does not use a word that signifies to open
a thing that is shut, but to open, clear, and manifest a thing that is
obscure, it was open before.

Limbus Patrum, that there are clear passages in the Scripture and undeniable
reasons drawn from the Scripture that does prove Believers under the old
Testament went to Heaven before CHRIST'S Ascension; As in Luke 16.22. And it
came to pass that the Beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's Bosom: the Rich man also dyed, and was buried. He lived two thousand
years and more before Christ was borne, heaven is called Abraham's Bosom, and
the Elect that dyed are said to go into Abraham's Bosom, and Eliah and Enoch
are in Heaven perfectly, Heb. 11.5. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he
should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him. And in
Heb. 11. there the bodies of the Patriarks are reckoned up together, in the 16
verse. But now they desire a better Country, that is Heavenly, wherefore God
is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City.
He is not ashamed to be their God, therefore they have a City prepared for them
by God, that likewise if it be a History or a Parable, Lazarus was said to be
carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, this was before Christ dyed: then
frequent Scriptures there are, touching Christ's transfiguration that when
Christ was taken up, that he saw Moses and Elias, from thence Divines gather
that they must be in Heaven. There are four undeniable Reasons that will prove
that the godly before Christ's Ascension they went to Heaven.

Lazarus into Abraham's Bosom; now certainly Angels are not in Limbus Patrum,
Luke 16.22. Again if the Believers of old should not go into heaven, then the
Death and Merits of Christ would be much extenuated, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. He was the same yesterday, that
is, before he was borne he was of use then as well as after time.

Again, if the Souls of wicked men be in Hell before Christ's time, then the
Souls of godly men must be in heaven before Christ's time, that must clearly
follow by the Rules of contrary; now that wicked men went to Hell is clear
Jude 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner
giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example suffering the vengeance of eternal Fire. They went to
hell before Christ's time, therefore clear it must follow that the Elect must
go to Heaven before Christ's time.

Cor. 4.13. We having the same Spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I
believed and therefore have I spoken, we also believe and therefore speak; and
they with us had the same justifying Faith. Then for circumcision, it was a
sign of righteousness by Faith. And then again, they had the same Gospel
that we have, Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the same Gospel Preached, as well as
unto them: but the word Preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith
in them that heard it. The same Gospel, only theirs was dark, for the
ceremonial Law was Gospel; merely Types and Shadows to come, Shadows of
Salvation by Christ's Blood, to them was the Gospel Preached as well as unto
us; Nay they had the same Christ as we have, 1 Cor. 10.4. And did all drink
the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that Sipirituall Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ. And in the Wilderness it is said, Let
us not tempt Christ as they also tempted him, they sinned against Christ in the
Wilderness, and they enjoyed Christ in the Wilderness: so that they had the
same Christ as we have; Again they are under the same Covenant that we are,
Jeremiah 31. It is the same Covenant with ours in Hebrews 8. So that is there
not the same reason why Believers under the old Testament should go to the
same place as Believers under the new, for they had the same spirit, the same
Faith, the same Gospel, the same Christ, and under the same Covenant,
therefore they must needs go to the same place, though heaven be prepared by
Christ's Ascension, yet heaven was opened before, yet not so manifested before
as since Christ Dyed, Rose and went up to Heaven.

Jesus Christ by his going into heaven has prepared a place for the Elect
there, then learn by way of recompense, by way of compensation and
gratification to Jesus Christ; O prepare thou a heart for Christ who has
prepared a heaven for thee. Shall Christ go to heaven to prepare a place for
thee, yet thou afford Christ no corner in thy heart? thou let thy lust sit
on the Throne of thy heart, yet not give Christ any room there. We read in
Revel. 19.7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the
Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. O be thou
as the Bride, make thy self ready for the Marriage day, the betrothing day was
when Christ went up to heaven, thy Marriage day is thy dying day; O against the
Marriage day of the Lamb, do thou who art his Bride make thy self ready, do
thou prepare a heart for Christ who has prepared heaven for thee. Origin has
a good passage on Luke 22.12. And he shall show you a large upper room
furnished there make ready, though he does much abuse the scope of the
Scripture. There were three properties of the Room wherein Christ are the
Passover, a large, upper, and a furnished Room, he makes this Allegory of it;
I do not give it to you as the sense of it, but take his gloss, that if thou will come to sup with Christ thou must make thy heart as the upper Room, a
heart raised in Divine contemplation, and not only an upper Rome, but a large
Room, a large Heart, a furnished Room, a Heart adorned with grace; O do thou
prepare a large Room, an upper Room and a furnished Room for Christ.

now he is in the heavens, he is of greater avail to us, then if he were
upon the Earth, for if he were on the Earth all the World could not see him at
once, so that we are greater gayners by Christ's bodily absence and by Christ's
going up to Heaven, then if he were in person here amongst us, truly as Christ
says in John 14.28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come
again unto you, If ye loved me, ye yould rejoice, because I said, I go unto
the Father, for my Father is greater then I. Truly it was matter of joy and not
of grief that Christ left this World and went to Heaven, because he went
there to prepare a place for us. I would feign know whether Jacob would have
been troubled for his Son Joseph, if Jacob had known this that his Son was
gone into Egypt to prepare a place for him and all his Brethren, against the
Famine: surely it would never have troubled him. Truly your Joseph, your Jesus,
he is gone to Heaven to prepare a place for you there; therefore let it not
trouble you seeing you are more happy by Christ's presence in Heaven, then if
you had his Bodily presence upon the Earth.

Christ is gone to prepare Heaven for thee. It may be many of you have poor
cottages, smoaky houses, why for all that, lift up thy heart with joy, that
Christ is gone to prepare a large place in Heaven for thee. Ballans the Arrian
Emperor, when he did threaten Basil, and said that neither by Sea not Land
he should be safe from his power, yet says Basil. for all the Emperors rage,
I shall be either in Heaven or under Heaven. Why so, though thou may be
driven to and fro, by Sea and Land, and have no abiding place of safety to put
thy head in, yet maugre the malice of Men and Devils, thou shall be either in
Heaven or under Heaven. A Cardinal threatened Luther with this, that there
should not be a place left for Luther in all the Empire; O says Luther
smilingly, if Earth cannot keep me, yet Heaven shall. Beloved, bear up your
Hearts, that though thou may not have an abiding place on Earth, yet thou
have one prepared for thee in Heaven.

Lord Jesus. Christ dyed, but not for thee; Christ rose again, but not for
thee; Christ is gone up to Heaven, but not for thee; he^ will prepare no place
in Heaven for thee, therefore as was spoken of Judas, Acts 1.25. That he may
take part of this Ministry and Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression
fell, that he might go to his Own place. It was to no place of Christ's
preparing, it was prepared of old for condemnation; In the phrase of Jude,
Tophet is prepared of old, it is a place of an angry God, and not a place
prepared by a Mediator. This therefore should be matter of astonishment to all
Christlesse and Graceless men: what though Christ be gone into Hearen? yet
thou shall never follow after him. What though Christ prepares a place for all
his Elect? yet he prepares none for thee, thy place is prepared by an angry
God, thou go to Hell, and not to a place prepared by Jesus Christ. And thus
I have done with the second Doctrine, to wit, that the fruit and benefit that
all the Elect of God have by Christ's going into Heaven, it is to prepare a
place for them, I go and prepare a place for you.

I go and prepare a place for you, but I will come again. Christ may stay
long, but he will not stay ever, but Christ that said he would go away, also
said, he would come again. To explicate the phrase, I will come again, what
is meant by Christ's coming again? Beloved there are four sorts of
Interpretations of these words, neither which are true, but the last.

Christ is come, so they make it of his coming in the flesh, John 4. it was
their sense of the coming of Christ in the 25. verse. The Woman says unto him,
I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ, when he is come, he will
tell us all things: why, he was come, but she thought that he had not been
come; O says Jesus Christ, I am he, I am come already, so that the Jews and
the Samaritans did ever take the phrase of Christ's coming: but not to Judge the
World, but of the coming in the flesh.

Christ by his spirit, so some Interpreters do understand the words, but I
will come again, by his Spirit, and they make it agreeable to that phrase, but
lo I go away, but I will be with you to the end of the World, but Calvin
rejects it, because the next words say, I will come again, to receive you to
my self.

Christ's coming again to remain a thousand years upon the Earth, and for that
I shall give you several demonstrations from Scripture when I come to handle
it.

Christ's coming again, it is to be understood as Calvin and most Interpreters
take it, of Christ's coming to Judge the World. As if he should say, I go to
prepare Heaven for you, and I promise you to come again, that though your
bodies die and rot in the Graves, yet I will come again and raise you up
another day, and receive you unto my self; It is to be understood of his last
coming. And thus much for the Explication of the phrase.

Christ does here give them a promise of his coming to comfort their troubled
hearts. From thence observe, That Christ's coming again to judge the World is a
Doctrine full of comfort to every Believer whilst they are here upon the Earth,
for the proof of this see 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. to the end, For this we say unto you
by the Word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming
of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asteepe. For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a sheut, with the voice of the Archangell, and
with the Trumpe of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which
are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord;
Wherefore comfort one another, with these words. In the handling of this there
are three particulars, and then the use.

Christ should bid them they should not be troubled, that he would come
again, when between the making of this accomplishment and this time it has
run above 1600 years already?

Answer, First, that Tract of time can neither interrupt the accomplishment of
a promise, nor the comfort of a promise, it is comfortable that what is
promised shall sooner or later come to pass, especially in this, wherein all
the comforts of the Elect of God are reserved to the day of judgment. Daniel
10.1. In the third year of Cyrus, King of Persia, a thing was revealed unto
Daniel, whose Name was called Belteshazzar, and the thing was true, but the
time appointed was long, and he understood the thing, and had understanding of
the vision. It is a promise made by Christ to comfort you against all the
troubles of the World, he will come again, and though the time be long ere
he does come, yet the time appointed will be true, it is certain, though it
be long.

us, they could rejoice in promises being made to them, though the
accomplishment thereof was not fulfilled till many years after, and why should
not the Disciples be so, then, and why should not we be so now? I will give
you two or three instances, John 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day, and he saw it, and was glad. Abraham that had a promise of Christ, the
promise was made to Abraham above a thousand years before he saw him, and he
was glad, Heb. 11.13. These all dyed in Faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them. They did embrace the promise, though they were far off in
their accomplishment. An excellent Text you have in Isaiah 9.6. For unto us a
Child is borne, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulders, etc. Behold this is matter of joy* for to us a Child is borne, and
unto us a Son is given, why they might have said, Lord what is that to us? we
hear of garments rolled in blood, and of the confused noise of Warriers, and
do thou tell us of that which shall not be till many years after? and yet
the Prophet does think no fitter a promise to give them, then the promise,
that a Virgin should conceive a Son. I mention it for this, that though
promises were made long since, yet bear up your hearts for that it will be
sure and certain though it be long, and so much for the first particular.

The next particular is, I but how does it appear that Christ's coming to judge
the World is a Doctrine so full of comfort to Believers?

Christ's coming to judge the World, it is the people of Gods property to long
for the appearance of Christ, when it makes the heart of a Felix to tremble,
but it is a Doctrine of great comfort to a Believer, it is called the day of
Redemption, and called by Peter the day of Refreshing, and this made the Church
say, Come Lord Jesus come quickly, this shows that to the people of God there
is no Doctrine so comfortable as the Doctrine of Christ's coming to judge the
World, Titus 2.13. Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Peter 3.12. Looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire,
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. That men
should so long after Christ's coming, nay love Christ's coming. 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing. A crown is laid up for me, and not for me
only, but for all them that love his appearing. This shows, that surely it
must be a Doctrine of great comfort to the Elect of God, because they so long
look for, and love the coming of Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ has reserved the full glorification of the Elect for that time,
though Christ brings Souls to Heaven before his coming, yet he does not
completely glorify any of his servants till his coming again to judge the
World, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet
appear what we shall be, but we know not when he shall appear, we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is, and in Colos. 3.4 When Christ,
who is our Life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.
God has reserved the full glorification of the Elect against the time of his
coming. 1 Peter 5.4. And when the chief Shephard shall appear, ye shall
receive a Crown of glory that fades not away. Frequent Texts of Scripture
there are, to prove, that the reserve that Christ has of the full glorifying
of the Elect, it is at the time of his coming to judge the World.

comfortable to Believers? there are these four Particulars more especially
wherein the Doctrine of Christ's coming again to judge the World is a Doctrine
full of comfort to Believers.

Cor. 4.3, 4. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment, yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing
by my self, yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges me, is the
Lord. Censure me what you will, and judge of me what you please, for he that
judges me shall be the Lord, therefore it is a small matter that I am judged
of. Why suppose thou art judged, thou art scandalized, and thou art aspersed in
the World, why appeal to Jesus Christ in Heaven, for he that judges thee, is
the Lord, and this we find Christ did, 1 Pet. 2.23. Who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously. When thou art reviled, and aspersed, and
censured, why do not revile again, do not censure again, but do as Christ
did, commit thy cause to Christ that judges all things righteously. Christ
will come to over-judge all things that have been judged amiss. Jude, 1.5. To
execute Indgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst them,
of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and of all their
hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Men have hard
speeches against many, who are upright in the Land, why it is a comfort that
Christ's coming again, one end is, to convince men of all their hard speeches
and scandalous aspersions.

These. 1.6.7. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you. And to you who are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels.
As if he should have said, you are troubled and persecuted about the Gospel
for Christ's sake, why be not troubled, for Christ is coming from Heaven, 1
Peter 4.13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings,
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.
When Christ comes to be revealed and judge the World, why rejoice in your
sufferings, you shall be glad also with exceeding joy, that is a second case
wherein this Doctrine may be of comfort.

comfort, in case of any inward accusation of conscience from the apprehension
of thine own guiltiness, it may be thou judge thy self that thou art a
damned undone Creature, why remember, that there is a Judgment to pass on
thee besides thy own mistake and misapprehension, Christ coming to Judgment
should be a comfort to thee against thine own Inward accusation, because he
that is thy Jesus, is thy Judge, he is thy Advocate to plead thy cause, when
he is thy Judge to judge thy cause; Suppose thy conseience does accuse thee,
and thou judge thy self to Hell, yet comfort thy self with this, that thy
Jesus will afterward come to judge thee.

Jerome says, that Christ shall come to judge things that are not judged in
the World, and CHRIST shall come to judge things that are judged amiss in the
World, Christ shall judge all Oppressions and violence which is done by an
usurping hand, here is matter of comfort that Christ comes to judge them all
over again, an excellent passage which Solomon has, Eccle. 3.16, 17. And
moreover I saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was
there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there. I said in my
Heart, God shall judge the Righteous, and the Wicked: for there is a time there
for every purpose, and for every Work. That is, I saw into Courts of
Judicature, and I saw wickedness was there, and I looked into the place of
righteousness, and behold iniquity was there, then I said in my heart, surely
God shall judge both the righteous and the wicked; If there were no argument in
all the Scripture to prove Christ's coming again, why this Argument it will
evince that Christ shall come to judge the World, there must be a judging over
again; there shall be a general Judgment, because there is so much
perverting of judgment below, and thus you have wherein or in what causes the
doctrine of Christ's coming it may serve for comfort.

I am now come to the Application of that point. The use is of caution, and
cautions from this Doctrine of Christ's coming again, there are Three.

as to give you comfort, it is a great abuse of your privileges when you make
any Gospel point to be an inlet of comfort, when you do not make that very
comfort to be a spur to duties, and the Scripture puts you upon this, 1
Cor. 1.7. So that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him. He presses
them to duty on this Doctrine by the coming of Jesus Christ. Now to speak
distinctly to this caution, there are duties that the Doctrine of Christ's
coming is subservient and serviceable unto.

James 5.8. Be ye also patient, stablish your Hearts, for the coming of the
Lord draws nigh.

Cor. 1.7. So that ye come behind in no gifts, waiting for the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
should provoke you to a holy improvement of growth under Ordinances, for Christ
will call you to an account of your hearing, Revel. 22.17. And the spirit and
the Bride say come, and let him that hears, say, come. Christ when he comes
he will call you to an account for your hearing, thou that art an unfaithful
hearer, an unprofitable hearer, thou dare not say as the Spirit says, Lord
come, Lord come, but he that grows better by hearing, he will say Lord
come, Lord come, a notable Text, Mat. 25.22. He also that had received two
Talents, came and said, Lord thou deliveredst unto me two Talents, behold, I
have gained two other Talents besides them, His Lord said unto him, well done,
good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will
make thee Ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. This is
Christ's Language as Divines interpret, that he will come to judge the World,
he will call thee well done thou good and faithful servant thou have improved
thy gifts well, thou have improved thy Talents well.

Austine that I might have my desire, that when Christ shall come that he
might find me either Preaching or find me Praying. Labor then to be about
your work when Christ comes, for Christ to come and find thee in a stews,
when Christ comes and finds thee working of wickedness; O how unmeete art
thee for CHRIST'S coming!

Phil. 4.15. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand,
Luke 21.34. And take heed to your selves, Lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeitting and drunkenness, and cares of this Life, and so
that day come upon you unawares. It was Christ's counsel to his Apostles, 1
Pet. 4.7. But the end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober and
watch unto Prayer. So that the Doctrine of Christ's coming it seems for to
provoke you to be patient in suffering, to profitablenesse under the use of
Ordinances, to faithfulness in your callings, and to a moderation in the use
of lawful comforts.

Acts 17.30.31. And the times of this Ignorance God wincked at, but now
commands all Men every where to repent. Because he has appointed a day in
the which he will Judge the World in righteousness, by that Man whom he has
ordained. The Doctrine of Gods appoynting the day for the Man Christ to judge
the World, it should be a Spur to the grace of Rep^ntance, that now every Man
every where should repent, Christ's coming should be a Spur to Repentance.

Acts 24.15.16. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow,
that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just and unjust.
And herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God, and towaeds men. The thoughts of Christ's coming to judge the Quick
and the Dead should make you have thoughts of that, to have a good conscience
void of offense toward God and Man, 2 Pet 3.11. Seeing then that all these
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness. And thus much for the first caution, that you are
to look on the coming of Christ as a Doctrine serviceable as well for duty as
comfort. The second caution is this, take heed of peremptory conclusions about
this dark and obscure thing touching the Doctrine of Christ's coming to judge
the World. There are many loose and lavish frolic wits that have bold and
adventurous attempts touching the corning of the Lord in determining that,
which the Scripture determines not, it is not my intent to trouble you with
nice^ies, but only check the frollick and bold attempts, who go about to
determine of that which the Scripture does no way reveal, to which, take heed
of these things.

Christ shall comes as lightning from the East, but that does not show the
place from whence he comes; but as Christ shall come as Lightning, it notes
the visibility of Christ's coming, and the celerity of Christ's coming; Lightning
it is visible, and so shall Christ's coming be, all shall see him as ye shall
see Lightning; Now bold attempts it has been the Foundation to many
Superstitious Opinions, and that is the reason of bowing and cringing toward
the East. All rose merely from that ground of Christ's coming from the East:
the Scripture only says, that he shall come down from Heaven, and the Lord
shall come from Heaven, but from what part of the Heaven the Scripture speaks
not.

Again, pass not bold attempts in determining the place where Christ shall
come to judge the World, many men where the Scripture is silent do run into
many strong conceits to determine that which the Scripture does not, many Books
do determine the place where Christ shall come to judge the World, and that is
in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and there is one T^xt which seems to carry it
that way; which is in Joel. 3.12. Let the Heathen be a wakened, and come up to
the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to judge all the Heathen round
about. Here they do conj^cture that Christ shall come to the Valley of
Jehoshaphat, and there he shall judge all the World, and I shall to show the
vanity and weakness of these, take these five Demonstrations.





Jehoshaphas should contain all the men that ever were, that are, and that
shall be in the World to be judged, therefore it is not probable that this has
refetence to the last judgment.

Fourthly, the time that this judgment here is spoken of, it is limited by the
Prophet himself, for compare this verse with the second verse. I will also
gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
and will plead with them there for my People, and for my heritage Israel,
whom, they have scattered among the Nations, and parted my Land. The time is
spoken of when God shall turn again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
then God should judge the Babylonians, and those Heathen Nations that assisted
them for to undo the people of God; therefore it refers to some time after the
captivity, and not to the general and last coming of the Son of God, and
thus much for taking off that Text from being a patronage of that fond conceit
of Christ's coming to judge the World in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and the
Scripture is far from giving you the place where Christ shall come to
judgment, either in the Valley of Jehoshaphat or Mount Olivet, but only in
the air. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and
so shall we ever be with the Lord. The Scripture does make no mention of
Christ's coming upon the Earth at all. So much for the second caution, take
heed of bold attempts and conjectures about the place of Christ's judgment.

Gerrard does confute the folly of such men that do guess at the time when
Christ shall come to judge the World. Austin does make mention of some in his
time, that held that Christ should come to judge the World a thousand years
after his Death, but we have seen their folly and shame, for there is more
time expired then that. Another says, that some held in his time that Christ
should come to judge the World 365. years after his Death, that is a folly
likewise, for there is more time past then that. Luther says, that there were
Anabaptists which held that in the year 1530 Christ should come to judge the
World, but we have seen their folly likewise, for there is more time past
then that. Naples, though a learned Nobleman in Scotland, he was too frolic
in this way, for he does boldly say that Christ shall come to judge the World
^n the year, 1683. but beloved Christ's coming to judge the World cannot be
determined, for Christ would not gratify his own Apostles to tell them the
time when his coming should be, Mat. 24. He would not tell them when the end
of the world should be, it shows then that it is great pride of heart to pass
peremptory attempts upon the period of time, Christ did not think it meet for
to tell his Apostles of the time of his coming, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1. But of the times
and seasons, Brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you, nay Angels in
Heaven. And Christ himself as he was mere Man could not tell the time, Mark.
13.32. But of that Day, and that Hour, knows no man, no not the Angels
which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Mat. 24.36. But of that
Day and Hour knows no Man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father
only. I only mention it for this, to show the vanity of our age, of those who
will undertake to show the very day when Christ should come; Likewise to
condemn the former Ages, who run to things not revealed, I remember what a
learned Man says, one that commenteth upon my Text, says he, There is
nothing that does expose the Christian Religion to more contempt, then that the
Preacher of it, or the hearers of it will run into nice Questions, and be
peremptory in their resolves of that the Scripture speaks not of; And Jews and
Gentiles may sufpect the whole Gospel, because they see Men so peremptory
about things which are not revealed in the Gospel, and shall see their
false-hood appearing to all; be not peremptory in your determinations about the
time of Christ's coming, nor about the place where, for neither is revealed in
Scripture; Christ did deny his Disciples when they asked him where he should
come. Luke 17.37. And they answered and said, where Lord? And he said unto
them, where the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together. Christ
told them of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the World, then
said the Disciples, but where Lord will thou come? Christ only gives them this
answer, that where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles flee, that is,
where Christ is, all the Elect shall be gathered, as Birds of prey flock
together after a carcass to feed upon, so that Christ would neither tell the
place where, nor the time when, and this should be a check and a control to
men's curious pryings about that which the Scripture is silent in.

Lastly, take heed of bold and adventurous attempts of the manner of Christ's
coming to judge the World, many are very peremptory about it, and there be
strange Books, at least in their own expressions, that they can descry the
very manner of his coming, that CHRIST shall come from Heaven, and dwell a
thousand years upon the Earth, and the Dead shall rise and live in the World,
but these are such things which the Scripture does near take notice of. I am
to handle on this p^omise of Christ, but I come again; A perplexed Quere which
is this, whether Christ Jesus in promising to his Disciples to come again,
whether that promise of Christ coming again be to Reign upon the Earth here a
thousand years, or whether it be to be meant of Christ's last coming to judge
the World; this Scripture and others are made use of, and brought to prove that
Christ shall come from Heaven and in person, and live upon the Earth, for a
whole thousand years, they fancy that Jesus Christ when he shall come, on
this personal Reign, then he shall raise all the Martyrs that have lost
their Lives in his Cause, and the Devil shall be bound up, that he shall
tempt Men to sin no more, and wicked Men shall be tied up that they shall
not persecute the Church of God, this is an Ancient Opinion, and almost since
the Apostles days. Before I shall come to give you my thoughts from the words
touching Christ's coming, as they pretend to Reign a thousand years upon the
Earth; I shall show you the rise of this Opinion.

Eusebius and other, they give us this to be the rise of this Opinion from
Cyrenthus which had it, who lived in the time of John. This Cyrenthus who was a
pestilent Heretic in those times, who held that Christ was borne by the
Conjunction of a Man and a Woman, and not borne by a Virgin, and was borne as
others are, and so must be a sinner, He was the Man that was the first author
from whom this Opinion had any life and being. Patrius seemed to maintain
this, and diverse others were ensnared with this conceit: and Beloved, there
was some spice of this in the Apostles, for they did dream of a Temporal
Kingdom; Therefore they asked Christ when he was going to Heaven, Lord when
will thou restore the Kingdom to Israel? there was in the times of the Apostle
a fancy that Christ must be an Earthly Monarch, and destroy all the Kings of
the Earth, and all the Enemies of the World, and must come here to Rule and
Reign a thousand years upon the Earth; it was brought over in Transylvania
and Italy, in Germany, and there was taken hold on by John of Leydon, and in
Westphalia, and handed over to us in England by men of late. Now for the
confutation.





Thirdly, I shall show you some absurdities and incredulities that would follow
if Christ should come to Reign a thousand years upon the Earth.

Acts 3.21. Whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of
all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since
the World began. There the Apostle tells you directly, that the Heaven must
receive and keep Jesus Christ, how long? till the restitution of all things.
The Milleners hold that the restitution of all things may be at the time of
Christ's Personal Reign, but I shall show you that this restitution of all
things cannot be till Christ's judging the world. First there cannot be a total
abolition of sin in the World, at the thousand years end there shall be a
number of men, and wicked, during the thousand years, all things cannot be
restored, for sin brings the creature under a curse, it is apparent that it
cannot be till Christ's last coming to judge the world, because other Scriptures
tell you that the time of restitution cannot be till our bodies be raised from
the Dead, Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our selves also which have the
first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption to wit, the redemption of our bady; That is the
creatures do as it were groan, being used by man as an instrument to Gods
dishonor, so that till the bodies of all the Elect be redeemed and glorified,
till that time the creature lies under a curse by reason of Man's sins and
Man's abuse. And they themselves hold that plead for Christ's personal reign a
thousand years upon the Earth, though they do hold that the Martyrs shall be
raised at that time; but do not hold that all the Elect shall be raised at
that time, therefore the Apostle says expressly that the Heavens must keep the
person of Christ till the restitution of all things, till the bodies of the
Elect come to be raised from the Dead. Again, it is apparent from the Context
in Acts 3. That the restitution of all things can intend no other time then the
time of Christ's coming to Judgment.

Jews were to be refreshed from the Lords presence, v. 19, 20, 21. Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out when the times
of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord. And he shall send
Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you. Whom the Heaven must receive,
until the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the World began. And they cannot be
refreshed by the Lords presence till Christ's coming to judgment.

Repent, ye therefore and be converted, that our Sins may he blotted out.

Moses, Daniel and others, nay none of the Prophets speak of Christ's Reign a
thousand years upon the Earth, therefore this cannot have a reference to
Christ's Reign for a thousand years upon the Earth. A Second Scripture is in
Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right Hand, until I
make thine Enemies thy Foote-stoole. That Scripture tells you; that Jesus
Christ who is ascended into heaven and sits at Gods right Hand there, that
Christ shall sit at Gods right Hand, how long? till he has made all his
Enemies his Foote-stoole. The Apostle tells you that all Enemies to be made
Christ's Footstool, cannot be till Christ's coming at the last time. Will you
mark that Scripture, that the Apostle tells you directly, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24,
25, 26. But every man in his own Order, Christ the first Fruits, afterward
they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes the end, when he shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall have put down
all rule, and all authority, and all power. For he must reign, till he has
put all Enemies under his Feets. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is
Death. Here is the coming of Christ that has reference to all, the Just and
Unjust. Mark now, Christ therefore must reign in Heaven till all enemies be
under his Feet, now these thousand years all Enemies are not under his Feet,
why? because death will be then, death is not to be destroyed then, for there
will be thousands of Men upon the Earth; but when the end comes he must give
up his Kingdom to his Father. What is more clear then this, that the Heavens
must keep Christ till all things be restored? and that cannot be till the day
of Judgment.

Again, Christ must reign so long till the end of the World. The third
Scripture is in the 1 Cor. 15.23.24. But every Man in his own Order, Christ
the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father,
when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and all power. This
Scripture tells you that when Christ comes out of Heaven, upon Christ's
coming, three things must be done.

verse. 23. Now that cannot be at a thousand years, because they themselves hold
this, that there shall only be a Resurrection of the Martyrs, and here the
Scripture says, that every man shall rise, which cannot be till the day of
Judgment.



Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin, unto
Salvation. From that Scripture I will argue against Christ's coming to reign
upon the Earth for a thousand years.

First, it is expressly in the Scripture that Christ's coming there spoken of, it
referres to the day of judgment in verse. 27. And as it is appointed unto men
once to die, but after this the judgment. There Christ's second coming it does
refer to the day of Judgment. Now if the Scripture does call that his second
coming, which is his coming to judgment? then Christ cannot come before that
time as to reign upon the Earth, for if he should come to reign upon the
Earth, then the Apostle must call that his third coming, there was but one
coming which was from Heaven to the Womb of the Virgin, and there is no other
coming, but a second coming, that is to judgment, that is his second coming.

Concomitants of his coming that can be ref^rred to no other time then his last
coming to judge the World.

Jude 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying,
Behold, the Lord comes, with ten thousands of his Saints; So that when Christ
comes from Heaven he must come with his Saints with him, nay he must come with
his Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels. These two
Scriptures put together, Christ must come with his Saints and Angels. I but
those that fancy Christ's coming a thousand years, they cannot prove that Christ
shall come with his Saints and Angels, for the Scripture that seems to carry
it that way, does not speak of Angels and Saints coming.

These. 2.9. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him. So that the coming of our Lord,
and our gathering together to be judged by Christ, they are both coupled
together; because when the Lords coming is, then is our gathering time, Mat.
25.31.32. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. And before
him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats. And in 2 Timothy 4.1.
I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the Quick and the Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. The Scripture
tells you that when Christ appears to judge the World, he shall have this
Concomitant of his coming, he shall gather all together to judge both the Good
and the Bad. Those that pretend that Christ shall come to reign a thousand
years upon the earth, they cannot prove that then all shall be gathered
together, they only plead for the Martyrs, and none else, therefore it cannot
be referred to his coming to reign a thousand years.

Cor. 15.24. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father, etc. So when Christ comes, then comes the end; Now
those who hold for Christ's personal reign, they hold that the end of the
World shall not be till a thousand years after, because Christ must Reign a
thousand years.

Cor. 15.23. But every man in his own Order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. So that at Christ's coming the
general Resurrection of the just and unjust is to be.

Lastly, there is to be the Salvation of the Souls of all the Elect, that is a
fifth concomitant of Christ's coming, Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear
the second time without sin unto Salvation. This cannot be referred to
Christ's Person coming upon the Earth, because he does not come then to save
the souls of all the Elect, that is the first reason why Christ cannot come to
Reign upon the Earth, that when the Scripture speaks of Christ coming out of
Heaven, the Scripture does annex five Concomitants with it, that it cannot be
true of Christ's coming upon the Earth, but to come to judge the World. A second
reason is this, that Christ cannot come to reign upon the Earth, because if it
should be so, it would be worse for Christ, and it would be worse for us then
now it is, it would be worse for Christ, for to leave Heaven and come to the
Earth, for Christ to leave Saints and Angels and Heaven, for to live among the
wicked and the good, for they themselves confess that wicked men shall live
upon the Earth then. Then besides they fancy Earthly delights, that the fruit
of the Vineyard shall not fade, as now it does, why they would lessen Christ's
Glory, because he sits this day at his Fathers right Hand, for to fancy this,
that Christ must come to reign upon the earth, it would be a great loss to
all the Elect, for we have the benefit of Christ's everlasting Intercession;
And were Christ upon the Earth, we should lose that benefit, Heb. 8.4. For if
he were on the Earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are
Priests that offer gifts according to the Law. Therefore I do wonder what they
will do that pretend great glory to Christ to reign on the Earth, so that if
he were upon the Earth we should lose the benefit of his Priesthood;
Therefore it would be a great wrong to us, to have Christ here on the Earth,
because the benefit of his Priestly Office would not be so availeable to us as
it is in Heaven. Thus I have laid down Scripture and given you reasons, why
Christ cannot come, before his last coming.

Now there are eight Incongruities, and Absurdities that would follow in case
you should grant that CHRIST should come to Reign a thousand years upon the
Earth.

Christ's last coming to judge the World, for those who hold Christ's personal
Reign, they do as well hold the time as the thing, they do as well maintain
when this Reign shall begin; Therefore some have maintained that Christ should
come to Reign on the Earth in the year, 1650. One says if it shall not be in
the year 1650, it shall be in the year 1694. They that go furthest give at
that time, if so be they hold the thing, and maintain the time when it shall
begin, then of necessity, we must know exactly when the day shall be that
Christ shall come to judge the World, for they grant it shall be imediately
after the thousand years; Now Beloved, that Opinion that carries this
absurdity to know the day of Christ's coming to judge the World, which Christ
says, none in the World can tell, of that hour and day knows no man. Mark.
13.32. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are
in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Therefore it cannot possibly be
that Christ must come on the Earth, therefore those that live at least to see
Christ come from Heaven, they cannot tell to a Day when CHRIST shall come to
judge the World.

Christ shall Reign on the Earth a thousand years before his great and last
coming to judge the World, then it will follow, that Christ shall almost be as
long a time on the Earth as in Heaven, Christ dyed in the 33 year of his Age,
and has been 1619 years in Heaven, and he must be a thousand years upon
the Earth, that is very improbable. This incongruity will follow that it will
be a great disadvantage to Christ, for Christ to come in person a thousand
years on the Earth, he must leave his Father and leave his Heaven, and come
and only possess Earth. Now Christ has more happiness in the imediate
enjoyment of his Father in Heaven, then he can have here upon the Earth. Then
it will be a loss to us, that we should lose the benefit of his Priestly
Office, but Christ the Son of righteousness being in Heaven, is more
waileable to Believers, then if he were upon the Earth.

Christ should come on the Earth for a thousand years, then Christ would leave
the Church after that thousand years for a while, in a worse condition, then
he found it, if Christ must come on the Earth, he must leave his Church in a
worse condition then he found it, and I draw it from that Text which they
pretend to be the strength of their Argument, Revel. 20.5.7.8. But the rest of
the Dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the
first Resurrection, And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be
loosed out of his Prison. And shall go out to deceive the Nations which are in
the four quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to
Battle, the number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea. So that after the
thousand years, the Devil shall be let loose again, and there shall be an
innumerable company of enemies, and they shall destroy multitudes of the godly;
Therefore Christ would leave his Church in a worse condition then he found
them, if this were true that Christ should reign a thousand years upon the
Earth.

Christ should come to reign a thousand years upon the Earth, then this
incongruity will follow, that there must be three personal comings of Jesus
Christ, for his first coming was in the Incarnation. Second coming, to these
thousand years. And his third coming must be to judge the World, that is, the
last coming, but the Scripture makes but two comings of Christ; First, his
coming from Heaven when he was borne; his second coming when he comes to
judge the World again.

Christ comes personally out of Heaven, this incongruity will follow, that
either the Saints and Angels must come, or not come with Christ; if they must
come with Christ, then it is a loss to them, for them to come to leave the
imediate presence of God, and come upon the Earth where wicked men shall be
amongst them: or if they must not come with Jesus Christ, yet it is a lose to
them to remain there, they shall lose for a thousand years the Body of
Christ, if Christ be on the Earth, he cannot be in Heaven the same time;
Therefore it would be a loss to the Saints and Angels for them to be a
thousand years in Heaven without the company of Jesus Christ, not to have the
person of Jesus Christ with them.

Christ shall come to reign upon the Earth, then Christ's Kingdom must be a
worldly and terrene Kingdom, then it will be against the Word of God, he must
be a visible King to the Jews, and a visible King to all the World besides;
this would follow then that Christ's Kingdom must not be a spiritual Kingdom,
but a Terrene, a Worldly pompous Kingdom. John 18.36. Jesus answered, My
Kingdom is not of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, but now is my
Kingdom not from hence. Luke 17.20. And when he was demanded of the Pharisees
when the Kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The Kingdom
of God comes not with Observation. Would not all the World observe this, for
Christ to come bodily from Heaven, and in the Majesty of a Monarch? Now Christ's
Kingdom does not come with Observation. When the Disciples looked after an
Earthly Kingdom, No, says Christ, my Kingdom is for to Rule and Reign in
your hearts, you shall never see me for to be an outward pompous King in the
World, for Christ's Kingdom it is a spiritual Kingdom.

Jesus Christ shall come to take a Kingdom on the Earth for a thousand years,
then this Incongruity will follow, As if Jesus Christ had not a Kingdom, and
were not a King all this while he is in Heaven; they apply, that, that place
in Daniel and all those Phrases in the new Testament, that the Kingdom of the
World is become the Kingdom of the Lord, they deny that Christ is a King in
Heaven. When he was in the Cratch and borne in the Stable, he was a King at
that very hour, Psalm 2. The Apostle referres it to Christ's Birth and
Christ's, Resurrection. Christ when he arose from the Dead he was a King then,
and the Gospel under Christ's time is called a Kingdom. It is remarkable, in
John 18.37. Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a King then? Jesus
answered, Thou say that I am a King. Christ was a King, though he would not
be an Earthly King to destroy Earthly Governments, Therefore when the people in
a tumult would have made him a King, yet he would not, Zech. 9.9. Rejoice
greatly, O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King
comes unto thee, he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an
Ass, and upon a Colt, the fool of an Ass. He was a King, when he was on
that slow contemptible creature, so that now to say Christ shall come to reign
as King, it is to intimate to the World, as if Christ were not a King at this
day, and whereas he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords in heaven, therefore
cannot come a thousand years to reign on the Earth.

Now I will deal fairly to show you what strength, and give you the strongest
Scriptures that have most show of reason, for the maintaining of this Opinion,
and shall labor to take them off and clear it to you. There are multitudes of
quotations that varieties of men's thoughs fasten upon to prove this point, yet
those they most stand to, I shall fasten upon, their chief Pillar is in Revel.
20.2, 4, 5, 6. And he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the
Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years. And I saw thrones, and they
sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them, and I saw the Souls of them
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and
which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had received his
mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived and reigned with
Christ a thousand years; But the rest of the dead lived not again until the
thousand years were finished. This is the first Resurrection, Blessed, and
holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second death
has no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years. Now from this Text which is the chiefest in
the Scripture they seem to build these two things upon.

That Jesus Christ shall live upon the Earth, and the Saints reign with him
for a thousand years.

Those that were Martyrs by Antichrist shall rise from the dead, and come upon
the Earth, these thousand years to continue with Jesus Christ. This they build
much upon, That Christ shall come to reign a thousand years upon the Earth,
But I shall show you that this cannot be the sense of it, and I shall give you
Six Answers.

Text does not say that Christ shall come to reign with them a thousand years.

Christ a thousand years, yet the Text does not say that they shall reign
with him here upon the Earth.

Christ a thousand years, yet living and reigning with Christ does not
necessarily imply to be in the same place where Jesus Christ is, for then you
would pervert many Scriptures: For lo, says Christ, I am with you to the end
of the World; it does not therefore follow, from that time he will be upon the
Earth to the end of the World, but Christ being with us, or we with him, it
does not follow we must be with him where he is, but it is his Spirit. Romans
8.17. And if Children, then Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ: if so
be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. The Text
it does not denote the samenes of place, and the onenes of situation, I give
this to take off that which is made of this Text.

Christ shall come to reign a thousand years on the Earth, then it will not
only follow that men shall live so long, but shall reign with Christ so long
on the Earth. Methuselah lived but nine hundred sixty and nine years, and
David says, the life of man is cut short. The Text says, they shall live and
reign with Christ, in that sense, taking living properly, and all the Phrases
properly, they must necessarily say that men shall live when that time comes,
that men shall live a thousand years together. Then, it cannot be the sense of
the Scripture, because that cannot be the sense of this Scripture which
crosses the sense of other Scriptures, to make this Scripture to affirm that
Christ shall reign on the Earth a thousand years, for other Scriptures tell
you that Christ shall stay in Heaven in person, till all men shall rise from
the Dead, every man shall rise, then comes the end. 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. But
every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are
Christ's, at his coming. Then comes the end, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. Now we beseech
you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto him. Then besides it does cross the Scripture to say that at
Christ's coming, only some men shall arise, but not all. Job 14.10, 11, 12. But
man dies and wastes away, yea, man gives up the ghost, and where is he? As
the waters fail from the Sea, and the Flood decays and dries up; So man
lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more, they shall not awake,
nor be raised out of their sleep. Job tells you expressly, That the dead
shall not be raised till the Heavens be no more, and that cannot be the
thousand years, for there will be a Earth, and a Heaven then; And in Peter's
phrase, The Heavens shall melt away like a scrowle, etc. Now to make a
Resurrection, before a Resurrection, it is that which the Scripture does no
where mention, John 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in
the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice. And shall come
forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnation. The judging of the just
and unjust shall be the same hour, and upon Christ's coming all men shall be
judged, 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his
Kingdom. So that Christ's appearing, and Christ's coming is a judging of the
quick and the dead. Now Beloved, then to make this Scripture to say that Christ
shall come on the Earth before his last coming, this is to cross other
Scripture, then of necessity it cannot be the scope of this, for there is no
jarring between one phrase of the Scripture and another.

That they live and reign with Christ a thousand years, it may be as well,
and they have as strong a ground to plead, it is not spoken whether it be a
reigning with CHRIST in Heaven or on Earth, so the phrase neither carries it
one way or another.

John does not say, that he saw the bodies of men that were beheaded, and they
reigned with Christ, but he did in a Vision see the Souls of them that were
beheaded, now to say that they must come to reign on the Earth for a thousand
years, it were a great inconveniency to them; it is said, I saw the Souls of
them, the thousand years cannot be applied to Christ's personal Reign, for
either it must be applied to him as he is simply God, and it cannot be applied
to him, for so Jesus Christ has an eternal Kingdom, he does not reign a
thousand years on Earth or in Heaven, but everlastingly, Kingdoms and States
of this World have lasted a thousand years, and to make Christ's Kingdom to
last no longer, it is to give Christ's Kingdom too narrow a confine. I have
consulted with many Authors, and I find the concurrent of Interpreters
generally run this way, though some do fancy that Text speaks of the
binding of the Devil for a thousand years, and during this time, the Saints
should live and reign with Christ for a thousand years. The sense and scope
of this.

Constantine the Great, he being the first Christian Emperor in the World,
he coming after 300 years Persecution by the Roman Emperors, who made great
massacre and havoc in the Church of God; Insomuch that in the book of Martyrs
we read, that there may be for every day in the year five thousand Christians
slain, this is a dreadful persecution, and the Devil raged and stirred much.
Now upon Constantines reign the Devil was bound up, that is, the Roman
Emperors, who were acted by the Devil to all this cruelty, when Constantine a
Christian Emperor came to reign, he gave out impreiall Edicts and Laws for
Establishment of the Christian Religion, and that put an end to the Heathens
Persecution, the Roman Emperors, and of this Opinion many Interpreters give in
their consent, Brightman Napman, Gerrard, with multitudes of others, for the
thousand years when the Devil was bound did end 300 years and more, and this
is given to be the scope and sense of the Scripture.



Turkish Emperor began to bear sway, Gog and Magog, called the Turk, the
Turk prevailed and has gotten the greatest part of the World within his
power, and he was the Gog and Magog that did encampe the Saints, and did
spread almost over all the Earth, and truly comparing Scripture and story
together, this seems to be the nearest and the truest sense of this place, and
this Interpreters do generally concur in.

Two Objections by those, who plead for a Thousand years.

Balance the Arrian Emperor after these 300 years, and of Julian the
Apostate that did greatly persecute the Christians, and how can this be true
when we read of so much persecution, after the Devil was bound up?

Answer, That when it is said the Devil is bound up, it is not meant simply,
that there should be no Temptation to sin, for that there should be; Balance
the Emperor did establish Arrianisme and troubled the Church of God. One
answers, says he, it was nothing like the persecuting of the Roman
Emperors, it was nothing so long nor so tedious as the Persecution under the
Roman Emperors, for, for every day in the year, 5000 Christians were put to
death; In Dioclesians Reign there were 17000 Christians killed in one Month,
there was some sprinkling Persecution in the time of Balance, and Julian the
Apostate, it was nothing to that of the Roman Emperors, Bernard and others
gives that answer, which both concur in.

Again, though Balance the Emperor and Antichrist did trouble the Church at
that time, yet is a Prophecy, of what Exemption should be from the tyrannical
reign of the Roman Emperors. It is true, Antichrist did trouble the Church,
when the Roman Emperor did not, and the Church was free from the Roman
Emperors.

Christ a thousand years, this is the first Resurrection, how can it be said
that after the time that the Roman Emperor was curbed by Constantine, how can
you say, that, that was a Resurrection, and that they reigned with Christ at
that Time.

For Answer, first, That that was the first Resurrection, it is said so in
Scripture phrase, the word rising does not carry a reference of the body from
the Grave, but from a state of affliction and of sin, they are expressed in
Scripture by a Resurrection. Romans 10.10, 11. Let their Eyes be darkened, that
they may not see, and bow down their back always. I say then, have they
stumbled that they should fall? God forbid, but rather through their fall,
Salvation is come unto the Gntiles, for to provoke them to jealousy, Isaiah
22.19. And I will drive thee from thy Station, and from thy state shall he pull
thee down. The men that are as it were low men in captivity in Babylon, they
shall rise, it does not refer to the Resurrection from the dead at the last
day: so a rising from sin, Coloss. 2.12 Buried with him in Baptism, wherein
also you are risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. We are risen with Christ, not bodily, but out of our
sins, Coloss. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits on the right Hand of God. So that here a
Resurrection, this is the first Resurrection, the meaning is this, that those
that did escape the rage and cruelty of the Ten Persecutions, and did come to
live in Constantines days, and did all the while of the former Persecutions,
keep themselves from the Idolatry of the Heathens, and Corruptions of
Antichrist, they are said to have a first Resurrection: blessed are they that
were raised up by Christ from their Sins, and from their Errors,
Superstition and Idolatry both of Antichrist and the Heathens, that is, they
were blessed.

I but then it is said, they live and reign with Christ a thousand years.

Beloved, that phrase, living and reigning with Christ, though some
Interpreters refer it to Heaven, yet with Brightman and others, I concur with
these, and so Bernard says, it does denote thus much, that those in Successive
Ages, who enjoyed Liberty in the Christian Religion under Constantine the
Great, who lived to a thousand years, that were delivered from former
afflictions, and kept by Christ's Power from the Idolatry of the Times, and from
Antichrist, they were said to live with Christ a thousand years, for they
lived to him and depended on him, and were not plunged into the wickedness of
the Times; And thus with consulting of many Authors I find this to be the
truest recount, in a few words, in taking of this Text from giving any
foundation to Christ's personal reign for a thousand years upon the Earth.

Scripture that they do urge for Christ's personal reign upon the Earth for a
thousand years, and that is the 2 Peter 3.7, 10, 11, 12, 13. But the Heavens
and the Earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto
fire against the day of Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly men. But the day of
the Lord will come, as a Theife in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the Earth also and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then
that all these things shall be dissolved what manner of persons ought ye to be
in all holy conversation and godliness, Looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be
dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless, we
according to his promise, look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. Here is mention of a coming of Christ, we look for
and hasten to his coming, at Christ's coming we look for a new Earth; Now say
they, to what purpose were there to be a new Earth, if Christ were not to come
down on this Earth, and the Saints with him for a thousand years, as the
Scripture does seem to give warrant for a thousand years reign, this
Scripture seems to give warrant that it shall be on the Earth, they say that
the righteous shall only have benefit of Christ's personal reign upon the
Earth.

To take off this. Text, it is brought in by some Epicurian Principles that
some scoffers had taken in these times, ver. 3.4. Knowing this first, that
there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts. And
saying, where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation. We see no
change in Providence, therefore where is the promise of Christ's coming? They
scoffed at Christ, that Christ was a contemptible man in this World, and that
God should judge the World by Christ, this is the Answer in the 7 verse. But the
Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store
reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly Men.
Peter speaks directly that the time of Christ's coming (and they scoffed at it)
was not the time of the thousand years, but of the Time of the day of
Judgment; Therefore this coming here that Peter speaks of, it cannot be meant
of a thousand years before the day of Judgment.





But the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which tht
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, etc. That Epithet it is referred
to his coming to judge the World, to his last coming, and not to any other
coming. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. For your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord
comes as a Thief in the Night. But if Christ should come to reign upon the
Earth, then he comes visible, Mat. 43.44. But know this, that if the good Man
of the house had known in what watch the Thief would come, he would have
watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be
ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not the Son of Man comes.
Revel. 16.15. Behold. I come as a Thief: Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

Fifthly, and this Divines stand much upon. We according to his promise look
for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. That the
dwellings of righteousness here, it does not refer that such a thing shall
be on the new Earth, but the dwelling of righteousness referres to
righteousness here, it does not refer that such a thing shall be on the new
Earth, but the dwelling of righteousness referres to righteous men, not to
Heaven or Earth, the Greek word cleares it plainly, it is a word in the
Plural Number, Therefore it is not referred to the Earth, which is in the
Singular Number, Therefore Divines say, from the Original, 2 Peter 3.13.
(...). We in whom dwells righteousness, look for a new Heaven, and a new
Earth. So that the dwelling of righteousness, it is not referred as if there
should be men on Earth, but that righteousness should dwell in men, we read
of none being on the Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, ousnesse. Thus much
for that other Scripture, We look for new Heavens, and a new Earth.

A Third Scripture, and that they deem to have some strength in too; In Daniel
2.44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other
People, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever. And this Text, Aroher in his book referrs to the
personal reign of Christ.

Now Beloved, to give you the scope of this Text, take these Answers.

Jesus Christ, and that Kingdom was given by God to Christ while he was here
upon the Earth in the form of a servant, and this Luke tells you, Chap. 1.
verse. 32, 33. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the highest,
and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall
be no end. So that Jesus Christ had a Kingdom, and he is now King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords in Heaven.

Kingdom speak of? It speaks of those that divided Alexanders Kingdom, who
overcame the Medes and Persians, it was divided between Ptolomy Ring of Egypt,
and Silucas King of Assyria, and the loins of those Kings should succeed in
Government; In their time Jesus Christ did set up a Kingdom, for he was borne
King of the Jews.

it shall be for ever and ever.

A Fourth Scripture, is in Ephesians. 5.5. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger,
nor Unclean person, nor Covetous Man, who is an Idolater, has any Inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. And this Text Gerrard quotes and does
well resolve it, they say there is not only a Kingdom of God that is Heaven,
but the Scripture does make mention of a Kingdom of Christ, and a Kingdom of
God, Therefore they build on this of Christ's Reign, and of having of a
Kingdom here upon Earth.

his Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. Jesus answered, my Kingdom is
not of this World, etc.



Jesus Christ now in Heaven, he is King and Priest, his Kingly Office now in
Heaven ruling all the Church of God by his Word and Power; Therefore those
Phrases carry only thus much, that Christ is King now in Heaven, the
Administration of all affairs in the World at his dispose, but when he shall
come to judge the World, then he shall deliver up all to his Father.

Mat. 26.29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of
the Vine, until that day, when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom. And this Alsted quotes, from thence they gather, it cannot be meant
of Heaven, why? because there is no eating and drinking there, here is promise
by Jesus Christ, and come to them no more till he would drink with them Wine
in his Fathers Kingdom, and it cannot be unless Christ does come in person
amongst his people; Therefore Christ must have a Kingdom to eat and drink
with his people in this World. This they stand much upon.

Take these clear Answers, to these Quotations.

my Kingdom, and not my Fathers Kingdom, that is one answer that Divines give.

Luke 24.42. And they gave him a piece of broyled Fish, and of an Hony-combe,
And he took it, and did eat before them. So he may as well drink as eat,
but that to me is somewhat uncertain.

I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day when I
drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom: he was taking the Lords Supper,
and was drinking the Cup of Wine, says he, I am going away and will drink no
more till we meet in Heaven, not that there should be Eating and Drinking in
Heaven, but when you and I meet, we shall have sweet fellowship and communion
together, as Eating and Drinking together; As Feasting is a badge of Communion,
and a badge of Love, so there should be endeared love and endeared Communion
with Christ in Heaven: you shall drink it new, not new Wine, nor eat new
Bread, but after a new manner of Love and Communion, they should express Love
each to other, and have everlasting Communion, one with another.

They say likewise that there shall be no sin in the World, and that the
Earth shall be restored to its primitive fruitfulness as it were before the
fall, but I shall not meddle with these. And thus according to my poor measure
I have labored to lay down the grounds from Scripture, why Christ cannot come
to reign personally upon the Earth a thousand years, and have vindicated
those Scriptures that seem to patronize that Opinion.

it your work to have Jesus Christ as King to reign in your hearts by
mortification, to rule in thy Heart by his Spirit, to Mortify thy headstrong
lusts that are in thee.







This is but a bad preparation, and but poor encouragement to Jesus Christ to
come and reign amongst such Saints as these are, which indeed are a scandal
to Saints, a scandal to Religion, and would be a scandal to that thousand
years of Christ if he should come to reign, but Christ will have better
Saints then these are to reign with him.

In treating of the Doctrine of Christ's coming again, the other Quere is this,
how or after what manner shall this coming of Christ be? but I will come again.

Now in the resolving of this question, I shall confine my answer to these six
Particulars.

certainly.

personally.

visibly.

gloriously.

terribly.

unexpectedly. These ways the Scripture does furnish you with several hints
touching his coming.

Lord Jesus shall come certainly. Christ's coming is not to be numbered among
Poetical Fictions, or with the delusion of Mahomet, but the certainty of
Christ's coming again, it is built on these three foundations.

Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
World in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has
given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. The
immutability of Gods decree does prove the certainty of Christ's coming, God
has appointed a day in which he will judge the World.

Mat. 26.64. Jesus says unto him, Thou have said, nevertheless I say unto
you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven, there is Christ's promise, to which
three of the Evangelists do concur.

Solomon's Phrase, a just man perishes in his uprightness, and a wicked man
prolongeth his days in wickedness, therefore to show Gods impartiality, there
must be a coming of the Son of Man to judge the World righteously. I means
this, because the Doctrine of Christ's coming is impugned by Atheists, therefore
you read what Peter tells you, 2 Peter 3.3, 4. knowing this first, that there
shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, And
saying, where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation. And we
read of the men of Athens they questioned this, and would not believe this, of
Christ's coming to judge the World, Acts 17.32. And when they heard of the
Resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and others said, we will hear thee
again of this matter. Why of old time, in the times of Jesus Christ, or soon
after, men did mock at this Doctrine, that the dead should rise, and Christ
should come to judge both the quick and the dead; Herein Gerrard reckons up
abundance of Sects, as the Floriani, the Dociani, and many others, Indeed there
is but one Scripture that carries a hesitancy in these Atheists to deny the
coming of CHRIST to Judgment, John 8.15. Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no
Man.

But Beloved, to this Text that they make use of, to shake this great Pillar of
our hopes, the coming of Christ again, take these two Answers, when Christ
says, I judge no man, that is, I judge no man with a rash and heady judgment,
as you judge men that are not of your Opinion, you judge things rashly and
inconsideratly, but I judge no man as you do, so Austine, in his 36 Tract on
John, gives it to be the sense of the place, it does not exclude Christ from
judging the World at the last day, but not judging of men as the Pharisees, to
wit, rashly and inconsiderately.

Secondly, Christ does here speak, what was not the end of his coming in the
flesh, but the end of his coming was to judge all men, but I judge no man, that
is, it was not the intent or the end of my first coming in the flesh to judge
men, but I refer it to the last coming to judge all men, John 1. When God
sent his Son to be borne of a Virgin, he did not send him then to judge the
World, he reserved that till his last coming, John 12.47, 48. And if any man
hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not, for I come not to judge the
World, but to save the World. He that rejects me, and receives not my
words, has one that judges him, the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him in the last day. The end of my first coming was not to judge, it was
to be judged, and to be condemned by Pontius Pilate, and ^o die the cursed
death. And that is the end of Christ's first coming, he shall come certainly.

Secondly, Christ shall not only come certainly, but he shall come
personally; It was the great mistake of Origin, though he holds for the coming
of Christ again, but he pleades chiefly for the coming of Christ in Spirit,
Therefore that Text that is said, you shall see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven, but Origin understands by the Clouds, to be the Saints,
because it is mentioned in Scripture, that the Believers are called a cloud of
witnesses. Now this is to pervert the whole letter of this Bible, and turn all
the Scripture into an Allegory and Metaphysicall sense; Now to the opposition
of that, I lay down a second property, that Christ's coming shall be a personal
coming out of Heaven, but the Scripture does not speak of Christ's coming on
the Earth, but no further then the Air, Christ in his Body shall come
personally out of Heaven. Now to prove this second property, or second manner
or way of Christ's coming, there are two Texts of Scripture to confirm it. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord, verse. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend with a shout from
Heaven, etc. If it had been Christ in his Spirit, then it would have been
said, The Lord by his spirit shall descend, But the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, it notes his personal coming out of Heaven, that
whereas as Jesus Christ had a personal translation, and as Christ had a
visible Elevation, he was in the eyes of his Disciples lifted up, so Christ
shall bodily descend and come out from heaven, the Lord himself, etc.
Therefore it cannot be the Lord by his Spirit, Acts 1.11. Which also said, ye
men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen
him go into Heaven. The same Jesus that you saw Ascend, shall descend, so that
it cannot be Christ in his Spirit, but in his person. I only mention this, to
confute those that follow the conceit of Origin, merely to make Christ's coming,
to be but a spiritual coming, a coming in the hearts of Saints.

Acts 1.11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven shall so
come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven. That as Christ's
going up to Heaven bodily, it was visible, so Christ's coming out of Heaven it
shall be visible, Mat. 26 64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting
on the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds. Indeed Christ did rise
invisibly, for no man saw Christ rise from the dead, but Christ shall descend
visibly, you shall see the Son of man, etc. Mat. 24.30. And then shall
appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes
of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds
of Heaven, with power and great glory. All men shall see the glory of Jesus
Christ, the wicked shall see him to their Amazement, and consternation, and the
godly shall see him to their joy, and Consolation.

Christ's coming shall be gloriously, and there shall be many things that shall
make the coming of Christ to be a glorious coming, he shall come in the clouds,
these glorious bodies shall be the triumphant and swift Chariots of the Son
of God, wherein he will come to judge the World; And his Attendants shall make
him glorious, Daniel 7.10. A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before
him, thousand thousands, ministered unto him; and ^^n thousand times ten
thousand stood before him, the judgment was set, and the books were opened,
Jude 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of those, saying,
Behold the Lord comes, with ten thousand of his Saints. And in 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels. O then behold the clouds to be
the Triumphant Chariots of Christ, the Innumerable company of Saints and
Angels to be attendants on the person of Christ to come to judge the world,
and that is the reason that he is called so glorious, Mat. 24.30. And they
shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great
glory. Mat. 16.27. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father,
with his Angels. Luke 9.26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own
glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy Angels. And that is the reason of
that Epither given to Christ's coming. Titus 2.13. Looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Now beloved, Christ's coming to have this property or this manner in his
coming, the reason must be to distinguish his second coming from his first
coming; now to take off the contempt and reproach that was on JESUS CHRIST in
his first coming, therefore he shall come in glory in the second coming.

Phil. 2.7. But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. Now in the second coming, he
comes with that glory and Majesty of a King. In the first coming, he had no
reasonable creature to attend him, at the second coming he shall have all the
Saints and Angels in Heaven to attend him. At his first coming he was swadled
with swaddling Bands, but at this second coming he shall be as it were clothed
with the Clouds of Heaven.

Again, his first coming it was in dishonor and contempt, every Traveller had
more honor then Jesus Christ, for the Inn was for every Traveller, but there
was no room for Christ there, he was borne in an outside house; but his
second coming shall be in great glory.

Luther says, because he was poor, and the greatest sinner in the World, not
by way of Inherence, but by way of imputation, Therefore Luther calls him
Peccator maximus, the greatest sinner, Christ in coming into the World, had all
the sins of the Elect of God that were imputed to him, so he came as a
Sinner, as an Evil person, though he was not so, yet he was looked upon as
so; But the second time, he shall come without sin, he shall not have our
sins by imputation cast on him, because when he comes again he shall make
a total Abolition of sin; Therefore there needs no imputation of our sins
upon Jesus Christ. Thus you have a fourth way of his coming, he shall come
Gloriously.

terribly, In Isaiah 13.9. Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel both with
wrath and fierce Anger, to lay the Land desolate, and he shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it. Revel. 6.17. For the great day of his wrath is come,
and who shall be able to stand? The coming of Jesus Christ, it is a terrible
coming, that is a fifth way of his coming.

unexpectedly, though it is true, there shall be imediate warnings of his
coming, as the powers of Heaven shall be shakened, the Sun, Moon and Stars
shall be darkened, but that shall be but a little before his coming, but
beloved the coming of Christ shall be when men are not aware of it, as in the
days of Noah, men were eating and drinking, and marrying and giving in marriage
when the flood came and destroyed them, so shall the Son of man come. Christ's
coming shall then be to burn all with fire, when men shall be eating and
drinking possessing, and adding muck to muck, when men are secure and never
think of Christ's coming to burn all with fire, then the powers of Heaven
shall be shakened, and the World be on fire. Hence it is that you read in
Scripture in five or six places, it is said that Christ's coming it shall be as
a Thief in the Night, a Thief will come in the dead time of the Night, the
Lords coming it is often compared, that it is said he will come as a Thief in
the Night, as Christ said to his Disciples, in Luke 21.34. The coming of Christ
it is an unexpected coming, thus you have six Particulars of Christ's coming.



Now the Doctrine of Christ's coming, it is a terrible Doctrine in these four
things.

To all wicked men Christ's coming again it is a terrible Doctrine, because
first all the secrettest sins that ever a wicked man has committed in this
World, they shall be made manifest to all. I confess it is a contest among
learned men, whether the sins of good men as well as bad shall not be known,
and there are strong arguments that all shall be made known, but the Scripture
is full in this, that at the day of Judgment, that the sins that a wicked
man has done in this World, they shall be published to all the Saints and
Angels in Heaven, and all the men that were on Earth. It may be thou go for
an honest man amongst thy Neighbors, yet thou love thy Neighbors Wife, and
go in unto her; it may be thou art a Monster among men, if thou have been
so, and if thou have deceived in thy Trade, why for all thy secrecy here, yet
then all the World shall know thy deceit it is built upon that Text, Luke
8.17. For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest, neither any thing
hid, that shall not be known, and come abroad. Here a thousand things are hid
that men do not know, here thou carriest it fairly, and squarely in the World,
that men cannot say, black is thine Eye, but then they may say shame to thy
Face, this is dread.

Mat. 32.33. And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a Shephard divides his Sheep from the
Goats. And he shall set the Sheep on his right Hand, but the Goats on the
left. Here thou art mingled, it may be thou live in the same house with a
godly man, and lie in the same Bed with a godly man, but remember a parting
time is coming, that as the Shepherd parts the Sheep from the Goats, so
does Christ part the wicked from the godly.





I but you will say, It is true indeed, A Felix may tremble when Paul shall
Preach to him of Judgment to come; A Felix may tremble, but have we Christians
cause of fear? Yes, you that are Christians, in case you be found under these
particulars that I am now naming to you, the day of Judgment will be dreadful
to you.

Felix, but may make thee a Christian to tremble in these cases.

Eccle. 3.16, 17. And moreover, I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment,
that wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
there. I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked, for
there is a time there for every purpose, and every work. That is, to judge
every purpose and every work. That when God shall come to places of Judgment
and places of Judicature, and shall say, wickedness is there, and shall say
bribery is there, and the deferring of the cause of the poor is there, woe be
to all Oppressions of the poor, and grinding their Faces in Courts of
Judicature, many whereof are Seats of violence and not Courts of Judicature,
Christ shall come to judge things that men will not judge, men will not judge
Adulterers, but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Men will not judge
men for Heresy, but God will judge them, Christ's coming is dreadful to all
men that live by Oppression and Violence in Courts of judicature.

Mark 8.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in
this Adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. I
pray you mark, here are two answers to an Obj^ction in these words. First, men
might say, why blessed Jesus, who would be ashamed of thee, if Christ were in
the earth we would never be ashamed of Christ; Therefore Christ adds,
whosoever is ashamed of me and of my words: though you might not be ashamed of
Christ's Person, yet you might be ashamed of his words. Then men may Object and
say, why truly if it were a peaceable time, a safe time to profess Christ, but
what, when we live in a wicked place, and among a wicked people, why will not
Christ bear with us, to hold down our heads a little, and to sleep in a whole
Skin? no says Christ, whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in
this Adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man,
etc. Let the place be never so bad, thou must not be ashamed of Jesus Christ,
and his words: why if thou be, the Son of man shall be ashamed of thee when
he comes with the glory of his Father. Christ's coming is dreadful to all you,
who are ashamed to profess Jesus Christ in a sinful and adulterous age and
place, wherein you live, I shall leave it to you to make application.

Christ's coming to Judgment is dreadful to all those who spend their days in
sensuality and riot, Christ's coming is terrible to them, Luke 21.34. And take
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares. Men that live in riot and excess, and sensuality, why they do
but pamper their flesh and feed themselves, to make themselves a sweeter
morsel both for Worms and Devil, Christ's coming will be a dreadful time
for them.

Jesus Christ. Will thou mark one Scripture, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. There is much of Gods
Mind in this dark expression, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let
him be an accursed man, that is the meaning of the word Anathema, but the other
word Maranatha, it is a word compounded of two words, and it bears this sense,
Maran signifies a Lord, and Atha signifies venit, he comes, so then when the
Scripture says, he that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an
accursed man; Let him be Maran Atha when the Lord Jesus shall come to judge the
World, Let Christ then curse him that does not love him. Maran atha: O then I
beseech you think this with your selves, that all you who do not bear a
sincere love to Jesus Christ, when he comes, Christ's coming it shall be with a
curse, a curse to Hell and Damnation to all such.

These. 1.7, 8. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Christ's coming it will be in flaming fire to take vengeance on
all such.

Jude 15. To execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed,
and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.
I do wish it were engraven before the Eyes of all wicked raylers. Why here
beloved, there is many a railing Rabshakeh, and many a cursing Shimei which
has many a hard speech against the people of God, they accuse one man to be an
hypocrite for carrying of a Bible under his Arm, accusing another man to be an
hypocrite for shedding a tear in his Sermon, O you are the men that Christ
will come to execute judgment, to convince you of your hard speeches.

James 2.13. For he shall have Judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy, to him that shows no mercy, he shall have judgment without mercy,
Christ's coming to judgment shall be a time of thy having of judgment without
mercy, that shows no mercy; In Mat. 25.41, 42, 43. Then shall he say also
unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
no meat, I was Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink. I was a stranger, and ye
took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in Prison, and ye
visited me not. Austin has a good gloss upon this Text, says he, If that
man shall go to Hell, that will not give another man Bread when he is a
hungry, O then to what a Hell shall that man go to, which takes away Bread
from the hungry man! And if that man shall go to Hell that will not cloth the
naked, O then to what a Hell shall that man go to that takes clothes off the
necessitous man's back! And if that man shall go to Hell that will not visit
men that are in Prison, O then to what a hell shall that man go to that casts
godly men into Prison! Now beloved, I beseech you take heed that you be not
men wanting bowels of mercy toward your distressed brethren, you are to expect
judgment without mercy, that show no mercy.

Christ's coming it will be a dreadful day to them; Therefore you read that
God will judge Adulterers, he will judge a Drunkard, he will judge a Swearer,
he will judge a Sabbath breaker, yet particularly Whoremongers and Adulterers,
he will judge, Heb. 13.4. But Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will judge.
King Henry the 8. was a lascivious Prince, and old Latimer sent him a Token, A
Napkin and a Bible, and about the Bible was written, Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge, it was to terrify him. There is a strange Text, 2
Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly, out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, But chiefly them
that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness. Here is a chiefly for
them. God will punish every unjust man, but God reserves them to the day of
Judgment, chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness,
etc. Do I speak to men that may have this chiefly put on them? O take heed
that thou do not fall under the righteous judgment of God, O that thou be
not entangled in that sin, that will make the Lord judge thee chiefly.

Peter 9.10. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of Temptations, and
to reserve the unjust to the day of Judgment to be punished. But chiefly them
that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government,
Presumptuous are they, selfe-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of
Dignities. Men that under pretense of power and the like, shall trample down
Rule, Government, Authority, and Dignity, but the Lord has another day to
judge them that will not be judged here, he will judge them with a chiefly.
And thus I have done, I desire every man to make Application of it. Now living
and dying unrepentingly under these evils, it exposes thee to the righteous
judgment of God to destroy thee Another day.

I am now to make entrance into the fourth Fundamental Doctrine in these
words, And receive you unto my self.

These words contain in them, that great Fundamental point touching the
Resurrection of man's body, that not only the Soul shall go to Heaven, but
also the bodies of godly men shall go to Heaven, Christ shall come out of
Heaven for this end, to receive the bodies as well as the Souls unto himself.
I will come again and receive you unto my self.

There is some difference between a few Interpreters touching the sense of
these words, one carries it this way, that here the promise of Christ's coming
he made it a little before he was to die, says Christ, Be not troubled for
I will come again. Some refer that promise of coming again, not to the last
coming, but they refer it to that forty days that he was upon the Earth,
after his Resurrection to the Ascension; they refer that this promise was
accomplished, and then I will receive you unto my self, they make that to be
nothing but this, that Christ after his Resurrection did come to his Disciples,
and did eat a broyled Fish with them, and stayed forty days with them. Why
what comfort would this be to the Disciples to think of Christ's going away and
coming again, and stay but forty days, and then be seen no more? And this
would have made them the more sorrow^ull, that they should never have seen him
more. Here are two or three reasons from the Text, why that cannot be the sense
of the place, because here was a promise before that he was going to his
Fathers House; Now that living upon the Earth forty days after his
Resurrection, cannot be his Fathers House, but he being in his Fathers House,
this cannot therefore be meant of Christ's being coming again at that time to
them. Again, that it is said, where he was to go, he was to go to prepare
a place for them, now if his meaning had been that he would come again at
forty days, it should have been an Earthly place that he had prepared for
them; But the current of Interpreters, seeing the weakness of that, gives
many consequent reasons why it must necessarily be referred to Christ's last
coming, receiving of them everlasting, when the body shall be raised, that here
Christ's coming again it referres to no other coming but to his great and last
coming to judge the World, and at that coming he has promised the Elect, that
he will receive them unto himself; As if he should have said, Though I leave
your bodies behind me in the World for a season, though they may be mangled
and massacred by cruel Persecutors, and though you may be without my bodily
presence for a while, yet I do not go to Heaven to stay there for ever, but I
promise you, I will come again, and then I will take you into Heaven with me.
They would feign have had Christ to have received them into Heaven, and feign
would they have gone with him. The Disciples when they heard Christ speak of
going to his Fathers House, why they were all on fire to go with Christ into
Heaven; O no says Christ, I will come again to judge the World, and then I
will receive your very bodies into Heaven with me, that as my body is in
Heaven, so your bodies shall be there also with me.

Christ's coming again for to receive the bodies of all the Elect unto
himself, into Heaven with him, I come again and receive you unto my self. I
shall not follow the common place in handling the Resurrection of the body, I
shall only handle this point practically to you, in showing you what the
happiness of the Elect of God is in their bodies as well as their Souls; Now
because this Text is made use of to pervert many Scriptures, I shall handle
this practical Question before I can come to handle the Doctrine.

Jesus Christ does only promise that he will receive the Elect unto himself
at his coming again; Then this Question will be started, Then what becomes of
all the godly imediately after death, before Christ's coming again to
judgment? Therefore those that hold for the sleeping of the Soul, they on
this Text do ground that there is no receiving, neither one or other, the one
to Life, the other to Death, the wicked are not tormented then, nor the godly
glorified till then; Therefore it is needful that seeing Christ does here
speak of receiving them unto himself not till his coming, then what becomes
of the Souls of dead Men, before the coming of Christ?



First, there is a partial and incomplete receiving, and this is done
imediatly after death, that when the Soul does depart from the body, the Soul
is received by Jesus Christ in Heaven, and that is the reason of those Speeches
in Acts 7. There is a receiving them before Christ's coming, and this is called
a partial and incomplete reception, it is only a receiving of the spirit and
not of the body.

Christ's coming to judgment, yet there is a partial reception, I do not
speak to those that say the soul is mortal, and that it shall never live,
but to those that say the soul shall sleep, and the soul does perish with
the body until the Resurrection. Now against these that plead for the
sleeping of the soul till Christ's coming again, take these four ways how to
strengthen you in this.

pregnant instances in Scripture that after the godly die, their Souls are
received into Heaven before CHRIST comes.

general expressions in the Scripture, as well as particular instances to
prove this.

express passages in the Scripture to confirm this.

absurd inconsequences that will arise in case it should be denied.

Pregnant Instances, or examples in the Scripture to prove, that after death
the soul is received into heaven. Take three instances. First, that known
Text, Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, verily, I say unto thee. To day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. That day Christ dyed, that day Christ went to
Heaven, therefore that day the soul of that converted thief must go to Heaven.

Now beloved; there are two Evasions that those who plead for the souls
cessation, for the souls sleeping, that they make to avoid this Text, and take
off this Instance.

I say unto thee this day, thou shall be with me in Paradise, that to day,
they do not refer it that the Thief should be in Paradise. Peter Martyr
does give two Answers to this Evasion.



Another Answer, that it appears this cannot be the sense of it, to refer
to day, to the time that Christ spoke, and not to the time that the thief
should be in heaven, for says Gerrard, mark the thiefes prayer, In ver. 42.
And be said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.
Mark, there is the thiefes when, that when Christ should come to Heaven,
Christ should remember him. Christ's Hodie, must answer to his Quando, or else
he did not answer to his Prayer. Christ's to day, must answer the thiefes when,
that when Christ came to Heaven there to remember the thief. And Jesus said
unto him, verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

this day, it was needless for Christ to say to day, to tell him the time when
he spoke, he knew Christ spoke to him then, but to speak of the time when
the thief should be in Heaven, I say to thee this day thou shall be with Me
in Heaven.

The second Evasion is this. It is true, Christ promised, thou shall be with
me in Paradise, but Christ does not say, thou shall be with me in Heaven, but
with me in Paradise.

There are three answers to give you to this Evasion.

Paradise understand Heaven by this Text, they then fall in with the Papists,
either for Purgatory, or a Limbus Patrum.

Paradise is mentioned, it is to be understood Heaven, and so the Apostle does
expound it, 2 Cor. 12.2.4. I knew a man in Christ, above fourteen years ago,
whether in the body I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell,
God knows, such an one caught up to the third Heaven. How that he was caught
up into Paradise, and heard unspeakeable words, which it is not lawful for a
man to utter. So that the Apostle by Paradise does expound it to be Heaven,
Revel. 2.7. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God. That is, he shall enjoy Jesus Christ,
Christ in Heaven is the Tree of Life in the Paradise of God.

Adam was in before his fall, for the Earthly Paradise was destroyed by the
Flood, therefore of necessity when Christ tells the thief, To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, it must refer to the thiefes going to Heaven at that
day with Jesus Christ.

A second instance it is in Luke 16.22. And it came to pass that the Beggar
dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; The rich man also
dyed and was buried. This is another instance, that the souls of the Elect
after death they go to Heaven.

There are two Evasions made upon this Text.



To this I answer, though some men do say it is a Parable, yet many say it is
a History. Jerome and many following him does give many Arguments to prove,
that it was a History, and not a Parable. And Tertullian is confident that this
is an exact History of what was really done; And Peter Martyr does quote
Tertullian, says he, that Tertullian is so confident that this is a History,
that he undertakes for to tell this, to tell you whom were the men, says he,
the Rich man was Herod, and the Beggar was John the Baptist. But suppose it be
a Parable and not a History, yet Parables do carry the resemblance of truth,
Parables take their Foundations from truth, that there are some men in Hell,
and some men in Heaven, that in Hell there is torment and in Heaven there is
joy, that as the beggar went to Heaven after death, so shall all the godly, and
as the rich man went to Hell, so shall all the wicked.

The other Evasion is this, it is said that this Beggar is said to be carried
into Abraham's bosom, I answer, First, it is more then probable that Abraham's
bosom is Heaven; Now Abraham being in Heaven, why all his children are in
Heaven as children in a Fathers bosom, he being the Father of the faithful,
that is the answer that Gerrard gives.

Again, it is said, that they are carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom;
Therefore Abraham's bosom must be in Heaven: now certainly the good Angels
carry a good soul into Heaven, and the wicked Angels carry a damned soul into
hell, and thus you have two Instances, that imediatly after death the souls of
the Elect go to Heaven.

A third Instance is in Mat. 22.31, 32. But as touching the Resurrection of the
dead, have you not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God
of the dead, but of the living. Argue from that Instance that therefore
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were living at that time, though not in their bodies,
but they were at that time living, if you mark the reason, the reason of that
Text was not to prove a Resurrection of the body only, which the Saduces deny,
but also to prove the imortality of the Soul. The Saduces deny Spirits and
Angels too. Acts 23.8. For the Saduces say that there is no Resurrection,
neither Angel nor Spirit, but the Pharisees confess both. Christ does prove
that there shall be a Resurrection of the body, and he likewise proves that
the soul does not die when the body dies. Indeed there is a quotation that I
have read of a learned man that does make use of this Instance, Genesis 25.8. Then
Abraham gave up the Ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of
years, and was gathered to his people. Abraham was not gathered to his
Fathers, nor to be gathered in the grave where his forefathers were, how can
this be true that the Scripture says, Abraham was gathered unto his Fathers?
yet he was not gathered to his Fathers in God, therefore say Divines, it must
be in his Soul, that Abraham went to Heaven as his godly forefathers went,
that is the meaning of that phrase, to be bound up in the bundle of Life, to
go to Heaven as their forefathers did. And thus much for particular Instances.

Heb. 12.23. To the general Assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are
written in Heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men
made perfect: thence I argue, that the Apostle makes mention, and proves that
there were the Spirits of just men made perfect; Now if their souls did perish
with their bodies, then the Apostle should say, that their spirits are
annihilated with the body, but it is the spirits of just men made perfect; the
Scripture takes notice in general expressions that just men have their souls
made perfect. And then in Eccle. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the
Earth, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. Mark, here
are two things spoken of.

the body shall go to the dust, and the soul to God, the time when it shall
be is, when that man goes to his long home, when the keepers of the House
shall tremble, that is the Hands, and Arms; and the strong men shall bow
themselves, that is the Feet and Thighs; and the Grinders shall cease, that is
the Teeth; and they that look out at the windows shall be darkened, that is,
the Eyes; when nature decays and the body perishes by Diseases and dies, then
shall the body go to the dust, and the spirit to God that gave it.



John 6.40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
sees the Son, and believes on him, may have Everlasting life, and I will
raise him up at the last day.

Here are two distinct promises premised.







Another Text is in Luke 16.9. And I say unto you, make to your selves friends
of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you
into everlasting habitations. Kemnitius, makes great use of this Text to prove
what I am now arguing to you, that imediately after death, the soul of an
Elect man is received into Heaven. Mark, make you friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that is, your wealth, called so either because it is
unrighteously gotten, or unrighteously kept; use your wealth well, that when
you die you may be received into everlasting habitations. It is questionable
whether it be referred to Angels, or to the poor which shall pray for us that
we may be received into Heaven, but says Kemnitius, use your wealth well,
that you may be received into everlasting habitations, upon your failing, upon
your dying the Lord receives the Elect into everlasting habitations. This
Kemnitius does build on, that the soul does go to Heaven imediately after
Death.

A third Scripture is in Phil. 3.23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. So that the
Apostle does only make these two conclusions, a departing out of the World, out
of this Life, and a desire to be with Jesus Christ, he mentions no place for a
good soul to go to, he mentions no Purgatory, nor Limbus Patrum.

And so likewise a fourth Text you have in 2 Cor. 6.8.9. Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. We are confident I say, and willing rather to be absent
from the body, and to be present with the Lord; Wherefore we labor, that
whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him. Mark. That the Apostle
does only make these two conclusions, to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord, so that the soul is present with the Lord, whilst
absent from the body.

Then again, that Prayer of Stephen proves it likewise; in Acts 7.59. And they
stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. It
had been uncomfortable for him to have thought that he should have been
stoned for Jesus Christ, and it must have been above 1600 years before Christ
should have received his soul, but he prayed, Lord Jesus Christ receive my
Soul, which he would not have done if he had not believed that his soul
would have been received by Jesus Christ imediately after death.

And thus I leave those Scriptures to confirm you in this, that the soul does
not sleep in the body, but at the parture from the body it does imediately go
to Heaven.





Secondly, then it will follow, that God the Father would be more cruel to his
people, then he would have other men be to their servants which have done
their work. Mark that Text, Levit. 19.13. Thou shall not defraud thy
Neighbor, neither rob him, the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with
thee all night, until the morning. That the Master was not to keep the hire
of the Labourer long from him, that the Master should not keep the servants
wages long from him; Now will the great God keep you who are his servants that
have served him here in this World, and have done him faithful service, and
will he keep any reward from you till his last coming? No, but when you have
ended your Life, and done your work, you receive your wages, when your work is
done, you have your reward.

Jude, That the men of Sodom and Gomorrha suffered the vengeance of eternal
fire, And of Judas, Acts 25. That he may take part of this Ministry, and
Apostle-ship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his
own place. I could give you multitude of Instances where the wicked are in
Hell, 1 Pet. 3.19 20. By which also he went, and preached unto the Spirits in
prison. Which sometimes were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was a preparing, wherein few, that
is, eight souls were saved by water. That is Jesus Christ by his Spirit in the
Ministry of Noah did preach to the old World, who were disobedient to that
Preacher of righteousness, who is now in Heaven; To say that a godly man does
not go to Heaven imediately after death, it will follow that a wicked man does
not go to Hell imediately after death.

Christ shall come from Heaven with his Saints; And we read in Scripture,
that there are the Spirits of just men made perfect, as well as the innumerable
company of Angels.

body and my soul shall be thought of by Jesus Christ, it would be a very
uncomfortable Doctrine for a man to think that I shall die like a beast, that
my soul after death shall not be taken up into Heaven. And thus I have proved
that imediatly after the godly die, their Souls are received into Heaven: I
have proved it by pregnant Instances in the Scripture, by general expressions
in the Scripture, and by those express passages in Scripture, and have given
you those absurdities, that will arise in case it should be denied.

A word now from what has been spoken. If it be so that Christ does receive
thee, O thou Believer, receive thee to himself before his total and complete
reception, I would then give you this use for to comfort you.

that he has good evidences for Heaven! O this should greatly comfort thee
against thou come to die, to think that thy deathbed is the very Suburbs of
Heaven. I have read what John said, that wrote the Revelations, when he was
ready to die, I do believe, says he, that in this very day my soul shall be
represented before the Lord Jesus Christ. O think now thou art leaving thy
friends, but it will not be a day before Christ and I shall meet in Heaven. As
in the Book of Martyrs we read that in Queen Mary's time, of two friends
that were put to death together. One of them was fearful to think that the
flames should scorch his flesh, O, says the other, be of good comfort, for
half an hour hence thou shall be in Heaven! O think, though thou art weak
and sick even unto death, yet think that thou shall shortly be with Jesus
Christ, doubt not of the truth of this, for I could even pawn my soul of the
truth of it, that the Souls of the Elect are taken up into Heaven imediately
after death, O then let not death trouble you.

and receive you to my self.

end of Christ's coming again, is for to raise the bodies of the Elect, and to
receive them to himself, not only to save the Soul imediatly after death,
but to raise the body also. There are two Queres in the Doctrinall part of this
point touching the end of Christ's coming, which is to raise the bodies of the
Elect, and to receive them to himself.

Two things in this. Jesus Christ must raise the bodies of the Elect, and
receive them to himself, as well as the souls.





There are four Reasons.

Cor. 15.12. Now if Christ be preached, that he rose from the dead, etc. As if
he should have said, Christ being risen from the dead, does argue that our
bodies must rise from the Grave, though they be dead there. In 1 Cor. 6.14. And
God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even so them
also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. So that because Jesus
Christ's body is raised from the dead, and received up into Heaven, therefore
our bodies must be raised up and received into glory with him.

the very God of peace sanctify you throughont, and I pray God that your
Soul, Spirit and Body, be kept blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 6.18, 19, 20. Flee Fornication, every sin that a man does is
without the body, but he that comitteth Fornication sins against his own
body. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which
is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought
with a price; Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit, which
are Gods. Now the Spirit of God having a gracious work in the body as well as
the soul; Therefore the body must be raised up from the dead as well as the
soul, and this the Scripture makes an Argument of, in Romans 8.11. But if the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit
that dwells in you. So that spirit that raised up Christ from the dead, if
that Spirit dwells in you, the graces of the spirit, why that Spirit shall
quicken your mortal bodies; Therefore the bodies of the Elect shall be raised
from the dead and received into glory with the soul.

Jesus Christ, because the Body does cooperate with the Soul, Romans 8.13. For
if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. Now being that the godly do
mortify the deeds of the body, and do expose their bodies to tortures and
torments for Jesus Christ, now because the bodies of the Elect, do cooperate
with the soul in good, therefore the body shall be co-partner with the soul
in good also.

raised and received up to Jesus Christ to make his body a perfect body. Thus
much for the Reasons why that Jesus Christ at his second coming he shall raise
and receive the bodies of the Elect to himself, as well as the souls.

The second quere is this, I but what benefit is it to the body, what
endowments shall the body receive by this, when Christ comes?

Chrysostom says, Take Wool, and let this Wool be dyed into a Scarlet, or
purple color, dyed in grain, yet the Wool is the same Wool as it was
before, when it was white, but yet there is a more goodly luster put upon it.
Thy body shall be the same body, but thy body shall have more illustrious
endowments, then now it has.

And thus much only in the general, Now to come to particulars. I shall
resolve this Question in these six Particulars.

There are six glorious endowments that the body shall receive from Jesus
Christ, at his second coming, when he receives the body to himself.

Cor. 15.44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, There
is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. The meaning is, the body as
it lives here, is a natural body, reeding natural refreshments. I but says
the Apostle, it shall be raised a spiritual body, it shall have no more need
of natural refreshments, which the natural body requires, when it is a
spiritual body it stands in no more need of meat, no more need of drink
and of sleep, and other natural refreshments, it shall be raised a spiritual
body. Mat. 22.30. For in the Resurrection they neither Marry, nor are given in
Marriage, but are as the Angels of ^od in Heaven, The Angels have no need of
relations, and stand in no need of helps, when they shall be as the Angels of
God. Rev. 7.15, 16. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him
day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell
among them, They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, nither shall
the Sun light on them, nor any heat. Therefore O believing soul, behold thy
happiness of soul and body in glory; they shall be no more standing in need of
natural refreshments then spirits do, when the Scripture says that your
bodies should be received by Christ. The Platonic Philosophers understand,
because the body shall be turned into a Spirit, into a Ghost, or into wind or
air, but that is not the reason of it, it shall be of the same substance as it
is upon the Earth, but it shall be refined.

Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself. The Body of Christ is a beautiful body, neither spot nor
wrinckle, nor any such thing in it, why thy body shall be like Christ's glorious
Body, 1 Cor. 15.43. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power. Here thy body it is a vile body,
Eliphaz calls the body a house of clay, and Job calls it a house of Earth; It
is the Opinion of Gerrard, and he gives strong reasons for it, that if there
be any defects upon the body in this World, that if any of the members of the
Body be wanting, it shall be restored to thee at the Resurrection, and there
are these reasons to be given for it.





Adams body was in innocence; Adams body was created perfect by God, when
Christ raises thy body, it shall neither want a member nor abound in a member,
thy vile body shall be beautiful: what though others be fairer then thee, and
clearer skinned then thee, what though other men's earth be painted better then
thine, yet when Christ receives thy body, it shall be a beautiful, a glorious
body, therefore you have the phrase, Mat. 13.43. Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father.

Cor. 15.52, 53. In a Moment, in the Twinkling of an Eye, at the last trump,
for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and
we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality. Those mortal bodies that must die, must be
made immortal, and those incorruptible bodies, made incorruptible and never
die, this is the great happiness of the Elect, that their Bodies shall be made
immortal Bodies.

wipe away all tears from our Eyes, no sorrows, no crying, nor no pain,
there is the great happiness of the body, it shall be made impassive, not
liable to hunger, thirst, pains, diseases, and the like.

These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus Christ dyed and rose again, even
so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Which the body
could not do, if the body did not lose its lumpishnesse and heaviness which
it has here. Zanchy does illustrate it by this comparison, says he, the body
is like the Chick in the Egg, the Bird in the Egg strives not; but when it is
flusht, then it can fly; so, when thou art raised, thou can go from one
part of the World to another in a moment; so was Christ's Body when it was
glorified, Christ was taken imediately up into Heaven, which is as Astrologers
say, if we may believe their guesses, it is above 40 Millions of Miles; Now
the soul has a lumpish Body that it cannot follow the soul, therefore the
Body shall be made conformable to the Soul; the Body is now a tired Jade to
the Soul, but then it shall not be so.

Cor. 15.44. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power. The body of man it is a weak fleshly thing.
Luther is of this Opinion on this Text, 1 Cor. 15. says he, man's Body shall
be so strong that he shall be able to toss a mountain, as a Child would
toss a tennis ball; this is the great glory that God puts on the body, that
being a natural Body, it shall be made by Christ a spiritual Body; of being
vile Bodies; they shall be made by Christ beautiful Bodies, from being a
mortal body, it shall be made an immortal body; from being liable to sorrows
and sufferings in this world, they shall be made impassive bodies; from being a
heavy lumpish body, it shall be made an agile body; and from being a weak body,
it shall be made a strong body.

Now before I come to the Application, there are two Objections which lie in
the way. As in the primitive times there were the Saduces that held there was
no resurrection, and after Christ's time there was Hymeneus and Philetus, which
said that the Resurrection was past already, and the Church of Corinth was
tainted with this Error, if Christ be risen from the dead, how say some among
you, that there is no Resurrection of the dead? Now in the Primitive and
Christ's time, there was this Opinion, that there was no Resurrection of the
Body, and so made this merely but a Poetical fiction, and to be no real and
undoubted truth.

That I might take off this, The Scripture which they urge is this, you talk
of the Body being raised by Christ, how can this be when the Apostle says
expressly, the body is made of flesh and blood, 1 Cor. 15.50. Now this I say
Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does
corruption, inherit incorruption. Therefore if flesh and blood cannot come to
Gods Kingdom, how then can the Body come there? this is the Opinion of the
Photinians.



and blood is understood the bodies of men as liable to sin, as in this World
they shall not be raised up, they shall not come to Heaven, but we shall be
changed, we shall not all sleep, but be changed, the Apostle proves this
himself, 1 Cor. 15.50, 51. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption, inherit
incorruption. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed. Our corruptible Bodies they shall not come to Heaven as
they are corruptible, but come to Heaven by being incorruptible, but we shall
all be changed, that is, our bodies shall be changed from being mortal,
corruptible, and being weak and sinful, to be made holy and Immortal, so
that flesh and blood as now it is sinful, corruptible, till changed and made
glorious and pure, it shall not come to Heaven.

Job 14.7, 8, 9, 10. For there is hope of a Tree, if it be cut down, that it
will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though
the root thereof wax old in the Earth, and the stock thereof die in the
ground, yet through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth Boughs like
a Plant: But man dies and wastes away, yea, man gives up the ghost, and
where is he? A Tree, says Job, if that dies it may live again, because
waters may be about the root, but if man dies, he vanishes away, where is
man? on this they build that man shall never live again.

To this, take this clear Answer, That when Job speaks, though a Tree dies it
lives again, but if man dies he lives not, Job understands it by living
again in this World, so there is more hope of a Tree then of a Man.

I but you will ask me, How do you prove this for to be Jobs intent?

I prove it to you from Jobs words in the 12. verse. So man lies down, and
rises not, till the Heavens be no more, they shall not awake nor be raised out
of their sleep. So that here Job speaks of a raising when the Heavens shall
be no more, when the World shall be burnt with fire, then man shall be awakned.
And in the 14. verse. If a man die shall he live again? All the days of my
appointed time will I wait till my change come. Job speaks in this Chapter of
the change of the body, and of the raising of the body. Tertullian and Austine
say well, that there is no Doctrine of Religion is more repugnant to sense and
reason.

There is this reason that may seem to be against the raising of the body, How
it is possible that the bodies of men can be raised when that they are so
confounded together as they are in the Earth.

Suppose a Man be killed by a Wolf, a Lion eats that Wolf, suppose that Lion
dies, and the Fowls of the Air eat that Lion, and Men eat those Fowls;
Therefore how can the bodies of Men be raised being thus confounded? Suppose a
Man be drowned in the Sea, and the Fishes in the Sea eat that Man, how can his
substance be gathered together at the last Day?

Answer, it is the Answer of Perkins, First, much may be done by Nature, by
Art. First, an Illustration from a Refiner, put before a Refiner a mass of
metal, and there shall be in that one Lump, a vein of Silver, a vein of
Brass, of Gold, of Tyn, of Iron, and the like, and these Mettalls are all
mingled and mixed together; Now a Refiner by his Art, he can distinctly sever
the Silver from the Gold, and the Iron from the Lead: Now can Art do this, and
shall not the God of Nature sever this man from that man? God shall sever them
though they are heaps together.

Again, a Gardner sows varieties of Seeds, yet do you come to the Garden,
and let one ask you what seed lies in that Bed, or in this Bed, as it is
rotting in the ground, why you cannot tell; But come to the Gardner and ask
him what Seed is in that Bed, and he can tell you distinctly the Seed in
every Bed; And cannot the great God do this? He that made us knows our
shape, we cannot tell what Man's dust this is in the Grave, I but God that laid
thee in the Grave, he knows, he knows which shall be my dust, and which
shall be thy dust, and which every man's dust, he knows what body shall spring
up thence; Therefore labor to exalt Faith in the great Mistary of raising, and
glorifying your bodies.

I have now a practical application to make of this.

The Uses.



Let it not trouble thee then that thy body shall be a crucified Body, because
at Christ's second coming it shall be a glorious body.

Again it may be comfort to thee, by reason of thy natural infirmities.
Suppose thy body be a sickly body, suppose thy body be full of Aches, Agues,
Consumptions, Diseases and the like, suppose thy body be maimed, Blind and
Lame, yet remember thy body that is vile, deformed and sickly, it shall have
fresh Robes of glory upon it, and be made like to the glorious Body of Jesus
Christ.

We read in the book of Martyrs, of two Martyrs that were to be burnt at
Stratford Bow near London, one Hugh Laborocke, and John Price, the one blind,
and the other lame, this Price being full of fear when the fire was about him,
says Hugh unto him, Be not troubled, though thou blind and I lame, yet
remember death will heal thee of thy Blindness and me of my Lamenesse.
Suppose thou art blind, lame and maimed, why Christ's receiving of thy body
will cure all, and truly there were no comfort to a man under a bodily
distemper, when a man is under some great trouble, when a man should think
that this body of mine should rot in the Grave, and never be raised from the
dead, which were very uncomfortable.

But thy deformed body it shall be a beautiful body, that which is a sickly
body it shall be made a healthful body, and freed from all Diseases.

Then learn to have elongation of soul after the second coming of Jesus
Christ; Therefore do not desire to continue here upon Earth, but to be
dissolved, and to be with Jesus Christ. Will any man be grieved for changing of
an old suite for a new? Death does this, thou have here an old rotten ragge of
flesh about thee, why Christ will put a new suit on thee; Therefore the Apostle
calls it the desire of the body is to be clothed upon, we do not desire to
be in Heaven without bodies, but we desire to be clothed upon, with those
glorious endowments, wherewith the elect shall be clad in glory; Therefore be
not unwilling to die, do not be unwilling to leave an old rotten Carcass, a
sickly body, a Diseased body. Put a Bird into a Cage, though the Cage be made
of Silver, or Gold, yet the Bird had rather fly abroad, then be tide up in
the Cage. O thou whilst in the body art in a Cage, thou had better have thy
body in a glorified capacity then now it is.

is never quickened till it die, why let your body be kept alive here in the
World, and it will never be raised to glory, O do not then be unwilling to
die, because Death not come to an Elect man as a laying of Corn in the Grave
till the Resurrection day. As Corn does rot in the ground to spring again,
against the Harvest; So does thy Body rotte in the Grave, as Grain against the
Harvest.

Corinthians 6.14, 15. verse. And God has both raised up the Lord, and will
also raise us up by his own Power; know ye not that your bodies are the
Members of Christ? shall I then take the Members of Christ, and make them the
Members of Harlots? God forbid. This is the Apostles Argument. The A. postle
would reason against Adultery and Uncleanness in the body, what argument does
he use? Know ye this, Christ will raise up our bodies, and shall we take
these Memberr of our bodies, and make them the Members of a Whore? So that
Beloved, let the Doctrine of your Resurrection, and of your bodies being raised
and received to Jesus Christ, let it provoke you that you do not abuse your
bodies. He that keeps company with a Harlot, sins against his own body, 1
Cor. 6.18. Flee Fornication, every sin that a Man does, is without the body,
but he that comitteth Fornication, sins against his own body. For a Man to
lie and swear, it is against his Soul, but for a Man to be unclean, it is to
sin against his Body; O do not die with an unclean body, with an Adulterous
body, and do not abuse thy body, do not abuse those Eyes of thine to be
Windows of lust, that shall one day behold Jesus Christ; do not abuse that
body that must have a sweet communion with Christ in Heaven.

I am now come to handle the last point in the Text, the last Clause, that
where I am, there you may be also.

These words they note unto you the Event, or Consequent what shall follow upon
Christ's coming again, and receiving our bodies unto himself at the last day.
The Event shall be this, An exerlasting enjoyment of Christ, that is the result
and consequent of Christ's coming to be ever with him, that where I am, there
you may be also.

I shall open the Words, for there is some difficulty in one Expression, where
I am, you see it is a word in the present Tense, where I am, and though it be
a word of the present Tense, it does not denote thus much that they should be
at Jerusalem with Christ, for christ was then at Jerusalem, but as Grosius
says, that here the word of the present Tense, is to be understood of the
future Tense, that is, where I shall be shortly after I leave this World; where
I shall be, there you shall be, and so he does bring that Text to prove it,
John 7.34. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me, and where I am,
thither ye cannot come. It cannot be taken in the present Tense, for he was
then at Jerusalem, to show, that where I am, is to be understood in the future
Tense, where I shall be, I go, but I come again, that where I shall be when
I come to my Fathers House in Heaven; that where I shall be I may have all
your companies, to be personally present with me in Heaven, that is the scope
of the word.

John 3.13. And no Man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from
Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven. Christ was not in Heaven, he
was speaking on Earth to them in his Person, in his Humane Nature, so likewise
in John 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given Me, be with
Me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given Me, for
thou lovedst Me before the Foundation of the World. Gerrard does raise this
Question, that when Christ speaks of his being in Heaven, CHRIST does speak
of it in the Present Tense, as if he were there already.

Now why does Christ say that he is in Heaven, when yet he was in his body on
the Earth?

I am, it denotes the certainty of Christ's going to heaven, that he should be
there as sure as if he were there. Babylon is fallen, why the Popedom is not
fallen, yet it shall be as sure as if it were fallen. It is to note.



Gerrard gives; Christ does express in the present Tense where I am, though
he were on Earth, it was for this reason, says Gerrard, to show that Christ
was truly God as well as Man, and in regard of his Divine Nature he was truly
in Heaven, as in regard of his Humane Nature he was on Earth. Thus much for
the manner of expression, that where I am, there you may be also; the latter
part is, that they might be with Christ where he is.

One thing to observe, that in Scripture Language, there is a great difference
between Christ's being with us, and ours said to be with Christ. Christ is said
to be with us, it does not denote a personal presence, but a presence by his
Spirit, Mat. 28. last verse. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
shall command you, and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
World. It was not in person, for he left them, but I am with you in my
blessing, in my Spirit, but when the Scripture says of our being with Christ,
it notes a personal presence, a being with Christ in preson; Therefore Paul
says, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Christ was with Paul,
because Christ converted him, but Paul was not with Christ, but desired to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, our being with the Lord it notes a personal
presence, an enjoying of the presence of the Lord.

might be for ever present where Jesus Christ is in Heaven, that where I am
there ye may be also. This Doctrine it is out of the common place. Here in
setting out to you this great happiness that this should be the consequent of
Christ's great, and last coming to receive the Elect unto himself; that where
Christ is, there ye may be also. I shall then show you the great blessedness
in this condition, in these eight or nine particulars.

Christ is in heaven, I may first set out the happiness of it in this
particular.

Adam in a state of Innocence; we should have thought our selves happy, then
to be as Adam was, to have had the Immediate presence of God, we should have
thought this a very happy and glorious Estate. Indeed so it was, but now, to be
present with CHRIST in Heaven, thou art more happy ten thousand times then if
thou had been made when Adam was made, to have lived with him in Innocence.

First, Adam when he was made by God in Innocence, he was instated only into an
earthly Paradise, but now, thou being with Christ art stated into an
everlasting kingdom.

Again, Adam was placed in Innocence; yet so as to be liable to lose that
blessed and glorious condition he was in, and did lose it, though he were a
perfect Creature, yet he lay under a capacity to lose all his excellency, but
when God brings thee to be present with Jesus Christ, thou art instated into a
kingdom that cannot be shaken, into a happy condition that cannot be lost.



John 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given Me, be with
Me where I am, that they may behold my Glory. Beloved this is the Beatificall
vision, this referres to seeing the glory of Christ's Person in his Humane
Nature, not the glory of his Godhead, but the glory of his Manhood which was
in himself, that they may behold my glorified body, the glory of my Humane
Nature, that was so contemned, and so despised when I was on the Earth; I
beseech thee let all the Elect that long for me, and for to be with me, I
beseech thee that they may be with me where I am, to behold my glory; It was
a solemn wish of Austine a little before his Death, he wished that he might
see three things, and then if he might die, he did not care: I wish says
he, First, that I might see Rome in its beauty, and see Paul in the Pulpit,
and to see Christ in the flesh, every Believer shall see the Lord Jesus in the
flesh. Job tells you of his confidence long before Christ was borne, I know my
Redeemer lives, and with these Eyes I shall see my Redeemer, here is thy
happiness that being where Jesus Christ is, thou have a society with Christ in
his Humane Nature, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know not when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. We do not
know what Christ is, we do not know what a glorified body is, we shall know
him then, we shall see him as he is glorified in Heaven.

Christ, a notable Text, John 12.26. verse, If any Man serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am, there shall also my servant be; If any Man serve
me, him will my Father honor. That is, where I shall be in Heaven. Beloved,
the time is now of giving honor to God, and giving glory to God, but thy being
where Christ is. God gives thee glory and gives thee Honors.

the Evangelists are explained Gospel, the ceremonial Law is dark Gospel,
Exodus 25. Meaning the Holy place. There was to be golden Candlesticks which
Types out the Preaching of the Word; In the holy place there was the
Candlesticks, and the Incense Dishes, to wit Christ's Intercession, this was
only in the holy place, but in the Holy of Holiest, there was no Candlestick,
no Incense Dishes there, to show, that whilst you are on this side Heaven in
the Church of God, you need the Candlestick, you need Preaching and Praying;
I but in the holy of holiest there was none of this, to show that it was a type
of Heaven, and when Christ brings thee there then thou art above Ordinances,
and never till then, this is a fourth particular.

Jesus Christ in person. Beloved, here we have a communion with Christ, but it
is a communion far different from that which we shall have in Heaven.

and have communion imediately with Christ in Heaven.







Christ and us, here we enjoy Christ, he in heaven and we on Earth, but then
we shall enjoy Christ in one place, he in Heaven and we in Heaven, here thou
may think much of Christ, I but if thou were nearer Christ thou should
see and know more of his glory.

though thou do enjoy Christ, yet thou art inforst to discourse, and commerce
with wicked men.

Jesus Christ, there is this to attend thee, there shall be gladness, and
rejoicing among all the Angels in Heaven; if the Angels in Heaven shall
rejoice at a sinners conversion, they shall much rejoice at a sinners
inauguration and Inthronizing into Heaven, they and we shall make but one
head, but one fold to glorify the great Shephard of our souls the Lord Jesus,
what great joy shall there be among Angels, Archangells, thrones, etc. Singing
Hallelujah to God, making you partners of their glory.

Christ shall put us into a state of exemption from sin, from the causes of
sin, and from the punishments of sin.

Jesus Christ, thou art exempted from sin, sin no more.



by thy body by Diseases, and the like, here punishments from trouble of soul
but in Heaven freed from internal punishments and external punishments; this
was prefigured under the Law, 1 Kings 33. The Palm Tree is an Emblem of
victory; Therefore the victorious are said to wear Palm in their hands
triumphing, Revelations 7. to show that you can never be complete Conquerours,
to wear signalls of triumph and signalls of conquest in your hands till you
come to enter into the holy of holiest. That you have conquered over sin, and
over temptations to sin, and conquered over all punishments for sin. The
Moral Philosophers say, that Rain, Hail, Storm and Tempests are engendered
in the middle Region, but about the middle Region, there is no Wind, no Storm
or Tempest; but whilst thou art here below, there are Storms, Wind and
blustering Temptations; but when God takes thee above this middle Region, there
is no storm nor tempest to disturb thee, but thou shall be quiet there.

Jesus Christ, that those who have suffered most and done most for Jesus
Christ, shall have most glory with Jesus Christ, all shall have glory enough,
he that has least in Heaven shall have enough, every vessel of glory shall
be full, yet some shall contain more then others, as thou have had more grace
in this World, why thou shall have more glory. There are degrees of glory in
Heaven, and there are degrees of torments in Hell, there are degrees and orders
among the Angels in Heaven, not only Angels, but Archangells, not only
cherubins and ceraphins, but distinct orders among Angels; there surely is an
order and degree among glorified Saints, that those that have done most for
Christ and suffered most for Christ, they they shall have most glory from Jesus
Christ. I am loath for to run out upon these Arguments; I only take it in as
a comfortable head by the way, you shall accordingly as you have done and
suffered most, you shall have most glory from him; It is the saying of One,
that as God does inequally communicate his Graces in an inequall manner in this
Life, so he shall crown them in an inequall manner in the Life to come; as
thou have gone beyond some Men in graces, so thou shall be beyond some Men in
glory, in being present, in enjoying the bodily presence of Jesus Christ, thou
shall know all the bodies of all thy well-beloved friends that thou know
here in the World, this most Divines do concur in. Bolton is very strong for
it, all our Modern Authors are for it, and some of the Ancients too, I only
give it as a probable advantage and eomfort, when a Man shall say, Here is the
Child that I sought God for, and may the Minister say, Here is the People that
I have Preached to, and the people say, here is the Minister now in Heaven that
I have heard, take these probable grounds for it.

Dives in Hell knew Lazarus in Heaven. Then we read likewise in Luke 13.28.
There shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your
selves thrust out. Now the damned in Hell shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in the Kingdom of God, and why shall not the Godly know one another there?

Then again, Peter, James, and John, knew Moses in the transfiguration, Mat.
13. Then again the godly they knew the damned in Hell; Therefore certainly
they may know one another in Heaven. It is said in Mat. 8.11. And I say unto
you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. I do not give you
this for certain. I am loath in things controversall tossed to and fro by
learned Men, but there are strong Hints and Foundations at best to build hopes
on, that in thy knowing of Christ in Person, that when the bodies of the Elect
shall be raised, thou shall know the bodies of thy elected Friends. Boulton
here thinks it should detract much from the happiness of every Saint in
Heaven, if every Saint should not know one another, which knew one another here
upon the Earth, this adds much to this happiness in that they shall have a
sociable Communion in being with Christ in Person where he is. And thus much
for the Adjuncts of this Condition, that where Christ is, there ye may be
also.

Jesus Christ is, that place where he is gone to Heaven there you shall be
also: then I Infer; O take it well at Christ's Hand, suppose thou live here
in a smoaky Cottage; Suppose thou have not a place to put thy Head in; O think
what a place Christ is gone to prepare for thee, why he is gone to prepare no
worse a place for thee then Heaven; Nay be content with a Prison, be content
with a Dungeon, O the place in Heaven shall make a recompense for all the
obscure places in the World. Suppose thou be as Christ was in the World,
that the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son
of Man has not whereon for to lay his Head, but he has a House in Heaven, a
House not made with hands, a building of GOD, he has his Fathers House in
Heaven, there you may go, you must be patient though the places you dwell in
are not so comfortable as you may desire, but you shall be where Jesus Christ
is.

Tiberius, they stigmatize him for a very fool that would for a drop of drink
sell his Kingdom, and so was called of Tiberius (Biberius) O there are many
such Biberius's in the world, that for a draft of Drink, will venture the
danger of Drinking down shovells full of Fire to their own damnation; many in
the World, that will rather then lose their Places, and Possessions here upon
Earth, they will venture the losing of that place to be even where Jesus
Christ is. Thus I have in ten Sermons finished Five maine Points of Religion.
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall TABLE to the first Part of the Saints advantage by Christ's
Ascension, etc.
A.
THe Ascension of Christ, an advantage to the Saints, the whole scope of the
Book. Ascension of Christ, the manner how. page 33 Antichrist: troubled the
Church when the Roman Emperor did not. p. 98 The Athenians question the
Doctrine of Christ's coming to Judgment. 113 Anathema: the meaning of the word.
p. 126 Abraham's bosom: what. p. 139 Adam in innocence, how instated. p. 170
B.
The bodily presence of Christ in Heaven a singular benefit to Saints on Earth.
p. 6.21 Bodies three (only) in Heaven p. 34 The benefit of Christ's Ascension.
p. 35 Bernards and Brightmans Opinion (with the Authors) of the phrase of
living and reigning with Christ. p. 100 The bodies as well as the Souls of the
godly shall be received into Heaven. p. 131 Christ taken bodily up into Heaven.
p. 13 The bodies endowments when Christ comes to receive them. p. 153
C.
Christ's Arguments to his Disciples when he was toleave the World. Christ gone
bodily up to Heaven. p. 2 Proved and Confirmed By Scripture. p. 6 Proved and
Confirmed By Tipes. Ibidem Proved and Confirmed By Prophesies. p. 7 Proved and
Confirmed By The Apostles. p. 9 Proved and Confirmed By The Angels. p. 10
Proved and Confirmed By Several reasons p. 11 Christ gone to Heaven to prepare
a place for the Elect: in what sense. p. 36 Christ's coming again, what
understood thereof. p. 51 Christ's personal reign upon earth, the rise of
that opinion. p. 71, 72, 73 Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, how
long. p. 75 Christ must reign, how long. p. 76. 77 Christ at his coming to
Judgment gives his Kingdom to the Father. p. 77 Christ shall not become an
earthly Monar. p. 27 Christ's second coming not to reign upon Earth. p. 77
Christ shall not reign personally, reas. why. 78 Christ's coming the
concomitants thereof. 79 Christ's personal reign contrary to the Tenor of the
Scripture. p. 79 Christ's personal reign, a disadvantage to the Saints, and
Angels. p. 86. 88 Christ at his Birth and Resurre. a King. p. 89 Christians
5000 a day put to death, when. p. 98 Christians 1700 in one month, in whose
reign. Ibid. Christ shall come like a thief, p. 103 Christ's coming again,
the manner how: Christ shall come Certainly, p. 113 Christ shall come
Personally, p. 115 Christ shall come Visibly, p. 116 Christ shall come
Gloriously, p. 117 Christ shall come Teribly, p. 119 Christ shall come
Unexpectedly, p. 120
Christ coming again, proved by the Mutability of Gods Decree, p. 112 proved
by the Infallibility of his Promises, p. 112 proved by the Impartiality of his
Justice. p. 112
Christ's end in his first coming, what. p. 144 Christ's coming, what produce
to the wick. p. 123 Christians in some particulers have cause to fear Christ's
coming. Ibidem Christ's coming, dreadful to Opressors, p. 124, 125, 126, 127,
128, 129. Christ's coming, dreadful to Riotous persons, p. 124, 125, 126, 127,
128, 129. Christ's coming, dreadful to Non. Lovers of Christ p. 124, 125, 126,
127, 128, 129. Christ's coming, the end for what. p. 133 Christ by his Spirit
in the Ministry of Noah did Preach to the old world. p. 147 Christ must raise
the bodies of the elect, why. p. 150 Christ's Resurrection an Argument of ours.
Ibi. The Church of Corinth in an error, touching the Resurrection, p. 159
D.
The Doctrine of Christ's Ascension, p. 4 The Doctrine of The Resurrection, Ibid.
The Doctrine of Everlasting Life, Ibid. The Doctrine of Christ's Ascension
practically applied. p 27 Doctrinall Inferences (4) drawn from Christ's
Ascension, p. 27. 29 The Doctrine of Christ's coming again, a comfort to
believers, p. 50. 52. 55. 57. 121. Duties (6) to be learned upon the
consideration of Christ's coming again, p. 61 Determinations concerning the
place from Whence and Where Christ shall come to Judge the World, dangerous, p.
68 Bold determinations, the foundation of superstitions, p. 65 The Devil
bound, the time when it began. p. 96
E.
Epicurian Principles brought in that Doctrine of Christ's personal reign. p.
102 Endowments (6) the bodies of the Elect shall receive at Christ's second
coming. p. 154
F.
Fruits of Christ's Ascension, p. 4
G.
The Gospel under Christ's time called a Kingdom, p. 90 A godly Man (when)
dying is in the Suburbs of Heaven. p. 148
H.
Himenius opinion touching the Resurre. p. 159
I.
Instructions drawn from the crcumstances of Christ's Ascension, p. 226
Incongruities (8) that would follow upon the personal reign of Christ, p. 85
Inconveniences that would follow should it be granted, that God does not
receive the souls of the Elect (as some hold) into Heaven, till Christ's coming
to Judgment, p. 145
K.
The Kingdom given to Christ in whose days it began, p. 105 The Kingdom of
Christ not of this world. p 106 The Kingdom of Christ referred to that with the
Kingdom of God, p. 107
L.
Living and reigning with Christ does not imply the place where Christ is, p.
92 Labaroch (a Martyr) his story, p. 165
M.
Maran-atha a compound word, p. 127 Murder committed in Adams sin, p. 131
Moral men may live and die in an unpardoned estate p. 136 Magistrates commanded
to punish sin, p 66
N.
Non Lovers of Christ accursed, p. 102
O.
Opinions of the Seleucians confuted, p. 27 Observations drawn from the
Doctrine of Christ's coming again, p. 52 Objections raised from the doctrine of
Christ's coming again cleared, p. 53 Opinions of the Milleners, concerning the
restitutions of all things, p. 73 Objections (2) (by those that plead for a
1000 years) answered. p. 97 Opinions of Divines concerning the dwelling of
Righteousness here, p. 104 Origens mistake concerning the coming of Christ, p.
114 The Opinion of those: who hold the sleeping of the Soul, p. 134
P.
Practical inferences (4) drawn from the doctrine of Christ's Ascension, p.
33. 29 Practical inferences (4) drawn from the doctrine of Christ's preparing
Heaven for the Saints, p. 46 The place where (and where not) Christ shall come
to Judge the World, p. 66 The promise of Christ's coming handled, p. 7^ The
promise of Christ's coming again, what meant thereby, p. 71 Paradise, what, p.
72 Perkins opinion concerning the Resurre. p. 163 Price (a Martyr) his story,
p. 165 Paul's argument against uncleanness, p. 167
Q.
Queries (concerning Heaven) being prepared by Christ for the Saints, p. 39, 40
R.
Restitution of all things, the time when, p 73, 74 Restitution of all things,
what it intends, p. 74 Resurrection of the Just and unjust: what. p. 83 The
Resurrection of the body proved, p. 140
S.
The souls of Saints went to Heaven, before the Ascension of Christ, p. 41.
135 Scriptures (whereon are grounded those opinions of Christ's personal reign
upon earth) cleared, p. 91. 101. 105, 106, 107. The Saints living and reigning,
what Christ the First Resurrection, p. 98 The Scriptures do not determine any
coming of Christ out of Heaven, till he come to Judge the World, p. 109 The
sins of the wicked to whom published, p. 122 The souls of the Elect go to
Heaven, imediately after death, confirmed by Scripture, p. 141, 142. 150. The
Spirit sanctifies the bodies of the Elect as well as the souls, p. 151 The
Saints happiness in being with Christ, fully handled. p. 70
T.
The Turkish Emperor, when began to bear sway. p. 97
W.
The wicked separated from the Elect at Christ's coming, p. 122 The wicked go
to Hell. p. 147
An Alphabeticall TABLE to the Second Part. Saints are bound to confess their
Sins.
A.
ANtinomists their opinion of confession of sin. p. 37 Auricular confession, a
great mistake. p. 41 Auricular confession, invented by whom. p. 42, 43
Aggrevations (6) in Adams sin. p. 131 Austins aggravation of sin. p. 147
Authors opinions concerning Infants. p. 172 Antinomians opinions, concerning
the praying for pardon of sin. p. 181
B.
Believers both in New testament, and old made conscience of confession of sin.
p. 38
C.
Confession, the nature of it, p. 8 Confession is to the soul, as the whetstone
to the knife. p. 11 Confession of sin is no slavish work. p. 17 Confession of
sin, in what cases needful to confess them to Men. p. 44 Confesion of sin,
what kind, has necessary connection with forgiveness of sin. p. 72 Confession
of sin with its connection, how agreeable with the freeness of Gods grace. p.
76 Negatively, and Positively Considered. p. 78 Concomitants (6) that attend a
pardoned person. p. 83 Characters (4) of a pardoned Man. p. 87 Consolations (4)
for a disconsolate soul. p. 122. 151 Considerations (5) concerning lesser
sins. p. 128 Considerations concerning great sins. p. 139 Christ dyed for Man,
not for the Devil. p. 147 Cases of Conscience, resolved. p. 156
D.
The Duty of confession. p. 6 Defects (10) that the godly (as well as the
wicked) lie liable to confession of sin. p. 51 Doubts resolved. p. 90. 95. 98
David's (4) projects to hide sin. p. 98 Differences (5) between pardoned and an
unpardoned sinner. p. 104 David's sin the nature of it. p. 112 Directions sorgr
eatsinners. p. 142
E.
Every confession of Sin will not serve turn. p. 18
F.
Forgiveness of sin wherein it consists. p. 21 Forgiveness, and Confession of
sine a necessery connecti. p. 66 Forgiveness of sins, what it is. p. 66
G.
Gramarians, bow they distinguish the words, Sin, Iniquity, Transgression. p. 5
God comands confession of sin. p. 39 Gods Act touching the forgiveness of sin.
p. 46 God in some sense receives injury by Man's sin. p. 82 God pardons Sins
after repentance, not before. p. 167
H.
Holy confession, the properties of it. p. 30 Helps against the defects of
confession of Sin. p. 57
I.
Iniquity the signification of the word. p. 5. Justified persons bound to
confess their Sins to God. p. 8
P.
The pardoned Man's happiness. p. 2 Paul's (8) aggravations of Sin. p. 27
Peter's Sin, the nature of it. p. 118 Paul's Sin, the nature of it. p. 120
R.
Rules for confession of Sin. p. 19 Relapses into gross sins dangerous Symptoms
of a Man to be in a lost condition. p. 180
S.
Sin in us to hide our Sins. p. 1 Sin, what it signifies p. 5 Saul made the
same confession of Sin, that David did. p. 18 Saul confessed his Sin to Samuel,
not to God. p. 20 Sins, in how many respects said to be forgiven. p. 70 Sin,
how many ways considered. p 71 Selah, what it Signifies p. 111 Sin in diverse
respects, aggravated. p. 186
T.
Transgression, what it is. p. 5 Times (3) most seasonable to confess Sin to
God. p. 13
W.
The way to procure the pardon of Sin. p. 2 The wicked confess Sin, how. p.
31. 36 Women (4) infamos recorded in the Genealogy of Christ. p. 25.
THE END.

