A LOOKING-GLASS OF THE WORLD, OR, The Plundered Man in IRELAND.

His voyage, his observation of the Beasts of the Field, of the Fishes of the
Sea, of the Fowls of the Air, of the several Professions of Men, etc.

LONDON: Printed by F.N. 1644.

THE COMPLAINT.
WHo can that hears or sees but bear a part,
To help to bewail our grievous smart?
Being lately blessed with perfect health,
And also endued with store of wealth.
Nothing afraid our happy state
Should change by any untimely fate:
Our people from the fields come run,
To bring us news we were undone.
The Country up against us rise,
Making our goods their lawful prise;
Often we trotted from Market to Fair,
And for the good beast no money we spare.
To add to our stood, our herd, and our flock,
That now we were come into a brave stock;
Each year great droves we could well affoard,
Of fatted good Beeves to send a Shipboard.
First went our fat, and after the lean,
Next at our selves they draw their Skeene;
Our Market being spoiled thus on the Land,
And troubles increase as thick as the sand.
Some catches the pickax for the hard ground,
Some shoule and spade to make the trench round;
Some constrained to carry the barrow,
While other the house top watch with the sparrow.
To tell all our grief I mean not here,
Fearing lest some should let fall a tear;
Yet to think upon our settled place,
Whence we were thrust with foul disgrace:
This makes our heart with sorrow spring,
That have heard their mocks and libels sing.
But give such leave in height of their pride
Unto their own ruin fast to ride.
And all that does against Gods truth stand,
May fall as shipwrackt on the sand.
God end these troubles, and send peace,
That our estates and friends may increase;
Happily to live, comfortably to die,
On the wings of Faith to God to fly.
A Looking-glass of the World: OR, The Plundered Man's voyage.
THe Earth is made both firm and sure,
To Man and his heirs for to endure;
With all things moving in wood or field,
Their service unto man does yield.
The stately Horse both swift and strong,
Is guided with a leather thong:
In war, in peace, seek the world round,
A more useful creature is not found.
The Cow I can hardly reaise,
How in few words I should her praise;
Of her we find meat for babes and men,
God grant we never want her then.
The Sheep for profit not the least,
But may compare with any beast,
For every year a fleece does spring,
Makes Spinners and Carders merrily sing.
The Goat does crop the tender tree,
Wherefore keep from thy Nurcerie:
Yet good is both their flesh and milk,
Their skin for gloves well sow with silk.
The Hogs delight is in the mire,
Bestow on him a ring of wire,
That he may wear it in his nose,
And will not be proud thereof I suppose.
The Dog waits at his masters heels
When he does walk abroad the fields.
And when that honest men do rest,
He takes a thief then by the breast.
The Cat does watch by the wheat mow,
To keep away those we not allow;
As Rat and Mouse with their vermin breed,
That destroys our corn for bread and seed.
The Lion of all beasts is the king,
His fearful roaring like thundering:
Men praises him for his bold heart,
Kept close prisoner, lest some he make smart.
The Unicorn does stately wear
A horn of virtue that is most rare;
Which many be very glad to have.
To buy, to borrow, to beg, or crave.
The Bear, and Woolf, both fierce and wild,
Whose nature is not to be mild,
We watch and ward with Bow and Bill,
Lest they our flocks and herds should spill.
The Fox an enemy to the young lamb,
And subtle enough to deceive the dam:
They are very bad that no good can,
The Fox being good to the palsy man.
The Hare would faint, but by cunning trace
She lives in hope to win the race;
Yet many a huntsman to death follow,
With making sport to whoop and hollow.
The Monkey, and the Jackanapes tricks
Deserves sometimes a rod of sticks;
Yet for nimblenesse they far exceed
Most beasts that on the earth do feed.
On the mighty oak the Squerill leaps,
Thence to the heasle-tree retreats,
To gather, and hurd what she does lack
Nuts for her diet, which she will crack.
The Rabbet clothed all in furre
Being taken by a lurching curre;
Those that do quake to feel the cold,
On the Rabets skin does lay fast hold.
The Buck and Dowe in forest wide,
Are oft-times forced their heads to hide:
The threatenings of the horn and hound
The woods with eccows do rebound.
The Hedgehogge weapons never does lack,
He carries still a bundle ats back:
And when he suspecteth any harm,
He presently therewith round does arm.
The Mould does dig without any thanks,
And makes many little banks;
To throw them down they may that please,
Her self resolves not to live at ease.
Into our orchard the Snail does creep,
And climbes into the trees are steep;
But little welcome there to have,
Before it be ripe the fruit to crave.
The Frogge that lives in meadow green,,
Sometimes more black then yellow seen:
Though the Frog alters with the weather
Let not men's minds change with a feather.
The swelling Toad each man does fear,
His poisoning breath for to come near:
But if the Toad be dead and dry,
In the head a pearl more says then I.
The Spider to make thread does use,
And sets her web in the light to choose:
Her living chiefly herein lies,
By catching of the heedlesse flies.
Of all the kind of worms that be,
The Silk-worme chiefest in degree:
For Kings and Queens do think no scorn,
Their work upon them to be worn.
The Louce the quick eye does epsy,
Where he lies couchant secretly:
By chance makes many a stout man shugge,
Well as the beggar clothed in a patched rugge.
The Moth spares not our scarlet red,
But eats it too and through the thread:
If such a small creature can us annoy,
What have we secure here to enjoy?
In the raging Seas and restless floods,
God has provided for our goods;
Such great varieties of fish,
As any heart of man can wish.
The Oyster without bone or claw,
Commonly we eat them raw;
And choose them for a breakfast fine,
Being well washed with a cup of wine.
The Crab and Lobster with many feet,
Upon the ground not accounted fleet;
Yet at feasting tables comes in the crowd,
And for dainty dishes are allowed.
The Sturgeon, Saman, and the Ling.
The Flounder, Plaise, and the Whiting;
These after the Fishers-boat does dance,
And into England, Spain, and France.
With the Whale what creature can compare,
For greatness in earth, water, or air?
Man unto man wondering tells
What monsters in the Sea there dwells.
The Sprat and Herring in number great,
We do provide for speoiall meat,
Against the Spring, and time of Lent;
For to eat flesh some have been shent.
The Pike, the Breame, the Roach, the Dace,
The Ele the mud is his chief place;
These are deceived by baited looks,
Beware Youth of wanton women's looks.
The Otter or the water-dogge,
That lives in rivers, ponds, and bogge,
His tyranny many a fish does feel,
For himself is provided a trap of steel.
GOds blessing be upon the Air,
Whereof all things living takes a share:
Wherein Fowls delight of every kind,
Some lives in peace, some to war inclined.
THe Eagle is more strong to fight,
Then the Hawke, Buzzard, or the Kight:
Yet all of them do live by prey,
And smaller birds they much do fray.
The Raven in want when he does cry,
God sends him food he may not die:
Then comfort man, who is of more price
Then all the Ravens, and tell them twice.
But little good of the Crow do say,
Hang one to fray the other away:
Ill members fills the world with care,
And brings the Judge into his Chair.
The Jackdaw some do him keep tame,
Though his fosterer sometimes does shame;
By stealing when he is in need,
Himself, and little ones to feed.
The Goose does bear the common quill,
With which we use to make our Will,
And Covenants strong as iron chain,
That we, nor our heirs, can break in twain.
Of the Swan I have heard this Proverb told,
Before her death to sing is bold:
Being dead, through her wing feathers flow,
All sorts of Wines in Sellers low.
The Duck in water does delight;
The Spaniel turns her joy to fright:
Into the waters with haste does pack,
To keep her feathers on her back.
In the night, the crowing of the Cock,
If we do mark, as good as a clock:
And though his stature be not high,
Yet will he fight until he die.
The Hen does cackle when she does lay,
As I have heard some huswives say:
If we talk much of our good deed,
Smells of vainglory that stinking weed.
The Turkey, and the Peacock gay,
Jetting with their feathers play;
Turning their colors to and fro,
Like a Soldier to meet his foe.
The Phesant, Pateridge, and the Quail,
The Woodcock, Snipe, Curlew, and Rail,
On the rich man's table down do fall,
By the silver lodestone with a call.
The Plover green is much in fear,
When man unto her nest comes near;
With flying up and down does cry,
Her young in secret still may lie.
The dainty gray Plover on the ground,
He that will win does compass round:
But he that hastily comes run,
Prevents the benefit of his gun.
The Pigeon bestows all her pains
For house-roome in breeding, and gives her gains;
She loves to fly abroad at large,
And not to eat all at her masters charge.
The Owl that flies in the night,
And in the day comes least in sight:
Deserts, and unquet woods are fit
For this strange Bird therein to get.
The Bat although but very small,
Yet of Birds, and Fowls, reckon them all,
There Is none that can in any weather,
Fly like the Bat without a feather.
The Swallow, and the Martin spy
How to us they may be neighbors nigh;
They build their house upon our walls,
As if they were free of some of our Hals.
The Sparrow sits chirping on the house top,
About the corn-reek he uses to hop;
In Summer contentious with his own kind,
In field by the ears we many may find.
The Parrat, he is learned to talk,
To honest men say, walk knave walk:
But rather then we would do any wrong,
Should cut our tongue if it grow too long.
Within the airie singing queare,
All silence gives with lissening care
Unto the Nightingals trebble found,
When the sad night with darkness bound.
Another bird does take his time,
When that the earth is in full prime:
Yet nothing but Cuckoo is his note,
Though often with eggs he scoures his throat.
The Veldenere, Blackbird, and Thrush,
Makes Music upon every bush:
They sing a well to the churl, or clown,
As he that wears a velvet gown.
The Lark with joy when it is day,
Up toward Heaven does take her way:
So should our thoughts first in the morning,
For sleep is but to death a warning.
The pretty innocent Turtle-dove,
Highly commended for her love,
That she unto her Mate does owe,
One hurt, causing the others woe.
The Robin red-breast comes at some hole,
When we are warming at a coal:
Within some room craves little stay.
To help to drive cold winter away.
What commendation with us men,
Which do destroy the little VVren,
Making a sport their lives to spill,
When they are free from doing ill.
The Be a diligent servant is,
In time to work she will not miss:
If this be true, do this for her,
That none do harm, molest, or stir.
The Waspe loves sweet things as his life,
Yet often dear byes it with great strife:
The Be sometimes in fight overcomes,
Robs Orchards and Shops of Pears and Plums.
The Butterfly in the hot weather,
As gay as those decked with a feather:
In Winter sleeping, eating no crum,
And will not be waked by Fife and Drum.
The Fly comes singing for her meat,
The Butcher and Cook sometimes her beat:
Shes a guest comes whether they will or no,
Behaves her self like to a great so.
THe Bud and Blossom on the tree,
So come into the world do we;
By Gods all-disposing power,
Some in tent, and some in tower.
THe Gentleman that lives by his Lands,
And sets to work many poor men's hands:
Churlish conditions, he hates them all,
He is courteous, kind, and liberal.
The valiant Soldier haste to come,
At sound of Trumpet, and the Drum:
His honored deeds far do ring,
And makes a Commonwealth to sing.
The Merchant stays for wind and tide,
Upon the lofty wa^es to ride;
In hope the golden fleece to sweep,
He ventures the hazard of the deep.
The Husbandman provides good seed,
And carefully his fields does weed:
His Plough and Harrow, with Sickle sharp,
He loves better than the Harp.
The Carpenter his Art houses to rear
From the levelled ground into the air,
Wherein we sing, we laugh, we cry,
And wherein commonly we die.
The Joyner mustereth up his tools,
For to make tables, chaires, and stools;
The young man may rest his weary knee,
And old man sit comely to see.
The Mason makes the Castle wall,
Not thrown down by a tennis-ball;
Nor thundering shot as thick as hail,
Can make the battlements to fail.
The Tailor does not cast his head
To pinch a garment, and save a thread:
From antic shapes he turns his sheeres,
And keeps civil customs as appears.
The Miller keeps not his toll-dish to deep,
But each man's meal together does sweep:
Wonder he steals not; reason why,
Conscience his clack stands always by.
The Butcher with his mastie dog,
Kills the ox, the sheep, the gruntling hog:
He keeps his meat cleanly to show,
Without deceit to puff or blow.
The Smith cold Iron gives a heat,
With blowing and beating himself does sweat:
He rises more early unto his hard task,
Then those that vainly dance in a mask.
The Goldsmith of all the vessels he makes,
The Ring is excellent for Lovers sakes.
True love has no end, the Ring made round,
Ingraven'd with posies pretily found.
Good huswives follow the Weavers march,
As needful, they say, as to wash and starch:
To clothe their household each girl and lad,
Others neglect of rags are they glad.
The Draper has ready both Ell and Yeard,
To look they be sealed, and just, has regard:
He gives good words in prentiship taught,
And good words of all are easily bought.
The Turner makes wooden ware,
Of seasoned wood he need not swear,
To curse and swear in common use,
A custom of the heathens abuse.
The Tanner takes time enough
To tanne his leather to the proof;
He well considers in his mind,
A general good all shall it find.
The Shoemaker fits the Ladies foot,
As well as the Carter with a boot:
And three-sould shoes, with the single pump
He makes light to run, to leap, or jump.
The Cobbler that sits under a stall,
Not likely to catch any great fall:
Though some look not low him to epsy.
Sets many a man right, treading awrie.
The Dyer makes his colors in grain,
That quickly will not change or stain:
Be our coat what color we will,
So pride our heart it do not spill.
The Gardener does clip and pare,
To trim his walks and borders square:
He raises pleasant mounts we find,
And seated Arbours covered with Woodbind.
Through hollow vaults in dungeon deep,
Wh^^e v^^^ring Damps their tides do keep;
Thence culs the Miner gold friends may lend,
And Lead the token foe to foe send.
The Fisher to the salt Seas sets sale,
We desire he may have a happy gale;
By him on the Land we live in more plenty,
If he do not thrive, our table more empty.
The Fowlers horse and dog well taught,
His Piece the best that can be bought;
Though Fowl be raised where they lie,
He can command them as they fly.
The Uphoulster to furnish the Bed,
For rest when sleep is in thy head:
Much sluggishnesse but duls the mind,
But liveliness becomes mankind.
The Colliar lest we fire should lack,
Does bring us coals upon his back:
That when our house is beset with snow,
He may not see our nails to blow.
The Shepherds care over their flocks,
To keep the bushes from their locks,
And to lead them into pastures dry,
If need require, the tar-bottle nigh.
The Crosser for outlandish spice,
With Figs, and Almonds, Dates, and Rice:
If poor folk to much Sugar their taste,
I fear their small wealth too soon will waste.
The Cook for bakt meats, boiled, and roste,
Sends to the table hot as a toste:
To please with sauce both stomach and taste,
Without excess of making waste.
The Alchouse-keeper sets his sign,
The stranger may both sup and dine:
If any stays to carowse and talk,
He tells them plainly, my friends go walk.
The Maltman here and there does place,
And up and down his house does chase:
His Malt to keep from akerspire,
And after dries it with soft fire.
The Brewer his strong Ale and Beer,
Many drooping hearts does merrily chee^.
His smaller Beer for weaker brains,
Where quarrels and distempers reigns.
Many gives care to the Bakers knock,
Unbarring their gates, and doors unlock:
Bread being ordained the chief staff of life,
For man, his children, and his wife.
The Hatter with his Beaver trim,
And good strong Felt both crown and brim:
Of newest fashion the Hat-band wrote,
For to please children to be bought.
The Glover dresseth soft his leather,
To keep your hands from wind and weather,
And makes a Purse to keep your pence,
Think on the poor in time of expense.
The Inne-keeper he looks not coy,
But entertains his guess with joy:
Chamberlain, and Hostler at a call,
To answer unto great and small.
The Tapster I had like to forgot,
W^^le he went to wash the glass and pot;
Bu^ ravellers that are athirst,
Desires to talk with the Tapster first.
The Carrier travels up and down,
From City unto the Country town,
He uses not to ride post or speed,
But fair and softly taking heed.
The many slowers and herbs of fame,
The Apothecary can call by name:
Great cost and care takes to preserve,
From biting Winter them would starve.
The Physician prays health may stand,
If sickness come, send him horse well manned:
No age so healthy but some must needs die,
And some recovered by Physics reply.
The Surgeon joyneth heart and hand,
To the cure of the wounded man:
And more that does increase his fame,
He makes to walk the cripple, lame.
The Chandlour when the darksome night
Does bar from us the comfortable light;
Then appears his Candles set in frames,
For guides in the streets his Torches flames.
The Musitianer heavenly voice,
Delights the ears, the heart rejoice:
He turns and winds with curious strain,
Leaves idle songs to fellows vain.
The Imbroyderer works gold and pearl,
Fit for the Noble Lord, and Earl:
The meaner sort a golden praise,
To see them in good Country grayse.
The Labourer that works by the day,
Sleeps more soundly then they that play:
Content with what he eats and drinks,
As them worth thousands as merrily thinks.
The Brasier, and the Pewterer,
Early and late themselves bestir,
To help Housekeepers new and old,
With things needful as silver and gold.
The Tinker seeing others to work fall,
And he having none, aloud does call:
Or on a Pan a peal does ring,
That work unto him some would bring.
The Plaisterer and Painter rare,
Shapeth the Lion, with Bull and Bear,
With other objects of delight,
For exercising of the sight.
The Glasier his glass so clear,
The glorious Sunshine does appear,
A welcome to our house we show,
But blustering winds without to blow.
The Chimney-sweeper with holly bush,
From top to bottom down does brush;
The fiery sparks that turns to ashes,
Bred colly black with smokie flashee.
The Barbar with his washball sweet,
With Basin, Towell, and all things meet;
He cuts, and shaves with skillful aim,
No cause to cry, fie, fie for shame.
The Vintners treasure lies deep in ground,
Being well fenced and buckled round:
Near to it sets a watch in a Bar,
To see what goes to the Sun and the Star.
The Sadler them that please to ride,
Of men or women that ride aside:
Provideth furniture good and strong,
They may ride easy, and the horse not wrong.
The Cutler makes the well tempted blade,
Both back and edge he learned well his trade:
He that will be angry at a straw,
Give him a wooden sword to wear and draw.
The Peddler comes with his pack ats back,
Saying, Dame what now do you lack?
See choice of Needles, Pins, Points, and Laces,
And for your little girls I have Bongraces.
The Servingman we may epsy,
Diligent to his Master, it is no lie:
And if by chance a thief bid stand,
He strives to vanquish that proud command.
The Printer paper and Ink he finds,
To print the thoughts of many minds:
One age to let another know,
What things has happened here below.
The Lawyer marks well the poor man's case,
Lest wrong should force right to give place;
His organ voice in the Judges care rings,
While the adverse part full sore he stings.
The reverend Divine and grave,
Fights with Gods Word against the devils slave;
And humbly crave if this they see,
That no offense they take at me.
NOw comes three Sergeants to arrest our bones,
And carry them between hard stores:
Age, Sickness, Death, with his sting,
Remember always of this thing.
FINIS.

