TWO SPEECHES Of the Lord Chancellor of SCOTLAND:

THE ONE, To the King at Newcastle; declaring, that if His Majesty refuses the
advice given Him, He will lose His Friends, Cities, and all England join
against Him; whereas, if he hearken to their Council, they will sacrifice
their lives and fortunes for establishing of His Throne.

THE OTHER, At a Conference with a Committee of both Houses of Parliament; in
answer to certain Votes in Parliament; and giving the reasons, that the Kingdom
of Scotland have an equal interest to the Person of the King; and that He
cannot be disposed of without the advice of that KINGDOM.

And, that they cannot in Duty nor Honor deliver Him (without His own
consent) to be disposed of, as the Two Houses of PARLIAMENT shall think fit.

London, Printed for T. H. November. 9. 1646.

The Lord Chancellor of Scotland, his Speech to the Kings Majesty at Newcastle.
YOur Majesty was pleased on Monday last, to call the Lords of your privy
Council of Scotland, and the Committee to acquaint them with the Propositions,
and told, that before the delivery of your answer, you would make the same
known to them: the time assigned for the stay of the Commissioners is so short,
and the consequence of your Majesty's answer is of so great importance, either
for the preservation or ruin of your Crown and Kingdoms, as we could not be
answerable to God, nor to that trust reposed in us, unless we represent to
your Majesty how necessary it is (as the condition of affairs now stand, and
in so great an extremity) that your Majesty should assent to the Propositions,
and that the danger and loss of your refusal will be remediless, and bring
on sudden ruin and destruction.

I shall begin first with the last, which is the danger, and shall next speak a
word of the remedy. The differences between your Majesty and your Parliament
(which no man knows better then your Majesty's self) are grown to such a
height, that after many bloody battles, there is no cure but a present peace,
otherwise nothing can be expected but certain destruction. The Parliament is
possessed of your Navy, and of all the Forts, Garrisons, and strong Holds of the
kingdom. They have the Excise, Assesments, and Sequestrations at their
disposal, and have authority to raise all the men and money in the kingdom,
and (after many victories and great successes) they have a strong Army on foot,
and are now in such a posture for strength and power, as they are in a capacity
to do what they will both in Church and State: And some are so afraid, others
so unwilling to submit themselves to your Majesty's Government, as they desire
not you, nor any of your race longer to reign over them. Yet the people are so
wearied of the wars, and great burdens they groan under, are so desirous of
peace, and loath to have Monarchial government (under which they have lived so
long in peace and plenty) changed, that such as are unwearied of your Maj.
Government, dare not attempt to cast it totally off, till once they send
Propositions of Peace to your Majesty, lest the people (without whose
concurrence they are not able to carry on their design) should fall from them.
And therefore all the people being desirous, that (after so great wars and
troubles) that they may have a perfect security from oppression and arbitrary
power, The houses of Parliament have resolved upon the Propositions, which are
tendered to your Majesty, as that without which the kingdom and your People
cannot be in safety, and most part of the people think, that there cannot be a
firm peace upon any other terms.

Your Majesty's friends, and the Commissioners from Scotland (after all the
wrestling they could) were forced to consent to the sending of those
Propositions, or to be hated as the hinderers of peace, and to send no
Propositions at all. And now, Sir if your Majesty (which God forbid) shall
refuse to assent to the Propositions, you will lose all your friends, lose the
city and all the country, and all England will join against you as one man, and
(when all hope of reconciliation is past) it is to be feared, they will
process and depose you, and set up another Government, they will charge us to
deliver your Majesty to them, and to tender the Northern Garrisons, and to
remove our Army out of England, and upon your Majesty's refusing the
Propositions, both kingdoms will be constrained (for their mutual safety) to
agree and settle Religion and Peace without you, which (to our unspeakable
grief) will ruin your Majesty and your Posterity. And if your Majesty reject
our faithful advice who desire nothing on earth more, then the establishment of
your Majesty's Throne) and lose England by your wilfulness, your Majesty will
not be permitted to come and ruin Scotland.

Sir, we have laid our hands upon our hearts, we have asked counsel and
direction from God and have laid our most serious thoughts about the remedy,
but can find no other (as affairs stand for the present) to save your Crown
and Kingdoms, then your Maj. assenting to the Propositions. We dare not say,
but they are higher in some things (if it were in our power and option to
remedy it, then we do approve of: But when we see no other means for curing the
distempers of the kingdoms and closing the breaches between your Maj. and your
Parliaments, our most humble and faithful advice is That your Maj. would
graciously (...) to assent to them, as the best way to procure a speedy and
happy peace; because your Maj. shall thereby have many great advantages. You
will be received again in your P^rl. with the applause and acclamations of your
people: By your Royal presence your friends will be strengthened, your enemies
(who fear nothing so much as the gra^ting of the Pr^positions) will be weakened:
Your Maj. will have a fit opportunity to offer such Propositions, as you shall
in your wisdom judge fit for the Crown and kingdom. All Armies will be
disbanded, and your people, finding the sweet fruits of your peaceable
government, your Maj. will gain the hearts and affections, which will be your
strength and glory, and will recover all that your Maj. has lost in this time
of tempest and trouble. And if it please God so to incline your Royal heart to
this advice of your humble and faithful servants, who (next to the honor of
God) esteem nothing more precious then the safety of your Person and Crown, our
actions shall quickly make it appear to all the world; that we esteem no hazard
too great for your Maj. safety and that we are willing to sacrifice our lives
and fortunes for establishing of your Throne. And now, Sir, we prostrate our
selves at your Maj. feet, and in the lowest posture of humility do beg; that
your Maj. may (in end) grant the suit of your most humble servants and faithful
subjects, who have no private aims but only the glory of God, and safety of
your Maj. Person, Posterity, and Crown before our eyes. And the granting of our
desires will revive our fainting spirits, refresh our sad hearts, which are
overwhelmed and like to break with sorrow, and will turn the prayers and tears
of the many thousands of your people, in praises to God, and make them embrace
your Majesty with acclamations of joy.

The Lord Chancellor of Scotland his Speech, at a Con^e^ence in the Painted
Chamber with a Committee of both Houses, October 10. 1646.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis day I hope will bring our Conference to some results to be reported to
the Houses, and therefore I shall frame my Discourse and Arguments with that
succinctnesse as may bring us soonest to a close,

At our first meeting, the subject of our debate was; whether the Right Power
of disposing the Person of the King is solely in the two Houses as they shall
think fit, or in the two Kingdoms; and at our last meeting, we had some
arguing about the same question, but your Lordships did still assert the Vote
of the Houses, and we say in respect of the interest and relations which both
Kingdoms have equally to the King, especially in the present juncture of
affairs, when both Kingdoms are entered in the same League and Covenant, have
jeoparded their lives in the same War, are laboring under the same danger, are
seeking the same remedies, and stand in need of the same peace and security;
and both Kingdoms are bound by our Covenant to preserve unity, and are obliged
by Treaty that none of us shall make any peace, cessation, or agreement
whatsoever, without mutual advice and consent of both) That the Person of the
King cannot be disposed of without the joint advice and consent of both
Kingdoms. But as we do acknowledge that England has parity of interest with
Scotland, so do we still offer that they shall have parity of power in
disposing of the King: and we do affirm, That the Person of the King, who is
King of Scotland as well as of England, and is Head and Monarch of both
Kingdoms, cannot be disposed of by any one of the Kingdoms alone: but what
ever is to be done concerning his Majesty's person, ought to be done by joint
advice and common consent of both, as may serve most for the Peace, security,
and happiness of the Kingdoms, which we did prove by several Arguments: To
which there was nothing answered in effect, but, that the King being within
England, his Person was to be disposed of as the two Houses shall think fit,
and that the King being with the Scottish Army, and they being paid by the
Parliament of England, he is in effect in the power of the Houses, and ought to
be at their disposing in the ^^me way as if he had come to the Army of Sir T.
Fairfax, or any other of the Parliaments Armies* To which we shall not need to
make any reply other then we have made already, That the Kings present
residence in England, nor no locality, can take away the reality of our
relations formerly mentioned by us, far less can it take away the engagements
and stipulations between the Kingdoms; and though the Scottish Army paid by
the Parliament of England, yet they are the Army of Scotland, raised for
pursuance of the ends of the Covenant, and are to be ordered and directed by
the Parliaments or Committees of both Kingdoms; And therefore they cannot with
conscience, duty, nor honor deliver the person of the King without his own
consent to be disposed of as the two Houses shall think fit: but we have
declared and do still declare* That we are content that the person of the King
be disposed of (the word Disposed being taken in a right sense) as may serve
most for the peace, safety, security honor and happiness of the King and both
Kingdoms: and did offer to your Lordships consideration his Majesty's coming
to or near London, as the most probable means for a speedy and well-grounded
Peace. And seeing your Lordships have done us the honor to meet with us in
this free and brotherly Conference, we do expect that you will concur and
assent to this Proposition. or propound a better expedient for the good of both
Kingdoms.

But if the honorable Houses will not admit of this Proposition, our next
desire is (that it may appear, no lawful and possible means are left
unassayed which may procure a happy agreement betwixt the King and his
Parliaments, and for our further exoneration) That Commissioners may yet once
more be sent from both kingdoms to his Majesty, to show the meaning of our
Propositions and to assert them, and to hear the Kings doubts and
difficulties, and desires, who may further intimate that (if his Majesty shall
not give a satisfactory answer to the Propositions) then both kingdoms will
without making any such further application to him, take such course as they
shall judge fittest for the peace and security of the kingdoms.

And as at the opening of this Conference I did begin with an humble, lawful,
and laudable desire for unity in relation, the King, and amongst our selves, so
shall I close in the same dialict; for the first of Religion, if we do remember
our vows to God to perform them, and uniformity according to our Covenant, we
may certainly expect that God will crown this great work, wherein he has
honored us to be actors, with his blessing; but if in place of uniformity,
which we are obliged to endeavor, there shall be a toleration of all Sects and
sores of Religion, and if we neglect to build the house of God, and become
insolent upon our successes, although we could mount up with Eagles wings, and
build our nests as high as the stars, and had an army who for valor and
strength could march to Constantinople, God shall lay our glory low in he dust,
and suffer the work to fall in our hands, like the confusion of Babell; And
whatever has been moved by us concerning the King, we desire it may be rightly
constructed, as proceeding from such as have not wavered from their first
principles; for when the King was in the height of his power, we did not, and
(I hope) never shall flatter him; and when the enemy was in the height of their
pride and strength, Scotland did fear no colors: and now when the King is at
his lowest ebb, and has cast himself into our Army for safety, we hope your
Lordships will pardon us from our sense of honor and duty to be very tender of
the person, and posterity of the King, to whom we have so many near relations,
and not like the worse of us: that we cannot so far forget our allegiance and
duty as not to have an antipathy against the change of Monarchical government,
in which we have lived through the descent of so many Kings, and under which
both Kingdoms have been governed so many ages, and flourished in al^
happiness. And now my last word shall be for constant unity between the
Kingdoms, which as it has been the chief means to pr^mote the great work
wherein both kingdoms are so deeply engaged, so there is nothing can make us
so informidable to our enemies, nor so much ayding one to another as the
cherishing and continuing thereof; and I dare say that no man would divide the
one from the other, but such as desire to fish in troubled waters, and are
real enemies to both: God has blessed the joint endeavors of both Nations,
both are in one ship, and are come through a very great storm, and now when we
are come into the harbor, it would be great shame to both to split upon the
rocks of division (and devorato bove deficere in cauda) and your Lordships may
be confident that Scotland who have esteemed no hazard too great for settling of
Religion and love to their Brethren, will stick so fast and firmly to you, (so
^ong as you hold the principles of your Covenant) as no fear nor favor will
ever be able to divide them from you, and we do expect that reciprocal amity
which may perpetuate our un^ty.

FINIS.

