The CASE of Henry Long Esquire;
JOHN Long, late of Little Chiverell, in the County of Wilts, Esquire; being seized
in fee simple of diverse Messuages, Lands, and Tenements lying in Melksham in
the said County, and having no Wife, Child, Brother, or Sister then living; but
having diverse Nephews, and being desirous to Settle his said Lands and Premises
in the Male Line of his Family according to their Heirship, by his last Will
and Testament in Writing; bearing Date July the Twentieth 1676. did devise all
his Estate in Melksham aforesaid (except two little Tenements thereby given to
John Philipps) unto his Nephew Henry Long, who was eldest Son of Richard Long
the Testators eldest Brother, for and during the Natural Life of him the said
Henry Long, who was his Heir at Law, and from and after his Decease, to the
first Son of the Body of the said Henry Long lawfully Begotten, and the Heirs
Males of the Body of such first Son lawfully Issuing; and for default of such
Issue, to the 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. and every other Son of the Body of
the said Henry Long, lawfully to be Begotten successively and respectively as
they should be in Priority of Birth and Seniority of Age, and to the Heirs
Males of their Bodies successively and respectively Issuing the Elder of such
Sons, and the Heirs Males of his Body Issuing, being always preferred before
the younger, and the Heirs Males of his Body Issuing: And for default of such
Issue,

To Richard Long second Son of the Testators Brother Richard for his Life, and
from and after his Decease to his 1st. 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. and every
other Son in the same manner as above. And for default of such Issue, then

To no less then nine several other Nephews of the Testator, particularly named
in the said Will, in the same manner; and especial care is taken by the
Testator, that they should all take according to their Heirship.

Upon the Testators Death, which was soon after this Will was made, Henry
entered upon this Estate, and inter-marryed with Ann Long, Daughter of John
Long, late of South Wraxall in Wilts, Esquire; by whom he had Issue one Daughter;
and about Lady Day, 1687. Henry dyed, leaving his said Wife enseint with a Son
who was born within Seven Months after his Fathers Death, and Baptized by the
Name of Henry.

Upon the death of Henry without any Son, Richard Long being the next in
Remainder, entered and enjoyed these Lands, but on the Birth of Henry the now
post humus Infant; Richard well knowing the Intent of his Uncle the Testators
Will, laid no further claim to the Premises, but suffered Ann the Widow of
Henry, and Mother of Henry the post humus Infant, to enjoy this Estate as
Guardian to her said Son, who has enjoyed it so ever since the Birth of her
Son without any Interruption, till now lately Richard has commenced an Action
of Ejectment for this Estate, on which Action there is a special Verdict found,
containing all this matter.

It was and must be agreed, That if this Child had been born in the life time
of his Father, the Title had been in him; but only for the reason he was not
Born till after his Fathers Death, Judgment is given for the said Richard Long.

Whereas the Intent of the Testator is the main and only thing considerable in
a Will, and the intent in this Case is Notorious; That the Son of Henry whether
born before or after his Fathers Death, should enjoy this Estate, as appears by
the great care taken to limit it to so many Nephews, according to Heirship.

And whereas a post humus Son is as much an Heir as one born in the life of his
Ancestor; and constructions of Wills ought to be in favor of an Heir at Law,
and the Testators meaning; in regard Men in extremes are not supposed to have
Counsel for their assistance. And whereas this Will was made in the Testators
last Sickness, and for the Benefit of his Heir, 'twill be hard to frustrate the
intent of his Will, and wrest his meaning to disinherit his Heir; when by the
Laws of all Nations, a Will is nothing but a Declaration of the Parties Mind,
how, and by whom his Estate shall be enjoyed, and this is as plain here as
words can make it.

The Consequence of such a Judgment, will be to give Westminster Hall a power
not only to expound but to make Men's Wills, and to dispose of their Estates
contrary both to their words and meaning, since both are manifestly plain in
this last, in favor of the said Henry Long the Infant.

The CASE OF Henry Long, Esquire; To be heard on Monday, the 17th. of December,
1694.


