THE Main Points OF Church Government AND DISCIPLINE; Plainly and modestly
handled by way of Question and Answer. Very useful to such as either want Money
to buy, or Leisure to read larger Tracts.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for LUKE FAVVNE, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Parrot ni paul's Churchyard 1649.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
ALthough the worth of the Author, and solidity of the matter of this book
might sufficiently commend it self unto thy perusal, yet I shall add this to
its Commendation, that it is plain, but profitable, short, but sound: so that I
may say of it as Tully did of Brutus his Laconical Epistle, Quam multa, quam
paucis! how much in a little? Here is a great deal of matter in a few words; he
studied brevity, yet solidity, in this small piece; by the reading whereof not
only the weak may be instructed, but the strong also established in the truth,
which is the hearty desire of him who subscribes himself,

Thine in the Lord, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.

A plain PLATFORM OF Presbyterial Government, Catechistically and Methodically
propounded.
QUEST. I. WHat Government of the Church is most agreeable to the Word of GOD?

Answ. The Government of the Church by Presbyters or Elders for they have the
rule, Heb. 13. 7, 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
the keys (which in the very notion of them do carry power and authority
properly so called Isa, 22, 22 Rev. 1. 18, and 3, 7.
) are committed to them Mat. 16. 19
, and power to remit and retain sins John 20, 28
, they feed and govern the flock 1 Pet. 5. 2 Act. 20, 17 28
, and are over the people in the Lord 1 These. 5 12
; they are Guides, Leaders, Bishops, Governors, Pastors; which Titles in
Scripture are used to express the power of Civil Magistrates Josh 13. 21.
Numb. 31. 14. Mat. 27. 2. Jud. 8, 14. Acts 23, 14.
: Hence the Angels, the Elders of the Churches, are commended for good
Discipline and reprehended for bad. Rev. 2. 2, 6, 14, 20, and Rev. 3.


Quest. 2. What kind of Government have Presbyters or Elders over the Church?

Answ. Not Kingly, Lordly, or Magisterial power, which only belongs to Christ
1 Pet. 5, 3. 1 Cor. 8. 6. and 12. 5 Psalm. 2, 6, Col. 1. 18. Ephesians. 2, 22.
, but Stewardly and Ministerial, 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 5 20. Mat. 9. 38.
.

Quest. 3. From whom receive they their Stewardly and Ministerial Power?

Answ. From Jesus Christ Mat. 16. 19. and 28, 18, 19, 20. Ioh. 20. 21, 23. 2
Cor. 8. 10:
, they are his Stewards 1 Cor, 4, i.
, his Ministers and Ambassadors 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
, having their Office from him Ephesians 4. 8. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Act. 20. 28, 29.
, and they are to act in his name Mat. 18. 19 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
, and must give account to him Heb. 13, 17, 18. Luc. 12. 41, 42.


Quest. 4. But do they not receive their Governing Power and Authority from the
Church or Body of the People?

Answ. No, though they be for the good and benefit of the General Visible
Church, and of particular Churches Ephesians. 4. 7 10, 11, 12 2 Cor. 12. 14
, and ought to make themselves servants thereunto, as Jesus Christ and his
Apostles (which did not receive their authority from thence) did Math 20* 26,
27, 28 2 Cor. 4. 5 Col. 1. 7.
; and though they be elected by the people, yet they do not receive their
Authority from them. For, 1. the power of Church Government is not conveyed
to the body of the people, by any authentic grant or Commission from Jesus
Christ, as it is to the Officers. 2. The people are not called Governors,
Guides, Leaders, as the Officers are; but on the contrary, are called the flock
Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2
, the Saints Hebr. 13* 24. Phi 1. 1
, as distinct from their Bishops, Pastors, Rulers, to whom they are commanded
to be subject and obedient 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12 1 Timothy 5 17. Heb* 13. 7, 17.
. 3. The people have not received from Christ due gifts and qualifications for
the exercise of Government and jurisdiction 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 17 28, 29
as Officers have Ephel 4. 11, 12 1 Timothy 4. 14
. 4. It cannot be showed that God in the Old or New Testament did erect any
Church without Officers, seeing Adam was a Priest to his wife Genesis 4. 3
Ainsworth.
and family (as Noah also was,) and the first born were Priests Exodus 19 22
at the founding of the Jewish Church, and Christ his Apostles were Officers in
Commission at the founding of the Christian Churches. 5. It is more absurd and
irrational, that all the males should govern in a Church, then in a City or
Commonwealth; that the Elders should be subject to the people, then that
Magistrates should be subject to their subjects; seeing the power of
Church Government is derived not from the Law of Nature, which places the
Original of Civil Government in the people, but the Canon of Scripture, which
says no such thing concerning Church Government. Nor, 6. does it warrant, that
the people should exercise power and authority, in Preaching, Ordaining,
Administration of Sacraments or censures, therefore they have it not; for such
power is vain and impertinent, as may not be drawn into act by them that have
it; and therefore Pastors, Preaching, Baptizing, Ordaining, etc. do not put
forth the peoples power, but the power and authority of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 13
10. Math. 28. 19, 20


Quest. 5. You spoke of a General Visible Church; does the Scripture hold out
such a Church?

Answ. Yes, for, 1. The Apostles, which were General Officers (to which a
general Church is the adequate correlative) and had the care of all the
Churches 2 Cor. 11 28
, are said to set, put or placed, in the Church 1 Cor. 12 28
, as speaking but of one; Paul was a Minister of this Church Col. 1. 25
. 2. That one body, that one fold, into which all, both Jews and Gentiles, are
Baptized and brought 1 Cor. 12 12, 13. Ephesians 2. 16. and 36 Joh. 10 16
, mast needs be the universal visible Church. 3. That house or Temple, in
which Antichrist did sit 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4
, that woman traveling Rev. 12. 1 2. etc.
, the Bride and Spouse of Christ Rev. 21. 2
, a child, and in nonage under the Law, and at full age under the Gospel Gal.
4. 1, 2
, that assembly of 24 Elders and 4 Beasts Rev. 4.
, that one Sion having many Assemblies in it Isa. 4. 5
, that one City, one new Jerusalem Rev. 20. 9. and 21. 2
, that one Feast Mat. 22. 2
, field Mit. 13. 24.
, floor Mat. 3. 12.
, draw-net Math. 13. 47
, and the like, are to be understood of the Universal Visible Church, which is
further in Scripture described to be Organicall 1 Cor. 12 14 etc. Romans 12. 4 to
9. Ephesians. 4 4. with 11, 12.
.

Quest. 6. But we read of Churches Gal 1. 2. 1 Cor. 14* 34. Acts 9. 31.
in the plural number, of many Churches in the New Testament, and therefore
there is not only one Church?

Ans. These are the particular Churches I spoke of, of the same name and nature
with the whole, as the Sea is but one Psa. 95. 5
, yet the several parts of it, washing several shoars, are called Seas Psa.
24 2
, the dry Land but one Genesis 1. 10
, yet being possessed by several Nations, under several climates, divided by
hills, rivers, and other boundaries, is called Lands Genesis 10 31
, as Labans flocks, having all one owner, and probably all one mark, are called
one flock Genesis 30. 31, 32, 36, 38. and 33. 13
, as the free men of Rome, where ever born or bred, make but one Corporation
Act. 22. 3 with 28
; hence the Church of Ephesus, though a complete particular Church, is not
called the whole City or household of God, but fellow Citizens with the Saints,
viz. of other Churches, and of the household. As the Jewish Church was but one,
yet in regard of their Sabbath-convocations in their Synagogues Lev. 23. 1, 2, 3
, for hearing the Word read Act. 15. 21
, and preached Act. 13. 14, 15, 16
, for prayer Act. 16. 13
, for Rule and Government Act. 13. 15. Joh 12 42. and 9. 34. and 16. 1, 2
, was called Congregations and Churches Psa. 26. 12. and 68 26. and 74 4, 8
. As the Antichristian Churches of Italy, Spain, Germany, are but one Where
Rev. 17 5. and 18. 2 3. and 19. 2
, under one head the Pope, so the Christian Churches of England, Scotland,
Holland, etc. which have their Fathers name written in their foreheads Rev. 14.
1
, are but one woman Rev. 12. 1
; the one is the army under the Dragon, the other under Michael Rev. 12 7
: and as a whole Army is often times in the Original Language of Scripture
called a Church 1 Samuel 17. 47 Ezekiel. 16, 40. Jer. 50 9
, and the several Regiments and Companies are called Churches Eze 26, 7
, so particular Churches and Antichristian conventions, are as the several
Brigades, Regiments, or Company of those two Armies: Hence also the Church of
God is called Army and Armies Cant. 6, 10, 13
, Vineyard and Vineyards Cant. 7, 12 and 8, 11, 12
, Garden and Gardens Cant. 6, 2
, as well as Church and Churches.

Quest. 7. What sorts of Elders has God appointed in his Church?

Answ. Two sorts; extraordinary, as the Apostles 1 Pet, 5, 1 2* Joh. v. 1
; and ordinary, as Pastors and Teachers Acts 20 17, 28. Tit. 1, 5
. The Apostles were to Teach and Rule, not only Churches, but Pastors and
Ministers also, being men of an higher order 1 Cor. 12 28. Ephesians. 4 11
, immediately called of God Gal. 1, 1
, infallible in their doctrine Gal. 1, 7, 8. and 5, 2
, endowed with extraordinary gifts Acts 2* 1 2. and 8, 17 18
, saw Christ in the flesh Act. 1, 21 1 Cor. 9, 1
, were enjoined ordinarily to travel abroad to plant Churches Math. 28 19
, might act authoritatively in any Church without a call or consent of men, and
might shake the dust off their feet against such Ministers, or others, as did
not receive them Math. 10 14
, their commission was irrepealable, the limits they agreed on were large Gal*
2, 9
. But a Minister is not of an higher order, nor has power over his fellow
Ministers, nor has an immediate irrepealable Call, not infallible, nor in
these times extraordinarily gifted, has not seen Jesus Christ in the flesh,
cannot exercise pastoral authority in an ordinary or occasional way without a
call and consent of persons interested. And lastly, Pastors and Teachers are by
succession to continue in the Church to the end of the world Ephesians. 4, 11, 12
Rev. 12, 6 and 11, 2, 3
, whereas Apostleship continued in one age only; for though Matthias was
substituted in the room of Judas Act. 1, 25
, yet none was substituted in the room of James Act. 12, 2
, or of any other Apostle.

Quest. 8. In what Church has God set these Elders?

Answ. In the Universal Church primarily 1 Cor. 12 28. Ephesians. 4 11. To 12
, and in particular Churches secundarily Act. 13, 1
: Division of the Church into particular Congregations, and fixing particular
Elders to them, is no further of divine institution then order and edification
did first occasion, and do still require it should be so, as the whole Tribe of
Levi sed all the Jews in common, (for ought we know) while they were together:
Afterward (it may be) the four Families of Levites, as Aaron, Cohath, Gershon,
Metari, did take more special charge of those Tribes that quartered on the same
side of the Tabernacle that they did Number. 2, 3, 10, 18, 25. with Numb 3, 38,
10, 18, 25 Sec Ainsworth in Number. 2
, and then there was some division made, and yet after that a further division
was made, when the Tribes of Israel came to be fixed in their several
divisions, and the Levites also were scattered and fixed amongst them for the
better instruction of the people, and had their maintenance by Lands and Tithes
where they lived. So the Apostles notwithstanding their general commission
Math. 28 19, 20 Mar. 16
, did feet the Church in common, while there was but one particular Church, and
afterward when Churches were multiplied, did for edification and orders sake
agree upon a division of themselves, Gal. 2, 9
, (though they were not very precise in observing it, Peter preaching sometimes
to the Gentiles, and Paul to the Jews,) and had their several places ordinarily
to officiate in 2 Cor. 10 13, 14, 15, 16
, yea some probably think, that they did disperse themselves into twelve parts
of the world, and the Greek text Act. 1. 25
may (if you put the comma after (...)) fully bear this sense, that Mathias
might be sent that circuit which Judas, had he not fallen, should have gone;
and in likelihood it was from this agreement, that James (notwithstanding his
Apostolik commission was as general as the commission of the other Apostles) did
not travel abroad as the other did, but stayed at Jerusalem: as also some other
Apostles after their travels betook themselves to residence in some one place,
as if they had been the fixed Pastors of those places respectively. Those
Apostles that traveled abroad did carry Ministers along with them, as John,
Mark, Act. 13, 5 and 15, 37
their fellow laborer, Philem. 24
and did send other Ministers, as Tychicus, sometimes to one Church, as Ephesus
Act. 20, 4 Ephesians. 6, 21, 22
, and sometimes to another, as Colloss, Col. 4, 7
and did keep other Ministers from their particular charges, as Epaphras Col.
1, 7 with 4. 12
and all this was for the service of the universal Church, so much was it
preferred before the service of their particular Churches. In the primitive
times before division of titles, the Elders were not affixed to particular
assemblies, but the officers did in common teach and govern sundry
congregations; and so it may be at this day, when it shall be found most for
edification, and so it is in some Reformed Churches: As the Justices of Peace
have their commission for the whole County, yet by agreement or custom for
order-sake, they have their several Hundreds or divisions, in which they keep
their privy and public Sessions, and do ordinarily execute their office, and
in that respect may be called Justices of such a Division or Circuit; And as
the Militia Soldiers, which watch and guard the City of London, are primarily
the Soldiers of the whole City; and secundarily the Soldiers of such and such a
Ward or limits; so Ministers, which are called watchmen and soldiers Isa. 62. 6
1 Timothy 2, 3
, are Ministers both of the whole City of God, the universal visible Church,
and also of those particular Churches or Congregations, which they especially
take charge of and receive maintenance from, and as Soldiers, though they be
the Soldiers of the whole City, yet each have and ought in reason to have one
particular place assigned to be guarded by him, and the unwarrantable absence
of him from his guard is censurable; so a Minister should have his flock, and
be resident with it.

Quest. 9. How are men made ordinary Elders?

Answ. They are made Elders by Ordination, which is (as the Scripture defines
it) an appointment of men over the business Act. 6, 3
the seven Deacons had not been Officers though chosen by the multitude, if
they had not been by Ordination appointed over the business, the multitude
choosing them is not said to appoint them over the business, but to set them
before the Apostles. 2. Hence the charge is more express, that ordination
rather then election should not suddenly and hastily be made 1 Timothy 5 22
, whereas if election had only or chiefly made the Officer; then prudence had
required, that the charge should have been more express against hasty election
then hasty ordination. 3. Laying on of hands in ordination, not lifting up of
hands in election (which they so much urge) is reckoned amongst the principles
Heb. 6, 3
. 4. The description of persons fit for office is much more large in the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, which were to ordain, then in any or all the
Epistles written to the Churches, to whom election is conceived to belong 1
T^^. 3 2, etc. and 12, etc. Tit. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
; now the Apostle, which did all things fitly, would acquaint those most with
the qualifications of officers, which had the greatest hand and power in making
officers. 5. Fasting and prayer is to beg direction and assistance from God,
with reference to ordination, rather then election Acts 13 1, 2
; the Apostles prayed not before the election of the seven Deacons, (as they
would, if that had been of the greatestmoment,) but the Scripture witnesses,
that when the election was past they prayed before ordination Act. 6. 5. 6
. 6. The Scripture speaks much and plainly* for ordination, 1 Timothy 4 14. Tit.
1. 5 Act. 14. 23 Act. 13. 1, 2 1 Timothy 5, 22 2 Timothy 2, 2
, and but little, (some say, nothing at all) and that obscurely for popular
election of Elders. 7. The peoples election is but preparatory to the making of
Elders, or a nomination or designation of some persons to that office, if being
tried by the Presbytery they be approved as fit; God having d 1 Timothy 5 22
given special power and charge to the Presbytery not to ordain rashly (d) or
suddenly, 1 Timothy 5. 22
though the people should elect rashly, but to reject that rash election as
null and void. 8. To assert, that Ministers are made by ordination, does make
the line of ministerial power more straight and regular then otherwise; the
power of making Ministers was first in Christ, and he made Apostles; they, as
his stewards in the absence of the Lord, and by his direction and command, do
appoint other officers, Christ is the chief Pastor 1 Pet. 2 25*
, the Apostles next Joh. 21, 15, 16, 17
, then Elders 1 Pet. 5, 2 Act. 20, 17 28
, Christ the Archbishop, 1 Pet. 2, 25
Apostles, Bishops Act. 1, 2^
, and Elders Acts 20 17, 18. Tit. 1, 7
, Christ was sent and the Apostles Joh. 20, 21
, and Presbyters Ephesians. 4. 8, 11*
, Christ ordaintwelve Mark 3, 14. Ioh. 15, 14
, and the twelve ordained Elders Acts 14, 23
, and to Elders has God given the power of ordination of other Elders
successively.

Q. 10. To whom, say you, has God committed the power of ordination of Elders?

Ans. To Elders 1 Timothy 4 14. Tit. 1, 5. ut supra
: not to any unofficied man; For 1. there is no precept nor warrant for it in
all the New Testament, that Christ or his Apostles did leave to the body of
believers, Elders the power of ordaining, though it had bin much easier to have
writ to the Churches, that they should ordain their own Elders, then to ave
traveled themselves Acts 14 23
, or to have sent Timothy or Titus for that purpose 1 Timothy 5 22. Tit. 1 5
. 2. Not one instance can be given of any unofficed man, ordaining an officer
of the New Testament. 3. They that do ordain do put some of their work upon the
person ordained, but preaching, baptizing, etc. is not the work of any
unofficed man. 4. He that ordains blesses him that is ordained, and the less
is blessed of the greater Heb. 7, 7
. 5. Ordination is confessed to be an act of authority, and an unofficed man
have not authority. 6. The Church cannot lawfully depute a man to ordain whom
God has not deputed, nor can the man or men so deputed lawfully ordain, except
the Church have a Charter from God to that effect. 7. There is not one of a
thousand amongst the people that are able in all points to try and judge of the
sufficiency of preaching Presbyters, as they that ordain are bound by Gods Law
to do Tit. 1, 5, 6, 7
.

Q. 11. But is not ordination by one or more grave men deputed by the
Congregation more lawful, and valid then ordination by the Prelates*

Answ. No, the Bishops were Presbyters, and so more enabled by the Word to
ordain then any non-Presbyters: Prelacy, though an humane Institution, did no
more annihilate their being Presbyters, then Pharisaism did the Jewish
Priesthood, and they did ordain as Presbyters; for Bishops and Presbyters are
but made one order by the very Papists, which also judge, that if a Deacon
should be made a Bishop persaltum he has no power to ordein Presbyters: The
Elders ordained by the Apostles in every City, did in their meetings choose one
of their fellow Elders (if no Apostle nor Apostolic man did reside with them,
if they did, they by their places were superior to any Presbyter and Moderators
in any convention of Elders, and so should be at this day, if any Apostle were
now alive and resident) to be President of their company and Moderator of their
actions; now Presidency is natural and necessary for the regulating of matters:
Beza says, it is scriptural, and that this President was the same which S.
John called the Angel, the continuance of presidency in one man was not then
found to be either unlawful or inconvenient. To this president the Fathers
afterward appropriated the name of Bishop, and such as these being grave men,
and of great repute, and Pastors of the chief Cities, and having the spirit of
Government, (which every godly Minister has not,) partly through their own
usurpation, partly through the sloth and pusillanimity of the Presbyters,
partly by Law and Canon, were invested with too much power; yet did not they,
no nor our English Bishops ordain Presbyters, without the assistance of other
Presbyters, and therefore their ordination comes nearer to the Scripture-way of
ordination by the Presbytery, then any ordination by one or many non-Presbyters
can do, (one two or three deputed Members being nothing like a Presbytery, or a
company of Presbyters,) and is by this present Parliament and Synod, as
formerly, also by the reformed Churches, and godly non-conformists,
(notwithstanding their opposition to prelacy,) judged valid, and not to be
changed for any popular ordination; when the Church was in the wilderness, when
Antichrist most reigned and raged, God did preserve some fundamental doctrines,
and the essence of Baptism, and the essence of a true Ministry dispensing it,
and they, that is, her Pastors did feed her there Rev. 12. 6. 14.
.

Quest. 12. Who have power to preach the Word in the Church?

Answ. Pastors and Teachers, that have also authority to baptize Mat. 28 20.
. God having joined them together, no man ought to put them asunder Mat. 19. 16.
. 2. Preaching is a principal part of the Ministerial Office 1 Per. 5. 2 1 Timothy
3. 2 2 Timothy 4 2
, requiring more sufficiency then any other part 2 Cor. 2. 16
, (hence the ability of expectants is best tried by preaching,) and of as much
dignity and trust as the dispensing of the Sacraments John 4. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 17
, which yet (is confessed) may not be administered by private men. 3. God has,
by a special office, distinguished Ministers from other men, and separated them
to be Pastors and Teachers Ephesians 4. 11
, and therefore this order is not to be violated, nor should men enter in at
the window, but by the door Ioh. 10. 1 2
. 4. God has severely punished usurpers of the Ministerial function Number. 16 9.
10 1 Samuel 13. 9, 12, 13, 14
, yea when there seemed to be great necessity of it 1 San. 13 8 2 Samuel 6 6 7,
8, 9.
. 5. None ought to preach except they be sent, and called thereunto Rem. 10.
15. Ier. 23. 21. Heb. 5. 4, 5.
, but giftedness does not include in it sufficient mission or vocation: For as
women may be gifted, which yet are forbidden to preach 1 Cor: 14 34. 1 Timothy 1.
11. 12.
; so no man may exercise Regal or Magistratical power, or do the office of a
Constable, Lawyer, Attorney, a Reader in one of the Inns of Court, a Justice of
Peace, a Judge, a Speaker in Parliament, a Captain, Major, Colonel, or General,
only upon this ground, because he is conceived to be gifted for it. 6. It is
said, God has made his people Kings and Priests Rev. 1. 6 1 Pet. 2. 5.
, but not that (...) has made them Prophets; for though God did sometimes give
an immediate and extraordinary commission to do some Magistratical acts Number. 25
7, 8. Acts 5. 5.
, and the time was, when Gods Holy Spirit being extraordinarily poured out on
all flesh, their sons and daughters did prophecy, viz. some so extraordinarily
anointed did so Joel 2 28 with Acts 2 17.
, as they did also see visions, and dream dreams; and then it was also men's
duty to desire any spiritual gifts, as speaking with tongues, but especially
prophecy 1 Cor. 14 1, 2.
; but now it is unlawful to desire the one gift, or the other; God not inabling
gifted men now to understand the original languages as then he did. 7. Teaching
in the Church does imply authority over them that are taught 1 Timothy 1. 11, 12.
; but private men, though gifted, have not authority, therefore they are not to
teach or usurp authority. 8. God has not given them any power to receive
maintenance, which is due to those that labor in the Word and Doctrine 1 Timothy 5
17, 18 1 Cor. 9. 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11
.

Quest. 13. What maintenance mean you? If you mean Tithes, or any other settled
maintenance, neither private men nor Ministers ought to receive such
maintenance.

Answ. Tithes had many enemies, sundry exceptions made against the payment of
them, nor was it counted any robbery to detain them Mal. 3. 8 2 Chro. 31 4, 5,
etc.
, when both God himself, and the Magistrates, did expressly require the due
payment of them, and when there were few or no Sectaries, (at least not in arms
and authority,) which endeavored the ruin of the Ministry, especially when
there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own
eyes; then the Levites were glad to wander abroad for maintenance Jude 17, 7*
8, 9. 10, 11. and 19. 1
. Yet 2. the Levites, though a small Tribe Ainsw^rth in Number. 3. 39
, (if a Tribe, there being twelve besides,) scarce the 60. part of the house of
Jacob, had in Judea a small Country, 48. Cities with their Suburbs, 2000.
cubits from the wall on every side Josh. 21. 41. Number 35. 2. Lev. 25. 32, 33, 34
, and their first fruits Number 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 18, 4.
, and a great part of the manifold sacrifices Lev. 2 3. and 7. 5, 7, 8 33. 34
, and freewill offerings of all the males of the children of Israel, which were
to appear thrice yearly before the Lord with some offering Exodus 34 23. and 23.
15, 16, 17.
, and whatsoever house, field, person, beast, etc. was by a singular vow given
to the Lord, which was to be valued by the Priest himself Lev. 27. 2, 3, 4. 5,
8, 9, 10, etc.
, and all these duties were brought in to the Priest without charge or trouble;
they had not only the full tenth of all kind of increase, but also such an
imposition laid upon all kind of grain, as came to more then a sixth part of
the crop it self Goodwin. (...) and Aaron. 1. 6. c. 2, 3.
, and those Cities and Lands descended from them to their posterity from
generation to generation, as also did their Tithes and offerings. 3. Suppose
Jesus Christ, being a Member of the Jewish Church, did not demand the Tithes
then due by Gods Law to the Levitical Priests Mat. 23. 23 Heb 7. 5
. Suppose also the Apostles being by their office to travel abroad, did not
receive Tithes, (no more then the Levites did receive them in their travel,)
but were sometimes forbidden to take so much as a scrip Mat. 10. 10.
, (though at other times allowed it Luc. 22. 35, 36.
,) and enjoined to live at the charges of the faithful Mat. 10. 10, 11
; and though Paul and Barnabas did sometimes work with their hands that they
might not be chargeable 1 Cor. 9. 6.
, yet Paul does expressly affirm, that Tithes were not Aaronical, or proper to
the Levitical Priests, but on the contrary proves the greatness of
Melchizede^'s Priesthood, by his blessing Abraham, and tything him Heb. 7. 2,
4, 5, 7.
; the word (...) verse 6.
implies, requiring Tithes, as well as receiving them, and thereupon he asserts
our Savior to be a Priest after the order of Melchizedec v. 15, 16, 17
; and therefore Christ must needs have power to tithe the people as well as to
bless them, or else he comes not up to the type or figure: he therefore that
says Tithes are Ceremonial, must show wherein the Ceremony does consist, and
upon what Scripture he grounds his opinion, and answer Paul's argument, or else
he is to be esteemed a deluder of the people, supposing that gain is godliness
1 Timothy 6 5
. 4. The Ministry of the New Testament, being far more honorable 2 Cor 3. 6, 7,
etc.
, laborious and studious, then the Levitical Priesthood, and the Ministers of
the Gospel being to live of the Gospel 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14
, they have an evil eye that grudg the Ministers of the Gospel so much means
proportionably, as the Priests had under the Law, that judge 100. l. per annum;
or more, little enough for a Factor, but enough or too much for a Minister, A
principio non fuit sic; for Believers had all things common Acts 432
, and so far they were from grudging the tenth part of their increase, that
they sold their Lands, and laid the prizes of them at the Apostles feet v. 34,
35.
; and afterward, by one means or other, Ministers had, in persecuting times,
(much more ought they to have in peaceable and prosperous times,) not only
competent but honorable maintenance 1 Timothy 5 17, 18
, for themselves, their wives and children 1 Cor. 9, 4, 5, 6 1 Timothy 3, 4 5. and
5, 8
, and to keep hospitality Tit. 1. 8
, and all this without entangling themselves in the affairs of this life 2 Timothy
2. 4
.

As for the Tithes, with relation to this Kingdom, (omitting how far the Law of
nature, one of the fundamentals of our Laws, did teach them the Gentiles,) it
is unquestionable that they, in some Parishes at least, are the Ministers
right, by as good Law as the 9. parts are the peoples; and it is as illegal for
the people to withold their tenth's, as if the Minister should, besides his
tenth's, take away one or more of their 9. parts; and it is perilous to a
State, that private men should prefer their judgment of meum and tuum, of right
and wrong, before the public judgment of the Law and Courts of the Kingdom,
and may be as destructive to Nobility, Gentry, and others in the Kingdom, to
have the hedge of the Law broken down, as it is to the Ministry; sundry persons
(some whereof are in power and place) being as inclinable to defraud them also
of the Tithes, and to introduce equality and community in the Commonwealth, as
in the Church.

2. This Law of Tithes was not an imposition on the people, as some falsely
suggest, but a voluntary donation, not of the people (though, if they that were
then owners of the land, and had power to alienate them in whole, or in part,
and did so, that is a sufficient bar against those in whose hands they now are,
which have no title but what they hold from and under them, and can justly
claim no more then was transmitted by them,) but of the King, who then having
all the Lands in England in demesne, did give the tenth part of his own Lands,
or, as some call it, the tenth part of his Kingdom, to the Church, and were
consented unto, and have been since paid, as a rentcharge on the Land, before
the Subject, either Lord or Tenant, had any thing at all to do in the said
Lands; and therefore whether or no the Scripture does prescribe the particular
way of Ministers maintenance, in Corn, a seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, or
eleventh part, more or less, or in moneys, yearly, quarterly, monthly, weekly,
paid by Tax or Contribution, or in Lands, or in some, or all of these, it is
not much material; For though (suppose) before they gave it, it was in their
own power, (which was the case of Ananias and Sapphirah Act. 5. 4
,) yet the Tithes being so given, it is grievous sin to alienate them from
their general end: For first, it is sacriledg to devour that which is holy, or
devoted to the service of God and the Church Prove 20 25 Levit. 27. 28, 30
though this sacriledg be committed upon pretense of Reformation and hatred of
Idols Romans 2, 22
. Secondly, it is a disanulling of the testament of men Gal. 3. 15
, when it is confirmed not only by the Doners or Testators, but by several Acts
of Parliament, Magna Cha^^a, and late Ordinances. Thirdly, it wilfully incurs
those direful Execrations which were usually pronounced against all such
Church-robbers; and in some places, where Tithes are unjustly withheld from the
Ministers, God himself does, as it were, tithe their corn, and take away at
least the tenth part of it, that they see they are no gainers by this unjust
course: And these things are spoken for the satisfaction, not of the covetous
(whereof there is little hope,) but of the conscientious, and not for any
benefit of the Author, whose means (for his own particular) would be much
greater, if no Tithes at all were paid, then now they are.

And lastly, As for settled maintenance: 1. The Scripture does allude to a
certain and settled maintenance that should be given to the Ministry Ezekiel. 45 1,
5
, in comparing it with servants hire and wages 1 Timothy 5 18
, and a soldiers pay 1 Cor. 9 7
, both which are certain. 2. God doubtless has as much care of the maintenance
of the Ministers of the New Testament, as of the Old; shall we then think that
he did allow the one certain maintenance, which none could deprive them of, and
make the other incapable of such maintenance? 3. When a Minister has
set-maintenance he knows better how to proportion his living, his alms, his
expenses for the public, his provision for his children, and how to keep
hospitality. 4. Tithes are not, in one sense, settled or stinted maintenance,
for they are more or less, according as the Husbandman sows, and God
prospers; as Corn is little or much, good or bad, well or ill gotten, dear or
cheap: they that do receive Tithes do rise or fall with them that pay them. 5.
Magistrates should be nursing Fathers and Mothers to the Church Isai. 49 23
: they should bring their glory and honor into it Rev. 21 24, 26
: And may they not assign certain maintenance to the Ministers of the Gospel,
which they may do to their meanest servants, yea to to the meanest men in the
Kingdom, if so they please? But of this enough.

Quest. 14. Who may lawfully be admitted into the Church?

Answ. All that profess Faith and Repentance Mat. 3, 6 7. Acts 2, 41, 47 Acts
8, 37*
, (I speak of Jews, Heathens, and other strangers to the Church, not of
children born within the Church, which may be baptized before any such personal
profession, and are to be accounted within the Church by virtue of their
parents being within the Church,) except there be some just ground of personal
prejudice against them, as in the case of Saul, whom the Apostles might well
suspect to be still a Jew, a Persecutor, and a Spy, and that he but assayed to
join himself to them to atchieve his wicked ends, till they heard Barnabas his
testomony concerning him Act 9 26 27, 28
. But secondly, there is no precept or president of the calling of Christians
(before they could be admitted into the Church) to give account of the work of
grace in their heart, or of a Congregation judging whether that work was
wrought or no, or of their meeting together for prayer and mutual conference,
to be satisfied of the good estate one of another, or of their deferring
admission till they had such satisfaction; nor did Jesus Christ (as man) know
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round a- Jordan, with whom he was
baptized Mat. 3, 6 7
, nor were John Baptist, the Apostles, and those thousands and myriades which
they baptized, satisfied in their consciences of the regeneration each of
other, esteeming each other to be a real Saint; nor did the Jewish Church
(though called Saints) Psa. 89. 5 7. Psa. 149 1. Exo. 19 5, 6
consist only of such which were, at least in the judgment of Charity, sincere
Converts; nor does Paul's writing to the Church of Corinth, called to be Saints,
evince, that at the time of his writing to them (much less before or after) he
did judge the Corinthian Church to consist wholly of true Saints, the contrary is
evident 1 Cor. 3 1, 2. and 5, 1, 2* and 11 21. 2 Cor. 12, 20, 21 1 Cor. 15 34
. The Churches charity is but a leaden rule, no certain one; some men's charity
being more, some less Acts 15. 37, 38, 39
, and the same men's charity being larger at sometimes then at others, and to
some men, as those of their own opinions, kindred, benefactors, etc. then to
others; whence it follows that some men may sometimes lawfully admit such,
which others, yea themselves, at other times, may lawfully reject; the case, in
it self, being the very same.

Quest. 15. How come particular Churches to be one in themselves, and to be
distinguished one from another?

Answ. First, Their habitation is in this case considerable; it being agreeable
to the Law of Nature and Scripture, that there should be Parishes, or Churches
should be confined within convenient local limits: For 1. else the members of a
particular Church migh live 10. 20. 50, an 100. miles each from other without
blame. 2. The word constantly holds forth, that the Christian inhabitants of a
City, Town, or place, were the Church in that City, Town, or place. 3. Churches
are usually denominated from places, as the Church of Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch,
etc. and Cities and Churches do expound one another Acts 14 23. Titus* 1, 5.
Acts 16, 4, 5
. 4. They that did remove their habitations, did (it is very probable) fall into
membership with those Churches whither they did remove Act. 18, 2 24, 25, 26
Romans 16, 2
. 5. If, Church members be not resident amongst themselves, how can Pastors be
resident amongst them 1 Pet 5, 2
? 6. Cohabitation of Church Members has diverse paterns in Scripture
uncontrolled by precepts and other paterns; For no instance can be showed: that
any dwelt nearer to one true Church (though corrupt, as Corinth, Laodicea,
Sardis, etc.) and was a member of a Church in another City or Town, as
Cenchrea; or that any dwelt within the civil comunion of the members of a
Church, (which is often for worldly ends) and was not a member of that Church; or
that Christians, dwelling remote one from another, were of one particular
Congregation. 7. That none but those that cohabite should be of one
Congregation, is required by Reason, as well as Scripture: 1. For their more
commodious meeting together in public with ease, frequency, less expense of
time and money. 2. Their more easy conversing with, watching over, comforting
and relieving one another. 3. For the preventing of confusion, contention, and
offense. 4. For the more convenient inspection over their Families, that their
Families, as well as themselves, do sanctify the Sabbath; and therefore if the
Magistrate do command, that Churches should have such and such convenient
bounds, his command is to be observed, being according to Scripture and right
Reason.

Secondly, These Christians, thus cohabiting, are to choose, or to submit unto,
and maintain the same individual Church Officers, frequent the same numerical
Sacraments, and other Ordinances, and so are easily enough distinguished from
those Churches, the members whereof dwell elsewhere, and submit to other
Officers, and frequent other meeting places for Sacraments and other
Ordinances: Paul and Barnabas, assembling themselves a whole year with the
Church at Antioch, are said to be within that Church Acts 11, 26, with 13, 1
: And this was the primitive way; When many Christians were converted in a Town
or City, the Apostles ordained them Elders Acts 14 23
; and the Elders and Christian inhabitants, mutually performing the duties of
their places, became a Church together, sufficiently distinguished from others;
and this is far from the Church Covenant urged by some, it being only an
agreement employed in actions, as when a man dwells in a Town, joins in choosing
Constables and other Offices, pays Lays and Taxes, assists Officers, and bears
Office, if required, does tacitly agree that he is one of that Town; and yet we
cannot say that he has entered into covenant, or that entering into covenant
does make him so.

Quest. 16. How large or how little may particular Churches be?

Answ. A Church must consist of more then two or three (though when there was
no more in the world but Adam and Eve, they two made a Church if there was any)
for two or three were to give the second Admonition which if a man did not,
here they were to tell the Church Math. 18 15, 16, 17.
and therefore the Church must of necessity consist of more then two or three:
yea, there should be in a Church a competent number to be Officers and Members,
at least the Members should be as a Flock, that is, many, though there were no
Officer, but one Pastor: The Churches in the Gospel were numerous, consisting
of thousands, and that they might do so, the Apostles planted Churches only in
Cities, and in great Towns; Cenchrea, the least, was a much frequented populous
and famous Haven-Town Gualter in Romans 16
, so also were the Churches of Galatia, Macedonia, Judea, placed in the Cities
of those Countries, as Antioch; Laodicea, Philippi, Thessalonica, Jerusalem,
Lidda, etc. and how numerous soever any Church did grow, we read not that it
was divided into two or more Churches, or that there were more Churches then
one in any one City or Town. As it is acknowledged on all hands, that a
particular Church may consist of as many as may meet every Lords day in oue
place for edification; so it may be proved, that the Church of Jerusalem did
consist of more, then did or could meet with edification in one place. 1. By
the multitude of Believers, Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan, were baptized by John Mat. 3. 6 7
; and the Disciples of Christ baptized more Disciples then John Joh. 4. 1
; and many of the people believed in Jesus Joh 2. 23 and 7 31. and 8 30
: The Pharisees said, the world is gone after him Joh. 12 19
; and after Christ's ascension there were added 3000 souls Act. 2, 41
, and 5000 Act. 4. 4
; and afterward the Disciples were multiplied greatly, and a great company of
the Priests were obedient to the faith Act. 6. 1, 7
: Now all these, which deserved to be called a City, a World of people,
thousands and multitudes (for the Holy Ghost, at the last, leaves numbering)
could not meet together in one place for hearing the Word: For no one room in a
private house could hold them all; no one man's voice could reach them, much
less could so many thousands, orderly, at once, receive the Sacrament together;
nor could be accommodated with beds to sit, lie, or lean upon, (which was
Christ's gesture,) a Table to receive at, and Cups to drink in; and therefore
they were constrained to sever themselves into diverse companies for breaking of
bread Act 2 46
, and to meet distributively in their private houses for that purpose: Hence it
is observable, that though proof be offered by some that the Church of
Jerusalem did meet together in the Temple to heat the Word (which was common to
Jews with Christians,) and to choose Officers, (which is not every Lords
day-work, and to which the presence of women and children, the greater half of
the Church, is not required,) yet not one word is brought to prove that they
all met in one place to receive the Sacrament, the chief Church-ordinance. 2.
Twelve Apostles Math. 9. 35. and 10 1
, seventy Disciples Luke 10 2
(besides Elders mentioned Act. 11. Act. 11. 30
as being extant before that time) which doubtless were diligent Preachers in
Jerusalem, the chief place of their residence, and could not all, nor most of
them, be employed once every Lords day, if there was but one Congregation in
Jerusalem. 3. The Church that prayed for Peter, met many of them in the house
of Mary, and others of them, James and his brethren, elsewhere Act. 12. 5. with
12 17
, so that Church did not meet in one place. 4. It is said that Paul abode in
Jerusalem with Peter fifteen days Gal. 1. 18
, and doubtless Peter and he frequented the Church-meetings, yet he saw no
other of the Apostles, save James the Lords brother, (he says not they were
not in Jerusalem, but he saw them not) which had been very improbable if not
impossible, (seeing the Apostles were diligent in preaching) if there had been
but one Church-meeting in Jerusalem, more might be said to prove, that the
Church of Jerusalem consisted of more then one Congregation, and instance of
the like may be given in other Churches of Samaria, Ephesus, Corinth, etc.

Q. 17. May not every Congregation enjoy all the Ordinances of God within it
self?

Ans. No; 1. Synods are the Ordinances of God, and cannot be had in a
particular Congregation; yea general Councels are the Ordinances of God, and
yet cannot be found in any less Church then the universal visible. 2. A
particular Congregation, consisting only of private Members, cannot enjoy
ordination by Presbyters, which is an ordinance of God; nor can she in that
state regularly partake in Sacraments and Censures, therefore combination or
consociation of Churches is useful and needful in the aforesaid cases, as also
in case of a particular Churches insufficiency to transact her own business, in
case of business of common concernment to more Churches then one, in case of an
incompetent particular Eldership, of appellation, of presumed
mal-administration, of divisions in a particular Church, of differences between
Churches, of spreading Heresies indangering Truth and Peace, decision of hard
questions, direction in hard cases, or the like Act. 15
.

Quest. 18. Does the Scripture warrant the use and subordination of
Congregational, Classical, Provincial, National, and Ecumenical Assemblies?

Ans. Yes, it does. For 1. of Congregational Assemblies no question is made. 2.
The proving of the Church of Jerusalem to consist of more Congregations then
one, and their Elders questionless convening for Acts of government of those
Congregations, does also prove the warrantableness of a Classical Assembly. 3.
There being warrant sufficient for combination of Churches, and the Scripture
not limiting it to such or such limits, beyond which it may not exceed, does
sufficiently warrant the greater combinations, as occasion may require them,
and they may with convenience be had; the Scripture does not determine those
cases in which a Church may call neighboring Churches together for advice, nor
with how many Churches, or with what Churches she should advise, nor in what
cases neighbor Churches may call an offending Church to account, or how often
they must do it, nor when they may lawfully non-communion a Sister-Church; nor
does the Scripture limit the number of Elders, as three, four, five, six, etc.
which each Congregation must have, and neither more no less; nor does it bound
a Congregational Church, saying, it must consist of one hundred, two or three
hundred, five or six hundred, or a thousand, two, three, or more thousands, nor
that the bounds of the habitation of its members should be two, three, four,
ten, twenty miles; but these things are left to prudence, according to the
general rules of the Word. 4. How much the greater distance there is between
Churches, so much the less needs the visible communion thereof to be, because
danger of scandal and infection, and opportunity of mutual edification is less
or more, according as the distance of place is greater or less, and this
occasions and justifies the more strict, ordinary, visible, Ecclesiastical
Communion of the Congregations within a Classis, then within a Province, within
a Nation then in all the World. 5. God requires no further association then he
gives opportunity to, as in case a particular person have not opportunity of
joining to any Congregation, or a particular Congregation have no neighbors to
associate with, that is supreme Ecclesiastical Authority to us, which is the
highest we can get pro hic et nunc, if God by his providence shut the door of
higher Appeals that we cannot ascend above a National or a Provincial Assembly,
or above a particular Church; and this is true also in some necessary cases,
that supreme civil power may be exercised in one Assembly, yea in one Family;
the same thing may be said of the Jewish Synagogues in Heathen Countries, that
they were independent, when they could not have the benefit of superior
judicatories, though they were nothing so in Indea, where they might have that
benefit. 6. In the Jewish Church were several distinct Presbyteries or
Conventions of Elders, subordinate one to another, and as the word Presbytery
is translated to the Christian Church 1 Timothy 4 14.
, so that subordination of Presbyteries was not ceremonial, nor typical, nor a
temple-ordinance, but grounded on Reason, and the light of nature, as appears
by Jethro's advice to Moses Exodus 18 21, 22, 23, etc.
, and by the consent of all Nations warrantably moulding civil Government in
such a subordination; and God has not commanded men to lay aside their reason,
nor has he prohibited such subordination, but commanded it rather, Mat. 18.
For. 1. Christ speaks of a Church then extant, which could be no other then the
Jewish Church, (no Christian Church being then founded,) with subordinate
Judicatories and appeals, and therefore must needs be understood by [tell the
Church,] to command appeals from the Synagogue to the Sanhedrim, while the
Jewish Church, and the Government thereof, stood undissolved. 2. There is no
appearance in the words there, or elsewhere, that Christ appointed that the
Christian Churches Government should be molded after another manner then the
Jewish, in matters* of moral Equity. 3. Subordination of a particular person
offending to a particular Church, does by a like reason prove the subordination
of a Church to greater Assemblies, because the grounds, reasons and ends of
subordination are the same in both. 4. The Elders and Governors are in
Scripture frequently called by the name of Rahal, and by the Septuagint
Ecclesia, or Church Deuteronomy. 31 30. with 28 Lev. 4. 14. with 15. 2 Chronicles. 1 2.
with 3. Deuteronomy. 23. 1 2, 3, 8.
, and sometimes the word Rahal, or Church is translated by the 70. [the
Synedrion] Prove. 26* 26.
; and therefore the Apostles might well understand our Savior, by Church, to
mean the Elders, and not the whole Congregation, especially he speaking of
judicial proceedings: when the Elders came alone to the Church-meeting, then
but one trumpet sounded; but if both trumpets sounded, then both Elders and
people met together in one Assembly Number. 10 2, 4.
. They that interpret the word [Church] of Elders and brethren of a particular
Congregation, are desired to show where Elders and Brethren, without women and
children, are called a Church. 7. If there be an universal visible Church, and
Apostles, Teachers, Governments 1 Cor. 12 28.
be seated primarily in it, and the whole is not subject to a part, but the
part to the whole, then the nearer any Assembly of Churches combined comes to
the universal visible Church, the more authority it is invested withal; and a
general Council is of more authority then a national, and a national then a
provincial.

Quest. 19. It is granted that the Scripture does warrant elective occasional
Synods, such as that was, Acts 15. but does it mention or warrant set, stated,
Synodical Assemblies to meet monthly or yearly?

Answ. This is but a circumstance of time, which follows necessarily the
substance of the things; if Synods sit, they must sit in some time, but what
time or times they should sit does depend upon circumstances, and as the Church
business requires; the Scripture mentions not any stated Ecclesiastical
meeting for Government Synodical or Congregational, that they should meet
weekly, monthly, etc. nor any set Church-meetings (except the Lords day) for
preaching, hearing, fasting, prayer, thanksgiving, conference; yet the Church
may, upon occasion, order weekly or monthly Congregational meetings, according
to the general Rules of Gods Word; the same may be said of Synodical
Assemblies. 2. There is no such material difference between standing Synods,
and occasional, neither in point of lawfulness nor power, both (for ought we
know) may be of like divine authority: Triennial standing Parliaments may be as
lawful and authoritative as occasional Parliaments. 3. There may be standing
Courts at Westminster, though differences and suits in Law be occasional; and a
standing College of Physicians, though diseases be occasional. 2. As to
electiveness; 1. It is contrary to Reason and Scripture, that an erroneous and
offending Congregation shall choose their own Judges, seeing it is probable
they will either choose none at all, or such as they know, before hand, are
likely to be of their Judgment. 2. If those that are in the right should choose
the Synod, yet still the question will be, who are in the right? for of
dissenting parties both pretend to it, and neither will confess they are in the
wrong. 3. It a thing is agreed on, that all the Churches in a Province, being
offended at a Particular Congregation, may call that single Congregation to
account; yea all the Churches in a Nation may call one or more Congregations to
account, that they may convent and call before them any person within their
bounds, whom the Ecclesiastical business before them does concern, may examine,
admonish, and in case of obstinacy declare them to be subverters of the faith;
may give advice to the Magistrate, in matters of Religion, determine
Controversies of Faith; and their determinations are to be received with great
honor, and conscientious respect, and obligation as from Christ: and if an
offending Church refuse to submit to their determinations, they may withdraw
from them, and deny them Church Communion, which sentence of non-Communion may
be ratified and backed with the authority of the Magistrate; and therefore
Synodical determinations may oblige those Churches which did not choose them,
nor make any reference to them.

Quest. 20. But they cannot judge authoritatively, nor excommunicate one or more
offending Churches, they may only withdraw Communion from them; for if a
national Synod should exercise Jurisdiction, then every member of it would be a
national Officer, and have relation of Elders to all and every the Churches
within a Nation; and why are they not to preach to all the Churches, as well as
to rule over them, and to feed by doctrine, as well as by discipline?

Answ. As to the point of non-Communion of Churches or persons, we say, 1. If a
Synod of Churches can proceed no further, but to non-Communion an offending
Church, then the Synod has in this no more power over a particular Church, or
a particular person, then one brother has over another brother, yea over a
whole Church; for (they say) that a brother may admonish, declare, and withdraw
Communion. 2. Separated Churches of Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc.
count non-Communion no punishment to themselves, but a privilege; or, if it be
a censure, it is no other then they inflict on all the Churches in the world
besides. 3. It is not suitable to the wisdom of Jesus Christ to apply the
strongest remedy for the weakest and least dangerous disease, viz. the case of
an offending brother; and the weakest remedy to the most dangerous disease,
viz. the case of an offending Church.

2. Excommunication of Churches by Synods is a thing not known in the reformed
Churches, but only of some particular persons in those Churches which are most
eminently guilty; the meeting at Jerusalem censured the false Teachers at
Antioch Acts 15.
, not the Church of Antioch: As when a Prince or State makes a a Law against
Rebels or Traitors to punish them with death; in case an Army of such Rebels or
Traitors, or a whole Province rebels, this multitude does not excuse any one
person of them from being obnoxious to that Law, or the penalty of it; yet it
may be a reason why such a Prince or State should not, in prudence, execute
that rigor of the Law upon every person of them, but upon some principal
offenders; yet is that whole Province or Army of Rebels subordinate to that
Prince or State, and the Laws thereof.

3. It follows not, that if a Pastor be a Member of an authoritative national
Assembly, that then he is a national Pastor, and should preach to every
Congregation over which he rules. For 1. As Knights and Burgesses in Parliament
are not each of them severally and singly Kingdom Officers, though in that body
they do many authoritative acts relating to the whole Kingdom; and Colonels in
a Council of War may order the whole Army, and yet not be each of them a
general Officer; so it is an incongruous and unjust speech to say that every
Member of an authoritative national Assembly is a national Church Officer. 2.
As a Colonel does not singly and severally govern the whole Army, (but jointly
with others in a Council of War,) and therefore cannot be expected to lead up
or train every Regiment; so a Pastor, who is a Member of a national Assembly,
does not separatim govern all the Churches in a Nation, but jointly with
others, and therefore it cannot be concluded that he should separatim feed
them. 3. All that can be concluded is this, that he should feed them by
doctrine, as well as by discipline, and so he does; he with the rest does put
forth doctrinal power to bring light to the Churches, as is acknowledged they
may and ought upon occasion; and why then may they not feed by discipline, as
well as by doctrine? why may they not admonish offenders? And if they may, and
this admonition be a censure, why may they not proceed to other acts of censure?

4. Elders receive their power for the whole Church of Christ upon earth, and
though the ordinary exercise of their power be confined to their own particular
change, yet having a call, they may preach, administer the Sacraments, or rule
in any Congregation, or do one of these, and not the other, where their call,
and the necessity of the Church requires the one, and not the other.

Quest 21. But can you show that Elders may put forth any act of power and
authority over other Churches?

Answ. Yes; but 1. it is acknowledged by Mr Buroughs Buroughs Irenicon.
, and (as he says) by other Congregational men also, not only that Synods are
the Ordinances of God, but also that the Elders thereof are to be looked upon
as the Officers of Jesus Christ, when they do such Synodical acts as they may
do in relation to many Congregations. 2. A Minister may administer the
Sacrament, as a Minister (for as a gifted man he cannot administer it,) to a
Member of another Church; and if to one, then to two, three, six, twelve,
twenty, etc. which (it may be) are the whole Congregation, and that by virtue
of Communion of Churches, and therefore they are still considered as of
distinct Churches, for Communion must be betwixt two at the least, as
Congregational men assert; and if it be lawful to do it once, it is not
unlawful to do it twice, thrice, or as often as the same call and occasion
requires it; and if he may do it when Members of other Churches come to him, he
may as well do it when he goes to them, unless the place, or his, or their
going or coming to the place do alter the case, which is no whit probable; and
if a Minister may act ministerially to the Members of one other Church, why not
of two, three, or more Churches; when they are together may not the Minister of
any of those Churches administer the Sacrament to all of them? If he may, why
may not all the Ministers of the said Churches join together in that
Administration? If no, which Elders are to be suspended? And if Elders may join
together in acting ministerially in point of the Sacrament to diverse
Congregations, why not in point of censures? Where does the Scripture require
the one and not the other? how comes the one to overthrow the relation of
Elders and people, and not the other. 3 Tichicus of Asia is commended to the
several Churches of Ephesus and Coloss, not only as a beloved brother, a gifted
brother, but as a faithful Minister Ephesians. 6 21. 22. Col. 4. 7,
, and sent to them; why did Paul send a Minister, and commend him to them as a
faithful Minister, if he might not exercise ministerial acts in either or both
those Churches* 4. If an Elder, in no case, have authority in another Church;
then, if he preach there by virtue of office, baptize, ordain, administer the
Supper, or the like, those acts are altogether null and void, as if they had
never bin, and persons so baptized or ordained ought to be rebaptized and
re-ordained; for if a Major of one Corporation do the act of his authority out
of his limits in another Corporation, the act is void in Law and Reason; but
Congregational men will not assert, that Baptism, by a Minister of another
Congregation, is void and null.

Quest. 22. But those that dissent in these particulars are good and gracious
men, and their way seems to be purer then other ways; and therefore I would not
have any one to oppose these men; for if the work be of God, it will stand; if
of men, it will come to naught.

Answ. 1. The Anabaptists in Germany, yea the first broachers, and chief
Propogators of ancient and modern Heresies and Errors, were reputed godly men:
The Heretics and Sectaries of New England did seem very holy, humble,
spiritual Christians, full of Christ, denying themselves far; they could speak
excellently, and pray with soul-ravishing expressions and affections, and yet
notwithstanding they were severely censured, some disfranchised others fined,
others banished, by our Independent brethren there M. welds Epistle before his
book of the Rise reign, etc.
. 2. We cannot be assured that other men are truly godly and gracious; they may
be Hypocrites, (as the Parisees (the word may signify Separatists) of the
strictest Sect amongst the Jews were,) though we may not without good ground
think so of them: Corah, Dathan and Abiram which took men and separated them
into a distinct Congregation Number. 16 5. 16. Psalm. 106. 17.
, and pleaded for power and liberty Number. 16 3.
, and questionless profit too, (for if the Priests work might be taken from
them, why not their Tithes and wages,) saying, all the Congregation is holy;
every one of them: you Elders, take too much upon you, and that every man might
exercise the function of the Priests verse 10
, were esteemed by all the Church to be the people of the Lord, and they
murmured against Moses and Aaron for opposing them verse 41.
; yea 250. Princes of the Assembly, or of the Council of Governors; which were
religiously affect, yea famous in the Church, men of renown, did join unto them
verse 2.
; so well did they esteem of them, and doubtless they were no Blasphemers,
Heretics, fundamentally erroneous, nor groslly vicious in any kind, and yet
the Spirit of God calls them wicked men verse. 26.
, because of their Schism, a work of the flesh Gal. 5. 20.
, showing men to be carnal 1 Cor. 3. 1. 2.
, the original has it, restless and turbulent men; the Greek has it, hard
men, and the Lord did execute his wrath on them, and on the Congregation, for
their sakes Number. 16 32, 44. 45, 46, 47.
; and this instance is the more pertinent, because the gainsaying of Corah is
a sin of the New Testament, as well as of the Old Jud. v. 11
. 3. The question is not who are good men, (though, if it were, there are
multitudes of good men against their way, for one or a few for it,) but what is
good and acceptable in the sight of the Lord: For 1. They were as good and
gracious men when they were Presbyterians, (as some were;) yea when they were
conformable to Bishops Canons, (as leading men about London were,) as now they
are; yea so far as men can judge, they were then more holy, humble, heavenly,
charitably affected, more mortified to the world then now; and they are not the
better, if they be not the worse for Independency. 2. A good man may act for
Satan, and not discern it Mat. 16. 23.
; M* Archer, an holy man, did hold and broach hellish opinions. 3. The
temptation lies in this, when Angels from Heaven, men of singular parts and
piety, preach other doctrines Gal. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 11. 15.
, Satan, which could catch godly men in the snare of Heresy and Schism, (not
wicked men, whom he has fast enough in the stocks by the other foot,) must
make use of such as are reputed good: A drunken loose Minister can never lead a
pious people into error.

4. As to the seeming purity of that way, we know, that the Word of God is the
rule of purity; whatsoever comes short, or goes beyond, it is impurity;
voluntary purity is as bad as voluntary humility: the Pharisees seemed to be in
a purer way, and more afraid of pollution by sinners, and more zealous in
observation of the Sabbath, then Jesus Christ himself: Popery came up under
pretense of purity, piety, chastity and charity; if they can prove their way by
Gods Word, then it is pure, if they cannot, it is impure.

5. As for opposing them; both Magistrates, Ministers, and others, are bound to
contend in their places for the faith delivered to the Saints Jud. v. 3
, and to oppose false teachers Tit. 1. 11 Revel. 2. 2 2 John v. 10 11. Gal. 1
7, 8. Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8 Rom 13, 4
, which are ravening and grievous wolves Math 7. 15. Act. 20 29
, which do leaven and trouble the Church Act. 15 24. Gal. 5 9, 10, 12.
, and (as experience of this and former ages shows in Germany, New England, and
in this Kingdom,) disturb the civil Peace.

6. Though Heresy and Schism be works of the flesh, and not from the God of
Truth and Peace, yet they may stand a while, as Anabaptism did in Germany, yea
a great while, (though I hope they shall not), as Arrianism, Pelagianism, and
Popery have done* and the true way may be suppressed.

7. If Independency, or Anabaptism, etc. be either Heresy, or Schism, or
contrary to sound doctrine, we are bound by Covenat (let who will expound it)
to extirpate them, or atleast each in our places to endeavor to the utmost the
extirpation of them. The known sense of the Scottish Nation, which framed the
Covenant, and for whose satisfaction the Covenant was taken, does include
Independency under the name of Schism, or at least under those words, Contrary
to sound doctrine; and the English could not but know this to be their sense of
it, and yet did not (that we know of) protest against it, or explane themselves
otherwise at the first taking of the Covenant, if they have done it sithence;
and that Independency is covenanted against, is further clear by the
Parliaments publishing Ordinances for a Presbyterial Government (which are
ridiculous and null if any one that will may plead exemption from it) by the
Ministers of London and other places, so expressing the sense of it; and by the
Independents themselves, which now generally renounce or refuse the Covenant;
being conscious it neither is, nor can be (except it be made a nose of wax)
consistent with their Church Way.

8. It may as well be said of Prelacy and Malignancy, as of Independency, that,
if they be of God, they will stand, and if not, they will come to naught;
therefore we ought to refrain from them, and let them alone, and not oppose
them; for questionles many of them truly feared God

Quest. 23. What is the difference between Prelatical, Presbyterial, and
Independent Government?

Answ. These three Governments do somewhat resemble Monarchical,
Aristocratical, and Demonacratical Governments; The first give power only or
chiefly to one Minister in a Diocese: the last gives the power only or chiefly
to the people, as the Brownists do, for they hold, that the people have a
Negative Voice, and may disanul the acts of the Presbytery, not only in facto,
(as when the Kingdom will not withdraw from one that is justly and judicially
outlawed), but in foro, that the sentence is null and void in it self; but the
Presbytery, according to them, has not a Negative Voice, nor can disanul the
act of the people in Election of an Officer, deposing of him, etc. The middle
is the right mid way between the other extremes, consisting of Ministers and
other Rulers and Governors, which are chosen by, and do represent the people,
as the Common Council do represent the City of London, and the House of Commons
the Commons of England; and placing the Government, not wholly in the
Mininistry, nor in the body of the people, but in Ministers and Elders. How the
Presbyterian way differs from the Independent way, may in some measure appear
by what has been said: Now it differs from the Prelatical thus; The Prelate
called and counted himself only a Bishop (a Act. 20 17 28. Tit. 1 5, 7.
name common to Elders,) he challenged Jurisdiction above his Fellow-Ministers
to belong to him as a man of an higher rank, challenged that to one that does
belong to a College, did not associate Congregations, but subjugate them to
him, and himself would be subject to no Presbytery; he made the Cathedral, or
Mother Church, superior in* power to the rest: but the Presbyterian way is a
social way, as between friends, confederates, brethren, where all judge, and all
are judged; all things done communi Presbyterorum consilio; where no
Congregation or Minister is above another Congregation or Minister, though the
major part of them associated (as of congregational members, though equal one
to another) are above the minor part; where every Elder is left to enjoy the
office of an Elder, and every Congregation the freedom of a Congregation, in
what belongs to them, and they able to perform. The Prelates power was
altogether extrinsecal to those Congregations that were under it; they did not
consent unto it, nor send commissioners to assist or concur in it; but Classes
and Synods are aggregates made up out of their mutual associations into one,
and do in matters of common concernment strengthen and help particular
Congregations, walking according to rule; and reduce such as walk not in truth
and peace, but are leavened with Error and variance. The Prelates urged
Subscription, Ceremonies, had their Chancellors, Commissaries, Surrogates, etc.
their Courts were remote from many of the people; they were expensive,
oppressive, by exaction of fees; they promoted Tyranny, Popery, Arbitrary
Government; suffered idle, ignorant, profane, Popish, Arminian, Socinian
Ministers, which the Presbyterian Government, where it is in full strength (as
in Scotland) does not.

FINIS.

