THE LIFE OF ADAM.

Written in Italian BY GIOVANNO FRANCESCO LOREDANO, A Venetian Nobleman.

AND RENDERD INTO ENGLISH By J. S.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

TO THE INCOMPARABLE LADY, THE LADY S. B.
Madam,
YOur Incomparable Beauty, and exemplary Virtue, so justly entitle you to the
services of all those whose happiness it is to know you, that your interest in
this Dedication is rendered unquestionable; coming from him who may, without
vanity, profess himself best acquainted with the Power of the one, and
Sublimity of the other. Nor let any judge the concealment of your Name to
proceed from other than the experience of your exact Modesty which declineth
all public applauds: together with a consciousnesse of the vast disproportion
which this trivial Present bears either to your Merit or my Duty. And for
its subject, as being the History of the First of Men; it could not make a more
proper, or more honorable, Address, than to the Best of Women: In which
quality you shall ever be acknowledged and obsequiously admired by,

Madam, Your most constant and most devoted Servant T. S.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LORD PIETRO MICHIELE.
My Lord,
I Have readd and readd again the ADAM of the most Ilustrious Lord Gio:
Francesco, with excessive delight. O what Wit* O what a happy hand he had! But
it was necessary it should be no less, for the making of an Adam: nor is it
fit that any one should write the life of the first Man, but one of the first
Writers of the Age. The alteration of the style in some places hindered not, but
that without seeing the name of the Author, I should easily have known this Work
for his. I hold it not fit that, because Adam used to cover himself with
leaves, he should therefore be decked in flowers. All dresses become not all
matters a History extracted out of holy Writ, is not to be trimmed like
Plays, and Romances. Noble Loredano was desirous to give us not only the
history, but together with it also the true manner of writing it. Does your
Lordship require my thought of it? Adam, in my opinion, will receive no less
grace from these lines, then from the ruddy earth of which he was formed; yea,
so much the greater, inasmuch as then he was a sinner and mortal; and here he
is revived, sanctified, and immortal. We must needs acknowledge him very
ungrateful that will not render perpetual applauds to that pen, that has so
learnedly, in this Treatise, eternized our Common father. My Lord. I remain of
your most Illustrious Lordship.

The most partial Servant Nicolo Crasso.

Reader,
I Have at length, (more to gratify friends, than to comply with any humor of
appearing in public) exposed to thy veiw these indigested productions of a
few vacant hours: and after the approvall of some, esteemed competently
judicious, shall not go about to court thee into a liking hereof; but freely
remit that to thy censure without any solicitude how thou receivest it, which
was not so much intended to please thee as to satisfy others, whose power over
me, could only have induced me to this publication: Farewell.

J. S.

THE LIFE OF ADAM.
BEhold, O Ambitious man, thy first original! Thy pride and stateliness,
which contendeth for reverence with the sovereign power of God, came from a
vile mass of clay. And thou, o Sensual man, that debasest thy self in
adoring a face, so much the more unworthy of Love, by how much the more
unchaste; consider how thou renderest thy self odious in the eyes of that God
that condescended to give thee a being; and contemptible to that divine hand,
which has vouchsafed to form thee of Nothing

God had, with Idea's suitable to his own omnipotence, compiled the machine of
Heaven and of the World. The Chaos retained no longer either confusion, or
darkness. The Elements, though proud of their variety of qualities, united
themselves for the conservation of the Whole. The Sun and Moon received light
and did impart it. Herbs, Plants, Birds, and (...) the sensitive appetite, and
which procure pain and torment; perceiving himself to excel in beauty above
all things created, with an infused knowledge that enabled him to understand
all sciences; knowing perfectly the nature of all Plants, Stones, Herbs, and
animalls; and understanding the virtue, and properties of the heavens,
elements, and stars; perceiving himself, finally, to have the scepter of
dominion over all creatures, possessing the World and Paradise: after he had a
good space beheld the Heavens with admiration of that cognition, he threw
himself at the feet of his Creator, and thus began to thank and praise him;

O Lord, I did not return thanks for so many gifts, because I would not
diminish them, seeing contemplation cannot arrive to comprehend them. By how
much the more is the admiration, by so much the greater is the silence. What
tongue, although made by God, can worthily extol the works of God? the
greatness of God? the gifts of God? Of what expressions shall I make use to
praise that God, which has been pleased to communicate his Divinity? Lord I
ought not to praise thee, because all praise would fall short of that
Omnipotence, which is the more incomprehensible, whilst that a mouth so much
obliged confesses it self incapable to sing thy wonders He that attempts to
commend thee, O Lord, either knows Thee not or else is unworthy to know thee.
To say that thou art greater then the greatest, is the most that my voice can
express, but yet the least that thy greatness can admit. The greatest
attributes that my judgment can invent, would not express the Sovereignty of
that God that is greater than all things. I would make thee an oblation of my
being, but I know not what to offer thee that is not thine, and that I have not
received from thy bounty, who have pleased, with an incomprehensible benignity,
to make a gift of my self to my self. That part therefore of my self, over
which thou have granted me dominion and superintendency even that I offer thee.
Disdain, it not, o Lord, because it conserves the impression of thy image. I
cannot offer to thee any thing greater then the resemblance of thy self. The
excess of thy liberality permits me so much; for otherwise I cannot dispose of
the air that gives me breath. And as I am what thou wast pleased to make me;
so I will be what with thy commands thou art willing I should be.

God willingly lent his car to the words of Adam; for being the workmanship of
his own hands he could not but love him; and loving him, hearkened* to him with
such a tenderness as a father hearkens to the voice of his children. And thus,
in all likelihood, he answered him:

Adam, I rejoice in the inclinations of thy heart, and I forbore to prescribe
man any other laws than those of the will, to delight my self in the
affections of man. See here the Fishes, Birds, and other animalls, formed to be
at thy sole disposal. These shall allways receive laws from thy pleasure, and
motions from thy beck. Nor shall their velocity, nimblenesse, or terriblenesse
be able to render them contumacious to thee. Give them names as thou please,
that so they may the more willingly obey thee, and may be the more strongly
obleiged to thy commands. In reward of all this that I have done for thee, I
demand no more but a bare acknowledgement. I have given thee the Monarchy of
the Earth. I may well therefore reserve to my self the Supremacy, with a small
tribute, as a badge of my superiority and thy obedience. Therefore suffer not
the allurement of thy taste to persuade thee to eat of the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil: for if thou do thou shall feel the severity of
death.

God first named the Fishes, and afterward all the other Animalls, to teach
those in Authority, to have a more especial care of the irremotest Subjects, as
those who may be more easily oppressed by their Ministers, and Officers; or to
give them to understand, that they take those into protection, which like the
Fishes are naked, and cannot speak.

His divine Majesty forbade Adam the fruits of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, because having the power over all things created, he should not
exercise the same with pride and ambition. God would have Adam command with
the curb of being commanded. There being nothing will more moderate the
Statelynesse of a Prince then his subjection to Law. Or else, the fruits of
this tree having a virtue to make Man know the misery of Mankind, God forbad
Adam to taste of it; both because he would have him free from all those
inquietudes which did accompany the necessities of the body, and because he
would have him employ all the ardor of his affections, in a careful
solicitude for the welfare of his soul.

God gave Adam a Prohibition to eat of the fruits of the Tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, although he knew he would not observe it, to show that Laws
are necessary, notwithstanding they may be abused. And again how could God
triumph in the excesses of his mercy, in the extremes of his goodness, in the
trophyes of his justice, if he should not permit man to sin, and if he
should favor all universally with efficacious grace? God threatened Adam with
death as the punishment of his transgression, because Death is the extremest
of all evils, and the greatest of all terrors. All other evils, all other
pains had so-much of bitterness, as they had affinity and resemblance to
death. Death is the Center in which all the lines of worldly passions meet.
His Divine Majesty might have prescribed him Hell; but he would propose a
chastisement, of which there was no retraction by repentance: and with all
because he knew, that humane affections were more to be moved and amated with
the certain knowledge of a small evil, then with the uncertain belief of a
greater,

His Divine Majesty made all Birds and other Animals of the earth to come
before Adam, that from him (who had received from God the knowledge of their
Natures) they should receive their Names. The Lord did this, to make Adam see
by comparison how much he was obliged, in seeing himself so different, and so
upright above all other Creatures. Or, because God having created Man Prince of
all creatures, would have him know his vassalls and the Animals reverence him
as their Prince. Or else, he permitted that he should name the creatures
according to their natures to show him what a gift of wisdom he had bestowed
upon him, that so sinning, he might not excuse himself with ignorance.

The animalls came by two and two, with an obedience moved by the divine will
to receive their names. Adam, sitting in an eminent place, with a face so full
of splendour, that, breathing Majesty, it taught veneration; he gave them names
proper to their natures, calling them one by one in the Hebrew tongue, which
was the universal language until the confusion of tongues.

The Fishes came not, either because they could not live out of their element;
or because they could no way be serviceable to man, not as yet used for food:
or else because God would thereby give us to understand, that Grandees in
Progresses, should not expect the attendance of their poor vassalls; who cannot
stir from home to accompany their Lord, or to attend him at his beck.

God permitted, Adam should give names to all creatures, but not to Himself,
to give him to understand that, as all other creatures, were his inferiors
having taken their names from him; so on the contrary he should acknowledge God
for his Lord, seeing he had been named by him.

In the mean time, his Divine Majesty considered that it was not good for man
to be alone, for there is little contentment in those delights we receive
without other's participation. Or else it was, that God foreseeing that the
height of his glory consisted in acts of Clemency and Mercy; would not have
man to be alone: those faults seldom proving either great or frequent, which
have not company for spurs and incentives.

He would therefore provide him of a fit Companion in his own likeness, that
so he might love her the more and she might be more capable of assisting him.

Whereupon he cast Adam, into I know not whether, an exstasy or a ravishing
slumber.

It was Gods pity that he should be asleep, for he knew that in the company of
woman, he should lose his sleep. Or else, He made him shut his eyes, to show
that he would have men blind in understanding Divine operations. Or else it
might be, that he cast Adam into a sleep, as if he feared that he would
contradict him; whilst with the spirit of prophesy given him, he might foresee
the mischeifes accrewing to mankind in the making of Eve. And besides, men are
with much difficulty persuaded to part with any thing of what they have, though
thereby to receive the greater profit. Whereupon God would bereave him in his
sleep of that which, perhaps, he would not have consented to have parted with,
of himself.

Whilst Adam was taken up with the dulcity of repose, rejoicing in those
phantasms with which he was honored, of the most abstruce secrets of secular
adventures; the power of God, which has no impossibility that can prescribe it
bounds, took, with a delicacy which is to be supposed in a Divine hand, a
ribbe: of which he formed Eve, filling up the void place with flesh.

God was pleased to make Woman of Man, to show the union, and affection that
ought to be in Matrimony: or to admonish women to acknowledge with obedience
the cause of their being.

God made choice of the ribb taken from the left side, to advert us that the
woman ought to be the heart of the man and not his head. Or God took a ribb of
Adam in the making of Woman, because being about to form a body worse happily
than all the others he had hitherto made, he would permit that man should
concur thereto. And Woman being to bring to man a sinister fortune God, would
have her to have her original from that side.

In the Terrestrial Paradise did God form Woman, having created Man in the
Field of Damascus; that she might have no occasion, to complain of being
inferior to Man, whilst she surpassed him in the nobility of her place of
birth. If, happily, he would not advert her, that she should not lend her ear to
the lies of an odious Serpent, that had been nobly created in Paradise: or, to
persuade her, that inamoured of the beauty or delight of that place, she should
avoid sin for fear of being driven from it. If peradventure it was not, that
she deserved to be created in Paradise, who was to be the Paradise of her
husbands Eye,

God for the more expeditious population of the World, could have made many
men, and many Women, but would, that all should descend from one Father, and
one Mother, to the end Men should conserve Love, peace, and concord amongst
themselves.

And who knows, that, making but one only woman, he might not instruct the
married to content themselves with one alone. Or else, he would not permit Adam
multiplicity of Wives for that he might not thereby multiply his miseries:
there not being that thing, that more destroys the quiet, nor that torments the
patience of Men more, than that which for the most part Wives do occasion.

Scarce was Adam released from the power of sleep, when he fixed his eye on the
beauty of the woman, The observing, admiring, loving her, was in him but as one
entire act, done in one and the same time. She cariied in her face so singular
indowments, that not to appropriate them to himself would be rather an effect
of stupidity than of prudence. Beauty has a strange virtue. It, with a sweet
Tyranny introduces subjection into noblest minds and stoutest breasts.

Adam stood stupefied in contemplating two Sunns under one pair of eybrows,
whilst he saw no more but one in Heaven. Nor satiated he himself enough in
re-beholding those Charms, and those Graces, that ravished him from the
contemplation of so many objects, by his opinion believed more considerable,
but not more amiable.

He observed a gravity so full of tenderness that it necessitated his heart in
the same instant to Resistance, and to Love.

The by-Nature-plaited tresses, so nearly resembled Gold in tincture, and
purity, that they pleaded Adams excuse, if he did not refuse so honorable a
prison, The dishevelled hairs trembled on the head of the woman, and it seemed
as if the gently breathing Zephyrus would have made a prey of so many riches.

Her flesh appearing like a lovely composure of scarlet and milk, although at
the touch it would be taken for marble. Her age was about the fourth luster,
(accompting five years to a Luster) proper for a woman in reference to
Procreation and Love. In short, she was such as the malignity of Envy would
have woven her Encomiums.

The woman on the otheside, although modesty should have restrained her
desires, gave notwithstanding liberty to her eyes; thereby with furtive glances
to enjoy the beauty of him, who was destined for her companion. His looks
represented a robustuous youthfullnesse, the more desierable to Women, in that
they desire not to be overcome in effeminacies. She observed that in that face
nature had not affected to bestow her Curiosity. She admired those years which
having past their adolescence, that rendereth the mind sickle and inconstant,
promised her maturity of judgment, and effects of prudence.

Whilst her mind was ravished with the delights of her eyes, Adam was about to
have adored her as a Goddess. For but only that it was infused into him by
revelation, that the woman was a part of himself, doubtless disobedience
should not have been the first of his sins.

Not being longer able to refrain the tongue from discovering the resentments
of the heart, with those sweet expressions which use to abound in the mouths of
Lovers, after many caresses, he thus broke silence.

Oh most dear, and most beloved part of my self, Bone of my bone, Flesh of my
flesh, Soul of my soul. I would say more, if the tongue were able to express
the sentiments of the heart; I here offer my self, to love and serve thee,
seeing that we are to unite our minds and wills, being made of the same matter,
and springing from the same original.

But for the time to come I will, that all call thee part of man. I clearly
foresee, that those that shall take original from us, shall forsake the
interests of their Families, the affections of Fathers, the tendernesses of
Mothers, to cleave to a Female, to live with a woman, which shall be destined
him for Wife. Women shall do the same, and with greater ardency by how much the
more inconstant their desires are than men's.

Here stay I entreat thee, oh Reader, and consider the debility of our
humanity. Adam was but newly come out of the hands of his Maker. God himself
studiously contributed to his heart's delight, yet nevertheless at the single
sight of a Woman, he lost all that remembrance which should have entirely fixed
him in the contemplation of his Divine Majesty. He called her alone his
delight, her his content, her the sum of all his desires. To be short, Women
have derived from heaven so sweet a Tyranny into their faces, that the denying
them the subjection of all hearts, is an effect rather of stupidity than of
prudence. He that can resist the enchantments of a femine beauty, either is no
man, or is endued with qualities superior to those of a Man.

Yet the goodness of God which expressed a complacency in this tenderness with
which Adam smothered the impetuosity of his affections, with the excesses of
his accustomed beneficence, he estranged not himself in the alienations of
Adam, but said unto them:

Children see here the Herbs, see here the Trees that shall administer food to
you! With these ye may refresh and recreate your bodies, whilst I have put
nourishment and sweetness into them. All things here are fruitful, all
exposed to your pleasures, all are produced for your contemplation, I have so
copiously provided for you, that there is not only sufficient for your
occasions, but also to serve the birds, beasts, and other living creatures. The
providence of God diffuseth itself over all things. He that knew how to create
you, has also provided for your necessity, and for your conservation. I bless
you, foreseeing the propagation of that seed that is to populate the World.
Increase and multiply; for from your posterity the earth expects her population.

His divine Majesty assigned man, for food, all the herbs, all the Trees; to
show us that in the time of Adam's Innocence, all Trees were fruitful all
Herbs were healthful. Sin that brought the maledictions on earth, has
impoyson'd the herbs, has insterilized the plants.

And who knows that God in assigning Adam for food the fruits of the earth,
intended not to teach us what our viands ought to be? knowing very well, that
the clouds of the air, nor the gulphs of the Sea, are not secure from man's
Gluttony.

After that sense, in Adam, had given place to reason, and that delight had in
a great measure seated and rebated the edge of his appetite, the woman was
adverted by Adam, not to touch that Fruit which was so mortiferous in its
effects to the eater. Such, says he, my Dear, is the commandment of God. The
transgressing it, would be ingratitude, and impiety, and would ravish us of all
these delights, and our Empire over the Creation. It is unworthy of the
affection of great ones, that know not how to part with their obedience; and if
obedience is necessary to all, how much more does it beseem us, that have a God
so prodigal of his bounties, that he has vouchsafed to us, together with his
image, a part of his Divinity.

The Woman became at those prohibitions the more curious. To forbid a woman, is
to increase her appetite. He that denies the any thing, adds a spur to that
desire, which is ardent in all things; but, in things prohibited, insatiable.

The Woman therefore, transported by those impatiencies, that interposed between
them and their felicity, left Adam; desiring to enjoy without testimonys, and
without check, the sight of that fruit, which being forbidden, was to be
supposed the more exquisite.

The Woman, the more distant she is from her Husband, the more adjacent she is
to Sin; and, whilst alone, is in peril of destroying herself, because she
gives encouragement and opportunity to any one to tempt her. A solitary Woman
is exposed to the temptations even of Serpents. The Moon is eclipsed by the
vicinity of the Sun. The Woman on the contrary commonly finds her honesty
eclipsed in the absence of her Husband.

Having found the tree, she beheld the fruits with so-much curiosity, that it
induced the Devil to tempt her.

He that takes away opportunity from the Devil, takes away his strength, he
can do little harm to those, that do not give him access. Curiosity is the
mother of sin, and daughter of disobedience.

Amongst the infinite forms of animals there was a Serpent with the face of a
Damsel, which God had replenished with all subtility. In sagacitie, and in
craftiness there was not that creature under Heaven that could match him. This
the Devil chose for the instrument of his wickedness; envying the felicity of
Man, because (created after him and of a more ignoble substance) he triumphed
with the Dominion of the World and the possession of the favor of his Divine
Majesty.

He served himself of a serpent, that had the face of a Damsel; to advertize
us, that trecheries always mask themselves with the pretexts of simplicity,
and mansuetude Or because the Devil believed himself unable to deceive a
Woman, if he did not make use of a mouth, or face like that of a Woman.

The Devil would tempt the Woman and not the Man, because he knew her more
facil of belief and more feeble of resistance. He began from the inferior
part that so with order he might come to possess himself of the whole. He
knew that men seldom give credit to promises; and fall easilier by yelding to
the errors of others, than being deceived in their own.

This enemy of Mankind first suffered the eyes of the Woman to convey to the
heart the desire of tasting that forbidden Tree. And then with a smile, which
nourished and confected the poison, he said unto her;

O fairest Woman, the miraculous gift of Heaven, to bless the eyes of your
beholder, I do for my part believe that this Garden can only so far boast the
name of Paradise as it injoyes your presence, which has efficacy to imparadise
not only the affections of all hearts, but also the insensibility of all plants
and stones. But be pleased to honor me with the solution of one doubt. Why are
you prohibited by God to taste of all the fruits of this Garden, since they
are prostituted to the desire, even of the vilest animals; and are so delicate,
that it suffices to say that they are of Paradise?

Did it not suffice God to have subjected you to the law of nature, and
moreover to have added the supernatural; without imposing the yoke of a
positive law upon you, to which the irrational Brutes themselves are not
obliged! This God is too severe that prohibits you the very fruition of the
Trees of the earth. And too parsimonious, in that he would reserve those
fruits, which were given by the seasons. I compassionate your condition,
restrained within so narrow bounds, that to observe them is of necessity to
contend with impossibility.

How great is the malice of the Devil! God had prohibited the fruit of one
only Tree, but he, making the commands of God difficult by aggravating them,
demands, why they were not forbidden all. As if the greatness of precepts
excused and warranted in some part their non-observance, and disobedience.

The woman wondered not, to hear a Serpent which articulated his voice and
pronounced words; either because she believed it a miracle of the Sovereign
power of God; or because Women, when they are once ravished by any appearance,
regard not the very impossibility of Nature herself.

She started not at the sight of a Serpent; for seeing it resemble her self in
countenance she rather rejoiced then feared; it being natural to joy in those
things which resemble us. Or else, because in the primitive state of Innocence,
all creatures obeyed man; and as they had not power nor poison to offend, so
much less did they retain any thing of terror to affright.

This was the will of God, who would not permit, that any greivance or annoy
should occur to man, unless he was first provoked to it by sin,

The Woman answered to the Devil; The command of God is not so restrictive, as
thou say. We may enjoy all Trees at our election having a Dominion over all:
The fruit of this alone, that is in the midst of the Garden, is forbidden us.
God has commanded us not to taste, nor to touch this, because perhaps it would
subject us to death. The fear of Death has power to refrain all desires. Nor
am I such a fool to desire by a wicked transgression to provoke and irritate
the wrath and judgments of God.

His Divine Majesty had commanded only that they shouid not eat of the Tree of
the knowledge of good and evil; but the Woman moreover adds the Touching it:
because as a Woman she could not discourse without aggravating or overreaching.

Or, it may be, she was thus advertised by Adam, who knowing the frailty and
weakness of his Wife would also remove the occasion: for when sin gets into
the hands, it is almost impossible but that it should at last to the mouth. To
touch with the hands, the things forbidden to the mouth, is either a voluntary
meeting sin, or a presuming too high upon our selves.

The woman put the pain of the transgression in doubt, saying, Perhaps we shall
be subject to death; because we feign those things always easy, and of little
danger which we most desire: and put the Judgments of God ever in uncertainty:
so much the more, in that incredulity is the particular defect of the Woman.

The Devil animated by the lie, and incredulity of the Woman, began to hope
for victory, persuading her to violate the precept of God. He endeavored
therefore with admirable artifice to remove the fear of the punishment, menaced
by his Divine Majesty, and to allure her with the hope of that good which is
the most desirable to man. Wherefore he said unto her;

Comfort your self, o Woman; your fears are vain, for death is an imaginary
subject, to terrify the simplicity of the more weak. How can a thing die, that
is the immediate production of Gods hands. It would be too great a
disparagement to the divine workmanship to say, that his labors could be
subject to death. Works that have took their qualities from God cannot dissolve
without the dissolution of God himself. He has intimated death unto you; as
being an ordinary thing in them that command to menace their vassalls with
impossible chastisements, for to be served with the more blind obedience. He
prohibited you to taste of this fruit, because he feared, that ye should be
equal to Him. And he that has Supreme authority can very hardly be persuaded
to admit of Competitors. Envy is of the quality of thunder, that smites the
sublimest things. Her fangs exempt not Divinity it self. God knows very well
that, with tasting these fruits, you shall open the eyes of your understanding,
and obtain the science of good and evil. And what is it that renders God
considerable? what makes God admirable? what makes God GOD, more than this
knowledge?

These words of the Serpent were false, impious, absurd, and incredible. He
made God a Liar, and Envious. He would persuade that a Tree had power to
communicate Sapience, and that men with this should equal themselves with God;
and this, by taking the fruit to eat.

The woman not adverted of this, so impious, and so impossible a falsity, was
deceived by his promises. The Ambition of becoming equal with God, and the
desire of tasting the Apple forbidden, deprived her of judgment and reason.

What thing more contrary to sense, and possibility, than to style truth
falsehood, and clemency envy? and to say that by tasting this fruit, we should
gain the Sapience and similitude of God? Yet, in the opinion of the Woman
these things past for truths, because when Women treat of their interests, they
take shadows for substances.

The Woman might have said to the Serpent; If thy words be not masked with
deceits, wherefore take not thou of that fruit, and give that to thy self
which thou promisest to me? How came I to merit so much of thy affection that
thou should desire, that I should first obtain a benefit so great, a
prerogative so rare, as to be divine? Eat thou first, and testify whether thy
promises are true? If God, envying our state so great a felicity, did prohibit
us this Tree, why did he not rather not create it, or having made it, extirpate
it?

The unfortunate woman believed all for truth, because she desired all to be
true. She did not contradict him, because she reputed it a less crime to sin
with the hazard of acquiring divinity, than by not sinning to lose the hope,
though impossible, of obtaining it.

Howbeit the words of the Serpent were full of fallacy, and ambiguity. The
[not-dying] might be understood of dying presently upon the transgression, or
of the death of the soul. The [opening the eyes] referred to the misery and
confusion in which man should be after the sin. The resemblance to God, might
signify the Devil. Lastly the knowledge of good and evil, might be meant by
the privation of good and the experience of evil. How subtle a Sophist, is the
Devil!

The Woman had beheld the Tree before with some curiosity; but after the words
of the Serpent, she betook her self to contemplate it with ardent desire of
tasting it. Her eyes misled her soul, and believing, that the beauty of that
plant must needs produce births equal in goodness, contracted in that all her
complacencies and affections.

It is probable, that the debt of obedience, and loyalty, which lives in those
souls that have vowed their genius to rebellion, might administer to the Woman
these conceits;

Woman, curb thy vain curiosity. Thou should yield obedience to that God,
which, after he had conferred upon thee thy being, has also given thee the
dominion over all things created. Its ingratitude, its impiety, to controvert
those commands, which deny thee nothing but the fruit of a Plant. All the
fruits in Paradise are permitted thee, but only that of the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. If therefore all the others be perfect, and you know
the good, why will you eat of this Apple to know the evil also? Seek not to
know that which is not fit for thee. The knowledge of evil is not knowledge but
ignorance. Keep thy self from the things prohibited, that thou lose not those
that be already granted. That Plant which thou beholdest with so much
curiosity, and with so much complacency, compriseth in its fruit, together with
thy death, the perdition of all mankind. To what end do you look upon a thing,
which cannot be tasted, without offending God. The hands commonly follow the
delight of the eyes. Its true, thou art not forbidden the sight, but the
tasting of this Tree. Yet nevertheless, though the beholding it be no sin,
yet it is the beginning of sin, it is the occasion of Sin.

Give no credit to those promises which that they are deceitful it suffices
to know, they are the promises of a Serpent, the most sagacious of all beasts.
With giving thee an Apple, he would rob thee of Paradise. He treates thee with
simplicity, to take thee with Apples.

But inspirations avail not in a soul, that suffers it self to be transported
by promises: and he cannot but sin, who fixes his eyes with immoderate delight
on sin. The Woman took the Apple, and with a disobedience, so much the more
inexcusable, by how much the more unjust, gathers it, and makes it serve for
food. The woman had sinned with Sloth, Lying, and Gluttony, whereupon she would
Seal so many evils with the violation of the law of God, because when
praevarication begins in a soul, there is no end of sinning.

She called not Adam to eat of the Apple before her, as was the duty of her
subjection; because believing divinity to be reposed in that fruit, she would
not admit any to have the precedence of her. In sum; Self-interest destroys
all the laws of the will, and of nature.

The woman having essayed the dulcity of the fruit, and absolutely obliged her
credulity to the lies of the Serpent, whilst she found in some measure made
good his promise, in securing her from death, she gathered one of those Apples
and ran with much have in quest of Adam. The love she bore him made her
impatient, to communicate to him so many benefits. Scarce did she see him, but
she, making her laughter and looks accompany her language, said unto him.

Sir, see here an argument of the love I bear you. They know not how to love,
that know not how to give and gratify. And by how much the greater are the
gratuities, by so much the greater is the affection. I bring thee in this Apple
the Divinity that God denied us, because the Great, desire no equals in their
Grandeur.

This is the fruit of the forbidden tree, which for sweetness and dulcity
ravisheth the applause of perfection from all the others. The punishment that
was prescribed us in tasting it, is not to be feared; for I have eaten and am
alive.

Adam interrupted her and vesting his countenance with somewhat of severitie,
said;

Dear Companion, Content your self with having your self alone transgrest
the commands of God's law. Desire not company in evil. Lead not others into
your precipices. I am your companion, I am your Lover; but will know how to be
your Enemy, if you will not take your laws from my will.

What can we promise our selves from her, that knows not so much as how to obey
her God? What may we not question, in the vanity of your affections, whilst you
rebel from the obedience of him that has created you. I love you as much as
your beauty merits; and as much as a human heart can, and knows how to do: but I
ought not to like, nor adulate your errors. He that punishes not faults,
approves them; and they deserve greater chastisment, who assent to the sins
of others, than they which sin.

The only answer the woman gave to these reprehensions, was sighs and tears,
the wonted artifices with which women betray the honor, liberty, and safety of
men.

Casting therefore her arms about the neck of Adam, she so besieged his
constancy, with her glances, caresses, and kisses that, after some small
resistance, he yielded himself overcome.

What cannot women do in an amorous soul! What fortitude will not she conquer,
what constancy will not she subdue, what Will will not she pervert, what
impossibility will not she effect? He that, loving, is able to resist the
violences of a Woman, is either a God or has the power of a God.

Adam knew very well, that the eating of the Apple was a particular offense
against God; but either seeing that the woman was not dead, and therefore, that
the punishment assigned by God for the disobedience was made for terror; or
persuading himself the divine justice was less severe in a matter of so small
importance; or else, imagining to excuse and justify his error by showing that
he had don it to gratify the companion that he had received from his Divine
Majesty; he took the Apple and began to taste it. O wonderful! A woman did that
which the Devil wanted courage to attempt!

Scarce had a small part of this fruit received Sepulcher in the throat, when
remorse (the invisible companion of the greatest crimes) with the sting of
Conscience assailed the soul of Adam. He perceived suddenly, together with his
wife, that they were naked, whereas before, covered with innocence, they knew
not the necessity of clothes.

Their eyes were opened, not because they were blind before, but because before
they regarded not that nudity, whilst lust had not ability to suscitate
sensual affects, without the consent of Man. Nor had yet the flesh to reprove
their disobedience discovered its inclinarion and property. They, poor
wretches, hitherto only perceived themselves to be naked, in that devoid of
grace they observed their members to rebel against their wills.

Or else now they open their eyes, since they know that, which through their
great desire of sinning they could not see. They saw the treachery of the
Devil, the malignity of sin, and the vicinity of punishment. When Man sins,
he is always blind. Now he sees that, the sin consummate, he remains full of
blushing, remorse, and confusion. Now he sees that conscience armed with
zeal, reprehends and condemns him.

Nuditie before the fall wrought the same effect in Adam and his Wife, that the
discovery of the face and hands does in us. They were like to children, who,
before they arrive to the use of reason, care not to cover themselves. When
they come to the knowledge of good and evil, and they enjoy the fruition of
free will, they blush at nakedness. That which befalls children in regard of
age, happened to them in regard of original righteousness.

The woman perceived not herself after the sin to be naked but only after the
fall of Adam; either because the woman in satiating her disordinate appetite,
forgot her own shame; or to give us to understand that his Divine Majesty
punishes with greatest rigor, not him that sins, but him that makes others
sin.

God would have it that our first parents were naked in Paradise, because their
clothing suited neither with nature nor art. Not with nature because it agreed
only with Brutes, as skins, feathers, and wool, to resist the rigours of
Winter, or the ardors of Summer; and man now partaker of every good, commanded,
not obeyed the seasons. Those virtues, which might be produced by art, brought
along with them, employment and trouble; and it was no reason that he that
received felicity from God should think on labors, and toyling.

Or God would have them naked, to cloth them with the splendors of his grace
and to make them like the Angels which are so covered with light, that they
leave to the eye nothing but confusion and astonishment. Sin stole this blesing
out of the hands of God.

Adam, agitated by the fear of Gods indignation, thinking perhaps to cover his
sin, clothed his obscene parts with Figg-leaves.

Oh effects of sin, that depraves the reason, and obfuscates the
understanding! Scarce had Adam sinned but he became ignorant, desiring to cover
that which cannot be hid. And who knows, but that, seeing himself naked, he
would, out of excess of envy, dispoil the Trees also?

He used Fig leaves, either because the Fig tree being of the nature of
Laurel, to preserve from thunder, he thought perhaps to escape the stroke of
divine vengeance. Or else the root of the Fig Tree having a power to cleave
marble, he flattered himself with a conceit of being able to break the
hardness of Gods wrath.

His Divine Majesty, in the mean while, walked into Paradise, receiving those
Zephyries, that grow strong in the declension of the day, to show that man's
sin disquieted him, and that to assuage the heat of his just indignation he
went fanning the gales, now that they became greater, and were more temperate.
Or to teach us that when God will punish sin he does not run but walk, and
delights that all things should hinder him.

Adam, by the walking of God, soon remembered the deserts of his own
inconstancy, which deprived him of eternity. The pleasing aires that
accompanied his Divine Majesty, fraze his heart the more, clouded with a
thousand terrors; and the approaching setting of the Sun, made him perceive
that the darkness of chastisement was near at hand: whereupon not being able
to suffer Gods voice (who hitherto was meditating a reproof) and to endure the
guerdon of his crime, he hid himself and his wife under a Tree, which,
enriched with an infinity of boughs, seemed to thrust forth those arms to
defend every one from the dartings of the Sun's rays.

He had good reason to run to the umbrages of Trees that was not able to
withstand the heat of sense. How blind are the counsels of humane reason? Adam
perhaps pretended that if a Tree had administered to him matter of sin, a Tree
also would cover it. But Adam hid not himself to fly from God, but for that he
could not sustain the sight of God; whilst he heard the checks of Conscience
upbraiding the demerits of his disobedience, ingratitude, and rebellion:
because, We cannot brook the sight of those whom we have offended, and who can
punish us.

Or, it being the proper effect of sin to take away the judgment and blind the
understanding, he pretended to be able to hide himself from the sight of God.

Foolish Adam! that begged security from a Tree that was the instrument of his
perdition.

God now articulating his words, though hid to the eyes of Adam, said unto him,
Adam, Adam, Where art thou?

God said not this, for that he was ignorant of the place where he was, since
the sight of God has no prescription of place, nor obstacle of impediment;
but, to invite him to confess his crime with repentance and implore his pardon
with humillity. It was the voice of a Pastor and Father, that called back his
strayed Sheep and Son. God perhaps with these words would declare the
infelicity of Adam; whilst by the fault committed he was in such manner
departed from God, that he knew not where he was.

Or he would say, Adam Where art thou? whither has thy disobedience carried
thee? Have thou lost thy primitive felicity? Who has led thee into the Gulf
of misery? where is thy pristine tranquillity of heart, thy security of mind,
and thy peace of Conscience? Where are the effects of thy hopes, the fruits of
thy pretentions, the promises of the Serpent?

God would say, poor Adam, to what a plunge art thou brought? from what good,
from what beatitude, from what grace art thou fallen? Thou have lost eternal
life, art made subject to the miseries of death, and art become a Sepulcher of
errors.

Adam was hid under that very tree, that had been the occasion of his sin.
Therefore God sought Adam with anxiety, scarce being able to imagine that a wise
man as Adam should be so imprudent, as to approach so near that occasion, which
had brought upon him the extremity of his miseries. He strove (to speak with
reverence) to deceive himself, in seeing Adam to beg shelter from that Tree
which had deprived him of the Divine Grace.

Or else God would give us to understand, that sin maks us lose the shapes of
men, and therefore though God saw Adam, he called him with a replicated voice,
as if he knew him not, to show us that sin had transformed him, even in the eye
of God himself.

God called Adam and not the Woman; Or, because he had been the last sinner and
his crim was nerer; or, not to provoke the woman to new errors; lying being too
natural to her sex.

He called not the Serpent for the same reason, because being accustomed to
lie, he would have denied every thing.

Adam answered; Lord, My nakedness made me fly from thy face. I could not
suffer that thy Divinity should fix its eye on these members, which I could
not till now cover.

Poor Adam greived and lamented more for his nakedness, then for having
offended God and lost his favor. Thus we have derived from Adam this weakness
of human nature; to be more afflicted with the incommodities we receive in our
persons or estates, then with the injuries done to his Divine Majesty, or the
loss of Heavens enjoyments.

Who gave thee, ungrateful Adam, replied God, to understand thy nakedness,
unless thy disobedience? Thou have woven thy own miseries, and contrived thy
own infelicities. Thou would not at present receive such horror at the
presence of him that honored thee with a being, if thou had not tasted of
the forbidden fruit.

God would understand from Adam the truth of his sin, as if he knew it not; to
teach us, with what accuratenesse and with what diligence men ought to proceed
in judging others crimes, and condemning others errors; whilst God himself,
that enters into the secret corners of the heart; questions and enquires with
so much circumspection. Or else, he intended to make Adam to diminish his
punishment by the blushes of Confession.

Adam persuading himself that silence would be an aggravating his sin, whereas
the case may in great part obnubilate the fault, instead of imploring the mercy
of God, with supplications and tears, grown confident in his own merits, he
subjoyns;

Lord, I have sinned, without sinning. My Error has been promoted by the
prayers and solicitations of others. Who can resist the power of beauty? The
commands of her, that thou gave me for a Companion, has in such manner
tyrannized over my reason, and intellectualls, that I have not power to dispose
of my self. That her right hand which brought me the fruit, was a snare, that
captivated my mind; and it seemed to me, that, lifted up, it menaced its
displeasure, in case I should not obey. I have a heart too tender in its
affects. He that can withstand the importunate solicitude of the fairest piece
that ever came out of thy hands, either knows not how to Love or deserves not
to be Beloved.

The sins of my inadvertency though they be very great, yet they are not mine.
That Companion, Lord, which thou gave me, has corrupted the acts of my
obedience, and contaminated the devoirs of my fidelity Alone I should not have
known sin, for bad-company is a fomentor of the greatest sins. Lord, turn
against her thy reproofs and chastisements. The woman alone has sinned in my
sin. My consent, obliged to the will of Thy Divine Majesty, has not in the
least part strayed from the laws of its duty.

Oh bold conceits! Oh rash expressions! fruits of guilt, which transports men
into extremes. No sooner has man sinned but confident of himself, he
despises all and fears not his forfeiture of Heaven's favor.

How interest alters affection? That Adam who professed himself so passionate
a Lover of the Woman, that to call her part of himself he believed was the
least argument of his Love; now makes her guilty before the justice of God, of
all his crimes. When we speak in excuse of our own faults, we spare not so
much as those whom we most love. Adam that refused not to be a companion in the
sin, shunns to be a companion in the punishment.

His Divine Majesty, though he saw Adams sin arrived to a supreme degree,
whilst to the exterior, and interior consent, and consuetude, he adds also his
excuse and apology: and though the temerity of Adam retorted the crime on his
Maker, so that God seemed the Author of such a fault, yet continuing in the
exercise of his wonted Mercy, he turned to the Woman and said;

Woman, Chosen by me for a Companion and Comfort to Man, why have thou been the
instrument of a sin, so much the hainouser, by how much the more unjust? why
have thou deceived thy Husband? Why have thou not obeyed thy God?

The woman suffered not the words of His Divine Majesty to be ended, but she
replies; My simplicity, Lord, has been deluded by the subtility of the Serpent.

He knew so well how to dissemble his words, that I believed he had neither wit
or power to betray my credulity. I could not persuade my self that there were
treacheries in Paradise, nor deceits in the face of a Damsel. Thunder
therefore, O Lord, thy punishments upon the Serpent, as upon the author of all
evil.

Guilt is a weight, that superfluously aggravates every one. Happy does he
think himself, that, to quit himself, can accuse either the innocence, or
guilt of others.

God, who had all this while been so full of patience, and goodness, in citing
Adam, in attending to his defense, and in harkening to the excuse of the woman,
no sooner hears the Serpent to be the Author of so much evil, but presently
without hearing him, he hastened to punish him.

O the wonderful mercy of God that makes the punishment of all things precede
man's punishment. To Serpents, that is, to Devils he shows not any mercy.

Hence we may argue, that those who are men, namely that prostitute not their
reason to sense, always find God exceeding in new benefits. The Serpents on
the contrary, namely those obstinate sinners, which know not how to leave
grovelling in the dust of sin, receive their punishment, before they be
arraigned of their offense. It admonishes men to be men, and to keep
themselves men.

Because, (said God in cursing the Serpent) thou have been the Author of the
breach of my precepts; because rhou have deceived Innocence; because thou art
opposite to the execution of my commands and desires; and because thou have
been so bold as to be tampering with my image; I will make thee accursed among
all the beasts of the earth. Thou thy self shall be a burden to thy self,
always going upon thy belly. Dust shall be the sustenance of thy life. There
shall be an antipathy between thee and the woman, and enmity between her seed
and thy seed. The treachery of thy stingings, shall be rewarded by her heel,
which by Crushing thy head, shall take away thy Life.

In short, the means of sin become the instruments of punishment. The
serpent had lift up it self in tempting the woman, and now God commanded him
for ever after to creep upon the earth. With a thousand promises had he got
the favor of the woman, and now God condemns him to a perpetual enmity with
her.

Its not to be doubted but that His Divine Majesty, in the serpent understood
also the devil, but cursed nevertheless the Serpent only; because he would not
too much perplex the minds of Adam and the woman, who as yet knew not that
there was any other incorporeal spirits in the Terrestrial Paradise but only
God himself; and its a divine Maxim not to offer new occasions to those who
are apt to err.

The Devil goes upon his breast, and on his belly, to advert us, that he two
ways betrays the state of innocence; With Pride, which is emblematically
figured by the breast, which is the seat of the heart; and with Luxury which
has its residence in the belly. Or it teaches us that the irascibles being
seated in the breast, and the concupiscibles in the belly, he moves man's
affections with these, to precipitate and hurry him into sin.

He is condemned to eat the dust; which is as much as to say, those men only,
who having consubstantiated themselves with terrene vices little differ from
the earth or dust.

God to punish the Devil the more in cursing of him, threatens him perpetual
enmity with the woman; either because he knew her malice was implacable; or to
hint that he had overcome the woman with treachery, and not with open war.

After the maledictions of the Serpent, God turns to the Woman, and says; And
thou Woman, for thy credulity, for thy concupiscence, and for having seduced
others into thy sin, thy griefs and thy sorrows shall be multiplied to thee
according to the multiplicity of thy births. With the bitterness of those
pangs which shall make thee desire death, shall thou give unto thy children
life. Thou shall be always subject to the Man, and he shall exercise over thee
a perpetual command. It was with reason that three sins should receive three
punishments, Namely for overmuch credulity, multiplicity of births; for the
pleasure of the palate; the pangs of the belly; and for the imperious and
scandalous seducing the man, obedience and servitude.

It seems indeed a great felicity, the multiplicity of children, yet
nevertheless God intended by this multiplicity to curse the woman; Because on
many births attend many abortions, many pains, and many perils. It is,
again, to contend with an impossibility that amongst many children, there
should not be some monstrous either in manners, or else in wit, or else in life,
the which is insupportable to the Parents. Let us add that the number of
children disquiets the affection, and the desire of the Fathers, either in
their education, or in their vices, or in their misadventures. In a word, the
more fruitful the Woman is, the less fortunate is she to be esteemed.

If, happily, with a contrary meaning we may not say, that God intended by this
sentence to curse the Woman obliging her to pains, and to bless her, making
her fruitful; to denote to us that God in the rigor of chastisments themselves
is not forgetful of the excess of his Mercy.

The throws of childbirth are natural to women, but God in the state of
innocence with admirable and supernatural power, would have eased her of the
pain and anguish. All is easy, al is possible, to the omnipotence of an
Almighty God.

God came at last to pass Sentence upon Adam. Perhaps the love he bore him was
so ardent, that he would make him the last that should prove the effects of his
just anger. Or, he chastised him last, because his sin was greater then
others; that so he might receive greater terror and greater torment, in
beholding the punishment of the others.

The expectation of chastisement is, happily, a greater pain then the enduring
of it. He that is punished, knows the worst of his sufferings He that waits
for punishments fears them to be much greater then they are. A Hell, to a soul
that has proved it, shall be no greater, nor more horrible. To one that dreads
it, the torments and stripes represent themselves centuplicated.

Because, says God, thou have bent thy ear to the flatteries of thy wife,
touching and tasting the fruits of the forbidden Tree, I will, that thy
labors curse the earth instead of cultivating it. With the sudors of thy
industry shall thou spend thy days. Thorns and thistles shall overrun thy
feilds, and like a bruit thou shall be constrained to take herbs for thy
sustentation. Thou shall not be able to eat without employing thy hand, or
sweating thy brows. These thy miseries shall determine with the ultimate period
of thy life, for I will for thy disobedience that thou return to thy
beginning, and that earth become earth, and dust dust.

How unexplicable is the mercy of God! Adam sins, and transgresses the
precepts of his Divine Majesty, and He in pronouncing the sentence of
condemnation curses the Earth. What will not love make one do! What share had
the earth in the faults of Adam? With what demerit had it irritated the
indignation of its Lord? Unless perhaps it was cursed by God, for that it did
nor suddenly open a gulf to swallow him, who had not known how to obey his
Creator. Or unless, that God would have it cursed, because it was always to
serve the serpent for food.

It argues also the goodness of the Lord, to remember Adam of the end of his
miseryes, whilst in minding him of his death he sets before him the period of
his infelicity.

And although Death is the wages of sin, it proves notwithstanding profitable
and necessary; that so man's miserys and misfortunes become not immortal.
Merciful God, that blessest even when thou chastisest us! Indeed death was a
necessary act in the world, that so the fear of losing the life, should spur
man on to all good actions and refrain him from all bad.

What would not man dare, what would not man atempt to do, if death should not
cut the thread of his sensuality, of his ambition! How would he despise the
death of the soul, and his last damnation in the fall of the world, that dying
every moment should nevertheless pride himself in a hope of immortallity? It
would not doubtless be the least of his rash attempts, with the union of the
mountains to attempt a scalado upon Heaven.

Let the goodness of God therefore be for ever praised, that, to preserve the
soul from perpetual damnation, and to interrupt a lethargy of vices, which
would determine only with the termination of time, has decreed the dissolution
of this mass of humane flesh, and permitted that a momentary pain, that is
circumscribed by the brevity of a groan, should deliver us from an eternal
torment, accompanied with such dolours, as the just anger of God is able to
produce.

Scarce had the Sovereign Monarch pronounced the punishment for the sin of
Adam, but making, either by virtue of his Divine power, or by means of the
Angels, certain garments of beasts skins, he therewith covered the nakedness
of Adam, and Eve; who stupifyed with Gods displeasure, knew not so much as how
with pardon to beg the mercy of his Divine Majesty.

This also is an argument of the wonderful beneficence of God, in that he
would not permit, that sinners, thrust out of Paradise, should for all that be
wholly deprived of his providence, as to the necessity of covering their
bodies. Because divine favors are of the nature of the Sun, which
participates its heat, and its light even to those that despise it.

God rendered the bodies of these wretches so miserable, that without clothes
they could not suffer the violences of the seasons, nor cover that part of the
body which is unworthy of the eye. He would have these clothes of skins, that
so they might daily wear about them the emblematicall tokens of their
mortality, which being of slaughtered beasts should daily remember them of
death, and advert them, that they dwelt under the intemperancy of a Heaven,
that would have dealt with them as with beasts.

And who knows but that God, in vesting our first Parents with skins, intended
to describe what ought to be the habit of wise and just men condemning silks
and purples which denote only effeminacy and pride.

Unless, perhaps, he would give us to understand, how full of blindness are
the counsels of men, that have not recourse to God in their miseries, since
the vesture, composed by Adam, covered not all his nudity, nor defended him
from external incommodityes, and was inconvenient, pricking the flesh, and
bringing pain and trouble.

Adam being clothed, God began to upbraid him saying, Behold Adam thy hopes
obtained, behold thy pretensions determined! Thou art made just like Us,
omnipotent, wise, and all composed of goodness, and holiness. Behold, thou
art become of a nature immortal, not obliged to any, needing of none, and
blessed in thy self! Behold, thy enjoyment of the knowledge of good and evil,
so much coveted by thy incredulity. Get thee packing therefore out of the
Paradise of delights, and fix thine abode where thou wast formed, cultivating
that earth from whence thou have derived thy being.

It was one of the wonted effects of Gods benignity to drive Adam out of
Paradise, because, if he had continued amongst those delights without enjoying
them, he would have received too much torment; there being no greater
punishment to be found then to be in the midst of felicityes and to be denied
the fruition. Or he was dismissed from Paradise, because, What could God hope
from him, that had not power to show himself continent, no not with the very
Trees.

More out of an effect of fear, then disobedience it was that Adam stood
immovable, when God by force took him from thence, appointing him a station
wherein he might command with the eye all the delights of Paradise; that so,
daily beholding the loss of his happiness, his penance should become more
severe, and his repentance more sincere.

It was goodness in God to thrust Adam out of Paradise, for that he thereby
removed the occasion of sinning anew; there not being a greater incentive to a
relapse into sin, then the being in the place where the sin was before
committed, Those remembrances are no other then stimulations, which enkindle
the desire, and hurry the will to new faults.

What Adams condition was, expulsed Paradise, many be easier imagined then
described. His eyes pregnant with tears, his mouth full of sighs were the
least expressions of his grief. His Wife, insted of comforting him augmented
his torments, not so much for her having been the original of his sin, as
for the griefs which he received from her afflictions.

Poor Adam! that did not scarce one whole day enjoy the gifts of Gods
favor. His felicity being shorter then that of an Ephemeris.

About three of clock he was brought into the Garden; at six a clock, he
sinned; and in the Evening, was expulsed.

In a word, Humane felicities are no other then moments. They for the most part
find their Coffin in their Cradle, and their death in their birth.

Whilst he was departing, the Sun retired to shroud himself in the Ocean, as
if external darkness should have seconded the spiritual of sin. An Angel
increased the grief and terror of his sadness, which, armed with fire and
sword, kept the entrance into Paradise; in that he saw himself wholly excluded
from all hope, who, flattering his sorrow, might be able to promise a return
to his lost delight.

In placing an Angel with fire and arms in his hands, his Divine Majesty
intended to impede the entrance of Men and Devils into Paradise. And to teach
us, that to enter into Paradise we must pass through the fire and sword of
penitence, with the consent of the Angel, which is Christ. Or else,
represented to us an Hieroglyphick of Hell; the sword signifying the pain of
guilt, and fire the pain of sense.

Adam, not omitting his sighs and complaints, gave the woman the name of Eve,
which signifies Life; because she was to be the mother of all Living. Or,
oppressed with his own sorrow, he would allude to the voice of infants, which
they make when they cry: She being the cause of tears, and through her all
mankind having occasion of weeping. Or else, would call her Life, because
seeing nothing but emblemes of death, he hoped to comfort himself with this
name. Or, it may be, happily, that he did as men now a days; who having death
before their eyes, speak of nothing but life.

He could not nevertheless so abstain through grief, but that the sense
misled him with its allurements. As often as he was incircled in the embraces
of Eve, who manifested her self an interessed companion in his misfortunes, he
received no small content. And it is probable that she some times served
herself of such like sentiments as these;

It Is not necessary (Adam) because thou must repent, that therefore thou must
despair. Let us not undervalue the mercy of that God, who with so gentle a
hand has so favorably punished our enormous crimes; by showing more of
cowardice then contrition in our tears. Let not him sin that has not courage
to undergo chastisement. And its true, that the soul dissolved into tears,
though it should evaporate by the eyes, would not be able to remove the misery
of our loss, and it is withal an effect of a great prudence, to conform ones
self to those things, which have no other remedy then sufferance.

Let Us endeavor to recover what we have lost by the procuring of children.
Slight comforts in our infelicity, but yet necessary, because God has
commanded them. Let Us sin no more in disobedience. Replicated sins, as they
admit not of excuse, so they provoke Mercy it self to anger. Let us endeavor
the procreation of mankind; for so we shall conform to the will of God. If
Death triumph over this mass of flesh, we shall survive in dispight of him in
our Children, Nephews, and the memory of our Progeny. I intend not by all this
that we should leave off our tears. The sorrow for my sin shall dye with my
heart, which I believe shall be the last part of me alive. I speak it, that we
may not incense with a new transgression that God, in offending whom I know not
which is greater, the danger, or the impiety.

Adam, with a smile begot by the stimulations of sensuallity, thus replied;

I need no longer now to fear your company (my Eve) since you become to me an
incentive to good. To persuade me that I bemoan not the miseries into which
sin has brought me is to desire me to assume the quality of flocks and
stones. I have lost too much ever to fear weeping. Its an effect of stupidity
and not of prudence, not to accompany great losses with great greifes. It is
yet true that there is a necessity to cheer up the sense, to propagate Nature,
and obey God.

Thus saying and with glances, and kisses having thrown his arms about his
wive's neck they gave themselves wholly up to delight, which peradventure for
the time begot in them an oblivion of all the accidents past.

There is not any thing more estrangeth the soul from afflictions, than the
complacencies of sense. In that act, a man not only communicates himself,
transformes himself, but goes out of, if not besides, himself. Greifs give
way torments vanish, discontents are forgotten, in those amorous games, which
admit of no other companions then laughter, sport, and audacity.

Till this instant Adam had been kept a Virgin, to intimate unto us that
Matrimony fills the earth, but Virginity Paradise.

Scarce had Eve satisfied the instinct of nature, and appeased in part the
allurements of sense, when with the signs of pregnancy, she was assaulted by
repentance, the indivisible companion of fleshly delights.

Here I will not mention the extremes of her passions, in loathing, and longing
for every thing; in the burden of her belly, in her vigils, and in the acerbity
of those pangs, the more grievious, by how much the more strange: because the
most that I can speak, would be the least part of what they were. Much less
will I speak of the sufferance of Adam; because it is known that to have a
wife, and a wife pregnant, is a species of martyrdom.

In the end, with all those payns that accompany the gravidnesse of women, the
time of delivery drew near, Adam playing at one time the parts of the
Midwife, Nurse, and Husband. Eve brought forth two births, Ca^n was the name
of the male, and Calamana that of the female.

Adam full of joy, and with eyes big with tears, betook himself to praise and
return thanks to his Divine Majesty.

Lord, said he, thy goodness be praised, who, not altered a jot by the
injuries of my sin, have condescended, that I continue a man. Merciful God,
glorious God, immense God; since thou ceasest not, to do good to those that
offend thee. I acknowledge that I merited, (grown odious to the air, earth,
and all creatures and lost amongst the clouds of oblivion) to be made my own
sepulcher, as not being able to imagine a viler place. Thou, on the contrary,
giving me a power of using all the elements, vouchsafest me to be the father of
mankind, and permittest me to live ever famous to the memory of all Ages. Lord
I will not go about to commemorate all thy favors for they are infinite. I
beseech thee only to continue unto me the assistance of thy grace, that so I
may not fall into those sins which have made me to deserve death.

Eve afterward bore Abel, and Delbora, whereby she increased the joy of Adam.
Children are doubtless the delight of their Parents; the fathers seeing their
lives renewed in their children, whom they look upon as their other selves
grown young.

Poor Adam had nevertheless little cause of rejoicing, whilst he saw borne
more subjects of humane misery. Yet he might withal receive a more then
ordinary content, since it is a great part of felicity to have companions in
infelicity. Abell was elected in the beginning of his adolescence to the care
of Flocks, and Cain was destinated to the tilage of the ground; the prudence of
the Parents being bound to set their children to some employment. Youth bears
a resemblance to wax, which is plyant to every impression: so that he that
ingageth it not to callings, wherein worthily to employ either the mind, or
body, lazily wanders out of the right path, and consumes, or loses it in
idleness. Those excercises grieve not, disquiet not, that, being learnt in the
more tender years, come to be held almost natural.

Adam saw himself ^n the mean while daily consume under the burden of labor,
whilst without incessant culture he was denied sustenance. The earth would not
yield him obedience, unless it was struck, and opened with a thousand wounds,
or won with the profusion of seed. And with so much the more difficulty did
he produce his harvest, in regard that humane wit had not as yet, introduced
into use plows, harrows, mattocks, and, other rural instruments,

It was a very admirable sight to see the Proto-Monarch of all the world to
labor for his living in the most just and lawful employment, I might add
also, the most vile, had it not been honored by the sudors of so many Regal
fronts.

Adam, not content with what the Earth repayd him with interest for the seed
received, employed himself also in continual grafting. He transplants wild
trees into the meliorated, makes the sterill fructiferous, and dulcorates the
insipid,

He transmutes one species into another, and inoculates many species upon one
sole stock.

Poor Adam sheltered himself (necessity constraining him) in certain
Cavernes, the palaces of Nature. Necessity it self furnished him with the
means of building certain petty Cottages, which were afterward augmented by
industry, and according to occasion.

He learnt, for his greater shame this first Architecture from the Swallow: in
that, though he was endowed with all the degrees of wisdom, he was forced to
receive from irrational creatures the instructions for his convenience and
safty.

When he would recreate himself after his greater toils, he betook himself to
Hunting not so much for the delight he took in the flight and destruction of
beasts; as for the benefit accrewed to him from the exercise it self, and from
the getting of vestures.

To say the truth, there is not an exercise more noble (for a man not obliged
to any other calling then that of Hunting.) Generous souls are stimulated by
this Royal exercise, whilst they accustom the body to hardship, the life to
dangers, and the hand to conquests. The Chase is a war in times of Peace, so
that he that triumphs in this, is so much the more commendable by how much the
more right he has over beasts than over men.

Cain and Abel were come to that age, which makes men capable of reason, when
Adam spoke unto them to this or the like purpose;

Children, though I know, that, as the light of reason and the instinct of
nature point you to the knowledge of one sole God, Lord and Maker of all
things; so also they teach and command you the veneration of this great God,
with all the acts of humility, and adoration that may possibly proceed from
internal and external operations; yet nevertheless, as the Production of
God, and a Father, I cannot but satisfy my self, though I had no regard to
your necessity Children, acknowledge God; first out of an effect of gratitude,
and obligation of thankfulness; and afterward, for the interests of your
being, and for your own safeey. The not-acknowledgement of benefits, is
toward every one ingratitude; but toward God that has blessed you with a
such excessive mercies, it is impiety. The slighting of favors provoakes our
equals to hate us: Imagine then, what it will do to a Superior to a God,
whose power is equal to his will? Take heed, my Sons, that you provoke not
the formidable anger of his Divine Majesty, by your ingratitude for his
favors. As for the displeasure of God, take it upon my report that have
experimented it. If you be wise, learn from my evil to prevent your own;
from others harms, extract arguments of safety, and resolutions of sublime
prudence. God is your Lord, and King, your Monarch, and your All. Strive to
acknowledge his Sovereignty and your vassallage, by the offerings and
sacrifices of the first incomes, and first fruits. He will multiply your
substance, and shower all felicity upon your heads. Believe me, my sons, that
without the good pleasure and mercy of God, we cannot avoid those things that
afflict us, nor obtain those goods which our minds desire, nor arrive to that
eternity of life, that is promised to us in eternal beatitude. I have spoke
this, my Children, not that I doubt of your judgments but to satiate a desire
which I have of your good, and the Glory of God.

With these or the like conceptions Adam instructed his children, who remembered
all his examples and commands and admonitions, and with all possible reverence
adored his Divine Majesty. But the malice of the Devil impoysoned these holy
operations, being the cause of the Earth's polluting it self with the first
humane blood.

God was pleased with the sacrifice of Abel, both because he had chosen the
fattest firstlings of his flocks, as also because at the same instant he
offered his heart together with the Victime, The offerings of Cain on the
contrary, who brought the fruits of the earth, were not honored by the eye of
God; whereupon together with his remorse, a tormenting envy seized upon his
heart.

Envy is really a great evil. That soul discards reason and disbands all
judgment, that has not strength to resist it is assaults. It Is a Serpent which
not only impoysons, but stupifies. It is a vice so execrable, that it brings
into the hearts of the envious, the torments of a thousand Hells. The
Sacrifices of Cain please not God, who offered the fruits of the earth; to
denote unto us, that his divine Majesty aggradeth not those things which
proceed from the Earth, for all the actions of wicked men savor of the Earth.
And who knows if God intended not by this act to detest Avarice, since that
Gold lies in the bowels of the Earth, and God rejected those sacrifices which
are produced from the earth: it becomes execrable by having gold, and
treasures in its bosom: Or else, happily, it might be for that it was accursed,
the Lord not being pleased to receive the fruits of a thing, which once had
incurred his displeasure. What then can that sinner hope from his prayers, and
his sacrifices, who has by his sins many and many a time provoked the
maledictions of God?

It is not recorded that Adam sacrificed; perhaps because it was against reason
that he being the original of sin, there should also first be found in him
the beginnings of Piety and Religion. Or, because the sacred history stays not
upon the rehearsal of those things that contain not in them memorable
accidents.

Cain, in the mean time tormented by the fury of Envy, which had begot in his
mind an hatred against his brother, found no rest in himself. Envy resembles
fire, which is always in action. By the ashes of his face he presaged the
flames which he nourished in his breast. He held his eyes ever fixed on the
earth, ruminating on matters of cruelty.

One day he was advertised and admonished by God with these or the like words;

Whence, O Cain, proceed thy discontents? What means this thy palenesse? Why
are thy looks so dejected? Know, that he that beholds the earth, learnes only
things terreene. And if anger transport thy heart into some execrable sin,
consider, that it will inslave the to that blind complacency. This therefore
shall always represent unto thee thy guilt, and continually burden thy
Conscience, and forever prepare thy punishments. The Good knows not how to
produce any thing but good, as all evils come from the Evil. He that sins is
void of reason, in that of free, he makes himself a slave. And what greater
unhappiness then to be a servant to sin, and a vassal to vice?

But these holy admonitions had no influence upon the perfidious Cain, for he
retained his down-cast look. Seldom do God's advertisements avail with those
who look not upon his Divine Majesty. He ought to behold heaven that desires
help from heaven. It is as it were to contend with the impossible, for him to
sin that holds his eyes exalted toward God.

Therefore Cain being no longer able to endure the corrodings of hate, and
envy, invited his brother to go walk with him into a barren field, called
afterward of Damascus, which is as if one should say, A mixture with blood.

With reason did Cain call Abell into a Barren-field, because being to commit a
fratricide he made choice of a place which brought forth nothing. And where
could he slay a Brother, but there where fruitfulness was wanting? As if
nature in presage of so detestable an act, had made barren that place,
depriying it of her gifts, since that it was to receive the blood of an
Innocent. If, happily, he did not make choice of it, the better to conceal his
sin, in that he shunned the testimony of plants and herbs. Not imaginning
that Innocent blood would implore Divine Justice.

Cain could have slain Abell in his own house, but God would not permit it,
because it supplied the place and bore the form of a temple. Teaching us the
veneration which ought to be borne to the Church, since God would not suffer it
to be contaminated, no not by the most impious and execrable sinners.

Cain being come thither he began to say full of fury; There is certainly
neither Judge, not Justice. He that believes a reward to the just, and
judgments to the wicked deceives himself, Gods mercy neither has created, nor
does govern the world.

A vain fear has inplanted in our hearts a conceit that there may be a God
omnipotent, which I will not for all that believe, for it cannot be. An
accidental benefit of nature, (for just such is our life,) merits not
adoration. Chance rules and governs all. By this Chance, thy sacrifices have
had the precedence.

Abel, all confounded at the hearing of those blasphemies that at the same time
astonished his made and his ear, replied to him with something a discomposed
voice, for so the zeal of Gods honor commanded; which we ought to defend,
though with the certain hazard of our lives.

You speak brother (said he) against reason because you speak against the
prudence, goodness, justice, and omnipotence of God. My sacrifices found
Divine acceptance, because I offered the heart. And if thou leavest not these
impious conceits I shall renounce thy brotherhood.

He had not wholly uttered these words, when treacherously smitten by Cain, and
transfixed by many wounds, he miserably lost his life.

Cain was a perfidious man, that could learn from himself a villainy never
before practiced, and that it may be wickedness it self would never have
introduced. The virtues are learnt from others, and that with difficulty; and
the vices on the contrary are invented by our malignity, and are borne with our
selves.

He stood, Abel being dead, full of stupefaction, in beholding the Corpse,
either because he received horror from such a sight, or because the novelty of
the accident (he having never till then seen a dead man,) filled him with
wonder. Capital villainies terrify even those that commit them, and afright the
eyes many times at the attempts of the hand. After he had turned him many
times, and shaken him by the head, and by the hands not without suspicion that
he might revive, (for fear makes one believe impossibilities) he said;

Rejoice heart of mine, that thy enemies triumph shall never interrupt thy
victories. I will no longer endure superior, that may rob me of my honors and
gloryes. My soul deserves not the torments of any envious agitation. Envy is
an argument of inferiority. I neither could nor ought to be inferior to my
Brother, and for that end have with reason slain him. So much the rather
because he, with his modesty, has incensed the fury of these hands; now let
his zeal restore him to life. Let the sacrifices he boasts of, return his
soul.

But anon after, anger having a little yielded to reason, he perceived his own
error, and so much the more, in that those objects which obfuscated the sight,
now seemed testimonys that convinced him of vile wickedness. Terrors increased
the remorse of his Conscience, by the consideration of the anger and
reprehensions of his Parents, and sisters; therefore making a grave he covered
the dead body with earth, as if in that manner he would bury his sin.

Scarce had he with a pious act (though not directed to that end) covered an
impious fact, when God asks him, Where was his brother Abell? Merciful God!
Good God! that interrogatest sinners, to the intent they should call to mind
their sins, and beg pardon for their Errors.

His Divine Majesty would have men confess their sins; both because confession
is a great part of contrition, and to have the greater occasion to exercise
the extremity of his goodness, and the excesses of his beneficence. The
blushes of confession mitigate in great part the severity of the Judge; as on
the other hand, all the acts of pity it self are incensed by the obstinate
presumption of one that denies.

But he that has committed a sin always seeks to hid it. He that has hands
polluted with innocent blood, has commonly a lying tongue irreligious,
mendacious, inhuman, and cruel. Cain answered God; What know I of my brother?
Am I his Keeper? Vile wretch (replied God)! what is it thou denyest? The
Innocent blood of thy brother Abel invoketh vengeance upon thy impiety, so much
the more execrable by how much the more unusual Get thee gone, thou cursed, for
the earth having been contaminated by the wickedness of thy hands, shall deny
thee its fruits, and thou shall become a fugitive and vagabond. Cain, full of
confusion, and of fear confessed the whole fact, but to little purpose, since
he did it out of season. He departed therefore with his wives and children,
having received from God for a mark that none should kill him, the continual
trembling of the head. And with reason ought his head to be punished; that had
slain Abel, the head of the Church.

God permitted that Abel should be slain by his brother, it may be to chastise
their parents: Fathers not meeting a greater affliction, then in the death and
depravity of their children. Or else, it was to instruct us that just men, and
the true servants of God, are allwaies subjected to the persecutions, and
cruelties of ungodly men.

Adam, having discovered in the flight of Cain the death of Abel (for he that
flies, gives no signs of any thing but ill) after an infinite of tears, and
sighs, that well-ny deafned the air, turns himself to God, and, inspired
with passion and grief, expressed these or the like conceptions.

Lord, has not my sin yet received punishment equal to its desert? Do they
still importune thee to pay the debt, contracted by my disobedience? Is it
possible that my tears have not obtained from thy mercy a perfect absolution?
If this be true, my God, why enjoy I this light, why receive I the respirations
of this air? Earth, why do thou not intomb me in thy bowels? Heaven, why
do thou not slay me with thy thunders? Does divine justice want judgments? Is
the hand of God disarmed? But if my repentance be not able to cancel the debt
of my crimes, if my sins admit not the excesses of thy pity; if my
transgressions contend with the infinity of thy Goodness; what part, O Lord,
has the innocence of my poor son in the defections of my heart? Wherein has
that Abel offended, who in his sacrifices has had the honor of the Divine
Complacency? Oh miserable wretch, reduced to a misfortune beneath the condition
of brutish animals, which in their kinds produce births, that kill not one
another by fratricide; which with the only instinct of nature spare not only
such as are related to them in consanguinity, but also in their species. Wicked
Adam! These are all effects of thy sin: Good God, permit not the population
of the world in my descent, for from a bad root nothing can proceed but worse
fruit. And thou, vile Cain, that have rendered thy hands accursed abusing the
goodness of thy brother, not being worthy thereof; what will thou do? Hated by
God, by Men, and by thy Self, whither will thou go? Unfortunate father,
deprived in one and the same instant of two sons! Constrained much more to
bewail him which remains, then him which I have lest.

He would not here have ended his complaints, if the shriekes of Eve, that
introduced pity even into the insensibility of stones, had not necessitated him
to consolate her in the midst of her tears, Love making a separation of our
selves from our selves.

Eve, said he, there is a necessity of accommodating the affects of our hearts
to the will of of God, which in his works always includes secrets, impenetrable
by our humanity. All that which in this vale of the World, has the resemblance
of evil, is good with God, who works diversely from our understanding. What
does tears profit, which are, always, of small moment; but, for the dead,
vain and unprofitable? If by weeping we could retract that fatal point of Gods
decree, I would say, Let Us dissolve our selves into tears. But if this be a
vain hope, and an impossible supposall; Why should we with new sorrows
aggravate our old miseries? And in regard it is true, that, discovering by the
death of the more just, that thou will not, O my God, accept of the propagation
of mankind from me, I promise and swear unto thee never to know Eve more. Lord
I will no longer believe the Divinity of thy essence; if, I infringing this
promise, thou do not fulminate against me the thunder of thy wrath, and make
me to prove all the effects of thy displeasure. Eve presently with an oath
confirmed the will of Adam, and daily dieting upon tears, they ceased not to
bewail the hurt of such a loss. All greifs admit of some consolation; that of
the loss of children is insupportable, for it will make patience it self out
of patience. He that loses a son loses more than a part of himself. For in
himself a man dies daily, but in the life of a child he goes forward to
immortality.

They many years continued their continence and their condoleing, sacrificing
all their affections to the passion of such a loss; when, behold, at length a
Messenger of God admonished Adam, in words of this or the like purport;

Adam, It is now time to dry up thy tears: Continual sorrows are not
pleasing to God, who desires that in our misadventures we submit to his divine
will. Comfort thy self that Almighty God will in another son restore thee
all that which thou lamentest in the loss of Abell. This son shall, in his
successors, revenge thee of him who has been the cause of all thy miseries.
From him, after some ages, shall be borne God-man. Fear not again to touch
thy wife; for I by the will of his Divine Majesty do free thee from thy vow,
and absolve thee from thy oath.

Adam, humbly thanked God for his compassion, and imparted all to Eve, making
her gravid a little after, begetting a son, whom he called Soth: saying, The
mercy of God has furnished me with an Issue, which shall repair the loss of
the death of Abell. In the Education of this son, what pains Adam took, may
be understood by the success. He merited from people the attribute of Divine;
having given names to the stars, and invented the Hebrew-Characters. With
piety and goodness he ravished the affections of all, and was an example to
posterity, and a glory to his parents.

In the mean time, generations multiplied to that multitude, as that men were
forced to separate, to cultivate new grounds, the first not being sufficient to
maintain them.

Upon this occasion Adam exercised the talents he received from God. He made
certain laws, with which he taught, and commanded that which was good; Vices
being already so increased that they had great need of reformation. Adam, not
being able in regard of the distance of places, to prescribe remedies to those
evils which multiplied to infinite, made use of Laws; which make the Prince
always present, though he be far distant.

There is the Law of Nature, and the Written Law. That of Nature is a
sentiment, born with the Reason, which enableth the Conscience to distinguish
good from evil. But in wicked minds corrupted by a depraved consuetude, this
Law is either not known, or else despised: The Written Law therefore is
necessary, which dividing it self into Divine, Civil, constitutes the true
foundation of all humane societies. The Laws of Adam were all directed to the
union, and conservation of the people, to the correction, and direction of
manners; to the maintenance of obedience, and fidelity toward the Prince; and
to the acknowledgments, and devotions toward God. Yet Adam would not divest
himself of the gift received from God Almighty, of the universal Empire over
all things created; so that he reserved to himself, the reformation,
alteration, and interpretation of his Laws. He knew very well that all
garments, and all meats agreed not to men of all ages. The beginnings,
augmentations, and declinations of a disease are not cured with the same
remedies. With the alterations of times, there is a necessity of varying the
institutions.

Adam divided those primitive people into many Cantons, or Corporations; to
each of which he assigned for Super-intendent one of his sons, both because he
would ease himself of so many employments, as also because he would perpetuate
the sole command in his own line. It is then no marvail, that this desire is
innate in the minds of the Greatest, since it is an evil that has extracted
its original from the first Man of the World.

Though the command was parted amongst his sons, he nevertheless reserved the
Supremacy of all to himself; partly to restrain the licentiousness of his
sons, and partly that he might not seem to despise that gift of the universal
Empire, received from God, which is the most desirable in the world. He that
renounceth Command, confesses himself, for the most part, either unable to
exercise it, or unworthy to retain it.

In his latter days, Adam understood the progress of his son Cain. He had
news that he lived in the Oriental parts, and that he had built a City,
calling it by the name of his son Enoch. But he rejoiced not, knowing very well
that building of Cittyes, could only proceed from a soul very timorous, or
excessively ambitious.

Adam considered, by his own example, how dangerous it was for one to hide
himself. He knew full well that the nature of Cain was tyrannical, and
inclined to extort the goods and wealth of others, and bent upon the murder
and destruction of people. No less then a City, is sufficient to secure a
wicked man.

All these considerations disquieted the mind of Adam, so that his long life
was but a daily death. He grieved to see that the more men increased in number,
the more they multiplied in vice: That justice was abandoned of those in
particular who ought most to love it: That goodness was only known for an
imaginary thing: That Avarice was the first of man's affections: That Luxury,
accompanied by the most infamous debaucheryes, tryumphed in all hearts; upon
which occasion, it is more then probable, that he many times with more then
ordinary sentiments supplicated his divine Majesty, to take him out of this
torrent of the world, wherein there was nothing but Sin and Misery.

Adam was ready to pay the last debt to nature, having now seen the seventh
generation, when he called to him all his sonns and daughters, which were many
in number, and taught them what they were to do for the service of God, and
salvation of their souls.

Children, says he, the time is approaching that I must pay the Earth its
tribute. These hoary hairs tell me, that I am in the Winter of my life: These
limbs, that can no longer sustain themselves; that I must shortly fall. Thus
my fin has resolved, and thus That God has decreed which commands that all
things return to their principles. Before, therefore, that I depart, from you,
I will leave you, in testimony of my affection, all those records that conduce
to the good either of your souls or bodies. Nor think that my words are
overswayed by my affections, since he that speaks is a dying Father. My
Children, above all other things remember to love one only God, Trine in
person, and One in essence. You are obleiged to this not only by your duty, but
by your interest. He either is no man, or deserves not that name, who
consecrates not all his affections to that God, who has given him a being,
and that daily communicates to him temporal and spiritual blessings, and who
always appropriates punishments to vice, and rewards to virtue. Know, that he
requires sole adoration; and for this very thing, I foresee that he will shower
down miseryes upon my posterity (yea, blind progeny) an infinite of miseries;
foolish posterity, that shall so far dote, as to adore the things which thou
thy self have formed. The Idolatry I say that shall come into the world, shall
snatch the thunderbolts out of Gods hands, and violently force his mercy to the
punishment of infinite generations. As also lasciviousness dishonesty, and
luxury. These, Children, are sins that will constrain the fire to forsake its
sphere, not only to chastise sinners, but also to root out the memory of them.
Keep your selves, my Sonns, keep your selves from Anger, which is an undomable
passion, that hurries the hands to imbrue themselves in the blood of innocence
it self. And these homocides how displeasing they are to God is evinced in the
example of your brother Cain. Though the blood of the slain be not polluted,
yet it contaminates the hands and consciences of the murderer. And to show how
execrable a thing murder is, note, That even he is culpable that kills those
who implore death. Corn, and Cattle, and other the more esteemed sorts of
things you ought not to steal, no nor covet; for from this is ingendered that
cursed serpent of Envy, which has been the chief cause of all humane
misadventures. See that ye do not too much flatter the inordinate appetites of
your senses with a complacenciall indulgence, for they will lead you into a
thousand cursed sins. The senses are for the more part fallacious guides,
negligent sentinels, and the ruiners of the soul. These teach you pride, the
first of all sins, and a crime so execrable, that it has polluted heaven with
its filthiness. They teach you covetousness, which is an insatiable desire,
that, depraving faith and goodness, opens a door to all wickedness. They
teach you Luxury, which is a furious passion, that, perverting the reason,
makes man rebel against himself. They teach you Superfluous Gluttony, which
is a concatenation of a thousand Vices. This transports the will, fomenteth
love and hatred, extinguisheth the memory, distracteth the understanding, and
is the high way to all evils. In short, he that obeyes his senses, cannot be a
lover of God. The senses affect only their own delight; and many times rave,
giving credit to themselves alone.

My sons, the mercy of God, which will have his Advertisement precede his
Chastisements, illuminating your souls, commands that I denounce your miseries.
The vengeance of Heaven, my Children, shall set open the Abyss, and shall
drown the earth, the waters shall surmount the Hills, fishes shall possess the
places of birds* in brief, all mankind (except a small number of the good)
shall be the victime sacrificed to Gods anger. You have no way to avoid these
evils, but by loving, serving, and obeying God. Stupid people! why do you not
employ your selves in those works which promise you beatitude? Is it happily so
great a toil to exercise the works of temporal and spiritual Mercy?
Children, please God, please God; for else, you are near to destruction.
Educate your Children in his fear, that happily with their righteousness and
your penitence, you may be able to divert the impending judgments of Divine
Justice. I know, that these my words will not prevail upon those minds, who
have devoted themselves to ambition, jollity, dishonesty, thievery, murder,
and dissoluteness. But the grief I conceive for your calamities, urges me to
speak, though it may prove ineffectuall. I comfort my self nevertheless, that
if you observe not all these my precepts, yet one shall fulfill them for you
all. I see in the more hidden Arcana of God, that She shall spring from the
Loins of these, who, being a Virgin and a Mother, shall break the Serpents
head, bear God into the world, and open Heaven to the Just.

Adam was heard with more admiration then success: for all his sons, except
Seth, were maculated with a thousand enormous vices. His prophesies were
derided; because That is with great difficulty believed that is not desired;
and it is the property of Sin to bereave men of reason, and understanding.

To Seth, who by his virtue merited all his Affections and Benedictions, Adam
familiarly imparted all the particularities of the past and future eveniences,
which with the gift of Prophecy had been communicated to him by God. He
foretold him the Ruin of their posterity, the birth of the Virgin Mary, the
passion and death of God, the delivery of the righteous souls from Hell, and
the Institution of new Laws. He advertised him to instruct his posterity,
laying up these memorialls in two Towers, whereof one to be of a matter that
could bear out the impetuosity of water, the other resist the violence of fire.

He commanded him above all, that he should never permit any of his children to
marry into the family of Cain.

Vices are ever transmitted to posterity, and it would be a great benefit to
the world that wicked men were deprived of Issue. Wolves-bane, and Hemlock,
grow not on wholesome roots. Serpents bring forth only Serpents.

Thus Adam, being arrived to his Nine hundred and thirtieth year, oppressed
either by infirmity, or old age, departed this life, bequeathing his soul to
his Maker, and his body to the Earth; there to remain till the Resurrection,
when all the Holy Patriarks shall be freed from the prison of the Grave. It is
the opinion of many that he dyed on Friday the 3d of March, being the day on
which he was created to hint that misery comes in the very instant of our
felicity.

He was of very great strength according to the Giant like stature he was of.
We may believe that he was proportionable of person, and very handsome; for
coming out of Gods hands, he could not be otherwise.

He was buried in Hebron, in a Sepulcher of Marble, and was afterward
transported to Calvary, to the very place where Christ dyed. It was so decreed
by God, that so the innocent blood of a God, should wash away the guilty ashes
of a Sinner. Oh excess of Love! Oh stupendous Mercy! And hereupon I am of
opinion that a deaths head is always affixed to the feet of the picture of
Christ's Crucifixion, to show us that it is the head of Adam.

Of Eves age the Scriptures make no mention; perhaps because we ought not to
know the death of her, that deserved to dye before she was born; all the
miseries of mankind taking rise from her. Its probable that she was oppressed
by age, and passion, for Adams death. It pleased his Divine Majesty, perhaps,
that she should survive Adam to double her punishment, in beholding the death
of the dearest part of herself.

This (Reader) is the Life of the first Man, first Father, and first Saint. He
possessed all those benefits which were vouchsafed by nature, or acquired by
industry. He was endowed with all Sciences, was the inventer of all Arts. He
preceded all mortals in Wisdom, and the perfect knowledge of all natural
things, both because it depended on the cause, not on the effects; and because
he could not lose it with the state of innocence.

He found in advancement downfall, and in downfall glory. He was then most
infelicitous when he was in the height of all his felicity, because he could
not keep himself so. I know not whether be greater, the hurt he has done his
posterity in necessitating them to dye, or the benefit in occasioning the most
wonderful Love of God, to put himself upon it to undertake our humane nature.

And, Reader, consider in this Relation how vast difference there is between
God and man. Man brooks no parity nor equality in riches, dominion, nobility,
honors, nor virtue: God, on the contrary, is so full of benignity and so free
from envy, that he has been pleased to form man almost equal to himself.
And in every way that man resembled God, God in every of those ways has been
like Himself.

Consider that God has given the dominion over all creatures to man as being
endued with the light of reason, to teach us that the superior part of man
wherein is the mind, and reason, (the particular attribute of a man,) ought to
precede over the inferior, to wit the senses and affections, which we have
common with beasts.

Consider, that the greatest felicityes last not long, resembling lightening,
which the more it abounds with light, the sooner it vanishes and leaves behind
so much a greater darkness; as Adam in the Terrestrial Paradise, passed in a
moment from Paradise into Exile.

Consider, of what small avail are the favors of Nature, the gifts of Wisdom,
the Divine admonitions, and the Proximity of God himself, whilst a depraved
will tyrannizeth over the reason, inslaves the understanding, and resolves to
idolize vice.

Consider, that the greatest errors proceed from the greatest wits, in that the
wisest man in the world fell; and that so much the more inexcusably, in as much
as it was easy not to have sinned.

Consider, that it booteth not to confide in riches, honors, empire, nor the
love of great ones, when an error of disobedience has involved us in the
extremity of misery, and in the hatred of Him that has given us a being
according to his own similitude.

Consider, lastly, Reader, how much Children and Grand children and Posterity
lose in the sin of their Progenitors and Ancestors, in that all Ages pay a
perpetual penance for the transgression of Adam.

FINIS.

