A LOOKING-GLASS FOR Sope-Patentees: OR A Prospective-Glasse, making discovery
of a new Project contrived and propounded (by the Sope-Projectors) to the
PARLIAMENT, TO Monopolize the Soping-mystery, under Pretenses of good to the
STATE in the Duty of EXCIZE.

PROVE. 24.21, 22, 23. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

These things also belong to the wise, it is not good to have respect of
persons in judgment.

London, Printed in the Year 1646.

The Sope-boylers of London's New-project, or the last Sope-Patentees, and most
ancient projecting Monopolizers of the Sope-boyling Art. Propositions now
presented by them to the Honorable House of Commons, for the Monopolizing of
the Sope-boyling art, by Authority of Parliament, first proposed, then answered
or expounded.

First, Their Propositions.
The Grievances.

THat there are diverse persons of mean condition who in many by-corners in and
about London and Westminster, do make and sell Soap, not having bin Apprentices
to that Trade.

I. That this Soap for the most part is deceitful and unserviceable. II. That
abundance of this Soap being made and vented here and abroad by stealth: they
wholly deceive the State of the Excise thereof. III. That by this means they
sell it at cheaper rates then the Tradesmen paying the Excise can afford his
Exciz'd Soap, and so draw all the trade from the Tradesmen, whereby their trade
is decayed, and so consequently the loss falls upon the Excise produced out of
that Trade besides the ruin of the Tradesmen.
The Remedies.

Whereas the Excise is but 6. d. per pound on potashes, and 3 s. on every
barrel of Soap.

I. That the Excise may be advanced to 6 s. on every hundred weight of
Potashes, being the principal material (without which Soap cannot be made)
in lieu of the 3 s. per barrel, which amounts to more then both the former
Excises on Potashes and Soap II. That the Sope-makers may be enabled at their
own charges to collect the said Excise, and to proceed that due search be made
on all Potashes imported, that the Excise be not evaded. III. The former
Excise of Soap, and the materials thereof being cast up what it comes to per
Annum, they will farm the same and secure the State, 1000 l. per Annum, in
certain, more then the former revenew, which is cast all up, and by the Frauds
aforesaid daily deceived, and (...) without the enha^^cing the usual price to
the Subject.
That they propound really (without any by-ends) for the public good to
preserve their Trade, by which both themselves and the Excise subsist;
otherwise if either by this or some other like means the former Frauds be not
prevented, or if any further imposition be laid upon Soap, themselves add their
Trade must necessarily fall to ruin.

Secondly, the Parts or Division of them.
The general Parts are three.
I. The Reasons or Arguments on which they ground these their Propositions, or
the grievance of the State, and sufferings of the subject demonstrated by 1.
The Persons charged as offenders. 2. The manner how, or the prescription of
their offense by these three Particulars. 1. By illegal boiling of Soap. 2. By
making deceitful and unserviceable Soap. 3. By not paying the duty of Excise
thereof.

2. The Propositions themselves, or the remedies by them propounded. 3. Their
Protestations or Declaration of their simplicity in their Propositions.
Thirdly, the Exposition.
The answer which I shall give to these general parts, will declare that these
Propositions (what ever these Patentees do declare and protest by them) are a
new project (under vain and deceiving words) by them contrived and propounded
to Monopolize the Sope-trade, and to trample upon the liberties, lively hoods,
and estates of other Soap boylers and Tradesmen, (which are better Subjects and
as freeborn as themselves) now by the Authority of Parliament, as heretofore
they have done, by the Authority of the Kings Majesty, and the Lords of the
Privy Council (in their prosecution of their illegal Patent) gained of them, by
the self same false pretense of good to King and Kingdom. This being premised,
I come now to the answer or exposition of these three Generals.

I will speak first of the Persons charged as offenders, described by these two
Characters.

1 Men of mean condition. 2. Not Freemen, boiling in Corners.
First, They are now mean indeed (and they never shall be but mean, if these
projecting Patentees can but trample upon them by Authority of Parliament) and
the reason of their poverty is this, because these projecting Monopolers have
by their several burlaryes or forcible breaking open of their houses, Fellonies
or forcible taking away their goods, acted upon them, spoiled their materials,
and by imprisoning their persons, yea, by their cruel prosecution, have
committed several murders, or that which amounts to as much; And lastly, did
bind them in Bonds not to boil Soap, to which they have as much right as
themselves; by all which oppressing practices, together with the general
oppressions of the Kingdom, they have built their Nest on high, they have built
their houses with blood of these poor men, and have heaped much riches to
themselves by their oppressing Patent. These Patentees being covetous, dealt
with these poor men, as the unbelieving Jews of Thessalonica moved with envy,
dealt with Paul; namely, they did take to them certain lewd fellows of the
baser sort to act their cruelty.

Secondly, They are Freemen, and have as much right to the Sope-boyling Art as
themselves, and did serve Apprentises for their Freedom to Trade: And the truth
is, these Patentees are not Sope-boylers, in right of serving Apprentiships
thereunto, but Salters and Lether-sellers, although they charge these as
usurpers of a Trade; and concerning Sope-boyling, it is not a Manufacture
within the Statute of 5. Eliz. limiting Trades, as they would make men believe
(as they well know themselves) but an Art or Mystery which every Freeman that
knows how to boil, may as lawfully as themselves use Sope-boyling. As for their
charging of boiling Soap in corners, they mean, did boil Soap in corners, if
they did mean to speak the truth; and then this prescription is to be
considered as words of Patentees, and are thus to be understood, to be a
Declaration what they forced men to in the time of their Patent, (to escape
their cruel and barbarous prosecution of the illegal oppressing Patent) and not
that any now boil Soap in corners as they here falsely charge them. Besides
this I know, that there are 36. or 37. Complainants in the Committee, and ready
to be put in, for reparation for their several damages; and yet there is but
two of them that boil Soap, and as publicly as themselves.

Having spoken of the persons charged as offenders, I come now to speak to the
offenses charged upon them; which are these two:

1. Making deceitful and unserviceable Soap: this suffering relates to the
Subjects. 2. Deceiving the State of the Excize thereof.
If there be any that deceive the State (besides themselves) of the duty of the
Excise; this I am sure of, That it cannot be much, a very inconsiderable ground
to propound to so Honorable an Assembly as the Honorable House of Commons, such
Propositions (that amounts a Monopoly) for remedy: This being premised, I will
now to Answer the second particular offenses above expressed.

1. Making deceitful and unserviceable Soap; there are many hundreds of
evidences to prove the contrary; and reason tells every rational man, that when
men may buy freely, that none will voluntarily suffer themselves to be
defrauded by deceitful Soap: And the truth is, This is that false allegation
which these Monopolers have formerly calumniously charged upon them, and made
it their deceiving Argument to gain their Patent to oppress the Subjects in
their privileges and birthright, in their estates and lively hoods, and they
themselves are now and have been great deceivers of the Kingdom by deceitful
and base Soap, which I will demonstrate to you by three particulars of their
practices.

1. They adulterate the Major part of the Soap they make. 2. Witness the many
parcels of Soap which their Chapmen are forced to return to them again not fit
for use. 3. Witness the many parcels of old Soap cask which have been seized in
their hands, and burned in public view, by which said practice they have
deceived the Subjects, and gained many hundreds of pounds into their purse by
the said deceiving practice, though contrary to a Statute Law.
2. By deceiving the State of the Excize thereof: This is undoubtedly a
grounded charge, imposed upon them by these their oppressors, to render them
odious to the Parliament, (who are now Petitioners (in the Honorable Committee
of the House of Commons) for reparation for their several losses which they
sustained by these Projecting Monopolizing Patentees) and the better to
accomplish their wicked designs, which is the enriching of themselves by the
ruins of their Brethren, by this new Projecting Monopolizing Propositions: And
I am confident they are not able to make good their charging of them; but if
there be a deceiving of the State in the duty of Excize of Soap, if they which
are trusted with the Levying of the said Excize will but consider this ensuing
Proposition, (and what is the Annual Revenue of the said Excize) it will
evidently demonstrate to them how much they are deceived, and by whom.

The Proposition.
That weekly there is made in and about London, near 700 Barrels of Sept, out
week with another, all which is made by themselves, only some very small
quantities. Now the Revenue of the said Exci^ does annually amount to near the
sum of 5000. l. Look upon your Acco^^^* and then tell whether you may not say
to these Projectors as once Elijah in said to Ahab, It is not the oppressed
Sope-boylers, but your selves that have deceived the State of the Excize of
Soap.

I come now to speak the Propositions themselves, (or the remedies by them
propounded) which is the second general part, wherein they have propounded
three things:

1. That the Excize of Potashes which is but 6. d. per pound, may be advanced
to 6. s. upon every hundred wait, and 3. s. a barrel may be taken off which is
charged upon Soap; And they give you two Arguments to enforce this Proposition:
The first Argument is included, not expressed, and it is this, That it is the
most feasible way to prevent the deceiving of the State of the duty of Excize,
and this is limited in this expression, without which Soap cannot be made.
Their second Argument is this, That it will be advantage to the State in the
Revenue of the Excize. The other two Propositions are but a prescription of a
way how this remedy shall be acted.

1. That they be made searchers. (which have been P^tentees) likely men to be
trusted by a State, which have been barbarous and cruel oppressors of the
Kingdom, and great introducers of the present troubles that now lies upon us.
2. That they may farm of the State the said Excize. But before they are
trusted, it were meet, as I conceive, under correction, that they did give
satisfaction, first, for the re-infringing of the subject; liberties and
birthright in point of Trade, by taking their illegal Patent for their general
oppressing of the Subject in the price of Soap, and cruel prosecution of their
Patent upon hundreds of Freeborn Subjects, as is already expressed.
These things being premised, I will briefly, but satisfactorily, (in Answer to
these Propositions) speak to these two particulars.

1. These Propositions as they are groundless and upon false pretenses,
propounded by these Patentees; so they are deceiving and oppressing, tending to
the damage of many Tradesmen in all parts of the Kingdom.

That they are so, I prove by these two Arguments:
1. Potashes are of a different value, some worth four or five and twenty
pounds a Tun, others not really above fourteen or twelve pounds. It would be
unequal then that the worst sort of Ashes should be chargeable with as much
Excise as those which are of double the value; this oppression would lie heavy
not only upon other Sope-boylers, but also upon Salters and Dyers, and all
other Tradesmen that use Potashes.

2. One hundred of Potashes will make two barrels of Soap, and some Ashes will
not make above one barrel.

3. If the Parliament will but make these Projectors searchers, and farmers of
the Excise, they will undoubtedly make themselves possessors of all the best
Potashes, and so put all the burden of the Excise upon the rest of the
Sope-boylers to their inevitable ruin.

Secondly, That these Patentees design (by these deceiving Propositions) is to
Monopolize the Sope-boyling mystery into their own hands (which is sufficient
to maintain 200 Families) as they have done for above 30 years together, namely
by the engrossing into their own hands all the Potashes.

The reason why this must be their design.
Because the Arguments on which they do ground these Propositions, are the
selfsame false pretenses, and against the self-same persons which they did
charge to gain their Patent. There is one Scripture which I will propound that
proves this to be their design, Ier. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin
or the Leopard his spots, then can ye also do good that are accustomed to do
evil. I will conclude speaking of this second general part with this, They
offer the Parliament but a 1000 l. per Annum, for that which will be as
advantageous to them as their Patent, for which they gave the King 40000. l. of
the Kingdoms money, not their own.

Their third and last general is their Protestation that they have no by-ends
in these Propositions, but really intend the good of the State, and the
preserving of Trade, Ephesians. 5.6.

What I shall speak to this is by way of Caution to our worthy Senators, who
are Gods Vicegerents and bear Gods Image, from whom as from a fountain we
expect that justice shall run like water, and judgment like a mighty flood.

1. Let no man deceive you with vain words, it is the Word of the Lord by the
Apostle Paul. 2. You are not to judge by the sight of the eye, nor by the
hearing of the care, but with Righteousness to judge the poor, and reprove
with equity for the meek of the Earth, Isa. 11.3, 4.
I will leave all that I have said in answer to these Propositions to the
Judicious Reader, and conclude with this third caution, That if these Patentees
should obtain their Desires in these Propositions, and be oppressors in the
prosecution of them, and at last be called to answer their Delinquency, they
will translate their offense upon the Parliament, and say they did no more then
what they commanded them to do; Witness their Petition, in the answering
whereof I shall declare their Delinquency, in their taking of a Patent more at
large.

FINIS.

