Per psou Or Dionysius Longinus of the HEIGHT OF ELOQUENCE. Rendered out of the
Original. By J. H. Esquire

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL for Francis Eaglesfield at the Marygold in
Paul's Churchyard 1652.

To my Lord, the Lord Commissioner. WHITELOCK.
My Lord,
SInce I have overcome my nature to so much impudence as to throw this little
thing at your Lordships feet (though it be with the same devotion as the old
superstition inscribed the names of their greatest Deities upon their meanest
Donaries) I conceive my self obliged in justice to give you an account of what
I have done, and for what causes I was ambitious it should live under your
shadow, that so I may be in a greater possibility of pardon, in case your
Lordship descend to take notice of it, by diverting, so far as to a perusal,
from your high Judicial Trust, and those noble endeavors which employ you in
the Best and Justest cause that ever mankind can engage in.

To make therefore the best thrift I can with the time which possibly your
Lordship may waste in running over these miserable sheets, I doubt not in the
first place to profess, that this address is such, that upon the best
consideration I could make, I could not avoid it, as not finding a better
protector for such a discourse then your Lordship, who as you are entrusted
with the greatest civil employment that this Nation can make use of, and to
civil persons Longinus (who I dare say writes up to his own rules) tells us he
intended it, so you will find it a short draught, or to speak rashly, a kind of
prophecy of your own most excellent elocution.

In the 2d I considered that as Greece had the greatest Ascendant over
Eloquence of any nation whereof we have memory or acquaintance, and so derived
it to Rome, and thereby for any thing I know) to all the West, so know I not
whether this great Critic (for even so his own age acknowledge d him, insomuch
that Eunapius whose profession this was, and who has put upon the file the
Eminent of his Time, mentions him no otherwise then (...), and from thence
Athens her self not only employed him to put an Asterisme or spit upon
Spurious things of the Ancients, but the glorious and unfortunate Zenobia gave
him occasion of bravely dying for her in being her Secretary) may not now
though hoary and dismembered (for time has wasted him to what you see) find
acceptance with a person that in the Hurricans of these great Transactions, is
serenely pleased to throw off the public person, and adopt into his
tenderness and protection all that, unto which worth and letters may make a
claim.

It Is an easy objection, my Lord, that from the difference of Tongue, and Time
(which ever change the conceptions of men) this piece must be looked on as
obsolete, and to this age not at all pertinent, as that which expects men to
learn their Eloquence from their own Genius, rather then the Schools, which
manacle it with these old maxims; but yet if we will remember that though the
old Tacticks and Stratagems are, by the invention of Gunpowder made in effect
useless in this age, yet the greatest Captains have made considerable use of
them, and from Histories of different Climes and Governments, Politicians draw
no small advantage; so in this very point of Oratory, if we remember how those
wrastled with the disadvantage of single nature, and at last threw it into
Rule, reigned over the minds of men, and did many strange things, we may
consider that these old precepts may very well conduct the greatest wits, and
the sharpest observatours, through those obstacles which otherwise they might
not so easily overcome, as we see Logic files and keens the Reason of many
men, who otherwise had been blunt and in the wedge, and in Tongues, (which is
the only distinction of man from Beast) It Is a rare happiness perfectly to
overcome any one without Grammar.

Though I am to yield thus much, that the Crisis of eloquence is not a little
altered; In Senates and Harangues to the people length was necessary, for the
same men acted both parts, (and that in a single City) and that which was
necessary to gain the people, degenerated in time to be in fashion in counsel,
so that this was played for a prize, and was held so far unnecessary, that as
if the best Masters had not been enough, it was the care of parents themselves
to instruct their children, who seeing it the readiest way of advancement, were
not like to be wanting in emulation and endeavor, whereas now the Scene is
changed, and (in Civil matters) we are to speak to the few and not the many:
For as the corruption of time has diseased most Governments into Monarchies,
so the least of these few populacies now in being, is too great to be included
in the same walls, or brought to the hearing of one voice (long studied
Orations being become useless) and therefore as men now endeavor to sum up
their Notions, and draw them into a sharp angle, expecting reason should
overcome, so in the management and conueiance of that reason, there must be
needful so many artifices, charms, masteries, and such subtle conducts, that
without them a man cannot so well obtain his end, and a man of skill that
brings not so much force of reason may easily avoid them.

By this time it must be necessary (since I have talked so boldly) that I
explain my conception of Eloquence, which though I think it is such a thing as
we may rather Ideate and wish then describe, yet when once a man is of opinion
(and I think there are few dissentors) that the end of Oratory is to persuade
or Gain, I think he wants not a description, which if I may language is this, A
way of speech prevailing over those whom we design it prevail. This is if we
will take it in the short or Laconick way, a distilling our Notions into a
Quintescence, or forming all our thoughts in a Cone, and smiting with the
point; if the more spacious or Asiatick it is hard to describe, but in its own
manner, It Is what Tully says of the (...), Resultance and to be gathered not
expressed, the Galileans Via lactea a conflux of lesser stars clear yet
undistinguished, the Chymist's Elixar containing all Qualities in it, yet not
one perceivable; It Is Empire wholly commanding, yet never to be commanded.

But this my Lord is a thing so unattainable, and Nature has seemed to have
placed it so far above the reach of man, that notwithstanding all the
address and advantage it gives to public persons, all the means and
establishment of future fame, the number of Orators truly great, is scarce
equal to those precedent ages wherein letters have thriven: The encouragement
of Greece and Rome brought it up in their several times to an admirable
height, but this was so fatal and so vertical, that it could in neither
country stay an age in its Meridian, but it declined immediately; And in that
Age it was but one or two who by sovereignty of Genius and strange indulgence
of their stars could become consummate, and triumph in a true perfection,
though many others offered at it, rather to the commendation of their excellent
endeavors, or their happiness in some particular kind, then in attaining the
whole Tour entregent, and sway thereof.

It must therefore have somewhat I cannot tell how divine in it, for it depends
not of the single amassing or embrodery of words, there must be in it,
excellent knowledge of Man, deep and studied acquaintance with the passions, a
man must not only know very perfectly the agitations of his own mind, but be
seen and conversant in those of others, he must know all what the Sciences and
Prudence teach, what history has remembered, he must know the instinct, and
regular motions of nature that all may proportionably resemble her that she may
never be overdone, or too near the life. And yet all this without somewhat
which I cannot express, is but the smallest part that goes to the building up
of such a prodigy, there must be somewhat Ethereall, somewhat above man, much
of a soul separate, that must animate all this, and breath into it a fire to
make it both warm and shine.

I conceive therefore my Lord, that this being a business wherein man can
only, and that so hardly, be excellent, and withal a thing of so tender a
nature and easy to be offended in, that the observations of regular and vast
minds ought not to be neglected in it, especially considering how easy and
willing we are to adventure and transgress, in things which nature seems of
herself to teach us, and therefore was I the readier to make this publication
in acknowledgement of what my self had profited by this curious monument, and
having no better Present, I was encouraged by your Lordships general
indulgence and affection to all learning, to make this choice not without deep
acknowledgement of your Lordships favors to my self, which besides the shape
and apprehension of your great worth, fully seated and ruling in my soul, will
time in all the thoughts and actions of my life, zealously to aim at the Honor
of Being

My most honored Lord, Your most devoted and faithful servant J. Hall.

To the Reader.
THough I am of the unfittest making for a Translatour in the world, yet the
Generosity and Spirit of this Author, besides the exercise of the Tongue,
engaged me some years past to adventure this Translation, and the rather for
that I saw him so excellent a Judge, and so many men, to my thinking,
pretending to be Critics in things of this nature, and that but out of very
little reason, that I thought it was some service to them, and possibly a right
to some ingenuities and a means to bring true writing into esteem, and discover
that much of Tinsill and Sophisticate which now passes as current: though to
the disadvantage of my Author, the air and vivacitie of whose Spirit is such,
as it is impossible to be rendered; and therefore it was in my thoughts and
preparations to discourse several things by way of Commentary which he had
only touched and glanced at, or time had bereaved us of his, or were relating
to the point in hand. Besides so me light to Antiquity, which was but necessary
to a full understanding of him. But called on to other employments, and
considering the length and weight of the Book was not only too much for me,
but such as the Stationer was not willing to undergo, I suffer it to pass thus
naked, though it had been but necessary, that even for justification of the
Translation, I had made use of some short Notes. However if I have done ill I
have not done much, and I am less criminal because I have not offended in any
great Volume and the thing it self, I confidently say, is of such worth, that I
am only to beg a forgiveness for my own defects.

PEP PSOYS: Dionysius Longinus OF THE HEIGHT OF ELOQVENCE.
WHen you and I (my dear Posthumous Terentianus) had together perused, (as you
remember) Cecilius his book of Height, methought, besides that it was not
carried on with a greatness proportionate to the Subject, it blanched many
unnecessary points, and requited not the Reader with that profit which every
diligent Writer ought principally to endeavor. Now there being in the handling
of every Art, two things principally required, First, To demonstrate the
Subject, and Secondly, (though it be first by power and use) how and by what
means we may obtain it; Cecilius has taken a great deal of pains to show what
Height is, as though we had not known it before, but how we may advance our
Natures to some degree of excellency, he has quite neglected to set down, for
what reason I know not, unless perhaps it be that he judged it unnecessary. But
it is better justice to commend the man for his pains and curiosity, then to
blame him for what is deficient.

But since it is your pleasure I should say somewhat of the same Theme, let me
see if for your sake I can produce any thing that may be serviceable to civil
persons. But you (sweet friend) who best can and ought, must in every
particular give me your truest judgment; for it was well said of Him, who being
asked wherein we are like the Gods, answered, in Truth and Goodness.

Now writing to you that are such a knowing Lover of Learning, I am almost
eased of the trouble of Prefacing by laborious Hypotheses, That the bravest and
most shining parts of Speech are Height, that Height to which Poets and other
Authors owe their Eminency, and by which they have made their names to flourish
in all ages. For these sublimities do not only win, but astonish their Hearers,
and generally high and noble passages smite sooner, and ore-top those others
that are rather disposed for persuasion or ornament. For though Persuasion be
to be accounted amongst such things as are commonly in our power, yet those
things that have within them force and an irresistible violence orepell the
hearer and overcome him. And whereas the vivacity of Invention, the harmony and
order of Disposition cannot be discerned out of one or two clauses, but
difficultly make themselves appear in a general Survey of the whole fabric;
Height wheresoever it seasonably breaks forth, bears down all before it like a
whirlwind, and presently evidences the strength and ability of the speaker. But
of things of this and the like nature, experience has enabled you (sweetest
Terentianus) to direct and judge.

. 2.
But we must in the beginning clear the question, whether Height or Depth be an
Art, because there have not been some a wanting that thought them in an error
that endeavored to draw it into Rules and Observations. For Greatness (say
they) must be innate to our Genius, not acquired, and the only way to obtain it
is to be born a possessour of it; for (as they think) the works of Nature are
impaired and lessened when they suffer under the harsh Anatomy of Art. But I
can evidently disprove their assertion, if we will consider that as Nature in
matter of passion and exaggeration is commonly free and careless, so generally
in all other cases she follows a secret kind of order, and declines
irregularity. Now she indeed affords the first elements and materials of every
thing, but for increase, opportunity, and Height, she leaves it to the
determination and power of method: And as those things are most dangerous to
themselves, that are not poized with any Art, but left to float on their own
bottom; so are Great things when hurried on with an unadvised boldness, and
left to hang on their own weight; so that a Spur is not more necessary to the
one then a Bitt to the other. And as Demosthenes said, the greatest blessing in
all the life of man was to be Happy, and next to it (though it were no less
valuable) to Deliberate soberly, which who wanted could not be said to enjoy
the former; the like may I say of Speech, That Nature without Art is blind and
imperfect. And kept the ravenous flames within their chimney,
Could I but catch one housekeeper alone,
I Would take a squirt of fire and burn the house
And presently reduce it into Cinders,
But yet I have not heard the pleasant song.
These are not Tragical at all but Bombast, Squirts of fire, Vomit as high as
heaven, to make Bore as a pipe, and other like trash; but these things proceed
rather from a troubled then fierce fancy, and if you look on any of them by
the light of Reason, they by degrees slip from the terror (which they menace
at first sight) into a poor and contemptible lowness. And if in a Tragedy
which is naturally high and capable of elevation, it be unpardonable to swell
out of season, how may we think it suits with calm and sober Orations? For such
as this was Leontinus Gorgias laughed at, when he called Xerxes the Jupiter of
the Persians, and Gryphons living Sepulchers. Such as these, though they are
not heights but rackt extensions, are common with Calisthenes, and much more
with Clitarchus, a fellow made up of Puff paste and Cork, and one that (as
Sophocles said) plays on the small pipe without a muzzel. Such are
Amphicrates, Hegesias, and Matris, who many times when they conceive themselves
in a fury, vent not raptures but childish petulancies; insomuch that it appears
one of the nicest cautions in all Speech to beware of Tumor; for all men
naturally aim at high things, and ambitiously avoid the imputation of drought
or weakness, and therefore suffer themselves to be carried on I know not how)
beyond their due bounds, perhaps under this persuasion, That To fail in great
things is a noble Crime. But fungous and empty inflations are evil in an
Oration, as well as in a natural body, and for the most part produce effects
contrary to those for which they were intended, for nothing (as we say) is
dryer then a man in a dropsy. Now as this boisterous stuff boyls up above
just greatness, so a chil^ish flatnesse, which is a poor sneaking and ignoble
evil on the contrary directly opposes it. But what is this childishness? A
scholastic affectation with a great deal of pains labored into coldness,
into which they fall who endeavoring either an exact flosculent, or
delightfully formed speech make use of ill-favored Tropes, and bad imitation.
To these we may add a third Incident to the passions, Theodorus calls it
(...), which is either an unseasonable use of passion when there is no
occasion, or immoderate use of it when there is but ordinary occasion. Now
those who use it like drunken men are carried on with their own peculiar and
artificial passions, which are not at all consistent with the work in hand,
and trifle away a great deal of action before their unengaged and sleepy
auditors, and very likely, when they themselves are elevated, the others are
not stirred at all. But we shall more largely discuss the business of
Passions in another place.

. 3.
But for the other Vice, that I mean of Coldness, Tymaeus is full of it, a man
otherwise able enough and sometime in high Eloquence not unfortunate, and of a
various knowledge and acute discourse, but that he is implacable to other men's
errors, and insensible of his own. Besides that out of newfanglednesse, he
many times slips into very childish and low Absurdities. One or two of which I
will now produce, and the rather because Cecilius did not stick to quote far
more of him. When he commends Alexander the Great, he says he overcame Asia in
fewer years then Isocrates composed his Panegyric against the Persians. A very
rare parallel indeed of so great a Conqueror and a Sophister. But by this
account of yours, Tymaeus, it will soon appear that the Lacedaemonians were far
inferior in point of valor to Isocrates, for whereas they were thirty years
in taking Messana, he writ his Panegyric in ten. But when the Athenians were
defeated in Sicilie, what a strange exclamation does he burst into? Because
they had offended Mercury and maimed his Statues they were punished, and the
rather for one man Hermocrates the son of Hermon, who had some guilt entayl'd
upon him from his Ancestors. I have stranged with my self (sweetest
Terentianus) why he writ not also against Dionysius the tyrant, since he
exercised many bold impieties against Jove and Hercules, for which Dion and
Heraclides turned him out of his government. But what speak we of Tymaeus, when
those Heroes (Xenophon I mean and Plato) that had been under the Tuition of
Socrates, have through these littlenesses sometimes forgot themselves? For thus
writes the later in his Book of the Policy of Sparta; you shall no more hear
them speak then if they were all stone, you shall no more see their eyes turn
thou if they were brass, nay you will suppose them more modest then the
virgins in our eyes. It had become Amphicrates and not Xenophon to call the
apples of eyes modest virgins: but what a folly were it to believe that the
apples of all eyes are shame-fac'd, since the impudence of some men is not
otherwise discovered then by their eyes? and therefore Homer terms such a kind
of person, A Dog-eyed Drunkard. Yet had Tymaeus such an itch to be meddling with
it that he could not be content to let Xenophon alone enjoy such a poorness;
This therefore he says in Agathocles, He that would steal away his Niece that
had been bestowed on another, on the day of her marriage, I dare say has not
virgins in his eyes, but whores. What difference is there betwixt this and that
of the otherwise divine Plato, who being to name Note-books, says, They shall
place the Cypress memorials among the holy things: And again, For my part
Megillus I should advise the Spartans to let their walls lie and sleep on the
ground, but by no means to raise them up again? Nor is that of Herodotus afar
off, when he calls women a sickness of the eye: Although this may be said in
his excuse, that those whom he makes speak it are drunken Barbarians. But it is
not handsome under the pretense of such persons to commit these sor did
poornesses unto memory.

. 4.
All these extreme unbecommingnesses have defaced Eloquence upon no other
ground then the lechery that some men have to declare their notions with
somewhat of novelty, a crime passionately courted at this day. For we must note
that from those very causes from whence we derive our best things we commonly
use to receive very near the contrary inconveniences. Hence the happiness of
composure, the strengths, beauties, and allurements of Eloquence, as they may
fortunately succeed, so are the foundations and hypotheses of their contraries
to be considered in the same Nature. The like we are to suppose of Hyperboles
and Plurals. Now in the following discourse I shall show the danger that men
conceive in them, and therefore it will be very necessary to enquire and
resolve by what means we may avoid those vices which commonly sully and deforme
very excellent heights. And this (friend) we cannot better do then if we first
possess our selves of a right knowledge and judgment of what is just and true
Height: though I confess I do not look on this as a thing so easily feasible;
for to judge rightly of a book is but the reward and happiness of a great
experience; yet notwithstanding (to tell you so much by the way) I conceive it
not impossible, but a considerate mind may even from this Treatise, find a way
to make himself master of it.

. 5.
Now my dear Terentianus, we are to note that as it happens in the course of
life, there is nothing great which we can say it is noble in any man to
contemn; as for instance, Wealth, Honor, Repute, Empire, and all those other
things that to the outward appearance seem most majestic. For certainly no
rational man can think these so absolutely good when it is no mean happiness
to despise them, and therefore they must necessarily admire them that might
enjoy them if they pleased, but through royalty of mind despise them. The like
we are also to judge of all Elations in Poesy and Oratory, least some things
which may appear big and lusty and (at the first sight) wrought with a great
deal of skill, when they come to be weighed become miserably empty, and much
fitter for contempt then wonder. For indeed naturally our souls are so enflamed
by true heights that they generally elevate themselves, and in a transport of
joy and wonder own and father those great things that are presented to them, as
if themselves had produced them.

Therefore when we hear any wise and eloquent man utter and repeat any thing
that touches and pierces not, and fastens no more in the mind then a mere
remembrance that it was spoken, but after serious consideration decays and
vanishes, this we cannot call true Height, as that which can scarce outlast the
hearing. For that indeed is only truly noble which will stand to the test of a
scrutinous consideration, and which so possesses us that we are not able to
forget it; for the memory is greedy and will not shake hands with a thing
acceptable. But believe you those things to be only truly and exquisitely high,
that can please all men and at all times; therefore when you see men of
different customs opinions and ages unanimously approve one speech, it is to
be supposed that the judgment of so many various minds consenting therein is
uncontrollable and to be acquiesc'd in.

. 6
Now since there are five most rich fountains (if I may term them so) of
sublime Eloquence, (we supposing the faculty of Oratory as a common base to
these five pillars of the building without which we cannot build at all) The
first and indeed the most royal is regular vastness of thought (as we have
already declared when we writ concerning Xenophon). The second, fierce and
transporting passion. (But these two are commonly received from the indulgency
of Nature, these other we must be indebted for to Art and Industry.) The third,
a right fashioning and variation of Figures, (which again are two, those of
sentence and those of speech.) The fourth is generous and select phrase, which
we must subdivide into choice of words, and flourishing elaborate elocution.
The fifth and that which indeed consummates all the rest is nobility and beauty
of disposition. And now let us consider the latitude and extent of each of
these Ideas, premising thus much, that Cecilius has not mentioned some of
these five, as for example Passion. But if he thought height of mind and
vehemence of passion to be the same, or congeniall and producing the same
effects, he is much deceived. For there are some passions which are low and
miserable, as Regret, Sorrow, and Fear, which cannot be allied to Height; and
besides there are abundance of heights which are wholly dispassionate. For
example (not to instance a thousand others) what a daring speech of the Poet is
this concerning the Aloidae? They would have Ossa on Olympus thrown
And over that the shady Pelion
For to scale heaven --
But that which is biggest of all -- And they had done it too. So among the
Orators those speeches which are either Panegyricall or else pompous and
ostentatory are proudly full of sublimity and bravery, though commonly void of
passion. Hence is it that an Orator that can best move the affections is the
unfittest to praise, and he to praise that can best charm the affections. And
if again Cecilius conceived that passion was not sometimes necessary to Height,
and consequently not worth the mentioning, he is grossly mistaken. For I
confidently affirm it, that above all other things whatever, Generous passions
make men speak the most illustrious things, and breath such a gallant and
admirable madness that there is nothing nearer divine inspiration.

. 7.
Now for that which I placed first as indeed the most considerable of all,
Vastness of thought, it will be necessary we examine whether it be merely
natural or possibly acquirable, though notwithstanding we ought to nurture our
souls to greatness, and impregnate them (as I may say) to thoughts high and
extraordinary. But by what means say you? I have said here and upon other
occasions, that this greatness was but an Image or Resultance of the mind.
Hence is it that many naked sentences, wanting the advantage of a voice, are
admired merely for their strength and worth. For instance, the silence of Ajax
in (...) [(...)] is stately and indeed more forcible then any speech. We are
therefore first to enquire for a foundation upon which all this may be built,
and then we shall find that an Orator ought not to have any thing in his
thoughts low or unworthy. For it is impossible that men whose thoughts are daily
cageol'd to servile and mean designs can produce any thing miraculous and fit
to survive to all Generations; for we must conceive that those men speak the
bravest things that have the fullest and lustiest thoughts; therefore men of
vast spirits speak the hugest things. Thus [Alexander] to Parmenio telling him,
I should have been satisfied

as I am Alexander; And so I protest I would if I were Parmenio. This shows a
Royalty of spirit. And the like of Homer, in a description of Eris or strife,
She walks on earth, yet her head reaches heaven.

This any man will easily apprehend to be rather the stature of Homers mind
then of Eris. How unlike to which is that of Hesiod in his shield (if you will
allow it his) Her nosthrils dropped base nasty matter -- Here he makes his Idea
not terrible but hateful. But see the other [Homer] aggrandize his divinities,
So much of Air as a survaying eye
Freely stretched over the Ocean can epsy,
So far the Gods high-crested horses leap
At once --
Measuring (you see) their leaps by the breadth of the horizon. Would not any
man then probably astonished at these vast conceptions, cry out, If these
horses of the Gods should leap twice, there were no room in the world for them
to leap a third time?

Now observe but how Gigantick and transcendent are those images about the
[Giants] fight with the Gods: Olympus, nay even heaven ecchoed round, and,
Pluto the God of shades trembling below
And starting from his throne, must Neptune now
(Venting his fears, cried he) the earth divide
And with his Waters in these caves abide,
These horrid ghastly miserable abodes
Unknown to light and hated of the Gods?


See here (friend) the earth shaken, broken, and clefted, nay even hell it self
laid open, apprehending a turn and dissolution of the whole; nay altogether
Heaven, Earth, Mortals, Immortals equally endangered and concerned in this
fight. But these are terrible, and, unless allegorically understood,
absolutely Atheistical and indeed improper. For truly Homer (if my opinion be
any thing) when he brings in his Gods wounded, siding, revenging, weeping,
bound, suffering in losses; makes the actours in the Trojan war, as far as lies
in him, Gods, and the Gods men. For death to us is a certain haven and reposure
after all unhappiness; but he made the nature and infelicity of his Gods
equally eternal. Those things are far better which he says of the same fight,
when he mentions no Godhead but as great (as it is very just) pure and
incorruptible; for example (though many before have noted the place) -- Each
Mountain trembled, and each wood
Where the immortal feet of Neptune trod.
He drove to th'Sea, where the glad Whales advance
From their vast holes and to their Monarch dance,
(Knowing his power) they rather fly then glide,
Whilst the glad Seas their trembling waves divide.


Thus the Lawgiver of the Jews, and an excellent person, after he had
sufficiently declared the power of the Divinity, and acknowledged it, in the
very beginning of the Book of his Laws said, God spoke; what? Let there be
light, and there was light: Let there be earth, and there was earth. Pray you,
my noble friend, think me not troublesome, if out of the Poet I make bold to
quote one thing, and such a one as concerns the affairs of mankind, and that
for instruction sake, that we may know a means, and learn the custom how to
aggrandize our natures to these heroic pitches. There was a darkness suddenly
happened and a dismal obscurity waited on it which withheld the Grecians from
fight; Ajax being at a stand, says; Dear Jove clear up these mists, let the
Grecians see
A clearer day and not still darkened be;
Give day and let me perish --
Nothing can be more like Ajax then this passion; for he begs not life of
Jupiter; (that had been a Petition much below an Hero) but when he considered
that the night made men incapable of showing their valor, or at least, the
mist would render them undistinguished, he breaks into disdain and begs a
sudden approach of light, as one that would find himself a sepulcher worthy of
his valor, though Jove himself would combat with him. Herein Homer pursues
combats with equal violence, a man engaged and in fury could do no other. Like
dreadful Mars or hungry fires that rove
In their free rage and prey upon a grove,
He foamed for very wrath.
And indeed we may perceive by the Odysses (this in many respects is worth our
consideration) great minds in their declination stagger into Fabling; for it is
apparent out of many visible inferences, that the Odysses were a second work of
the Poets as additionall to what he had formerly treated of the war of Troy;
and thus much you cannot but acknowledge from those griefs and lamentations we
find there, which we must suppose to be made to people that knew them before;
for I may justly say the Odysses were but a corollary to the Iliads. Here lies
stout Ajax; here Achilles; here
Patroclus, whose great mind the Gods might steer;
And here mine own dear son --
From this very cause I think it proceeds that the Iliads written in the
strength and exaltation of his spirit were wholly full of life and action; But
the Odysses solely abound with Narrations which is the property of old Age, so
that in them a man may compare Homer to the setting Sun, who though he have
lost much of his vigor retains his greatness: For indeed he preserves not the
magnificence, the stayed height, the collections, constant Gravity, brave
uniting of different passions, subtle conduct and depths of Policy, shadowed
and veyld with appearances of Truth. But as the unquiet Ocean removes it self
and deserts those shoars it had formerly overflown; so may we say of him, that
this remainder was the Ebb of his greatness, though this will seem very
improbable to such as are delighted with Fables, or will remain incredulous.
When I say this I forget not the Tempests, the Cyclops, and many others; but I
put a remark on old Age, or to say better, the old age of Homer: Only in these
that I am now to quote the Fabulous part very much exceeds the Real. I have
digressed thus far as I formerly intimated, that I might show how the most
consummate minds being once in the wane, become darkened by the greatest
follies: to go no further for instance then the story of the enchanted Bottles;
Circe's transformed hogs, which Zollus pleasantly called weeping swine; the
nursing of Jove by Doves [or the Pleiades] He that after shipwreck lived 10
days without meat; and these absolute impossibilities of slaying the woers;
what can a man think otherwise of these but as excellent dreams? Another
question will now arise why I so often mention the Odysses, and I must answer;
To make it appear how far decrepit wits dwindle into things that concern
manners, as the things morally related to Ulysses [at his return concerning his
wife and woers,] seem to carry the shape and fashion of an exact Comedy.

. 8.
To pursue our Business we will consider whether there be any more ways to
advance Eloquence and render it Illustrious. Now since upon every occasion or
subject there are some parts or circumstances that must necessarily relate unto
it, we shall find a very good advantage to our intentions if we will choose the
best of those things that offer themselves unto us, and so cement them together
that (like Musive work) they may appear altogether but as one thing; for choice
of the most considerable notions, and beauteous disposure and crowding them
together persuades not the Reader, but enforces him. Thus did Sappho single out
all those accidents that are either inherent or consequentiall to love and
melancholy, and, apprehending what they are, really dispose them to the best
advantage. But where appears this great skill? she knew how to call out the
greatest and bravest things, and then to mould them into proportion and
correspondencie: He that sits next thee now and hears
Thy charming voice to me appears
Beauteous as any Deity
That rules the sky.
How did his pleasing glances dart
Sweet languors to my ravished heart!
At the first sight thou so prevailed
That my voice failed.
I Am speechless, feav'rish, fires assail
My fainting flesh, my sight does fail,
Whilst to my restless mind my ears
Still hum new fears.
Cold sweats and tremblings so invade
That like a withered flower I fade,
So that my life being almost lost
I seem a Ghost.
Yet since I Am wretched I must dare.

Wonder you not at this? The soul, the body, the tongue, the ears, the eyes,
the complexion, things so widely different are here by a strange artifice
brought together, and according to her several contrary agitations; how she
burns, how she freezes, how she raves, and how she deliberates! for either
she is in fear or at the point of death; so that it appears not a single
passion, but a conflux and general rendezvous of them all; yet all this is no
less then what any lover undergoes. Now the choice as I have told you of the
best, and handsome disposure has wrought up this excellency, and thus in my
opinion the Poet mentioning a tempest brings in the terriblest things can be
expected. Now he that writ the Arimaspeia conceived these circumstances full of
dread; It Is strange nor can our thoughts the reason tell,
Men far from Land in Seas and Water dwell,
All are unhappy though their task be hard,
Their thoughts in the Sea, their eyes to heaven reared;
Whilst to the careless Gods their hands they heave.
And the searched entrails no assurance give.


I think any man may conceive that this is very pleasant and flosculent: But to
show you what Homer has done in this point, I will give you this one instance
in stead of many. He fell, as on a ship an angry wave
Tossed by the wind which forcibly does rave
Covering her all with froth, whilst whirlwinds shake
Their Masts, and the despairing Seamen quake,
Seeing how little distant they are from death.
This did Aratus endeavor to imitate; A little timber keeps them out of hell.
Now in steed of making the business dreadful he has made it smooth and
little, for he ended their danger when he says, Keeps them out of Hell, that
is to say, secures them. Now the Poet not content with the single mention of
their danger describes them continually and variously perishing, and ready to
be swallowed up by every wave. Besides, how fitly has he brought together two
prepositions of a different nature, forcing them as it were in despite of
their singularity to join, (...), the verse being troubled like the passion it
treats of. Now this fainting of the verse does the most naturally resemble fear
of any thing possible, having so properly languag'd the danger that were it
real it could not produce any thing more passionate; (...). Thus Archilochus
in his Poem called the Shipwreck, and Demosthenes of the coming of Tidings, It
grew toward night, says he. But these men (some will tell me) choosing the
most illustrious things that had been said, and knitting them according to
their several worths into one piece, produced nothing that was swelling,
unbecoming, or Pedantick. For such things infect the whole like washes, but
great Buildings are raised up by the correspondence of parts one toward
another.

. 9.
Another virtue colleague to these is Amplification, that is, when, the Subject
bearing it, causes and circumstances are considered and thrown into such
Periods and turns and stoops, that they are so incircled and twisted one with
another, that they mount up by equal steps to just greatness, and this either
upon the handling a Commonplace, or upon exaggeration, or justification of an
action, or strengthening an argument, methodizing Relations, or Passions, and
millions of other. Now must the Orator know that none of these can stand by it
self, but it is utterly lame without Height, unless it be in cases of
commiseration or extenuation; But for all other Amplifications, deprive them
but of Height, and like soulelesse carcasses they fall down dead. For that
which is forcible in them if not strengthened and backed with Height,
languishes and decays immediately. Now what we at present speak is of a very
different nature from what we have formerly said, for that was merely a
dischesiling of the general design, and considering it all together; but now we
are to consider how far Heights and Amplifications differ in the main, and that
we shall briefly and perspicuously determine.

. 10.
I am to confess that I am very much dissatisfied with the definition which
they who have treated of this Art generally give; Amplification (say they) is
that which brings a luster or nobleness to the subject matter. This may as
well be a common definition to Heights, Passions and Tropes, which all derive
luster and greatness to what they treat of. Now (to me) there appears a very
great difference between Height and Amplification: from the first we must
expect elation, from the second, plenty; therefore we often find the one in a
particular sentence, the other must come in a Bulk and out of abundance. For
Amplification (to be short in the business) is a comprehension of all those
circumstances that concern the matter, and enforcement of the memory to a
compliance with the design in hand; and so it differs from strong argument,
because it must be admitted to the determination of the controversy.

Thus does Greatness oftentimes richly pour forth it self, and like a large
ocean overwhelm all round about it. Hence is it I conceive this Orator to be
so nobly passionate in his Orations, and have so much of flame and fiery
agitation of mind. Now he retaining his majesty and becoming magnificence
decays not at all: but methinks, Terentianus, in other places he does not so
well turn and wind himself as here; yet this I shall not so confidently affirm,
because possibly we Grecians are no competent judges of Cicero. Now Cicero and
Demosthenes differ very much in their Heights, for those of Demosthenes are
summed up into brevity, those of Cicero spread themselves at full. Our Orator
is so forcible that with his fierceness, swiftness, and strength, as a
whirlwind or thunderbolt, he overthrows and burns all. Now Cicero is like a
prevailing conflagration preying upon all, continually mounting, and not easy
to be extinguished, but ever enlarging it self, as indeed it is in him, varying
it many ways, but yet perpetually nourished and shining. But of these things
your self may better judge. Now the Demosthenicall elevation is then proper
when we have occasion to exaggerate, when we would violently burry all before
us with great passion, and indeed at once storm the mind of the Auditour and
take him in. The other greatness which is copious and Asiatick is then to be
used when we have a mind to stroke and surprise the Auditors with some
blandishments, when we have any common place to handle, in all expatiations and
digressions, in all relations demonstrations, or histories, in all descriptions
of natural things, besides a many other occasions whereunto this plentiful
way of speech is much more serviceable then the restrained.

. 11.
Nay that Plato too (for I return from this digression) like a deep river
glides smoothly and silently, yet notwithstanding wants not his sublimities,
you your self must acknowledge if you read his Politics. Now these says he,
that are strangers to wisdom and virtue, and lavish their time in banquets and
such entertainments, methinks are perpetually sinking downward, and do nothing
but straggle all their lives through, for their eyes are too feeble ever to
look upon truth, much less to gaze on her and admire her: Nor did they ever
taste any real or steadfast pleasures, but like beasts lay perpetually
grovelling and poaring on the earth, considering no further then their
victuals, with which being once glutted and satisfied, there is nothing to do
but to dance and wanton. Hence is it that the greediness of these things
increasing with the debauchery, they assail one another with a mutual rage,
and fighting with iron horns and hoofs perish in this brutall avarice. Now this
great man here shows us if we will but be content to learn from him, that there
is another way unto Height besides those we formerly mentioned: and what should
this be? A diligent and strict imitation of such famous Poets and Writers as
have gone before us. And this is a mark, my dear friend, that we ought to spend
all our skill and industry to hit exactly: For many are so rapt and
transported with the conceptions of another, that they are possessed like the
Pithia raving upon her Tripos, where there is a cleft of the earth breaths up
(as they say) a strong inspiring vapor, which seizing the prophetess shakes
her, and fills her with such divine furies that she raves out mysteries and
prophesies accordingly. Such kind of airs and vapors shoot themselves from the
admirable writings of ancient Authors, as it were from some secret cave, which
breath upon the souls of their imitatours though possibly not made for such
high transports, and swell them up into a greatness like their own. Herodotus
was in a manner a sole imitatour of Homer, and before him Stesichorus and
Archilochus, but none more studiously followed him then Plato, who derived many
streams from Homers great River into his own channells. Nor are we to call this
theft, but a representation of the best Thoughts, Artifices or Inventions. Yet
does he not seem to me to mingle these so commonly with his Philosophy, or
ordinarily to digress into Poetical expressions or conceptions: but only when
with a settled purpose he endeavors to dispute pre-eminence with Homer (though
already settled in a high reputation) which he does with so much eagerness,
that skirmishing (as it were) with him he often not unfortunately enters the
lists, and maintains the Combat: but as Hesiod says -- These strifes are good
in men -- And indeed these are the noblest and worthiest contentions that are
about the crown of glory, for in this to be overcome by ones predecessors is
not dishonorable.

. 12.
Therefore when we go about any thing which should carry in it sublimity of
spirit, it will be very good strongly to imagine in our selves how Homer if
there were occasion would have said such a thing, how Plato, how Demosthenes
would have raised it, or if it be in History, how Thucydides; for by that means
such illustrious shapes appearing to us, and, as it were, conversing with us,
whisper unto us expressions to shadow out what we shall conceive; or rather if
we can possess our selves with a jealousy, how Homer if he were present, or
Demosthenes would judge of such a thing. For it is no mean incitement unto
glory for a man to propose unto himself such a Theater and such a Tribunal,
and to have such Heroes the judges or advocates of his writings, and this in
realty. Above all this there is nothing more incites then if you weigh with
your self how every succeeding eye would receive those things which are in
writing. Now if a man be afraid lest he may live to see the funeral of what he
goes about, it is an evident sign that his conceptions are but flat, narrow,
abortive, and shapelesse, and not able to endure and survive to the enjoyment
of any future glory.

. 13.
Now is youth to be acquainted, that Pomp, wealth of Speech, proud Emulations,
are by no means better acquired then by Fantasies, which some have called
(...) [or inward images of things.] Now by Fantasy is generally understood
any conception which may be fashioned into Speech; but more particularly it
has prevailed to be accepted only of such representations as being to be
worded, thou will be so agitated with fury and passion as to think thou really
see them, and so make them visible even to the hearers. Notwithstanding you
must take this by the way, that a Rhetorical and Poetical fantasy are quite
different, for that which the Poet ought to aim at is Amazement, that which the
Orator, clearness and conviction, yet both of them equally require commotion
or agitation. O mother I beseech thee send not hither
These Serpent-hair'd, these bloody-visag'd hags.
O they are at hand, and now begin to seize me.
and O she will slay me, whither shall I fly? Here the Poet himself saw not
these furies, yet so imag'd them that he almost forced the spectators to
believe they were before their eyes. And indeed to speak truth Euripides is
very diligent in exalting and enflaming of those two grand agitations of love
and madness, and in them (I cannot say in the rest) extremely fortunate,
although he has not wanted courage to attempt other fantasies: for though his
mind was not framed with the greatest, yet has he often forced it into many
brave raptures and tragical excesses, but especially greatnesses, that we may
apply to him that of the Poet [speaking of a Lion] Then with his tail lashing
his sides and thighs
He gathers wrath and to the combat flies.
Now when the Sun delivers the reins of his chariot to Phaeton; Drive, but be
sure thou shun the Africa sky,
For she no moisture has to cool the heat
Of thy hot wheels --
And afterward, Toward the seven Pleiades Child bend thy course.
He bearing this eagerly snatched the reins,
And sharply lashing the swift fiery steeds,
Gave rein: they through the airs blew unequal flew,
Whilst that his Father as Postilion rode
Instructing him which way and how to drive;
But he drove up and down --
Would not any man say the soul of Euripides has here taken coach with
Phaeton, and with like danger was hurried along by the horses? for it had been
impossible for him to have figured such things, had not his thoughts been
mightily elevated in the contemplation of what was done in heaven. Parallel to
these is that in his Cassandra, But O Horse-loving Trojans -- Now Aeschylus was
very daring in these heroical conceptions, let this in his Seven at Thebes
demonstrate, -- Seven stout undaunted Captains,
Slaying a Bull upon a broad black shield,
Covenanted by oath to Mars and fierce Enyo
And pale blood-thirsty fear --
They without remorse mutually swearing their own deaths: and yet as he
sometimes flags into thoughts not only little and inconsiderable, but deformed
and unpolisht; so Euripides out of an affectation of honor imbarks himself in
the same danger. Thus in Aeschylus, when the court of Lycurgus was divinely
agitated at the unexpected appeara^ce of Bacchus,

The Court grew furious and the roofs (...) rage. Euripides speaks the same
thing though he speak it otherwise: -- The whole mountain raged. Nay and
Sophocles admirably represents Oedipus dying in the midst of a great Tempest
and burning himself: As also the setting sail of the Grecians, and likewise the
appearance of Achilles from the Tomb when they were setting forward. Which
very Image I know not who has drawn better to the life then Simonides. Now
these Idea's we find in Poets are more fabulously raised (as we said before)
and not to be calculated by faith; But the Rhetorical are then most excellent
when they are efficacious and veritable. But ^igressions are unproper and
unsufferable if they ramble into Poetry or fictions, or any thing that seems to
carry an impossibility: Yet now adays (forsooth) we see a many of those that
would be thought no small Orators swell in a Tragic manner and seem furies,
yet will these brave men condescend to consider or learn that when Orestes
says Unclasp thou that art one of my Tormenters,
And grasp me not to throw me down --
He imagines these things because he was mad. But then will you say, What use
of Rhetorical Fantasy? Marry to carry on high emulations, and heighten great
passions, besides many other; so that being mingled with other Arguments to the
purpose, they do not only persuade the Hearer but conquer him. If any (says
the Orator) should hear a great noise before the Hall of Justice, and some
body should bring word that the Prison were broke open, what old or young man
would be so unworthy as not to give all possible assistance in this case? But
if some passing by should say this is the man [that broke the prison and show
him] and he not be admitted to speak, he could not escape sudden death. Thus
Hyperides haranguing when he had set free the slaves after the defeat [of
Cheronaea] This was (says he) not done by voices, not by persuasions of
Orators, but the Battle of Cheronaea. Thus he not only fortifies his argument,
but makes way for a Fantasy and therefore by this assumption exceeded the
common bound and means of persuasion; for naturally in most things of this
nature we mostly fix our ears on that which is gallantest; hence are we drawn
from the Argumentative part to a smiting fantasy, whereby the other is both
hid and enlightened. Nor is it improbable that we should find this effect; for
two things joining forces, the greater usurps to it self the force of the
lesser. Now for height of conception, bravery of Thought, Imitation, Fantasy,
and what concerns them, we think what we have said may well suffice.

. 14.
Since we therefore have assigned [Sect. 6.] a proper place to figures, I am to
tell you that if they be choicely and regularly inserted, they are not
inconsiderable advancements to Height. But since to handle them all at present
would be a tedious work, or, to say better, impossible, we will any pitch upon
a few of such as conduce to the perfection of Height, and assertion of what we
have proposed. Demosthenes remonstrates concerning the management of the
Commonwealth: but what was the natural use or end thereof? You were not
deceived (Athenians) when you undertook to protect the Liberty of Greece,
though with your own hazard' nor want ye examples of this at home, nor did they
amiss that engaged at Marathon, nor those at Salamis, nor those at Plataeae.
But then as though he had been suddenly ravished with divine afflation, and
struck into a Transport, he swears by the gallant men of Greece; By all those
(says he) that were in danger at Marathon. Now by this figurate oath (which we
will here call an Apostrophe) does he intimate the deification of his
Ancestors, calling them though dead to witness, to whom as Gods we ought to
appeal. Now he recalling this action into the memory of his Hearers, and
raising up his demonstration to such a transcendencie and vigor, and
confirming it with new and venerable oaths, then giving lenitives and cordials
to their spirits, so enflames them with praises that they cannot imagine or
expect any thing less from the fight with Philip then victories as signal as
those of Marathon and Salamis: and yet they say he had the seed or hint of this
from Eupolis [the Comedian] Now by my victory at Marathon
Their merriment shall cause no grief in me.
Now to swear commonly or upon no occasion is little worth, but where, how,
upon what occasions, and for what ends [make the Height:] so that here [in
Eupolis's verses] there is nothing but a mere oath, and that to the Athenians
flourishing and not needing consolation, nor does this has imply the death of
the men he swears by, that by the virtues of such men he might install some
concernment into the minds of his hearers; but in stead of insinuating of
dangers makes only a dull mention of a victory. But in Demosthenes the oath
wholly levels at them that were overcome, that so the business of Cheronaea
might be no longer accounted a great misfortune to the Athenians: So that here
at once (as I said before) he not only evinces their war no error, but brings
a president, the assurance of oath, collaudation and instigation. But some may
object to the Orator and say, You that are a public Minister and mentioning a
defeat swear by a victory. [Answ.] For this cause he weighs his words, and that
he may with more safety utter them, he wisely restrains them: (teaching us,
that in the greatest debt cheries there must be some sobriety) He says his
were in danger at Marathon, he says they had a Sea Fight at Salamis, he says
they were (...) at Plataeae, not that they overcame, but still he forbears any
mention of the event, because it was fortunate and quite contrary to that of
Cheronaea. Wherefore suddenly surprising his hearer, he adds, All these
(Aeschines) the City buried at the public charge, not only those that returned
victorious.

. 15.
Now it will be worth our labor (friend) not to omit one thing which has fallen
into my consideration, and this in a word it is; That Figures are very good
servants to Height, and Height a very noble master to Figures: But how and on
what occasion I will now set down. It occasions suspicion to infect the use of
single figures, and raises a jealousy lest we intend either surprise, deceit,
or fallacies, but especially if we address to a Judge that has full power in
his hands; much more to a Tyrant, King, or General into, for they stomach,
presently if you endeavor to catch them like ^chool-voyes, with un^^bratil
Pedanteries of Rhetoric, and interpreting such little Sophistry to be brought
in contempt of them, disgust the whole, so that though courted with all the
blan^ishments and graces of speech, yet will they never be persuaded. This then
is the excellency of a Scheme, that it be (...) all yet undiscerned: therefore
Height and adorned Passion are the most safe disguises and sovereign Remedies
for such a suspicion; so that if a man can cunningly throw them into such a
posture as that they are overshadowed with Grandezza's and beauties, he avoids
all suspicion. We need no better instance then that we had even now, by those
at Marathon. But wherein here has the Orator concealed his Figure? [Answ.]
It Is as clear as light; for see how like as a small gleam approacht by the Sun
in its full luster presently disappears; so the Sophistry of Rhetoric is
wholly overshadowed, being so circumfused and covered by Height. Not unlike
this is an observation we find in picture; for after that Lines are drawn upon
a plain and colors laid on and shadowed and enlivened, this set In the light
projects a pleasant brightness, which is so much the more visible by how much
you nearer approach it: even so Heights and Passions of speech neighboring to
our souls, as knit thereunto by a straight alliance, outshine the figures, and
only stand in sight, overshadowing their Art and clouding it in obscurity.

. 16.
What shall we then say of Questions and Interrogations? does not any Oration
become much more intense and forcible by shaping and molding figures in this
form? Whether will you, I pray you tell me, meeting one another, Ask what news?
Can there be any greater then to bear that a man of Macedonia should overcome
the Athenians and rule in Greece? What is Philip dead? No indeed is he not, but
he is sick: but I pray you what will you gain by it? for should he dye never so
soon, you your selves would make another Philip. And again he says; Let Us sail
into Macedonia. But where shall we land asks another? War it self will find out
the weaknesses occasioned by the badnesse of Philips actions. Now if he had
simply propounded the business, it had been inferior and insufficient for its
end. Now the suddenness and swift prosecution of Interrogations and answering
of Objections, is not only a means of heightning the shape of an Oration, but
of rendering it more probable. For the intervention of some hindrances then
draw the Hearer more forcibly on, when it seems that they are not raised by
[the Orator] himself, but brought forth by occasion. For enquiries to a man's
self and sudden resolving of them seem to afford a just opportunity of
vehemency. For as if we be asked any question by others, we are obliged to
make a present return, and such satisfaction as may clear it out of the truth
it self; so the figure of Question and Interrogation makes things that were
premeditated to seem to be thought and said on the sudden, and so beguile and
seduce the Hearer. And therefore (if there can be any thing higher then this of
Herodotus) suppose thus.

How singly things fall and are in a manner powered forth, preventing in a
manner the very Hearer! And joining shields together (says Xenophon) they
pusht, they fought, they slew, they dyed. And that of Eurylochus, We searched
the woods (Sir) following your commands,
Where in the vales Circe's proud Palace stands.
These words thus dislocated yet speeded, show a great deal of grief yet both
prevailing and moderated. Yet this did the Poet by using by syndeta's [or words
not chaind by Anas.]

. 17.
Besides all this a conflux, of Schemes prevails not a little, that is when two
or three joined in an association, lend vigor, prevalescence, and ornament to
one another: such are those Asyndeta's against Midias twisted together with
Anaphora's [or Repetitions] and a Diatyposis [or description] He that beat
[him] did many outrages, which he that was beaten could scarce tell to another
by gesture, eyes, speech. Therefore least the speech might relapse into the
same things, (for in orderly speeches all things must be quiet and serene; in
disorderly, passionate, and proceeding from t^o^ible and commotion of soul) he
presently leaps into other Asyndeta's and Epanaphora's, when as insulting, when
as an enemy, sometimes with his fist, sometimes upon the face. Now the Orator
by all this endeavors as if he himself had beaten his Client, to work upon the
minds of the Judges, by a continual addition of new circumstances: then again
like a whirlwind making a new assault; These things move, these things enrage
men unaccustomed to put up injuries; Whoever relates this can hardly tell how
bainous a matter it is. So he still makes use of new Epanaphora's and
Asyndeta's, yet is always counterchanging them so that his very order seems to
be disorderly and his disorders are ranged into a certain kind of order.

. 18.
Now to consider of Conjunctions which [being contrary to Asyndeta's] the
followers of Isocrates affect, we must not pass over this; He that beat him
did many outrages, first by his gesture, secondly by his looks, and thirdly,
even with his voice. Now you must know that this urged in the latter manner
neither urges nor exasperates, but being slackened and disjointed by
conjunctions falls into an harmless smoothness and extinguishes it self: as
if you should ty two together that were running a race, you hinder the speed of
both; so passions manacled by conjunctions and other hindrances are smothered
and stifled for they deprive them of their liberty and force, which is such as
if it were shot from an Engine.

. 19.
Under this Idea must we place Hyperbata's, which is a troubled and disorderly
placing either of words or notions, and indeed the truest character of a
struggling and contending passion; as those who are really angered or afraid or
provoked, or possessed with jealousy, or any other passion, (for they are
innumerable, and it is only not impossible to reckon them all) falling from
their first thoughts straggle into others, and speak things clean different,
interrupting the series of the discourse with some new and improper things, yet
at last winding into what they had formerly proposed: And this through vexation
of mind, being drawn aside and tossed up and down by a giddy and unruly spirit,
disordering and entangling both their words and notions a thousand ways
contrary to the conduct and order of reason. So even the most excellent writers
have taken occasion to imitate this work of nature, and that by Hyperbata's:
for then does Art appear perfect, when she can scarce be distinguished from
nature it self; and again nature is ever happy, because she always carries a
hidden Art in her own bosom. Such as this was Dionysius Phocensis; Into this
pitch of extremity are our affairs fallen, O men of Ionia, that we must either
be free, or slaves, or in a manner fugitives. Now if you have a mind to avoid
these ensuing calamities, you must presently employ your selves in labor and
hardship, for so having overcome your enemies you will be free men. Now if he
had said this in order, he should have said; Men of Ionia, It Is now time for
you to undergo labor, for your affairs are in a pitch of extremity: But he
transposed Men. of Ionia to another place, and then mentions them when he had
hinted his fears, least in the beginning he might have called the hearers to
have learned their danger; and after this he wholly inverts the order of his
conception, for before he tells them that they were to undergo labor which
was his business to persuade them to, he first gives a reason why they ought
to undergo it; for, says he, our affairs are in a pitch of extremity; so that
he does not seem to speak things forethought, but arising from the occasion.
But besides this Thucydides is especially skillful in the severing, dividing,
and transposing things of one nature and in a manner inseparable. But
Demosthenes adventu^os not so far in this case as Thucydides, who most
frequently uses this figure of any other, conceiving it should seem both
vehemence, and (if you will) extemporary expression very much furthered by
these t^a^ections. Hence is it that he not seldom brings his Auditors into
very great danger of long Hyperbata's (by oftentimes forsaking the matter he
had in hand, and inducing foreign things one upon another, as though it were his
order for to hedge in things strange and inconsistent, ho casts the Auditour
into a fear least the whole Oration fall to pieces and so enforces him by his
attention, equally to rove and wander with himself;) yet unexpectedly after a
long time he handsomely returns to his first point and finishes it; with these
adventures and excursions, leaving the Hearer in much more astonishment. But I
forbear examples because they are so numerous [in him.]

. 19.
Now for those that are called Poly^^ota [or of many cases] collections,
interchanges, gradations, they are large supplies of courage and bravery, and
wholly, cooperate to ornament all kind of Height and Passion. But what can the
changes of Cases, Times, Persons, numbers, and gen^ers do? How do they
diversifie and work up Eloquence? I affirm as concerning numbers, that these
not only adorn that have a singular termination, yet after consideration are
found to have the power and nature of plurals; Presently (says he) a multitude
of people rushed toward the shore and dividing it self made a shout; But those
are more worthy observation when grand Plurals fall in together and triumph in
their own multitude and number, such as are these of Sophocles concerning
Oedipus; O marriages, O marriages,
From you I sprung, and being sprung returned
To whence you brought me, in me you have showed
Fathers and Brothers, children and affinity,
Brides, Wifes, and Mothers, and whatever else
Mankind knows horrid and detestable.
All these are but one name Oedipus, and on the other part Iocasta, so that the
number being spread into the plural multiplied his misfortunes. The like
dilatation is in this, The Hectors and Sarpedons issued out. And that of Plato
which we quoted in another place when we spoke of the Athenians; Neither the
Pelops's, nor the Cadmus's, nor the Aegyptus's, nor the Danaus's, nor any of
the barbarous Nations dwell with us, but only Grecians, we have not the least
commerce with Barbarism, etc. For naturally when words are so heal^'d and
amas^'^ together, we easily imagine the things they represent far more great
and magnificent. But this must not be done in all cases, but only in such where
the subject matter is capable of Aggrandization, plenty, excess, or passion,
or one of these or all of them; therefore to be always tinckling of Cymbals,
is miserably Sophistical.

. 21.
On the other side, those that are plurals yet summed up into singulars carry
in them a great deal of Height: After that all Peloponnesus was rent into
factions, Phrynichus acting a play of the taking of Miletus, the spectators
fell all a weeping. For the reduction of different things into a single number
carries with it a bigness and corpulency. Now the reason why either of them
conduces so much to ornament, I conceive to be this; for when there are many
singulars, to make them unexpectedly plurals, shows a mind settled and
composed; but if they be plurals, and many of them gathered into a right sound
by sudden changes of the things into their Contraries * * *

. 22.
Now [for Times] if you bring in things as now in action and present, you will
make your speech no narration, but a representation of a thing in being. A man,
says Xenophon, falling under the horse of Cyrus, is trod upon, he thrusts his
sword into the horses belly, Cyrus falls. This is very frequent with Thucydides.

. 23.
Of equal efficacy to this is the change of persons, whereby oftentimes the
hearer thinks himself engaged in the midst of danger; You Would say unwearied and
untamed they were,
They fought so fiercely and with such carreer.
And Aratus; In that month do not trust thy self to Sea. And the like
Herodotus; He going from the Elephantine City, [and after] Passing the Country,
and again taking ship, thou will be twelve days at Sea, and afterward arrive
at a great City called Meroe. See now friend, as if he had the guidance of thy
soul, he leads it through regions, making a report in a manner visible. Now all
these passages applied to the things themselves arrest and fasten the Auditour:
The like it is to make a show not to speak to all but one person: -- you, could
scarce divine
To whether Diomed did most incline.
For certainly a man is more moved and made more attentive and interested, when
he is awaked with such speeches as directed to him.

. 24.
VVithall it often happens that an Author making a narration in another person,
suddenly forsakes that and assumes his own; for this scheme is a grand
enforcement of passion: Hector withal his voice bid the Trojans dare
T'attempt the ships as spoils of bloody war.
Whom I at distance from their ships espy,
That man's death I resolve --
The narration (as well became him) the Poet assumed to himself, yet he before
all expectation, inserted that precipitous threat of the General. For alas!
the Speech had fainted had he said, Hector sai^ these things, or to this
purpose; when as now the swiftness of the translation of his speech prevents
him in all his haste. And therefore the opportunest use of the figure is in the
very nick of time when the writer cannot stay, but is enforced upon the instant
to change person for person; as this of Hecataeus: The Ambassador thinking
these propositions very harsh, commanded all the family of the Hearaclidae, to
depart, for it is not in my power to help you, for if I perish you perish;
indeed you may banish me and force me into another Country. But Demosthenes by
another way, and with greater variety and nimble turning represented this in
Aristogiton. None of you, says the [Demosthenes] will be found unprejudiced or
unoffended in those things wherein this detestable and shameless man has
violated the Laws; who (O thou wickedest of mankind) debarred of thy accustomed
petulancy, neither by grates nor by doors, which notwithstanding some may
open, -- changing you see in an imperfect sentence (through choler) and in a
manner by one word, his speech into two persons; who (O thou wickedest of men)
turning at one time his speech to Aristoglton, and seeming to fall off; yet by
this passion he much prevailed. Nor otherwise Penelope: Herald, did these proud
suitors send thee here.
To bid the Great Ulysses maids forbear
Their usual tasks, and feasts for them prepare?
Suitors and those that of acquaintance are
Must not expect to feast here any more.
You whose perpetual resorts devour
The wise Telemachus goods, did you not hear
Your fathers (you being children yet) declare
What brave Ulysses was --


. 25.
Now for Periphrases [or circumlocutions] I think none doubts but that they
very much elevate Speech. As in Music from discords there results the sweetest
harmony: so a periphrasis very often winds up it self in its own expatiation,
and most commonly tunes up it self into an agreeable sweetness, especially if
it has nothing in it blown up or inconsistent, but all proportionably tempered
together. I cannot cite a better witness then Plato in the very beginning of a
funeral Oration: And indeed we pay these Obsequies unto them as the last
duties they can receive now they are upon that journey which Fate has
preordain'd them, dismissed both by the public honors of the City, and
private offices of friends. Here he calls death a preordain'd journey, and the
burial by the public charge a pompous dismission by their own Country. Now by
this means he either gently swelled up his conceit, or else so disposed bare
words by this Periphrasis, that he wound them up into concord and melody. And
Xenophon: Believe that labor is the truest Patron of a happy life; and you are
now possessed of the bravest endowment and fittest for a Warrior, that above
all things you are delighted with praise: for in stead of saying you must
labor, he says, Believe it the truest Patron of a happy life, and so
enlarging himself in the rest, adds a huge notion unto his praises. And truly
that of Herodotus is imitable: The Goddess [Venus] punished those Scythians
that spoiled her Temple with the feminine disease.

. 26.
But above any of the rest a Periphrasis must choicely and opportunely be made
use of, and without immoderation, for so it grows remiss, faints, and
pitifully puffs up it self into light and empty obesitie. Hence is it that
Plato (who very excellently makes use of figures, though sometimes
unseasonably) has incurred ^ens^re and laughter for saying thus in his book of
Laws: They must neither suffer silver riches, nor golden riches to take place
in the City and dwell there. For, say they, if he had forbid the keeping of
cattle, he must at that rate have called it Oxe-wealth, or Sheep-wealth. And
now (my dearest Terentianus) I think we have sufficiently insisted upon those
figures which promote Height, and declared their use, how all of them inspire
an oration with life and vehemence; for Passion partakes so much of Height, as
Height of Delectation.

. 27.
Now since in an Oration both the concepcion and phrase receive spirit and
luster from one another, let us bestow our consideration about that part of
phrase, if there be any thing remaining to be said in it. That the election
therefore of big and magnificent words strangely strokes and wins the Hearers
and supplies all Orators and other Writers aiming at Height, not only with
Majesty, but beauty, clearness, weight, strength, prevalescence, and what ever
else can yield any help thereunto, animating and polishing speeches like rare
Statues, and striking a Morbidezza and sprightlinesse into them, inspiring the
subject with a vocal kind of soul, I conceive it unnecessary to demonstrate to
a man of understanding. For indeed selected and flourishing words are
reflections, and (as a man may say) transparences of the mind: yet is not the
state and bigness in them always required, for to enunciate slight and
creeping matters in terms grave and lofty, is a business no more congruous,
then to impose an high tragical person upon an Infant: yet in Poetry

Yet rich and plentiful. And that of Anacreon, The Threician [harp] shall no
more take up my thoughts. The like is that of Theopompus, very laudable, for
the Analogy of it seems to me very significant, although Cecilius, I know not
for what reason, blames it; Philip, says he, knows now to swallow and put up
any thing. For a natural expression is many times more prevalent then
ornament, as is easily observed out of the common course of life; for things we
are accustomed to, soonest gain our belief, and therefore to a man that can
patiently sit down under things unhandsome and ill-favored, nay be glad of
them so they may bring him in some profit, it is most properly said, He can
swallow and put up any thing. And I pray you what think you of that of
Herodotus, saying, Cleomenes being mad cut his flesh with his sword into small
bits, till he was sliced and minced to death, Pythes fought so long upon the
deck that he was at length chopped all to pieces? These seem to rule upon a plain
simple man, though the sense of them is nothing such.

28.
Now for many metaphors [put together] Cecilius seems to be of their opinion
who will not allow above two or three at the most to any one sentence. But we
must make Demosthenes our rule and law in this matter. Then therefore are they
fitly used, when passions rush in like a Torrent, and forcibly drive them along
in great numbers. Detestable men (says he) Flatterers, Furies, who have maimed
their Country, drinking and guzzling up her liberty, first to Philip, now to
Alexander, measuring [her] happiness by their bellies and vices, and
overturning liberty and freedom from any Master, which were formerly the very
essence and bounds of the Grecian Felicity. Here does the mind of the Orator
fall in upon those a band of Tropes. Therefore Aristotle and Theophrastus
prescribe us some allayes for the boldness of such Translations; as, As I may
say, or, as it were, and, if I may speak it in such a manner, or, if a thing so
daring may be spoken: for such acknowledgments lessen the appearance of
Boldness. For my part, I also willingly admit them, yet so as I believe the
number and pride of Metaphors, (as I said) the seasonable enamel of schemes,
concitated passions, and Generositie to be the strongest Antidotes of Height.
For by their force and Impetus, they bear down and chase all other things
before them, and make the greatest ^arings of speech seem merely necessary, not
permitting the Reader to weigh their number and use, as being equally entranced
with the Speaker. But in all tractations of places and descriptions, there is
nothing so significant as numerous and continued Tropes; By which means the
Anatomy of an humane Tabernacle is pompously described by Xenophon, and much
more divinely painted by Plato. The head of a man he called a Cittadell; and
that the neck was an Isthmus raised in the midst between it and the breast;
That the muscles were placed there as hinges for it to turn about upon; That
pleasure was a bait of evil to mankind; the Tongue the tryer of Taste; so [the
heart] the spring and maker of the veins, and fountain of Blood which swiftly
glides through all the members, which is guarded in the Quarters of the
spear-men; so the passages of the pores he calls streights: Now for the
palpitation of the heart in great fears and disturbances of anger, The Gods
(say they) preparing a remedy, joined unto it the lungs, which consist of a
soft and bloudlesse substance, having certain pipes and passages, and easy
conveyances, least when Choler boils too much in it, it be corrupted into
obedience. Thus did he call the house [or seat] of Desire a Nursery; that of
wrath an Andreson, [or place of the house wherein men only converse] the spleen
the Cook house of the entralls, by whose excrements it being once filled it
swells up with a great deal of fulsome matter: Yet all these are covered over
with flesh both as a defense and assistance from cold and heat, and such as
like wool it gently yields and obeys any impressions made upon it: Blood (he
called) the supplyer of flesh; the easy currents of the veins for the better
disposing of nourishment disperse themselves like channels artificially cut in
a garden for to moisten it, gushing through their little [valunlaes or]
openings as through a pipe. And when death approaches, he says, the faculties
of the soul are loosened like the ropes of a ship [setting sail] and so she is
set free. There are many other like to these in the same place, but these we
have instanced are enough to manifest of what brave use and how conducing to
Height are exchanges of words and metaphors, and how much all places both
passionate and expository may be beholding to them. And yet we conceive, should
we be silent, it is evident, that the entertainment of figures as all other
gallantries helps mainly to bring on somewhat extraordinary, and too Giantly in
speech. And in this Plato himself has incurred no little censure, as one led
away out of a Phrenzie of Eloquence into rough and savage Metaphors and ranting
Allegories: It Is not easily apprehended (quoth he) that a City must be tempered
as you mingle a glass of wine: for the wine first poured in flies and mantles,
but when once punished and weakened by the other sober god, tempers it self
with it and becomes good and wholesome drink. To call water a sober god, say
they and mingling punishment, were proper only for a Poet, for no sober man
would ever affect such pitious decadences. Nay and from this place Cecilius in
his discourses upon Lysias, takes the boldness to pronounce Lysias absolutely
a better [Oratour] then Plato, biased it appears by two inconsiderate
passions; as a lover of Lysias even more then himself, and more to all purposes
hating Plato then he loved Lysias. But as it may be all this proceeded from his
prejudice and partiality, so are not his considerations, to be received as
clear and indubitable; for he makes [Lysias] a consummate and faultlesse
Orator, and cites many lapses in Plato, but it is so far from being true
that it seems not probable. But I pray let us once find some perfect and
blameless Writer.

. 29.
But it will be worth our pains first to enquire in the General, whether in
Poems and Orations an irregular and luxuriant greatness be sometimes better
then a staid proportionate and steady regulation: And withal whether many
virtues or the greater ought justly to obtain the primacy in speech, For these
questions are very proper to the disquisition of Height, and therefore cannot
but require our determination. Now I observe that excesses of greatness are
naturally the least pure, but what is nicely exact is in danger of littleness.
Thus in sublimities as in vast estates, there must be somewhat to contemn and
throw away. And must not this also be necessarily found, that men whose
understandings are of a little making, never adventuring themselves in attempts
of height, seldom or never fall, but walk on sure ground? yet for all this it
is not to be concealed, that naturally all humane things are ever rather
adjudg'd by the worse, and the memory of the bad stands fixed and permanent, but
that of the good glides away and vanishes. Now should I instance some; no small
faults both of Homer and other Grandees, though for my part as I am as little
pleased with their failings [as any man] so would I rather call them voluntary
[errours] then offenses, or [properly] failings of carelessness, heedlesly
overseen by chance in several places by a noble pride of nature: yet
nevertheless I think the greatest virtues, although not equally regnant in the
whole piece, ought to carry the suffrage for precedence, were it for no other
cause then their height and greatness. Now though Apollonius that writ the
Argonauticks has never offended, and Theocritus in Pastoralls (excepting some
what he has of foreign) is most fortunate; pray whether would you choose rather
to be Homer or Apollonius? and whether, is Eratosthenes for his Erigone, (a
Poem absolutely unblameable) to be accounted a greater Poet then Archilechus,
that says many things in confusion, yet proceeding from the motion and
dictates of some assisting spirit, which so break out that they cannot be
digested into order? And in Lyricks, whether would you be Bacchylides or
Pindar? and in Tragoedy, Ion, or Chius, or (O difference!) Sophocles? these
have been never found to fail as perpetually writing smooth and clear. But
Pindar and Sophocles as they burn up all before them, so flaming oftentimes
above the measure of their fuel they extinguish and miserably decay. Yet
would any judicious man putting all these works of Ion into the scales with
that single Play of Dedipus [of Sophocles] think them of equal value to it?

. 30.
Besides if we will judge these excellencies rather by their number then weight
or realty, it will follow that Hyperides must be accounted a better Orator
then Demosthenes, for he sounds fuller and higher, has a many things
commendable, seeming a Master in what he undertakes, like an Olympic Gamester,
who is generally worsted by the best Gamesters, but carried it solely among the
mean ones. Now Hyperides is a great Emulatour of Demosthenes in all wherein he
is exequisite (except it be his composition) and to this has added all the
virtues and graces of Lysias, yea and he is smooth and sapple when there is
occasion, and carries not all on in an equal Tone, as does Demosthenes.
Besides he guilds and sweetens his Ethics very pleasantly, his Urbanities are
innumerable, his reprehensions most civil, his ingenuity in wrestling with
Allegories and retorting of jests not sordid or disigenuous (like those of the
Atticans,) but tart and pressing: How dexterously removes he a crimination, and
how facetiously? what handsome and sure stabs he gives? his elegancie and
polishure in all these to speak truth is inimitable: withal he is much
inclined to commiseration, and not seldom wanders with fabulous narrations,
through a lubricity of spirit, being very prone and apt to digress; as for
example, when he flew out into those politic things concerning Latona, he made
a funeral speech so full of amplification, that I know not whether any other
[could.] But Demosthenes meddles little with manners or passion, seldom
dilates himself, is nothing fluid or large, and in a word for the most part is
guitlesse of those matters which we now mentioned in the former. And therefore
when he is enforced to be cheerful and pleasant that he may provoke laughter,
he is rather laug'd at then raises it: and when he endeavors to approach with
somewhat winning and complaisant, he is furthest from it. But yet since I
conceive that the handsome things of the other are very little (as coming from
a man sober in heart) and flat, and such as leave the Reader unmoved; (for what
man reading Hyperides would be struck into a passion?) whilst the other taking
the accents of Height it self from the highest pitch of advanced Nature, and of
skill perfected to the most exquisite extremity, breaths out living passions,
substantial plenty, skill, swiftness, and thereby a lordly, and, which is
above all the rest, an unacessible fierceness, drawing all these divine
endowments, (for I do not think it lawful to call them humane) unto himself.
And therefore these excellencies which he bids at he solely Masters, and
without a Rival; and in stead of those which he has not, thunder-strikes and
in a manner enlightens the Orators of all ages, that a man may sooner open his
eyes to a flash of lightning then look fixtly upon his motions and wonderful
agitations.

. 31.
Now in Plato (as I have said) there is another difference; for Lysias is not
only inferior to him in the greatness, but in the number of his virtues, and
so much the rather exceeds him in many more faults, then comes short of him in
virtues. What therefore saw these godlike men, and endeavourrers of the
sublimest writing, that they seem to contemn and slight this exactness in all?
Among the rest this; that nature making us no humble or inferior creatures,
but framing man into bravery, and bringing him into life and view of the world
as a full and large Theater, to be spectator of all that should be acted
therein, and an emulous contender; engrafted at the same time in his soul an
indeleble desire of greatness and somewhat to us divine. Therefore to the
consideration and attempt of his own advancement the whole world suffices not,
but his thoughts very often mount further then the surface that comprehends it.
And if a man look about and examine what in life is excellent, great, and
worthy above the rest, he will soon understand for what end we enjoy it. Hence
is it that even out of common notion, we admire not little pure or useful
streams, but the Rhine, Nile, or the Danow, and above, these the Ocean. Neither
do we the most look at our ordinary fire, although we see it daily burn shine
and recruited, but we rather look up and adore those celestial flames, though
to us often darkened. Nor do we think any thing more wonderful then the Pits
and vortices of the Aetna, whose eructations throw whole stones from its
depths, and huge fragments, nay poures out rivers of no other species, which is
fire. So that from all this we may well draw this result that what is
profitable and necessary for Mankind is easily attainable, but what is
admirable is beyond his expectation or attempt.

. 32.
In all the braveries therefore of speech to which Height concurs not without use
or profit, we must here note that such men though they could not arrive to a
pitch above failing, yet they have put themselves in a condition above Death or
oblivion: And as the other things do but show were men, so their greatness
has set them in a condition next to Immortality; and indeed their fallibility
is not so much blamed, as what is laudable admired. But what need I add any
more? Any of those Heroes are able to expiate all their offenses with one
glorius and fiery passage: and that which is of greatest consideration, if a
man should pick out all the errors of Homer, Demonsthenes, or Plato, or any
other of those renowned men, and put them all together, they would be found not
the thousand part of those exquisite things scattered up and down in their
immortal papers; and therefore all Ages, and the men of those Ages could not
be so infatuated with envy, as not with a joint consent to raise up tropheys to
them, which to this day remain fair and undemolish'd, and are like ever so to
do Whilst springs shall glide, and woods their leaves renew. You will
therefore say that a writer is an irregular Coloss^^, no better then the
Doryphorus of Polycletlo^^^: but among other things it may be answered, That in
Artificials we require exactness, in Naturals, greatness; now nature made a
man rational, and in statues we expect a thing like a man; but in Speech, some
what I know not how exceeding (as I have said) Man: yet ought we (for now we
return to that Monition we began with in this Book) since infallibility is for
the most part the effect of Art, and sublimities are various and different,
call in Art always to the assistance of Nature for their better perfection, for
by their confederacy all must he consummated. And thus much was necessary for
us to resolve upon the Questions we formerly proposed, every man make election
what he will follow.

. 33.
Of near kin to Metaphors are Parables and Descriptions, [or Pictures]
differing only in this

And such as these, if you brought your brains placed in your head and not in
your heels. Therefore it will be necessary we know how far we may proceed in
any thing, for to adventure beyond the set limits, destroys the hyperbole, and
slackens and breaks the things so stretched, nay and sometimes they are
perverted into utter contrarieties. And therefore Isocrates I know not how
played the very child in his sedulous affectation of speaking all his things
largely and copiously. Now the end of his Panegyric is, to show how far the
good turns of the Athenians to the other Grecians exceeded those of Sparta; but
he in the very beginning brings in this; Since that Orations have such a
natural property, as they can devance and lessen great things, and exalt and
heighten little, and repeat matters of Antiquity as done yesterday, and
discourse of Novelties as things of many ages standing. But I pray (may some
say) Isocrates, are you about to make such a counterchange of the affairs of
Lacedemon and Athens? Now this commendation of Orations did little less then
give his hearers fair warning and premonition to be incredulous. And therefore
the best Hyperboles are those, (as we said before of Schemes) when they are so
disposed that they are not known to be Hyperboles: and then is it, when in the
height of perturbation they fall in with the circumstance it self, as was
handsomely done by Thucydides [writing] of those that were slain in Sicily; The
Siracusians (says he) coming down did most execution upon those that were in
the River, so that the water was in an instant corrupted, and yet
nevertheless, for all it was bloody and dirty, they drank of it, nay some
fought about it. Now the transport of passion and the circumstance make it
probable that they might drink mudde and blood, and quarrel about it. Like to
this is that of Herodotus of those [that fought] at Thermopylae; In this place
while they defended themselves with such swords as they had left, the
Barbarians encompassed then, and falling upon them both with hands and mouths
overthrew them. You would say it is strange they should fall upon armed men with
their mouths, and that it is not usual [for a number] to be overthrown with
darts, and yet this is as credible [as the other.] But we must not take
occasion to bring things in order to bring in Hyperboles, but we must make
Hyperboles arise from the things: and indeed (to prosecute my purpose) papious
and circumstances coming near the thing in hand, are great remedies and
qualifiers of Height; hence is it that many comic passages though stretched
unto impossibility seem to be probable because they are ridiculous; [as that]
He had a piece of groundless then a Laconie Epistle; for laughter is a passion
that consists of pleasure. Now Hyperboles are as well admitted for diminution
as augmentation, for both extremes correspond and answer one another, and
indeed elevation is nothing but the plucking up of depression.

. 34.
We are now arrived at the fifth branch, which we said in the beginning was to
glorify speech, and that is (my noble friend) the disposure and Architecture
which we have already sufficiently discoursed of in two Treatises. Yet for so
much as I did then insert to this purpose, I thought it but necessary to
transcribe hither: as, that harmonious fabric of speech is not only very
fortunate in persuations, and naturally full of allurement and delight, but
also a most admirable promotion and engine of liberty and passion. For a Pipe
makes not only an impression upon the hearers, but unsettles them and makes
them rove about like mad men, and if you choose any particular tune compells
them to dance after it, and by several gestures to answer and imitate it, or
any other when it is changed: And can it be denied that the several Tunes of a
Lute (though they signify nothing in themselves) varied and changed by
several touches and stops into a sweet concord, do not wonderfully charm and
bewitch the spirit? But these airs and imitations are forced and bastardly, not
real and genuine movers of the mind of man. Shall we not therefore think that.
Composition being a Music resulting from words which are natural to men,
gains admission as well in the soul as at the ear; when it musters up numerous
Idea's of words, things, luster, proportion, and what ever else is innate or
congeniall with us, and by mixing and moulding their sounds disperses the
passion of the Speaker, and infects all near him, and by all this adding
magnificence to the structure of words, and raising them up to glory and
majesty, and whatever it comprehends within it self or may touch upon our
spirits, or any way master our understandings? But it would but seem madness
to doubt any longer of things so universally acknowledged, for there needs no
other proof but experience. It Is a very rich and indeed extraordinary thought
that of Demosthenes after the decree; This very Vote made all the danger that
oung over the City to vanish like a cloud. Yet was the music and utterance of
it not at all inferior to the conceit, for it all runs upon Dactyls, which are
the most heroic and stately measure, and therefore are they chosen for that
verse, [the heroick] which is the gallantest and most princely of all the rest.
Now if you should transpose any thing here out of its place according to
pleasure, as (...), or but cut off one syllable (...), you would find how much
the time sets off Height; for that (...) knit to the former long foot is of
four syllables, but being mangled into (...) it comes lame and the greatness
is lost, but if again you stretch it out to (...) it runs otherwise and becomes
the same it was formerly, for by the length and stop of the last particle the
breach closes up, and it runs free and smoothly.

. 35.
Besides that this apt disposure of parts does greaten speech, as the like in
membe^s does a body: for if one be once cut off and severed from another there
is nothing comely, but all remaining together make up an handsome system; so
generous things being scattered and parceli'd one from another can never close
into any Height, but brought into a coalition and bound up into harmony, they
circulate and become sonorous; so that the true sounds and tones of Periods,
may be compared to a great feast made up of many dishes. And indeed a many both
Poets and other Writers, though they had none of the highest natures, and use
mostly but low, common, trivial and plain words, yet by the contexture and
fabric of them have arrived at pride and stately interstices, and made show of
nothing less then their meannesse: as for example (among many others)
Philistus in some things, Aristophanes in many, Euripides as we have
sufficiently manifested. Thus Hercules [in Euripides] when he had slain his
children;

I Am full of evils, there is no place for more. This is but popularly spoken,
yet is made Tragical by its order and figuration. Now if you will but
discompose it a little, you will find that this proceeds rather from the
modelling of the words, then the notion they comprehend. And of Dirce being
hurried about by a Bull, -- Where e're
He turned about, he turned about withal
The Woman, Stones, and Oaks, throwing them round.
The speech is lofty, but is made more weighty in regard the tone is not made
too swift and precipitate, but has its stays and rests at every name, and
pauses of time, whereby it established it self into just bigness.

. 36.
Nothing at all so enervates greatness, as numbers rent and shattered in the
pronunciation; as the Pyrrichii, Trochaei, Dichoraei, which can only be
accommodated to a nimble dance; for all such [things] as are bundled into
numbers, presently become pretty, thin, and dis-passionate, flowing silently
and untroubledly by reason of their too much smoothness, and which is worst of
all in them they withdraw the hearer from what they treat of, and entertain him
only with their noise. So these Rhythmicall and footed passages feed not the
attention of the hearers with their matter, but their sound, and they
foreseeing their periods join with them in the close, and as in a consort
anticipate the conclusion. So [we may say of] these small things triflingly
flatted and smoothed, and sliced into particles, which seemed to have their
fractures naild up, and botch'd into a continuity.

. 37.
That which also diminishes Grandeur is too much concisenesse of phrase, for if
it be too Laconic it dismembers it: but this must not be understood of such as
are limited to a just narrowness, but such as from which somewhat is lopped,
for such maims arrest the understanding; compendiousnesse furthers it, but
lifelesse and tedious prating is to be held excrement and excrescency.

. 38.
VVithall the use of little words is a great shame and blemish, and therefore
Herodotus excellently describes Winter as to his notions, though his subject is
not so worthy of it; as in this, (...), the Sea frothing, (...) is very
eloquent by reason of the harshnesse of the sound; (...) (says he) (...) this
(...) is unhandsome because of his commonnesse, and (...) is unsuitable to such
a passion. So Theopompus endeavoring magnificently to describe the expedition
of the Persians into Egypt, stabbed his narration by a few little words; What
City, or what Nation (says he) in all Asia sent not their Ambassadors to the
King? what was it that grows upon the earth, and could either be made curious
or precious by Art, which was not brought and presented to him? How many rich
Carpets and Robes? some purple, some part colored, some white, Golden tents
fitted with all kind of utensils, many under-garments, and embroidered beds,
silver and gold already coined, platters and goblets, some whereof you might
see studded with gemmes, others wrought with exquisite skill and vast charge.
Add to this innumerable myriads of Arms, some of the Greek, some of the
Barbary fashion, besides Beasts for carrying of Baggage above all account, and
besides others for sacrifices, a number of bushels of seasoning for them, many
sacks and packs of Books, and what ever else could be necessary, so many Tubs
of all kind of Sacrifices salted and prepared, pil'd into such heaps, that
viewing them afar off you would have supposed them Hills and Mountains new
risen up. Here when he should have pursued the highest things, he falls upon
the lowest, whereas to have gained his point, he should have done the contrary;
and in this grand news of such a preparation, mentioning chests of seasonings
and sacks, he makes the business little better then the march of a Sutlery;
for it is no other, if in the same memorial, wherein he mentions golden and
studded cups, stamped money, golden tents, he also places chests and sacks,
which certainly were a very unfitting and unbecoming sight; so the words
expressing them must needs be ugly scars as unhappily placed there. He might as
well to make a full narration, have told what Mountains they were that were
conjectured to rise, and have made the Camels discourse one with another what
kind of preparation the other was, or a multitude of Beasts carrying all that
might serve the luxury of the Palate and Table, or have particularized the
heaps of all those provisions, and told whether they served rather for
necessary food or wantonness of Banquet, or else in this manner he might have
mentioned all things he thought requisite either for Table or Banquet. For in
high matters there mast be no tumbling into other base and sordid, unless
there be an absolute and unavoidable necessity: For words ought to carry a
stamp worthy of the things they represent, and in this to imitate nature in the
making of man, who neither placed our privy parts nor our excrements in view,
but as well became her, hid them, and, as Xenophon says, turned their
channels and passages another way, least there should be any thing to impair
the comeliness of the whole. But I will no longer insist upon these causes of
littleness, for having once shown what makes speech generous and sublime, it
will follow that the contrary for the most part humbles and deforms it.

. 39.
It only remains, and for your better information (dearest friend) I will go
through with it, to satisfy a question which a certain Philosopher sometimes
asked; It Is a great wonder (said he) whence it should come that in our age as
well as in many others, large capacities, deep judgments, clear and searching
heads, but especially vigorous and fiery wits, made for the enriching of
Eloquence, are very seldom or not at all found, such a general death there is
of all men constellated for the sciences: Shall we I beseech you believe that
which has been in many men's mouths, that a Democracie is the best Nurse of
high Spirits, and under it so many great Orators have in a manner not only
flourished, but even decayed with it? For just liberty feeds and nourishes the
thoughts with great notions, and draws them forward, and increases their
emulations and the strong desires they have to obtain the priority of honor,
and that by the rewards proposed to them in such Republics: the faculties of
their minds and all their skills are whetted, and in a manner kindled into a
flame, which commonly shines freely and brightly as the things they deal with.
But we of this age, said he, seem to be taught from children to endure
slavery, being swathed as it were in these customs and persuasions even from
our tenderest nails, so that we cannot possibly taste of that rich and full
fountain of Eloquence, I mean, says he, Liberty. So that in the end we become
at best but excellent flatterers, and from hence, says he, these kinds of
habits follow us to our own homes; and it is impossible for a servile man to be
a true Orator, for presently his Liberty and his boldness decays and
consumes, and being as it were by custom used to buffeting we dare never
speak out but only mutter. We lose one half of our virtue (says Homer) in
one day of our servitude. And as (if it be true which I have heard reported)
they say the cages in which Pigmies commonly called dwarfes are nourished not
only hinder the increase and growth of them, but even streighten them by a
muzzle [or band] put about their mouths: So may we say that any slavery be it
never so just, may truly be called a cage of the soul and a common Goal of it.
But my good friend, said he, I believe that it is proper to man to blame and
repine at the present time, but look if * * * * *

It Is peace that corrupts the greatest wits in the world, and so much the
rather that this War which is endless puts a stop upon our inclinations: And
besides we may add to this the perturbations that besiege the present way of
living, and oftentimes toss it and disorder it; For Covetousness as a
general fever will not suffer our thirst to be quenched, and our pleasures
lead us captive, or, to say better, swallow up both our manners and designs.
Now Covetousness lessens a man the most of any thing, and pleasure renders him
the most ungenerous: nor upon the deepest resuerie can I find or opinion that
it can possibly be, that those who can value such unmeasurable wealth, or to
speak truer, adore it, can lay aside those base humors that infect the mind
at the same time with it. Now to such excessive and unbridled wealth, there
necessarily follows like a shadow at the heels prodigality and other vices,
she opening the Gates and entrances of Cities, possessing her self of them and
seating there. Now when these have had any long entertainment in the life of
man, they build nests there (as the wise men have said) and presently
impregnate; and do but you consider what they must bring forth, marry
haughtiness and luxury, which are not their bastard-children but legitimate.
Now if any cherish these grandchildren of wealth, they breed up incontroulable
Tyrants over their souls, contumely, and shamelessenesse: for these things must
necessarily follow, and it is impossible men should look up to the pinnacles of
honor, or say any thing more then ordinary. Thus are these corruptions of life
perfected by degrees in a circle, and the excellencies of the soul decay,
languish and grow drowsy, since they perceive men cherishing only their
passible and mortal parts, and slumbring in irrationality, so that they
neglect the pursuit of the virtues. For it is impossible in a Judgment seat
that any man bribed or prepossessed should be a good judge of what were just or
unjust, for whoever takes a bribe, must needs think that which is domestic to
him the best and honestest. Now since bribes and false judgments follow us all
our lives, and contrivances and expectances of [others] deaths, and falsifying
of Testaments, and truckings for gain out of any thing whatever, every man
selling into slavery his own mind; can we think in such a pestilent
perversion to expect any free and right judge of such things, as being great
and generous would divert him from his former designs, and not gratify him
with the flattery of his present oberrations? Now is it not better for us that
are men of this kidney to have a Ruler set over us then to be left to our
freedom, since that our Covetousness let wholly loose (like prisoners set out
of prison into the voysinage) would run headlong into such mischiefs as may set
all the world on fire? Then (said he) the laziness of our modern wits
proceeded also from profusion, to which, except a few, we are all inclined,
not otherwise laboring then men newly recovered out of sickness, unless it
be for praise or pleasure, but out of no zeal or to any profit worthy of
praise. But it would be better perhaps to dismiss this point and fall upon
that which must next follow, and that is the passions, which we have promised
to treat of in another discourse, in which both other speech as well as Height
will I suppose have a share.

THE END.

