LOOK ABOUT YOU: OR, A Groatsworth of good Council for a Penny: BEING Variety of
Councels, Cautions, Caveats, and Directions: Which, as they are necessary for
Young Men; so they are not to be rejected by Old-men.
He that refuses now to buy good Council at a cheap rate,
Shall not fail to purchase Repentance deer either soon or late.

V^ VULNERE VERITAS

depiction of Truth

FIrst, Make not an envious man a drunkard, a woman, nor a man in subjection to
a woman of thy council: for it is impossible for them to keep close thy secrets.

2 Be not over-prodigal in gifts, or chargable courtesies, for thanks wax old
^o soon as ever gifts are in possession.

3 Begin no great Enterprise before thou know how to accomplish it.

4 Mock no man in his misery, but rather by him take heed how to avoid the like
misfortune.

5 Labor not to inform him that is without Reason, for so shall thou not only
lose thy labor, but also make him thine enemy.

6 Desire not that of another, that thou thy self being asked would deny, for
therein it is ridiculous.

7 Attempt not two things at one time, but accomplish one first, so shall not
the one hinder the other.

8 Choose rarher to live solitary, for it is better to live alone in the corner
of an house top, then in a spacious Palace with a brawling and contentious
woman.

9 Let not thy liberality exceed thine ability, nor thy hand go beyond thy
purse.

10 Bewars of pride in prosperity, for it will make thee impatient in adversity

11 Speak no more to a stranger in private, then thou would have publicly
known.

12 If thou doubt in any thing, ask council of wise men, and be not angry if
they reprove thee.

13 Do to all men as thou would be done unto.

14 Boast not of thy good deeds, lest also the bad be laid to thy charge:
however do good to all men, although in doing good to an ill disposed person it
happen to thee as to those that feed other men's Dogs, which bark at their
feeder as well as at any other stranger.

15 If thou give ought give it at the first asking: for that is not freely
given which is craved with importunity.

16 When thou give a gift to thy friend, let it be of the best: yet be not
like a Boulter, that in bolting the meal casts out the fine flower, and
retains only the bran.

17 Be courteous, and show a good countenance to all: yet enter not into
familiarity with any, but only such whose Conversations are honest, and whose
truth by trial is made trusty.

18 Instruct Youth in good and commendable qualities: for as a Vessel savoureth
always of the same liquor wherewith it was first seasoned, so the mind does
retain those qualities in age in which it was trained up in youth.

19 Be not over profuse either in gifts or expenses: for it is better to be
envied for thy provident sparing, then pitied for thy prodigal spending.

20 Beware of Envy, the most ancient pride the most great: and women the most
dangerous and excess the most foul evil,

21 Women in their Wills are peremptory, and in their answers sharp: yet like
Faulcons they will stoop to a gaudy lure, and as they are apt to weep, so are
rhey to deceive: for thou know whether her tears be of sorrow, or of
dissimulation, for she can shed both: and indeed women's sorrows are either too
extreme, not to be relieved; or else picled up with dissimulation, not to be
believed: it is natural for a woman to despise the thing that is offered her,
and yet it is death to be denied the thing she demands. Women's hearts are said
to be full of holes, apt to receive, but not to retain: so that if love creeps
in at one hole, it steps out at 3 or 4. The Closets of women's thoughts are ever
open, and the depth of their hearts has a string that stretches to their
tongues. Women are like to the pictures of Fortune standing upon a Globe winged
with the feathers of fickleness: and as for little goodness they look for great
praise; so for much evil they look for no chastisement: and as there ir no
Creature that more desires honor, so there is no Creature that worse keeps it
then a woman. And finally, he that can abide a cursed wife and her conditions,
need not care what company he keeps.

22 Nevertheless, if thou be'st wed to a curse wife, refrain both thy tongue
and hands, and make a Virtue of Necessity, placing that with patience thou
can not remove with ease: and consider, that it is thou that defervest to be
beaten either for making choice of at all, or at best for making thy choice no
better.

23 Wine and strong Beer are crafty Wrestlers, and overthrows the Wit,
weakneth the feet, and overcomes the vital Spirits: and therefore it may be
truly said, that Drunkenness does metamorphise a man into a beast, a strong man
into a weak, and a wise man into a fool: A drunken man like an old man is twice
a child. Drunkenness is a Monster with many heads; as abominable discourse,
fornication, wrath, murder, swearing, cursing: and Wine is said to have
destroyed more men then the Sea has drowned: and to say no more, Drunkenness
is a voluntary Madness.

24 Pride eats Gold, and drinks blood, and climeth so high by other men's
heads, that it often breaks its own neck: it chances often to proud men, that
in their greatest jollity, and when they think their Honor to be spun and
weaved, that then the Web of their lives in a moment are cut and broken. Pride
causes that Work to become wicked, which in it self would be good: so that
humble submission is beter then proud boasting of our deeds, which often cause
a proud man to fall into more detestable vices then before. A proud heart in a
poor man, is like a great fire in a small Cottage, which not only warmeth the
house, but burns all that is in it. Advance one of low estate to high degree,
and none alive aan reap more pride then he: and when ambition and pride is in
the saddle, then mischief and shame is on the Crupper.

25 Envy is the Daughter of Pride, the Author of Murder and Revenge, the
beginner of secret Seditions, and ever waits at Virtues Elbow. Envy is the
slime and impostume of the soul, a perpetual torment to him in whom it abides,
as well as to virtuous persons, and actions; a venom, a poison, or
quicksilver, which consumes the flesh, and dries the very marrow of the
bones. An envious man waxes lean at the fatness of his Neighbor, and ever
accounts his Neighbors losses his gains, and his Neighbors gains his losses.
Envy is said of the Poets to dwell in a dark Cave, being pale and lean, looking
a^quint, abounding with gall, her teeth black, never rejoicing but at other
men's harms ever unquiet and always careful of doing mischief. And in this,
one only point may be distinguished from Hatred: the one is secret: the other
open: And in this alone is the envious man's meat above others (to him) he
continually gnaweth upon his own heart.

GEntle Reader, Be pleased to accept of this as an Introduction to some other
things to follow, wherein he that collected these Sentences, intends variety of
Councels, Caveats, Cautions, and Directions, which as they be hurtful to none,
so if they may be useful to any, he shall think his time and pains well
bestowed.

LONDON: Printed for G. HORTON, 1654.


