A LONG-VVINDED LAY-LECTURE.

Wherein the Licentiousness of this Lewd and Lying Age, in perverting the
Sacred Tents of Scripture, and the Divine Dictates of the Fathers, to the
scandal of the Church, and Ruin of our Nation, is Poetically presented,

To the view of all such as Fear God and the King, and meddle not with those
that are given to change.

By a Lover of (and Sufferer for) the TRVTH.

Printed in the year 1647.

A Long-winded Lay-LECTVRE.
COme Christian Brethren, now the time is fit,
Round about our ^^ale fire let us friendly sit,
And while ^ou listen close (as we are cut,)
I will lay open (whilst the door is shut)
Unto you all, (in brief) a sum of what
No man can justly sum; so intricate
Is our (Meandrian) faith, t'hath no beginning,
Nor has it other end, but the end of sinning;
How? no beginning, said I, then our profit
Is now to be the Prima P^reus of it:
And sure enough, now it beginning has,
Time will in the end put end unto our faith;
Prick up your ears my brethren, elevate
Your eyes dear sisters whilst I do relate
The comforts which peculiar are to us,
Who (by the Spirit) are sanctified thus,
To be the Lords elected, if I said,
The Lords anointed, I'^ not be afraid,
Of contradiction: (...)(for ^s) says,
You are a Kingly Priest ^oo^: though his faith
We else reject, in this ^ee'll take his word,
And all be Kings and Priests unto the Lord.
I, let us be free, let neither Priest nor King
Control nor govern us in any thing.
But stay, me thinks Paul seems to mistake,
Who bids us to oby for conscience sake,
And therefore (silly man) he and the rest
Obeyed the Tyrant Nero, who oppressed
The Brethren and did take their lives away
Tush, they deserve death that will thus obey*
Obey to Death, do so who li^^s for us,
The spirit of freedom does not reach us thus.
So Solomon ('cause he would under bring
His people) says, fear God, honor the King
Yet Solomon in this I Will send to school,
For all his wisdom he was but a fool
In Christian Liberty there is no such thing,
We can fear God, yet disobey the King
Yet (in one sense) he is not to blame that said it,
He was a King himself, 'twas for his credit:
So David spared Saul (as Gods anointed)
Because the Kingdom was for him appointed.
But let not us (my brethren) be such Calves,
To take their words spoke in their own behalves,
For we are free (in body and in soul)
Our tongues are ours, what Lord shall us con^^oule?
Yet one objection is, that Christ does say,
Give Caesar's due that is Caesar to obey
But I an answer ready have for that
Caesar ruled Rome, and every one known what
Antipathy there is (...) Rome and us
Perhaps he might mistake (...) ^pake thus.
But right or wrong (...) we hold.
To rule our selve, rather than others should.
Let Patriarchs, Prophets, (...) Fathers, nay,
If God and Man say what they please to say,
Unless it, (...) respond (...) mind,
We in their wor^s and (...) some fault will find;
By Church no^ (...) ruled be,
No more then wh^^ o^ fancy does agree.
What though the (...) Prayer ^y him spoken was,
Yet since (...) ended in (...) Mass,
We ought* abolish it (and so we will)
Using no For me (nor Chair) but th'Bed-side still.
The Creed we cred^t not, it is not contained
In The written Word; why may it not be feigned?
It Is said The Apostles made it, 'tmight be so*
Were certain true, we trust reject it tho:
For among other Articles it has
One, that obliges (as a point of Faith)
Upon a Church Catholic to conside*
Such chains as these our Freedom cannot abide,
To no such Article must we give credit,
Although belief in the holy Ghost precede it,
For our pure Consciences have given the Lurch
Both to the Roman and the English Church.
What tell they me of Faith Apostolic;
If that were true, then 'm an Heretic:
Think you The Apostles had such strong ingages,
To build a Church should last so many Ages?
My Faith to me can dictate no such thing*
Though they a Cloud of Witnesses can bring,
We must explode them all, ^hey were but men,
The Spirit's more abundant now then then.
Let none of us be subject to such dotage,
To stench our zealous hunger with that Potage,
Wherein the Coloquintida is fed,
Which is contaginat to the Babes of God:
For it is most certain, that this Hotch-potch was
Turned into English from the Latin Mass.
The Spirit taught the Prophets what to say,
So did it teach The Apostles how to pray:
And shall we (which to them are not inferior)
Be taught to pray (or preach) by ^^les extend?
No, Brethren, no^ we the elected Seed,
Not any Tutor but the Spirit need
Each Brother and each Sister (I dare say)
Are Churches in themselves; then to ob^y.
Another Church (beside my private Fancy)
I Will sooner yield to study Necromancie.
To cross the Papists, let us abhor the Cross
I protest (zealously) were not for th'losse
Of all my Gold and Silver, I should pine,
Rather then use that (so much hated) Sign,
And were I sure my forhead ere were crossed.
I Would flay the skin off (though my life it cost.)
Yet some who venerate Antiquity,
Affirm the Cross is used, that thereby
Christians may be distinguished from Jews
And Pagan Infidels which Christ refuse.
What? does Antiquity then stand so for it?
That very thing does make me most abhor it,
For any thing that is old my Conscience loathes,
I Would have Religion newer then my Clothes.
The Surplice white's an emblem of the state
Of The Ministry, pure and immaculate;
The use on it some count decency, but we
Reject it as a Rag of Popery.
Verily Sisters, when I see that Smock
Of The Whore of Babylon, O what a rock
Of spiritual force it rayseth in my hose!
You know my zealous meaning (I suppose)
The Corner'd-Cap (square dealings perfect Trope)
'Cause its original is from the Pope,
It fits not our Roundheads, full of deceit,
Swear not at all but content pole and cheat,
And lie with any body: Sisters hear me,
I feel strong motives through such objects near me.
Because the Wedding Ring's a fa^^ on old,
And signifies by the (...) of God.
The purity required th'marry'd pair,
And by the rotunditie the union fair
Which ought to be betwixt them endless; for
No other reason we that use abhor:
We love no union nor perfection in
Religion we are always to begin.
Fasting's a means proud flesh to subjugate,
And to the Spirit it humilitate,
Those heinous sinners earne such punishment,
But we unspotted are, (and innocent,)
Let them fast (and give alms) whilst we do feast:
(And starve the poor,) both fruit, foul, fish, and beast,
Are only made for us that godly be,
The wicked live in awe, but we are free.
We Will have no Antichristian Prelates, that
Shall dominiere over us, nor knee, nor hat,
We to the greatest Bishop will allow,
No, nor at th'Name of Jesus will we bow:
Though Paul (o're-seene) in humble sense does say,
All knees must bow at it, we will not obey:
If any ask a reason, tell them plain,
It Is used in Popery, which we must refrain.
Let Peter, Paul, James, Jude, (with all the rest,)
Whose writings are to the world made manifest,
Expressly say, do this, abstain from that,
Rather then we will with Rome participaet,
We'll utterly the Text it self disclaim,
Or without sense adulterate the same.
Although the Scripture strong appears to be*
For the maintaining of Presbytery,
What Is that to us? who must be ever bent
Against that or what ever government:
By the Bishops fall these their up-rising gather,
As Rehoboam did succeed his Father.
What difference rests 'twixt these and them before?
Though th'title's lef^, the power's retained, and more:
For whereas but a few of them did flourish*
Now here is a Bishop over every Parish
Those Bishops did by proxy exercise,
These by their Elders rule, and their own eyes,
Then let us for our free^^me still contest,
And by no mortal power be over-prest:
Why should we put our necks into the Collar
Of any such proud (Babylonian) Scholar?
Let Us rather bid defiance to all the Rabbie,
Learning to us must be abominable.
What Is Latin, but the Language of the Beast!
Hebrew, or Greek: is not enough a feast?
Have not we the Word in English, (which at ease)
We can convert to any sen^e we please*
Let them urge the Original, if we
Say 'twas first writ in English, so't shall be,
For we will have our own way be it wrong or right.
And say (by strength of faith) the Cross is white,
Scorning by any to be contradicted,
Though they of ignorance have often convicted
Our (rarely gifted) brethren, Cobblers, Weavers,
Tailors, and other tradesmen, whose endeavers
Even in their very Steeple Houses durst
(As the boy counselds mother) call Whore first.
These are stout Champions (O let us all do so)
That (in despite of Discipline) dare do ^^cotten)
Such bold attempts (ah how does this geere does
This zealous valor (when they 't dead and rotten)
Shall be recorded to their high renown*
Follow this course, all Government go down,
That Jdoll (Grandam) Paul's, with all the rest
Of The Steeple Houses we will have suppressed.
But since I Have spoke against Schollership, I grant,
There is one error which I Will now recant,
And that is this, (in truth I Am sorry for it,
You (brethren) may (amongst the Saints) report,
(Unto my great Confusion) that I did
Do that my self which I to you forbid,
For at my first beginning I spoke two
Words in plain Latin, which nor I nor you
(I hope) do understand (the fault's the less*)
Brethren forgive me, now I do confess,
Yet in confession lie not play the fool,
To bring mine Ars upon the Scottish Stool:
No, I Will not subject be to such an Order,
Which will ere long invade our English-Border:
Then they who will be slav'd (after the sentence)
Must sit upon the Stool of their Repentance:
But no sike Scottish (Presbyterian) trick
Shall make my (freeborn) heart with sorrow sick;
Let those who have a mind to it most commend one,
On that (and all the rest) I Am independent.
Briefly dear Brethren and Sisters kind,
Let Us do (or not do) what contents our mind,
And not be ruled by any: that were base;
What, in subjection bring the Babes of Grace*
Why 'twere a thing preposterous to reason:
What ere we do, our actions are no Treason,
For all our words (and works) are sanctified:
What Is in us meekness, is in the wicked Pride;
Lust is but holy Love, and burning Zeal:
When we dissemble, flatter, lie, or steal,
Alas it is only frayltie; flesh is frail,
Witness my self, for now my breath does fail.
Thus having proved words, works, and faith, all fickle,
I Will now conclude this present Conventicle.
FINIS.

