Daphnis.

Chloe.

Printed for John Garfeild 1657. Cross facit



Daphnis and Chloe.

A Most Sweet, and Pleasant Pastoral ROMANCE for Young Ladies.

By Geo: Thornley, Gent.

Humili Casa nihil antiquius, nihil nobilius.

Sen. Philos. The Printing Press for Pictures


London* Printed for John Garfeild, at the Sign of the Rolling-Presse for
Pictures near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, over against Popes-Head-Alley,
1657.

To young Beauties.
THis little, pleasant Laundschip of Love, by its own destiny, and mine,
belongs most properly to your fair eyes, and hands, and happier laps. And them,
who would not lay his leg over a book; although that, sometimes has been the
complaint of a Schollar's solitude? But hold! There is nothing here to that
purpose, but what Lycaenium taught her Scholar in the Wood: Here Cupid is a
Shepherd: Pan, a Soldier: Chloe, a maid, of whom Love would write a story: a
Youth, the Darling of the Nymphs: Love caught robbing an Orchard; and his own
Herald from a Myrtle Grove. Here are Pipes that drown Pirates; others reduceing
a Captive maid; pastoral Festivalls, and Games; The ceremonies, customs, and
manners of the ancient Greeks; with a delightful interspersion of their old
and sweet Tales: And in short; nothing to vex you, unless perchance, in your
own conscience. Chloe knew well enough (though the Author makes her simple)
what, and where, her Fancy was; and Daphnis too, needed not Lycaenium's
Lanthorn to a plakit, or to follow Will with the wispe* But hark you Lady; and
I will tell you a story; one I had at a Tavern vesper; a Dialogue from a
Summer shade. A boy, and a Girl were got thither together: The boy opened his
shop, and drew out all a young beginner had to show: The Girl asked him, what it
was: The boy said; It was his purse: the Girl looked upon her self; And, if
that be thy purse; Then (quoth she) my purse is cut. And these are parallells
to the simple ruralls here. But what say you to that Tradition of the Hebrews;
That a very wise man, knew not the way of a Serpent upon a Rock, nor of a young
man with a maid? And those that say, Nicaula Sabaea had like to have puzzled
him quite, with Boys and Girls in the same dress, but that he made them wash
before him, and found out (as you do) all the Boys, by a stronger kind of
rubbing. But besides; It is so like your own either simplicity, or Art, you
cannot but approve it here. You do not know what we mean, when we speak as
plain as day. And now you have an Author too (which you never had before) to
prove you do not counterfeit; The sophist in his third book; a man of great
Authority; a Magistrate among the maids. For this, I have deserved a kiss of
every sweet ingenious Girl; and if I find, that this book lies nearer to you,
then the other Romances do, those of the affected, twirling tongue; I shall
try, either to find, or ideate, somewhat for you, that for its various
invention, intertexture, and the style; shall be composed, examined, and sent
to your hands, by the test of Music, beauty, Pleasure, and Love.

Your loving Servant. Geo. Thornley.

To the Critical Reader.
THe Pastorals of Longus Sophista, to my knowledge have bin signed with the
Youthful Emeralds of some of our own, most excellent, sparky, astrall Wits. But
Those have kept within their own Ingenious, quiet Cortina, and have not come
abroad by their Pens; and therefore I shall give you Testimonies to the Drama
in hand, as from the Laureats of other Countries. Angelus Politian an Eloquent
Italian, in his Books of Miscellanies: Quatuor (says he) extant Graece nimis
quam Libelli elegantes, Poemenic^n Titulo, There are extant in the Greek four
very spruce Books under the Title of Poemenica; and I am sure he meant These,
for That Is the Title to the Four; and there are no other Extant. Other Erotic
Writers indeed there are; Aristinaetus, Achilles Tatius, Heliodorus,
Eustathius, or Eumathius, as others call him; but not under that Title. Longi
liber lectu Dignissimus: and again, Dulcissimus ac S^avissimus Scriptor, is the
language Maretus gives him. Longus his Book is very well worth the reading: A
most sweet, and pleasant Writer. And now for him speaks the Tripos of the
World; so the Critics call their Joseph Staliger; and indeed in my Judgment,
he has hit him to a hair: Auctor est Amaenissimus, et Character eo melior, quo
Simplictor. He is an Author pleasant as the Spring; pleasant as Groves, Launs,
Hills, Vales, Eccho's, soft winds; and his style, or Character, so much the
better, by how much the more Simple, and rural. Heinsius too gives him the
Venus. Longo Sophist a Nil Venustius. And besides These, the Patriarch Photias,
very well might be cited hither too, to the Assertion of the Book, where he
speaks of the Greek Erotic Writers, though but to the general; and gives a
breviary of Antonius Diogenes his book, Of the Wonderful, Incredible Things
beyond Thule; and tells us, that That book was the Fountain of all Writings of
this kind; but I had rather (if an Ingenuous man, when he has satisfied
himself, may speak what he thinks of his own Work) close up this discourse with
our Authors own words; (...).

I drew up these four Books; A Perpetual Oblation to Love; An Everlasting
Anathema, Sacred to Pan, and the Nymphs; and, A Delightful Possession even for
all. But here comes a Snapdragon Objection from a Poetaster in the way; and he
would spoil our Poetry, as Prophetasters do Theology. These Books (says he)
are handsome in the Greek, but in our Saxon (make the best) it cannot be. Our
Pastoral Doricque (Sir) has shown it self in verse, and prose, fine as
Arcadian Holy Days. -- But there is another still. To imagine Children
exposed, (the very basis of the book) is not at all for this Age, an Age wiser
far then that. It may be so; For Aesculapius had always a great beard, though
his Father Apollo never had any. Did you never leave any your self to Saint
Antholin's, or Greggs? Then read the Stories of the East and South, and you
shall find many Children, both exposed, and Fortunate. This -- enough to face
the Cuffs of this Book; and make me laugh in my sleeve if any man require more.

Yours to serve you, Geo: Thornley.

Upon the most Ancient and Elegant Poem of Daphnis and Chlce, accurately and
deliciously rendered by his Learned Friend Mr. George Thornly.
To the READER.
AS flesh and Fish and Plants thy Body feed,
(Gentle sweet Reader) so thy Mind has need,
With Speakings, Writings, Printings to be fed,
And fresh-suggested Notions nourished.
And as our Rabbis of severest brow,
Not only food to keep thee live, allow,
But to delight thee many dainty dishes,
Of Flesh and Fruit, of Pasterall and Fishes,
By Art composed; So, that thou have, it is fit.
Custards, Tarts, Puf-pasts, Florentines of wit,
For to refresh the Palate of thy mind,
And to divert those rugged cares that grind
And fret thy Heart and overtire thy Brain;
Mingling delight (as Cato bids) with Pain.
See here, of Grecian Turtle Doves a pair,
Dish't up in VVhite-Broath, by the witty care
Of learned Longus, and our Thornlyes Art;
Whose Alchymie is able to convert
The Grecian Silver into English Gold,
And all the Elegancies to unfold,
Of that sweet language. Come and sit awhile,
And let these innocent Lovers make thee smile.
R. W.

Upon the Author.
AFter the Scaligers and Heinsius name,
Our Critick-Caesars, who can raise thy fame,
Great Sophist? Unless Colleges, and the Pen
Of all our best new University men,
If yet in all their Libraries there be
So much of the Arts left as to praise thee.
Let then their Aristotle himself rehearse,
And prove thy worth by Syllogisms in verse;
And then conclude, None truly can declare
The Sophists praise but the great Sophister.
James Wright.

Upon the Translator.
YOu're prodigal, Sir, and give more then our due;
For you translate Longus and Lesbos too:
That Island's now turned English, and we see
Greek Mitylene made of London free;
Both Cities speak one Language, and our stock
Of sheep first sure were brought from Chloes Flock.
For when I see the Lesbian Dorick Fleece
Spun to so fine an English thread from Greece;
I straight conclude, The Sheep, the Wool's the same,
And differ not in goodness but in name.
Only I wish Lycaenium and her Goose
Had still spoke Greek; and not her self proved loose,
And public too: For sure a dim eye may,
See through her thick dark Grove too much of day;
And I, who yet am young, thus censure can,
The Book thee Scholar speaks, the Grove a man.
James Wright:

A Summary of the First Book.
THe Sophist sees a picture of curious Interpretation in the Island Lesbos. And
he describes it in four Books. The Situation of Mitylene (the Scene of the
Story) is drawn. Lamo a Goat-herd following a Goat that neglected her Kid,
finds an Infant-boy Exposed, with fine Accoutrements about him, takes him away,
keeps him, and names him Daphnis. Two years after, Dryas a Shepherd, locking
for a sheep of his, found, in the Cave of the Nymphs a Girl of the very same
fortune; brings her up, and calls her Chloe. Dryas and Lamo, warned by dreams,
send forth the Exposed children together, to keep their flocks. They are
joyful, and play away their time. Daphnis running after a hee-goat, falls
unawares together with him into a Trapditch made for a Wolf: but is drawn up
alive, and well. Dorco the Herdsman asks of Dryas, Chloe for his wife; but all
in vain. Therefore disguised in a Woolfs-skin, he thinks to seize her from a
Thicket, and carry her away by force; but the flock-doggs fall upon him.

Daphnis and Chloe are variously affected. Daphnis tells the Tale of the
Stock-dove. The Tyrian Pirates plunder the fields, and carry away Daphnis. Chloe
not knowing what to do, runs up to Dorco, whom she finds a dying of his wounds;
he gives her a Pipe of wonderful power; she plays on it, and the Oxen and
Cowes, that were carried away, turn over the Vessel; They and Daphnis swim to
the Land, while the armed Pirates drown. Then they bury poor Dorco, and return
to their wonted game.

Daphnis and Chloe.
The First Book.
WHen I was hunting in Lesbos, I saw in the Grove of the Nymps, a Spectacle,
the most beauteous, and pleasing of any, that ever yet I cast my eyes upon. It
was an Icon, or varied picture, reporting a History of Love. The Grove indeed
was very pleasant, thick set with Trees, and starr'd with flowers every where;
and watered all from one Fountain, with diverse Maeanders and Rills. But that
picture, as having in it, not only an excellent, and wonderful piece of
Fortune, but also the Art of Ancient Love, was far more amiable. And therefore
many foreigners enchanted by the fame of it, came as much to see that, as in
devotion to the Nymphs. There were figured in it, young women in the posture of
teeming their babes: there were others, swaddling children that were exposed,
children which by the destiny of the draught, did then tend their flocks of
Sheep and Goats; there were many Shepherds slain; young men banded together;
Incursions of Thieves; Impressions of Enemies; Inroads of armed men. When I had
seen with admiration these, and many other Things, but all belonging to the
sweet, or to the dangerous affairs of Love; I had a mighty Instigation to write
something, as to answer that Picture. And therefore, when I had carefully
sought, and found an Interpreter of the Image, I drew up these four Books; A
Perpetual Oblation to Love; an everlasting Anathema, Sacred to Pan and the
Nymphs; and A Delightful Possession, even for all men. For this will cure him
that is sick; and rouse him that is in dumps; one that has loved, it will
remember of it; one that has not, it will instruct. For there was never any yet
that wholly could escape Love, and never shall there be any: never, so long as
beauty shall be; never, so long as eyes can see. -- But help me God to write
with wisdom and proportion, the Passions, and wonderful fortunes of others;
and while I write of their Loves, keep me in my own right Wits.

Mitylene is a City in Lesbos, and by ancient Titles of honor, it is the
Great, and Fair Mitylene. For it is distinguished, and divided (the Sea flowing
in) by a various Euripus, and is adorned with many Bridges built of white and
polisht Marble. You would not think you saw a City, but an Island in an Island.
From this Mitylene some twenty furlongs, there lay a Manor of a certain rich
Lord, the most sweet and pleasant prospect under all the Eyes of Heaven. There
were Mountains, stored with wild Beasts for Game; there were Hills, and Banks
that were spread with Vines; the Fields abounded with all sorts of Corn; the
Valleys with Orchards, and Gardens, and purles from the Hills; the Pastures
with Sheep, and Goats, and Kine; the Sea billows dashed to the shore as it lay
extended along in an open horizon, with a soft, and glittering sand. In this
sweet Country, the field and farm of Mitylene, a Goat-herd dwelling, by name
Lamo, found an Infant-boy exposed; by such a chance (it seems) as this. There
was a Laun, and in it a place of thick Groves, and many brakes, all lined with
wandering Ivy, the inner ground furred over with a finer sort of grass, and on
that the Infant lay. A Goat coming often hither, disappeared very much,
neglecting still her own Kid, to attend the wretched child. Lamo observes her
frequent Outs and Discursations, and pitying that the Kid should be so
forsaken, follows her even at high-noon; and anon he sees the Goat walking
carefully about the child, holding up, and setting down her feet softly, lest
she should chance to tread upon it, or to hurt it with her hooves; and the
Infant drawing milk as from the breast of a kind mother. And wondering at it,
(as well he might) he comes nearer, and finds it a manchild, a lusty boy, and
beautiifull; with precious accoutrements about him, the monuments and
admonitions of a secret noble Stem. His mantle, or little Cloak was purple,
fastened with a Golden button; and by his side, a little dagger, the handle
polisht Ivory. He thought at first to take away the fine Things, and take no
thought about the child. But afterward conceiving shame within himself, if he
should not imitate the kindness and philanthropy that he had seen in that
Goat, waiting till the night came on, he brings all to Myrtale his Wife, the
boy, his precious Trinkets; and the Goat. But Myrtale all amazed at This, What
(quoth she) do Goats cast boys? Then he fell to tell her all: namely, how he
had found him Exposed; how suckled, how overcome by mere shame he could not
leave the sweet child to dye in that forsaken thicket. And therefore when he
discerned Myrtale was of his mind, the things exposed together with him, are
laid up carefully and hid; they say the boy's their own child, and put him to
the Goat to nurse. And that his name might be indeed a Shepherds name, they
agreed to call him Daphnis. And now when two years time was past, a shepherd of
the neighboring fields, had the luck to see such sights, and find such
rarities as Lamo did. There was a Nymphaeum, a solitary, sacred Cave of the
Nymphs; a huge rock, hollow and vaulted within, but round without. The Statues,
or Images of the Nymphs, were cut out most curiously in stone, barefooted, and
bare-legg'd; their arms naked up to the shoulders; all their hair loose and
playing carelessly, their eyes and lips smiting the Maediama, the proper
sweetness of the Nymphs; their vests, and lawnie-petticoats tied, and tuckt up
at the waste. The whole presence made a figure as of a divine ammusing Dance,
or Masque. The mouth, and sieling of the Cave reached the midst of that great
rock. And from below out of the Chasme, gusht a strong Crystal Fountain into a
fair current or brook, and made before the holy Cave, a fresh, green, and
flowery Mead. There were hanged up, and consecrated there, the milking-pailes
of fair Maids; Shepherds pipes, ho-boyes, whistles, and reeds, the Gifts and
Anathema's of the ancient Shepherds. To this Cave the often gadding of an Ewe,
made the Shepherd often think, that she undoubtedly was lost. Desiring
therefore to correct the straggler, and reduce her to her rule; of a green
With, he made a snare, and looked to catch her in the Cave. But when he came
there, he saw things he never dreamed of. For he saw her giving suck from her
duggs in a very humane manner; and an Infant, without crying, greedily to lay,
first to one dugge, then the the other, a most neat and fair mouth: for when the
Child had sucked enough, the careful Nurse lickt it still, and trimmed it up.

That Infant was a Girl, and in such manner as before, was trickt and
harnessed out with fine and rich advertisements of her origin and Extraction:
on her head she wore a Mitre embroidered with Gold; her shoes were Gilded; her
blankets and mantle cloth of Gold. Wherefore Dryas thinking with himself that
this could not come about without the providence of the Gods, and learning
mercy from the Sheep, takes her up into his arms, puts her Monuments into his
Scrip, and prays to the Nymphs he may happily preserve, and bring up, their
Suppliant, and Votary. Now therefore when it was time to drive home his flocks,
he comes to his Cottage, and tells all, that he had seen, to his Wife; shows
her what he had found; bids her think she is her daughter; and however, nurse
her up, though uncertain, though unknown. Nape, that was her name, began
presently to be a Mother, and with a kind of Jealousy would appear to love the
Child, lest that Ewe should get more praise; and all in haste gives her the
pastoral name of Chloe, to assure us, it is their own.

These Infants, grew up apace, and still their beauty appeared too excellent to
suit with rusticks, or derive at all from Clowns. And Daphnis now is fifteen,
and Chloe younger two years. Upon a night Lamo and Dryas had their visions in
their sleep. They thought they saw those Nymps, the Goddesses of the Cave, out
of which the Fountain gusht out into a stream; and where Dryas found Chloe;
That they delivered Daphnis and Chloe to a certain young boy, very disdainful,
very fair; one that had wings at his shoulders, wore a bow, and little darts;
and that this boy did touch them both with the very self-same dart; and
commanded it from thenceforth, one should feed his flock of Goats; the other
keep her flock of sheep.

This dream being dreamed by both, they could not but conceive grief, to think
that Daphnis and Chloe should be nothing but Goatherds like themselves, when
they had read them better fortune from their Infant Swaddling clothes; and for
that cause, had both allowed them bolted bread, with a finer sort of meat, and
bin at charge to teach them to read a ballad in the Lesbian Tongue; and
whatsoever other things were passing brave, among the rural Swains and Girls.
Yet nevertheless it seemed fit, that the Mandats of the Gods concerning them,
who by their providence were saved, should be attended, and obeyed.

And having told their dreams to one another, and sacrificed in the Cave of the
Nymphs to that winged boy (for his name they knew not yet:) They set them out
Shepherds with their flocks; and to every thing instructed: how to feed before
high-noon, and when the scorching Glare declined; when to drive their flocks to
matter; when to bring them to the folds; what cattle was disciplined with the
Crook; what commanded by the Voice.

And now this pretty pair of young Shepherds, are as jocund in themselves as if
they had got some great Empire, while they sit looking over their goodly
flocks; and with more then usual kindness, treated both the Sheep and Goats.
For Chloe thankfully referred her preservation to a Sheep: and Daphnis had not
forgot to acknowledge his to a Goat.

It was the beginning of the Spring, and all the flowers of the Launs,
Meadows, Valleys, and Hills, were now blowing; all was fresh, and green, and
odorous. The Bee's humming from the flowers, the Bird's warbling from the
groves, the Lamb's skipping on the hills, were pleasant to the ear, and eye.
And now when such a fragrancy had filled those blessed and happy fields, both the
old men and the young, would imitate the pleasant things they heard, and saw:
and hearing how the birds did chant it, they began to carroll too; and seeing
how the Lambs skipt, tript their light and nimble measures; then to emulate the
Bees, they fall to cull the fairest flowers. Some of which in toysome sport
they cast in one another bosoms, and of some platted Garlands for the Nymphs.
And always keeping near together, had, and did all things in common: for
Daphnis often gathered in the straggling sheep; and Chloe often drove the
boldet ventrous Goats from the crags, and precipices; and sometimes to one of
them, the care of both the flocks was left, while the other did intend some
pretty knack, or Toysome play.

For all their sports, were sports of children, and of Shepherds. Chloe
scudding up and down, and here and there picking up the windlestrawes; would
make in plats, a Trap to catch a Grasshopper; and be so wholly bent on that,
that she was careless of her flocks. Daphnis on the other side, having cut the
slender reeds, and bored the quils, or intervals between the joints, and with
his soft wax joined and fitted one to another; took no care, but to practice,
or devise some tune, even from morning, to the twilight. Their wine, and their
milk, and whatever was brought from home to the fields, they had still in
common. And a man might sooner see all the Cattle separate from one another,
then he should Chloe and Daphnis, asunder. But while they are thus playing away
their time, to sweeten pleasure, afterward Love procures them these Cares:

A Wolf that had a kenncl of whelps, came often ravenous upon the fields, and
bore away many cattle, because she needed much prey, to keep her self, and
those cubs. The Villagers therefore meet together, and in the night they dig a
ditch of a proportinall Length, and Depth, and Breadth; the earth flung up they
scatter all abroad at a good distance, by handfulls; and laying over-crosse the
Chasm, long, dry, and rotten sticks, they strew them over with that earth which
did remain: that if a Hare did but offer to run there, she could not choose but
break those rods, that were as brittle as the stubble; and then would easily
make it known, that that indeed was not true, but only counterfeited Soil.
Many such Trap-ditches were dug in the Mountains, and the fields; yet they
could not take this Wolf, (for she could perceive the Sophistick, and
commentitious ground:) but many of the Sheep and Goats were there destroyed;
and there wanted but a little, that Daphnis too was not slain; and it was on
this chance: Two he-goats were exasperated to fight, and the shock was furious.
One of them, by the violence of the very first Butt, had one of his horns
broke; upon the pain and grief of that, all in a fret and mighty chafe, he
betakes himself to flight: but the victor pursuing him close, would not let him
take breath. Daphnis was vexed to see the horn broke, and that kind of
malepertnesse of the Goat; up he catches his Club, and pursues the pursuer.
But, as it frequently happens when one hastes away as fast as possibly he can,
and the other with ardency pursues; there was no certain prospect of the things
before them, but into the Trapditch both fall, first the Goat, then Daphnis.
And indeed it was only this that served to save poor Daphnis, that he flunder'd
down to the bottom of the ditch a cock-horse on the rough Goat. There in a
lamentable case he lay, waiting, if perchance it might be some body to draw him
out. Chloe seeing the accident, away she flies to weep over Daphnis his grave,
and found he was alive, though buried there, and calls for help to a herdsman
of the adjoining fields. When he was come, he busled about for a long Cord: but
finding none, Chloe in a tearing haste, pulls off her hair-lace and her fillet,
gives him them to let down; and standing on the pit brim, both began to draw
and hale; and Daphnis holding fast by it, nimbly followed Chloe's line, and so
ascended to the Top. They drew up too the wretched Goat, which now had both his
horns broke, (so fiercely did the revenge of the victor pursue ^im) and they
gave him to the herdsman, as a reward of the rescue, and redemption of their
lives. And if any body mist him at home, they would say, it was the Invasion of
the Wolf: and so returned to their Sheep and Goats. And when they had found
that all were feeding orderly, according to the precepts of Lamo and Dryas;
sitting down upon the Trunk of an Oak, they began curiously to search, whether
he had hurt any limb in that terrible fall; but nothing was hurt, nothing
bloodied; only his head, his bosom, and some other parts, were durtied by the
soil which covered over, and hid the Trap. And therefore they thought it best
before the accident was made known to Lamo and Myrtale, that he should wash
himself in the Cave of the Nymphs. And coming there together with Chloe, he
gives her his Scrip, his Jacket, and his Shirt to hold while he washed.

But it happened, that in an Agony that one kiss had cast him into, he fell
to mutter with himself, such fancies as these. Whither, in the name of the
Nymphs, will that kiss of Chloe drive me? Her lips are softer then Roses, and
sweeter then the honeycombs of the Launs, and Meadows; but her Kiss stings
like a Be. I have often kissed the young Kids; I have kissed a pretty whippet, the
whelp of Melampo; and that Calf which Dorco gave me: but this Kiss is a new
thing.

My heart leaps up to my lips; my spirit sparckles, and my soul melts; and yet
I am mad to kiss her again. Oh what a mischievous Victory is this! Oh what a
disease, whose name I know not! Did Chloe take poison before she kissed me? How
then is she not dead? How sweetly sing the Nightingales, while my pipe hangs on
yonder pine? How wantonly the Kids skip, and I lie still upon the ground? How
sweetly do the flowers grow, and I neglect to make garlands? So it is, the
Violet, Hyacinth, and the Cowslips flourish; but alas, Daphnis, Daphnis
withers! And will it come at length to this, that Dorco shall appear hereafter,
handsomer then I to Chloe?

These Passions and Complaints the good Daphnis felt, and murmured to himself,
as now first beginning to taste of the works and language of Love. But Dorco
the Herdsman observing when Dryas planted his Scyons near the palmits or
spreading branches of the Vines, came to him with certain cheeses, and his
wooing and wedding Pipes about him: the Cheeses he presented him withal, as
one who had long been his acquaintance and friend, when he himself tended
Cattle. And taking his rise from thence, he cast in words about the marrying of
Chloe, and if he might have her to his Wife, promised many and great Gifts,
according to the Estate of Herdsmen; a yoke of Oxen for the plough; four bives
of Bees; fifty choice young Appletrees; a good Bull-Hide to make Shoes; every
year a weaned Calf: so that it wanted but a little, that, allured by these
Gifts, Dryas did not promise Chloe. But when he had recollected himself, and
found the Maid deserved a better husband; and likewise, that he had reason to
fear, lest at any time being deprehended to have taken away the exposed Child,
he should fall into a mischief, from which he could no way then escape; he
desires to be excused, denies the Marriage, rejects the Gifts. But Dorco
falling from his hope, and losing his Cheeses, resolves with himself to lay his
clutches upon Chloe, if ever he could catch her alone. And having observed,
that every day, sometimes Daphnis, sometimes the Girl, drove the flocks to
watering; he practiced a Trick not unbecoming one that tended a herd of Cattle.
He took the skin of a huge Wolf, which formerly the Bull, fighting for the
herd, had killed with his horns, and flung it over his back, and it dangled
down to his feet; so, that the forefeet were drawn on his hands; the hinder,
over his thighs to his heels; and the Gaping of the mouth covered his head,
like the helmet of an armed man. When he was got into this Lycanthropy, as well
as possibly he could; he makes to the Fountain where the flocks, after their
feeding, used to drink. But that Fountain lay in a bottom, and about it all the
place, was rough with bushes, thorns, brakes, thistles, and the brush Juniper;
so that indeed, a true Wolf might very well lie lurking there. Therefore when
he had hid himself, he waited the time when the Cattle were driven thither to
drink, and conceived no small hope, that in the habit of a Wolf (a beast that
scares our voice away;) he should snap the poor Chloe. After a while she left
Daphnis shaking down green leaves for the Goats, and drove her flocks down to
the Fountain. But the flock-dogs following Chloe, and barking at Dorco, who had
moved himself, and rusled in the brakes, because he perceived they were hot on
the Sent; fell on him furiously as on a Wolf; and before he could wholly rise
from the lurk, because of the sudden consternation, all-to-towsed the Wolf-
Dorco, and gave him many a sharp nip. However, fearing lest he should be
manifestly discovered, blamed, and shamed, guarding himself as he could, with
the skin, he lay close and still in the thicket. But when Chloe was scared at
the first sight of she knew not what, and cried out to Daphnis for help; the
dogs soon tore his vizard off, tattered the skin, and bit him soundly. Then he
roared and cried out a main, and begged for help of Daphnis and Chloe. They
rated off the dogs with their usual known recalls; and lead Dorco, who was
torn in the shoulder and the Thigh to the Fountain, etc. where they found the
dogs had left the print of their teeth. There sweet Chloe gently washed, and
chawing in her mouth, the green ryne of the Elm, applied it softly to his
wounds. Now, because of their unskilfulnesse in amorous adventures, they
thought Dorco's disguising, and hiding of himself, was nothing else but a
Pastoral pranck, and were not at all moved at it; but endeavoring first, to
cheer and erect him with the gentle language of pity, and leading him by the
hand some part of his way, they bid him farewell, and dismissed him.

But Daphnis and Chloe had much ado to get together, before it was late in the
evening, their scattered, straggling Sheep and Goats. For they were terrified
with the wolfsskin, and the fierce barking, and baying of the dogs; and some
ran up the steeps craggs; some ran on rucks, and hurried down to the Seashore:
although they were taught, not only to obey the voice, and be quieted by the
pipe, but to be driven up together, even by the clapping of the hands. But fear
had cast in an oblivion of all: so that at length with much stir, following
their steps, like Hares by the foot; they drove them home to their own folds.
That night alone Daphnis and Chloe slept soundly, and found, that weariness
was some kind of remedy for the passion of Love. But as soon as the day
appeared, they fell again to these fits. When they saw one another, they were
passing joyful; and sad, if it chanced, that they were parted; in their grief,
they were volunteers, and yet they knew not what they would have. Only this
one thing they knew, that kissing had destroyed Daphnis, and bathing had undone
Chloe. Now besides this, the season of the year inflamed, and burnt them. For
now the cooler spring was ended, and the Summer was ended, and the Summer was
come on, and all things were got to their highest flourishing, a^e, and vigor;
the trees with their fruits, the fields with standing Corn* Sweet then, was the
singing of the Grasshoppers; sweet was the odor of the fruits; and not
unpleasant, the very bleating of the sheep. A man would have thought that the
very rivers by their gentle gliding away, did sing; and that the softer gales
of wind, did play, and whistle on the pines; that the Cattle, as languishing
with love, lay down and slumbered on the ground; and that the Sun, as a lover
of beauty, unvailed, did strive to undresse, and turn the rurals all naked. By
all these was Daphnis inflamed; and therefore often he goes to the Rivers and
Brooks, there to bathe and cool himself, and often he drinks of the clear
purls, as thinking by that, to quench his inward Caum, and scorching. When
Chloe had spent much time, because the flies were importune, and vexatious, to
milk the Sheep, and the Goats, and to curdle, and press it into smaller
Cheeses; she washed her self, and crowned her head with pine-boughes; and when
she had girt her Kid-skin about her, she took a piggin, and with wine and milk,
she made a Sillibub for her dear Daphnis, and her self. When it grew toward
noon, they fell to their fascination, or catching of one another, by their
eyes. For Chloe seeing Daphnis naked, thought she had fallen on the most sweet
and florid beauty, and therefore could not choose but melt, as being not able
to find in him the least moment to dislike, or blame. Daphnis again, if he saw
Chloe in her Kidskin, and her Pine coronet, give him the Sillibub to drink,
thought he saw one of the Nymphs, the fairest of the holy Cave. Therefore
taking off her pine, he would put it on his own head; and when he had kissed it
over and over, set it upon hers again. And Chloe, when he was naked and
bathing, would take up his vest, and when she kissed it, put it on upon her self.
Sometimes they flung Apples at one another, sometimes they dressed, and
distinguished one another hair, into curious trammels, and locks. And Chloe
likened Daphnis his hair, to the Myrtle, because it was black: Daphnis again,
because her face was white, and ruddy, compared it to the fairest Apple. He
taught her too, to play on the pipe, and always when she began to blow, would
catch the pipe away from her lips, and run it presently over with his: he
seemed to teach her when she was out, but with that specious pretext, by the
pipe, he kissed Chloe. But it happened, when he played on his pipe at noon, and the
Cattle took shade, that Chloe fell unawares asleep. Daphnis observed it, and
laid down his Pipe; and without any shame or fear, was bold to view her all
over, and every limb, insatiably; and withal, spoke softly thus:

What sweet Eyes are those that sleep? How sweetly breathes that rosy mouth?
The Apples smell not like to it, nor the flowery launes, and thickets. But I am
afraid to kiss her. For her Kiss stings to my heart, and makes me mad, like
new honey. Besides, I fear, lest a Kiss should chance to wake her. O ye
prating Grasshoppers, ye make a noise to break her sleep! And the Goats beside
are fighting, and they clatter with their horns. Ye Wolves, worse dastards
then the Foxes, come and ravish them away!

While he was muttering this passion, a Grasshopper that fled from a Swallow,
took Sanctuary in Chloes bosom, and the pursuer could not take her; but her
wing, by reason of her close pursuit, flapt the girl upon the cheek; but she
not knowing what was done, cried out, and started from her sleep. But when she
saw the Swallow flying near by, and Daphnis laughing at her fear, she began to
give it over, and rub her eyes that yet were sleeping. The Grasshopper sang out
of her bosom, as if her suppliant were now giving thanks for the protection.
Therefore Chloe again squeakt out; but Daphnis could not hold laughing, nor
pass the opportunity, to put his hand into her bosom, and draw forth the
Grasshopper, which still did sing even in his hand. When Chloe saw it, she was
pleased, and put it in her bosom again, and it pratled all the way. But
besides these, the Stockdove did delight them too; and sang from the Woods, her
bucolic's. But Chloe desiring to know, asked Daphnis what that complaint of the
Stock-dove meant; and he told her the tradition of the ancient Shepherds. The
Stock-dove ( Chloe) was once a very fair Maid, as thou thy self now art; and in
the flower of her age, kept her herds, as thou do thine. She was skillful in
Music, and her herds were so taken with her voice and pipe, that they needed
not the discipline of the staff, or goad: but sitting under a pine, and
wearing a coronet of the same, she would sing of Pan and Pitys, and her cowes,
would never wander out of her voice. There was a Youth that kept his herd not
far off; and he was fair, and musical, and not inferior to the maid: but, as
he tried with all his skill, to emulate her notes and tones; he played a higher
strain, as a male, and yet sweet, as being a boy; and so allured, from the
maids Herd, eight of her best Cowes, to his own. She took it ill that her herd
was so diminisht, and in very deep disdain, that she was his inferior at the
art; and presently prayed to the gods, that she might be transformed to a Bird,
before she did return home. The gods consent, and turn her into a
mountain-bird, because the Maid did haunt there; and musical, as she had been:
And singing still, to this day, she publishes her heavy chance, and demands her
Cowes again. Such delights and pleasures as these, the Summer time entertained
them withal. But when Autumn was come in, and the grapes were ripe, the
Tyrian Pirates, in a Carian Vessel, lest perchance they should seem to be
Barbarians, sailed up to the fields; and coming ashore, armed with swords, and
halfcorslets, fell to rifle, plunder, and carry away the best of all that came
to hand; the fragrant wines, great store of grain, the most precious of the
honey-combs. Some Oxen too they drove away from Dorco's herd, and took Daphnis
as he wandered near the Sea. For Chloe, as a Maid, was fearful of the fierce
and surly Shepherds; and therefore, till it was somewhat later, drove not out
the flocks of Dryas. And when they saw the young man was proper and handsome,
and of a higher price then any of their other prey, they thought it not worth
their staying longer about the Goats, or other fields, and hall'd him aboard,
lamenting, and not knowing what to do, and calling loud and often, on the name
of Chloe. But they, when they had loosed from the shore, and cast in their
Oars; when Chloe had brought out her sheep, and with her, a new pipe, that was
sent to Daphnis, made in haste away to Sea. When Chloe saw the Goats in a
hurry, and heard Daphnis louder and louder call Chloe, she presently casts off
all care of her flocks, flings the pipe on the ground, and runs amain for help
to Dorco. But he being cruelly wounded by the thieves, and breathing yet a
little, his blood gushing out, was laid along upon the ground. Yet seeing
Chloe, and a little spark of his former love being awakened in him; Chloe,
(said he) I shall now presently dye: for, alas, those cursed Thieves, as I
fought for my Herd, have killed me, like an Ox. But do thou preserve our
Daphnis, and in their sudden destruction, take vengeance for me, on the Rogues.
I have accustomed my Herd to follow the sound of this Pipe, and to obey the
charm of it, although they feed a good way off me* Come hither then, and take
the pipe, and blow that tune, which I heretofore taught Daphnis, and Daphnis
thee, and called it Dorco. Leave the care of what shall follow, to the pipe,
and Cowes alone. And to thee, Chloe, I give this Pipe; this pipe, by which I
have often conquered many Herdsmen, many Goatherds. But, for this, come, and
kiss me, (sweet Chloe) while I am yet awhile alive; and when I am dead, weep a
tear or two over me; and if thou see some other tending my Herd, upon these
Hills, I pray thee, then remember Dorco.

Thus spoke Dorco, and received his last Kiss; and together with the kiss,
and his voice, breathed out his Soul. But Chloe taking the pipe, and putting it
to her lips, began to play and whistle, as loud as possibly she could: The
Cowes aboard the Pirates presently hear, and acknowledge the music; and with
one bounce, and a huge bellowing, shoot themselves impetuously into the Sea. By
that violent bounding on one of her sides, the Pinnace toppled, and the Sea
gaping from the bottom, by the fall of the Cowes in, the Surges on a sudden
return, and sink her down, and all that were in her, but with unequal hope of
escape. For the Thieves had their Swords on, with their scaled, and nailed
Corslets, and were booted up to the middle of their thighs. But Daphnis was
barefoot, as he was wont to go in the fields, it being yet the heat of Summer.
Wherefore they when they had swom a little while, were carried by their arms to
the bottom. Daphnis on the other side, easily got off his clothes; and yet was
much puzzled to swim, because he had been used before only to the brooks and
Rivers. But at length, being taught by Necessity what was best for him to do,
he rushes into the midst of the Cowes, and on his right, and left, laid hold on
two of their horns; and so without trouble, or pain, was carried between them
to the Land, as if he had driven a falcked Chariot. Now an Ox, or Cow swims so
well, that no man can do the like; and they are exceeded only by Waterfowl,
and Fish: nor do they ever drown, and perish, unless the nails upon their
hooves, be thorough drencht with wet, and fall. Witness to this, Those several
places of the Sea, to this day called the Bosphori; The Trajects, or the narrow
Seas, swom over by Oxen. And thus poor Daphnis was preserved, escaping beyond
hope, two dangers at once, shipwreck, and latrociny. When he was out, he found
Chloe laughing, and crying; and, casting himself into her arms, asked her what
she meant, when she piped and whistled so loud. Then she told him all that had
happened; how she scutled up to Dorco; how, the Cowes had been accustomed; how
she was bidden to play on the pipe; and that their friend Dorco was dead; only
for shame she told him not of that Kiss. They thought then it was their duty
to honor their great benefactor, who so highly had obliged them; and therefore
they lamented, and buried the unfortunate Dorco, with all the Rites and
Ceremonies of the ancient Shepherds. By the name Dorco, thrice they called upon
his Ghost; then laid good store of Earth upon the Coarse. On his Grave they set
abundance of the most fragant, lasting, sative plants, and flowers; and vowed
an Anniversary suspension to him of some of the first fruits of the year.
Besides, they poured on the ground a libation of milk, and pressed with their
hands, the fairest bunches of the grapes, and then with eyes cast on the
ground, broke many Shepherds pipes over him. There were heard miserable groans,
and bellowings of the Cowes, and Oxen; and together with them, certain
incomposed cursations, and freques, were seen. The Cattle of the Herd amongst
themselves, as well as the Goatherds, and the Shepherds, had a kind of
lamentation, for the death, and loss of their keeper. When the Funeral of
Dorco was done, Chloe brought Daphnis to the Cave of the Nymphs, and washed him
stark naked with her own hands; and she her self, Daphnis then first of all,
looking and gazing on her, washed her naked limbs before him; her limbs, which
for their perfect and most excellent beauty, needed neither wash nor dress:
and when they had done, they gathered flowers, to crown the Statues of the
Nymphs, and hanged up Dorco's charming pipe, for an Anathema in the phane. Then
coming away, they looked what became of their Sheep and Goats; and found, that
they neither fed, nor blated, but were all laid upon the ground, as wanting
Daphnis and Chloe, that had been so long out of their sight. When they saw
this, and had called, and whistled, as they were wont; they rose up presently,
and fell to feed; and the mantling Goats skipt and leapt, as rejoicing at the
safety of their familiar Goat-herd. But Daphnis for his life could not be
merry, because he had seen Chloe naked, and that Venus of her beauty, which
before was not unvailed. His heart was gnawed, as with a secret poison, and had
deep sentiments of grief and anguish: insomuch, that sometimes he puffed and
blowed thick and short, as if some body had been in a close pursuit of him:
sometimes again, he breathed so faintly, as if he had been quite spent in
running. That washing seemed to him more dangerous and formidable, then the
Sea: And he thought his life was still in the hands, and at the dispose of the
Tyrian Pirates, as being but a young Rustic, and yet unskilled in the
Assassinations, and Robberies of Love.

The End of the First Book.
A Summary of the Second Book.
THe Vintage is kept, and solemnized. After that, Daphnis and Chloe return to
the fields. Philetas the Herdsman, entertains them with a discourse of Cupid,
and Love. Love increases betwixt them. In the mean time, the young men of
Methymne, come into the Fields of Mitylene, to hawk and hunt. Their Pinnace
having lost her Cable, they fasten her to the shore with a with. A Goat gnawes
the with in pieces. The Ship with her Money, and other riches, as blown off to
Sea. The Methymnaeans madded at it, look about for him that did it: they light
upon Daphnis, and pay him soundly. The Country Lads come in to help him.
Philetas is constituted Judge. A Methymnaean is Plaintiff; Daphnis, Defendant.
Daphnis carries the day. The Methymnaeans fall to force, but are beaten off
with Clubs. Getting home, they complain of injury and loss by the Mytelenians.
The Methymnaeans presently command Bryaxis their General to move with 10.
Ships against the Mytelenians knowing nothing. They land at the fields, plunder
all they can lay their hands on, and carry away Chloe. Daphnis knowing it,
would dye: but the Nymphs comfort him. Pan sends a Terror (which is rarely
described) upon the Methymnaeans; and warns their Captain in his sleep, to
bring back Chloe. The Captain obeyes, and she returns joyful to Daphnis. They
keep Holy Days to Pan, and Philetas is there. Lamo tells the Story of the
Pipe. Philetas gives Daphnis his most artificial Pipe. Daphnis and Chloe
proceed to the binding of one another by amorous Oaths.

Daphnis and Chloe.
The Second Book.
THe Autumn now being grown to its height, and the Vintage at hand; every
ruralr began to stir, and be busy in the fields; some to repair the
Winepresses; some to scowr the tuns, and hogs-heads: others were making
baskets, skeps, and panniers; and others providing little hooks to catch and
out the bunches of the grapes. Here one was looking busily about to find a
stone that would serve him to bruise the stones of grapes: there another,
furnishing himself with a stang, of very dry and smooth wood, to carry away the
must in the night, with light before him. Wherefore Daphnis and Chloe for this
time laid aside the care of the flocks, and put their helping hands to the
work. Daphnis in his basket carried grapes, cast them into the press, and trod
them there; and then anon, out of the Lake, tunn'd the Wine into the Butts.
Chloe dressed meat for the Vintagers, and served them with drink, the old wine
dashed with Fountain Water; and when she had done, gathered grapes of the lower
vines. For all the vines about Lesbos incline themselves, and protend their
palmits toward the ground, and creep like the Ivy; so that indeed a very
Infant, if that his hands be loose from his Swathes, may easily reach and pull
a bunch.

Now, as they were wont in the Feast of Bacchus, and the solemnization of the
Genethliacs of wine; the women that came from the neighboring fields to help,
cast their eyes all upon Daphnis, gave him prick and praise for beauty, and
said, he was like to Bacchus himself. And now and then, one of the bolder
strapping girls would catch him in her arms, and kiss him.

Those wanton praises and expressions, did animate the modest Youth, and more
and more inflame him still, but vexed and grieved the poor Chloe. But those that
were treading in the Press, cast out various voices, words, and verdicts upon
Chloe, and sang the praise of the young Baccha, like so many Satyrs drunk with
love and wine; and wished that they themselves were sheep, that such a
Shepherdess might tend them* And thus the Girl was pleased too, and Daphnis
stung with jealousy. But they wished the Vintage were done, that they might
return to their haunts in the fields; that, instead of that wild, untuned noise
of the clowns, they might hear again the sweet Pipe, or the bleating of the
Cattle. And, because after a few days, the grapes were gathered, and the wines
tunn'd into the vessels, and there needed not many hands to help; they drove
again their flocks to the fields, and with great joy and exultation worshipped
and adored the Nymphs, offering to them the first fruits, clusters hanging on
their branches. Nor did they in former time, with negligence ever pass by the
Nymphs; but always when they came forth to feed, would sit down by them
reverentially in the Cave; and when they went home, would first adore, and beg
their Grace; and brought to them always something, either a flower, or an
apple, or an a pornfull of green leaves, or a sacrifice of milk. And for this
great piety and devotion, they afterward received no small rewards and favors
from the Goddesses. And now being got at liberty, they skip, and dance, and
sing, and pipe to their flocks. While they thus delight themselves, there comes
up to them an old man, clad in his rugg, and mantle of skins, his carbatins, or
clouted shoes; his scrip hanging at his back, and that indeed a very old one:
when he was sat down by them, thus he spoke, and told his story:

I ( Daphnis and Chloe) am that old Philetas, who have often sung to these
Nymphs; and often pip't to yonder Pan; and have led many great herds, by the
art of music alone; and I come to show you what I have seen, and to tell you
what I have heard. I have a Garden which my own hands and labor planted; and
ever since by my old age I gave over fields and herds, to dress and trim it,
has been my care and entertainment; what flowers, or fruits the season of the
year teems, there they they are at every season. In the spring there are Roses,
and Lillies, the Hyacinths, and both the forms of Violets. In the Summer,
Poppies, Pears, and all sorts of Apples. And now in the Autumn Vines, and
Figtrees, Pomegranats, Orenges, Limons, and the green myrtles. Into this
Garden, flocks of birds come every morning; some to feed, some to sing. For it
is thick, opacous, and shady; and watered all by three fountains; and if you
took the wall away, you would think you saw a Wood. As I went in there
yesterday about noon, a boy appeared in the Pomgranate and Myrtle grove, with
myrtles and Pomgranats in his hand; white as milk, and shining with the glance
of fire; clean and bright, as if he had newly washed himself in all the three
transparent Fountains. Naked he was, alone he was; he played and wantoned it
about, and culled and pulled, as if it had been his own Garden. Therefore I ran
at him as fast as I could, thinking to get him in my clutches. For indeed, I
was afraid, lest, by that wanton, untoward, malepert ramping, and hoytie-toitie
which he kept in the grove; he would at length break my Pomgranats, and my
Myrtles. But he, with a soft and easy slight, as he listed, gave me the slip,
sometimes running un^er the Roses, sometimes hiding himself in the Poppies,
like a cunning, hudling chick of a Partridge. I have often had enough to do, to
run after the sucking Kids; and tired my self off my legs, to catch a giddy
young Calf. But this was a certain various business, and a thing that could
not be caught. Being then wearied, as an old man, and leaning upon my staff;
and withal looking to him, lest he should escape away, I asked what neighbors
Child he was; and what he meant to rob another man's Orchard so. But he
answered me not a word; but coming nearer, laughed most sweetly, and flung the
Myrtle berries at me, and pleased me so, I know not how, that all my anger
vanished quite. I asked him therefore, that he would give himself without fear,
into my hands, and swore to him by the myrtles, that I would not only send him
away with Apples and Pomegranats, but give him leave, whenever he pleased, to
pull the finest fruits and flowers, if he would but give me one kiss. With
that, setting up a loud laughter, he sent forth a voice, such as neither the
Swan, the Swallow, or the Nightingale has, and turned himself into Old man like
to me. Philetas, (said he) it would be no trouble at all to me, to give thee a
kiss, for it is more pleasure for me to kiss, then for thee to be young
again: but consider with thy self, whether such a gift as that be of use to thy
age. For thy old age cannot help thee that thou shall not follow me, after a
kiss that I have fired. But I cannot be taken, though a Hawk, or an Eagle, or
any other swifter bird, were flown at me. I am not a boy, though I seem to be
so, but am older then Saturn, and the whole time of this Universe. I knew thee,
when thou wast yet a boy, and kept a great herd in yonder Marsh, and was
present to thee, when under those Beeches, thou did sing, and play on the
Pipe for the dear love of Amaryllis. But thou did not see me, although I
stood close by the Maid. It was I that gave her thee in marriage, and thou have
had Sons by her, jolly herdsmen, and Colones. And now I take care of Daphnis
and Chloe; and when I have brought them together in the morning, I come hither
to thy Garden, and take my pleasure among these groves and flowers of thine;
and wash my self in these Fountains. And this is the cause, why thy Roses,
Violets, Lillies, Hyacinths and Poppies; all thy flowers, and thy Plants, are
still so fair and beautiful, because they are watered with my wash. Cast thy
eyes round about, and look whether there be any one stem of a flower, any twig
of a Tree broken; whether any of thy fruits be pulled, or any flower trodden
down; whether any fountain be troubled, and mudded; and thou ( Philetas) of all
mortals, rejoice alone in thy old age. This said, the sweet boy sprung into the
myrtle grove, and like a Nightingale, from bough to bough, under the green
leaves, skipt to the top, and highest story of the Myrtles. Then I saw his
wings hanging at his shoulders; and at his back, between his wings, a little
bow with two Darts; and since that moment, never saw him any more. If therefore
I wear not now these gray hairs of mine in vain, and by my age, have not got a
trivial mind; you two, (O Daphnis and Chloe) are destined to Love; and Love
himself takes care of you. With this they were both hugely delighted, and
thought they heard a Lesbian tale, not a true discourse, or story, and
therefore they would ask him questions:

And, What is Love (quoth Chloe then)? Is he a boy, or is he a bird? And, what
can he do, I pray you, Gaffer?

Therefore again -- thus Philetas: Love (sweet Chloe) is a god, a young Youth,
and very fair, and winged to fly. And therefore he delights in youth, follows
beauty, and gives our fantasy her wings. His power's so vaste, that that of
Jove is not so great. He governs in the Elements, rules in the Stars, and
domineers even over the gods, that are his Peers. Nor have you only dominion
over your Sheep and Goats, for Love has there his range too. All flowers are
the works of Love. Those Plants are his creations, and Poems. By him it is that
the rivers flow, and by him the winds blow. I have known a Bull that has been
in Love, and run bellowing through the Meadows, as if he had been pricked with a
Goad; a he-goat too so in Love with a Virgin-she, that he has followed her up
and down, through the woods, through the Launs. And I my self, when I was
young, was in love with Amaryllis, and forgot to eat my meat, and drink my
drink; and for many tedious nights, never could compose to sleep: my panting
heart was very sad and anxious, and my body shook with cold: I cried out often,
as if I had bin thwackt and basted back and sides: and then again, was still
and mute, as if I had layen among the dead: I cast my self into the Rivers, as
if I had been all on a fire: I called on Pan, that he would help me, as having
sometimes bin himself, caught with the Love of peevish Pitys: I praised the
Echo, that with kindness it restored, and trebbled to me, the dear name of
Amaryllis: I broke my Pipes, because they could delight, and lead the sturdy
herds which way I would, and could not draw the froward girl. For there is no
medicine for Love, neither meat, nor drink, nor any Charm, but only Kissing,
and Embracing, and lying naked together.

Philetas when he had thus instructed the unskilful Lovers, and was presented
with certain Cheeses, and a young Goat of the first horns; blessed their love,
and went his way.

But when they were alone, and had then first heard of the name of Love, their
minds were struck with a kind of Woodnesse; and they began to compare those
things which they had suffered in themselves, with the doctrine of Philetas
concerning Lovers and Love:

The Lover has his Grief and Sadness, and we have had our share of that. They
are languishing and careless to other things: just so are we. They cannot
sleep, and we still watch for the early day* They think they are burnt; and so
do we, even in the Fountains and the Brooks. They desire nothing more, then to
see, then to be near one another: And for that cause, we call, and rouse the
heavy day. This undoubtedly is Love, and we are in Love, and do not know it.
Philetas did not lie a tittle. That Boy in the Garden was seen too, by our
Fathers, Lamo, and Dryas; and 'twas he that commanded us to the field. How is
it possible for one to catch him? he is small and slim, and so will slip and
steal away. And how should one escape, and get away from him by flight? he has
wings to overtake us. Shall we fly to the Nymphs, our Patronesses? But Pan,
alas, did not help his Servant Philetas, when he was mad on Amaryllis.
Therefore those remedies, which he taught us, are before all things, to be
tried; Kissing, Embracing, and Lying naked on the ground. It Is cold indeed; but
after Philetas we will endure it.

This, to them, was a kind of nocturnal play, and entertainment. When it was
day, and their flocks were driven to the field, they ran to kiss, and embrace
one another with a bold, impatient fury, which before they never did. Yet of
that third remedy, which the old Philetas taught, they durst not make
experiment: for that was not only an enterprise too bold for Maids, but too
high for young Goatherds. Therefore still, as before they spent their nights
without sleep, and with remembrance of what was done, and with complaint, of
what was not.

We have kissed one another, and are never the better; we have clipped and
embraced, and that is as good as nothing too. Therefore to lie together naked,
is the only remaining remedy of Love. That must be tried by all means; there is
something in it without doubt, more efficacious then in a kiss.

While they indulged these kind of thoughts, they had, as it was like, their
sweet, erotic, amorous dreams; and what they did not in the day, that they
acted in the night, and lay together stark naked, kissing, clipping, twining
limbs. But the next day, as if they had bin inspired with some stronger Numen,
they rose up, and drive their flocks with a kind of violence to the fields,
hasting to their kisses again; and when they saw one another, smiling sweetly
ran together. Kisses past, Embraces past, but that third Remedy was wanting;
for Daphnis durst not mention it, and Chloe too would not begin; till at
length, even by chance, they made this essay of it: They sat both close
together upon the trunck of an old Oak, and having tasted the sweetness of
kisses, they were ingulf'd insatiably in pleasure, and there arose a mutual
contention, and striving with their clasping arms, which made a close
compression of their lips; and when Daphnis hugged her to him with a more
violent desire, it came about that Chloe inclined a little on her side, and
Daphnis following his kiss, fell o'th top on her. And remembering that they had
an image of this in their dreams the night before, they lay a long while
clinging together. But being ignorant what after that was to be done, and
thinking that this was the end of amorous fruition, most part of the day spent
in vain, they parted, and drove their flocks home from the fields, with a kind
of hate to the oppression of the night. And perchance something that was right
and true had then bin done, but that this tumult and noise filled all that
rural tract. The young gallants of Methymne thinking to keep the Vintage
holidays, and choosing to take the pleasure abroad, drew a small Vessel into
the water, and putting in their own domestic Servants to row, sailed about
those pleasant Farms of Mytelene. For the maritim Coast has many Havens, many
good and safe Harbors, and all along is adorned with many stately buildings,
and stairs. There are besides, many Baths, Gardens and Groves; these by Art,
those by Nature; all brave for habitation. The Ship therefore being arrived and
brought into the Bay, they did no harm or injury to any, but recreated
themselves with diverse pleasures: sometimes with Angles, taking fish from this
or the the other prominent rock: sometimes with dogs or toils hunting the Hares
that fled from the noise of the Vineyards: then anon, they would go a fowling,
and take the Wildgoose, Duck and Mallard, and the slower birds of the Marsh;
and so by their pleasure furnished themselves with a plenteous table. If they
needed any thing else, they paid the Villagers above the price. But there was
nothing else wanting, but only bread, and wine, and house-room. For they
thought it unsafe, the Autumn now in its declination, to quit the Land, and lie
all night aboard at Sea. And therefore drew the Vessel ashore for fear of a
tempestuous night. Now it happened, that a Country-fellow wanting a rope, his own
being broke, to haul up the stone wherewith he was grinding grapestones for his
use in the Winter, sneakt down to the Sea, and finding the Ship with no body in
her, loosed the cable that held her, and brought it away to serve his
business. In the morning the young men of Methymne began to enquire after the
rope, and no body owning the theevery; when they had a little blamed the
unkindnesse and injury of their hosts, they loosed from thence, and sailing on
some leagues, arrived at the fields of Daphnis and Chloe, those fields seeming
the likeliest for hunting the Hare. Therefore being destitute of a rope to use
for their Cable, they made a With of green and long Sallow twiggs, and with
that tied her by her stern to the shore. Then slipping their dogs to hunt
those grounds that seemed fittest for game, they cast their toils. The
deep-mouthed dogs opened loud, and running about, with much barking, scared the
Goats, that all hurried down from the Mountains toward the Sea; and finding
nothing there to eat, some of the bolder mischievous Goats gnawed the green
Sallow* With in pieces. At the same moment there began to be a bluster at Sea,
the wind blowing from the Mountains. On a sudden therefore the reciprocation of
the waves set the loose Pinnace afloat, and carried her off to the main. As
soon as the Methymneans heard the news, some of them posted to the Sea, some
stayed to take up the dogs, all made a hubbub through the fields, and brought
the neighboring rurals in. But all was to no purpose; all was lost, all was
gone. For the ship with an irrevocable pernicity and swiftness was carried
away. Therefore the Methymnaeans having a great loss by this, looked for the
Goat-herd; and lighting on Daphnis, fell to cuffe him, tore off his clothes,
and offered to bind his hands behind him with a dog-slip. But Daphnis, when he
was miserably beaten, implored the help of the Country Lads, and chiefly of
all, cried out for rescue to Lamo and Dryas. They presently came in and opposed
themselves, brawny old fellows, and such as by their Country labor had hands
of steel; and required of the furious Youths concerning those things that had
happened, a fair legal debate and decision. And others desiring the same thing,
they made Philetas the herdsman Judge. For he was oldest of all that were there
present, and famous for Justice amongst the Villagers. The Methymnaeans
therefore began first, and laid their accusation against Daphnis, in very short
and perspicuous words, as before a herdsman-Judge.

We came into these fields to hunt. Wherefore, with a green Sallow With, we
left our Ship tied to the shore: While our dogs were hunting the grounds, his
Goats strayed* from the Mountains down to the Sea, gnawed the green Cable in
pieces, set her at liberty, and let her fly. You see her tossing in the Sea:
but with what choice, and rich goods laden? all are lost* before your face.
What rare harness, and ornaments for dogs are there? what a treasury of
precious silver? he that had all, might easily purchase these fields. For this
damage, we think it but right and reason to carry him away our captive, him
that is such a mischievous Goat herd to feed his Goats upon the Sea, as if he
were some Mariner. This was the Accusation of the Methymnaeans.

Daphnis on the other side, although his bones were sore with basting, yet
seeing his dear Chloe there, set it at naught; and spoke thus in his own
defense.

I, in keeping my Goats have done my office well. For never so much as one of
all the neighbors of the Vale, has blamed me yet, that any Kid, or Goat of
mine has broke into, and eaten up his Garden, or browzed a young, or sprouting
Vine. But those are wicked, cursed hunters, and have dogs that have no manners,
such as with their furious coursing, and most vehement barking, have like
Wolves scared my Goats, and tossed them down from the Mountains through the
Valleys, to the Sea. But they have eaten a Green With. For they could find
nothing else upon the Sand, neither arbute, wilding, shrub, nor Thyme. But the
Ship's lost by wind and wave. That Is not my Goats, but the fault of Seas, and
Tempests. But there were rich Clothes, Collars, Dogslips, and Silver aboard
her. And who that has any wit can believe, that a Ship that is so richly laden,
should have nothing for her Cable but a With?

With that Daphnis began to weep, and made the Rusticks commiserate him, and
his Cause: so that Philetas the Judge started up, calling Pan and the Nymphs to
witness, That neither Daphnis, nor his Goats, had done any wrong; but that it
was the wind, and Sea, and that of those there were other Judges. Yet by this
Sentence Philetas could not persuade and bind the Methymnaeans, but again in a
fury, they fell to ^owse Daphnis, and offered to bind him. With which the
Villagers being moved, fell upon them like flocks of Starlings, or Jackdawes;
and carried him away as he was busling amongst them, never ceasing till with
their Clubs they had driven them the Ground, and beaten them from the hills
into the other fields.

While thus they pursued the Methymnaeans, Chloe had time without disturbance
to bring* Daphnis to the Fountain of the Nymphs, and there to wash his bloody
face, and entertain him after he had escaped the danger, with bread and cheese
out of her own Scrip; kissing him then far more sweetly then before; for it
wanted but a little, that then her dear Daphnis had bin slain.

But these Commotions could not thus be laid, and at an end; for those Gallants
of Methymne having bin softly and delicately bred, and every man his wounds
about him, traveling now by Land, with miserable labor and pain, got into
their own Country, and procuring a Council to be called, humbly petitioned
that their Cause might be revenged, without reporting a word of those things
which indeed had happened, lest perchance they should be laughed at for what
they had suffered by the Clowns: but accused the Mitylenaeans as if they had
taken their Ship and Goods in an hostile and warlike manner. The Citizens
easily believed their story, because they saw they were all wounded; and
knowing them to be of the best of their Families, thought it just to revenge
the injury. And therefore without denouncing a War by any Herald, they
commanded Bryaxes their General with ten Sail to infest the Maritim Coast of
Mitylene. For the Winter now approaching, they thought it dangerous to trust a
greater Squadron at Sea. On a sudden the next day the General sets sail; and
putting to the main, comes up to the maritims of Mitylene, and hostilely
invades them, plundering, and raping away, their Flocks, their Corn, their
Wines, (the Vintage now but lately over) with many of those that were employed
in such business.

They sailed up too to the fields of Daphnis and Chloe, and coming suddenly
down upon them, preyed upon all that they could light on. It happened, that
Daphnis was not then with his Goats, but was gone to the Wood, and there was
binding up green leaves to give them for fodder in the winter. Therefore, this
incursation being seen from the higher ground, he hid himself in an old hollow
tree. But his Chloe was with her flocks, and the enemies invading her and them,
she fled away to the Cave of the Nymphs, and begged of the enemies, that they
would spare her, and her flocks, for those holy Goddesses sakes. But that did
not help her at all. For the Methymnaeans did not only mock at, and rail upon,
the Statues of the Nymphs, but drove away her flocks and her before them,
thumping her along with their Battons as if she had bin a she-goat. But now
their ships being laden with all manner of prey, they thought it not convenient
to sail any further, but rather to make home, for fear of the winter, no less
then of their enemies. Therefore they sailed back again, and were hard put to
it to row, because there wanted wind to drive them.

These Tumults and Hubbubs ceasing, Daphnis came out of the Wood, into the
field they used to feed in; and when he could find neither the Goats, the
Sheep, nor Chloe, but only a deep silence and Solitude, and the Pipe flung
away wherewith she entertained her self; setting up a piteous Cry, and
lamenting miserably, sometimes he ran to the Beech where Chloe sat, sometimes
to the Sea, to try if there he could set his eyes on her: then to the Nymphs,
whither she fled when she was taken; and there flinging himself upon the
ground, began to accuse even the Nymphs as her betrayers:

It was from your Statues that Chloe was drawn and ravished away! and how could
you endure to see it? she that made the Garlands for you; she that every
morning poured out before you, and sacrificed her first milk; and she whose
pipe hangs up there a sweet Anathema and Donarie. The Wolf indeed has taken
from me never a Goat, but the enemy has my whole flock, together with my sweet
Companion of the field; and they are busy killing and flaying the Sheep and
Goats, and Chloe now must live in the City. With what face can I now come into
the sight of my Father and my Mother, who have lost my Goats, have lost Chloe,
and am quite broke, and must now give over my trade. For now I have nothing
left to feed, and Daphnis is no more a Goat-herd. Here I Will fling my self on
the ground, and here I Will lie expecting my death, or else a second war to help
me. And do thou (sweet Chloe) suffer now in thy self such heavy things as
these? Do thou remember, and think of this field, thy own Beech, the Nymphs,
and me? Take thou any pleasure from thy sheep, and those Goats of mine, which
are carried away with thee into Captivity.

While he was thus lamenting his condition, by his weeping so much, and the
heaviness of his grief, he fell into a deep sleep, and those three Nymphs
appeared to him, Ladies of a tall stature, very fair, half naked, and
barefooted, their hair disheveled, and in all things like their Statues. At
first they appeared very much to pity his Cause; and then the eldest, to erect
him, spoke thus:

Blame not us at all ( Daphnis) we have greater care of Chloe then thou thy
self her Lover have. We took pity on her, when she was yet but an Infant; and
when she lay in this Cave, took her our selves, and saw her nursed. She does not
at all belong to the fields, nor to Lamo, nor his flocks. And even now we have
provided, as to her, that she shall not be carried a Slave to Methymna, nor be
any part of the enemies prey. We have begged of Pan, Pan that stands under
yonder Pine, whom you have not honored so much as with flowers, that he would
bring back thy Chloe, and our Votary. For Pan is accustomed to Camps, and
leaving the Plains, has made of late many Wars, and the Methymnaeans shall find
him an infesting Enemy. Trouble not thy self any longer; but get thee up and
show thy self to Myrtale and Lamo, who now themselves lie cast on the ground,
thinking thee too, to be part of the rapin. For Chloe shall certainly come to
thee to morrow, accompanied with the Sheep and the Goats; you shall feed
together as before, and play together on the Pipe. For other things concerning
you, Love himself will take the Care.

Now when Daphnis had seen and heard these things, he started up out of his
sleep, and full of pleasure, full of grief, with tears in his eyes, adored the
Statues of the Nymphs, and vowed to sacrifice to them, the best of all his
she-goats, if Chloe should return safe. And running to the Pine where the
Statue of Pan was placed, the legs a Goat's, the head horned, one hand holding
a Pipe, the other a Goat dancing to it; that he adored, and made a vow for the
safety of Chloe, and promised Pan a he-goat.

Scarce now with the setting of the Sun, he made a pause of his weeping, his
walling, and his prayers; and taking up the boughs he had cut in the Wood,
returned to the Cottage, comforted the heavy Lamo, and made him merry, refresht
himself with meat and wine, and fell into a deep sleep, yet not that without
tears, praying to see the Nymphs again, and calling for an early day, the day
that they had promised Chloe. That night seemed to him the longest of Nights;
but in it, these wonders were done.

The General of the Methymnaeans when he had born off to Sea about ten
Stadium's, would refresh, after the Incursion and plunder, his wearied and
Sea-sick Soldiers. Coming up therefore to a Promontore which ran into the Sea,
winding it self into a half Moon, within which the Sea made a calmer station
then in a Port; in this place when he had cast anchor, lest the Rusticks should
mischieve him from the Land; he permitted them securely to rant and be joviall
as in peace. The Methymnaeans, because by this direption they abounded with all
things, feasted, carows'd, and danced, and celebrated victorials.

But the day being now spent, and their mirth protracted to the night; on a
sudden all the Land seemed to be on a light fire; then anon their ears were
struck with an impetuous clattering of Oars, as if a great Navy were a coming:
some cried out, The General must arm; others called to have it done; here, some
thought they were wounded; there, others saw the shapes of bleeding, falling,
dying men. A man would have thought he had seen a kind of nocturnall battle,
when yet there was no enemy there. The night thus past in these Specter, the
day arose far more terrible than the night. For on the horns of all Daphnis his
Goats, there grew up on a sudden the berried Ivy; and Chloe's sheep were
heard to howl like Wolves in the Woods. Chloe her self in the midst of her
flocks, appeared Crowned with a most fresh and shady Pine.

In the Sea it self too, there happened many Wonders, Paradoxes and Prodigies.
For when they labored to weigh their Anchors, and begone, their Anchors stuck
as fast as the Earth; and when they cast their Oars to row, they snapt and
broke; the leaping Dolphins with the thumping of their tails, loosened the
planks, and broke the ribs of the Barges. From that high Crag which lifted up
it self under the promontory, was heard a strange sound of a pipe; for it was
not pleasing as a Pipe, but like a Trumpet, or a terrible Cornet, which made
them run to their arms, and call those Enemies whom they saw not at all;
insomuch, that they wished it night again, as if they should have a truce by
that. Yet those things which then happened might very well be understood by
such as were wise; namely, that those Specter, phantasms and Sounds, proceeded
from Pan, showing himself angry at the Voyagers: yet the Cause they could not
conjecture (for no Chapel of Pan's was robbed) until, about high noon, their
Grand Captain, not without the impulse of some Deity, fallen into a sleep, Pan
himself appeared to him, and rated him thus:

O ye most unholy and wickeddest of Mortals! what made you so bold as madly to
attempt and do such outrages as these? You have not only filled with war these
fields that are so dear to me; but also you have driven away herds of Cattle,
flocks of Sheep and Goats that were my care. Besides, you have taken
sacrilegiously from the Altars of the Nymphs, a Maid of whom Love himself will
write a Story. Nor did you at all revere the Nymphs that looked upon you when
you did it, nor yet me, whom very well you knew to be Pan. Therefore you shall
never see Methymna, sailing away with those spoils, nor shall you escape that
terrible Pipe from the Promontore, but it shall drown you every man: unless
Thou speedily restore, as well Chloe to the Nymphs, as the herds and flocks to
Chloe. Rise therefore, and send the Maid ashore; send her with all that I
command thee; and I shall be as well to thee a Convey in thy Voyage home; as to
her a Conduct on her way to the fields.

Bryaxis being astonished at this, started up, and calling together the Captains
of the Ships, commanded that Chloe should be sought for among the Captives.
They found her presently, and brought her before him; for she sat crowned with
a pine. The General remembering that the pine was the mark and signal
distinction which he had in his dream, carried the Maid ashore in the Admiral,
with no small observance, and ceremonious fear. Now as soon as Chloe was set on
shore, the sound of the Pipe from the Promontore, began to be heard again; not
martial and terrible, as before, but perfectly pastoral, such as was used to
lead the Cattle to feed in the fields; the sheep ran down the scale of the
ship, and not so much as one of them slipped because they were hooved; The Goats
more boldly, for they were used to climb the Crags and steeps of the hills. The
whole flock encircled Chloe moving as in a dance about her, and with their
skipping, and their blating, showed a kind of joyfulnesse and exultation. But
the Goats of other Goatherds, as also the sheep and the herds, stirred not a
foot, but remained still in the ship, as if the music of that Pipe did not at
all call for them. When therefore they were all struck with admiration at these
things, and celebrated the praises of Pan; there were yet seen in both the
Elements, things more wonderful then those before. For the Ships of the
Methymnaeans before they had weighed their Anchors, ran amain; and a huge
Dolphin bouncing still out of the Sea, went before and led their Admiral: On
the Land, that most sweet melodious Pipe, led the flocks of the sacred
Shepherdess, and yet no body saw the Piper, no body knew from whence the
Charm. It was now the time of the second pasturing, and Daphnis having spied
from a high Stand, Chloe coming with the flocks; crying out mainly, O ye
Nymphs, O blessed Pan! made down to the Plains, and rushing into the Embraces
of Chloe, in a swoon fell to the ground. With much ado, when he was come to
himself with Chloe's kisses, and embraces in her close and warm arms, he got to
the Beech where they were wont; and when he was sat down on the trunck, he
asked her how she had escaped such a dangerous Captivity as that? Then she told
him every thing one after another, how the fresh and berried Ivy appeared on
the horns of all the Goats; how her sheep howled like Wolves, how a pine sprung
up upon her head; how all the Land seemed on a fire; what horrible fragors and
clashings were heard from the Sea, with the two tones of that pipe from the
Crag of the Promontore, the one to War, the other to Peace; the terrible
Specter of the night how she was ravished away; and how she not knowing her
way, had for her Companion and Guide, the sweet music of that strange
invisible Pipe.

Daphnis then acknowledged the vision of the Nymphs, and the works of Pan, and
storied to her what he himself had seen, and what he had heard; and how, when
he was ready to die for grief, his life was saved by the providence, and
kindness of the holy Nymphs. And then presently he sent her away to bring
Dryas and Lamo to the Sacrifice, and all things necessary for such a devotion
to Pan and the Nymphs. In the mean time, `he caught the fairest of all his
She-goats, and when he had crowned it with Ivy in that manner as the whole
flock had appeared to the Enemy, and had poured milk on the horns; in the name
of the Nymphs he struck and killed it, and sacrificed it to them; he hanged it
up, took off the skin, consecrated that, and made it an Anathema. When Chloe
with her Company was come, he made a fire, and some of the flesh being boiled,
and some roasted, he offered the Aparchae, the First, and chiefest parts of both
to the Nymphs, and filling a Crater with new wine, made a libation; then having
made several beds of green leaves, gave himself wholly to eating, drinking, and
playing, only he looked out now and then, lest the irruption of a Wolf upon him
should chance to do something like the enemy. They sung two certain songs in
the praise of the Nymphs, the solemn Carwen of the ancient Shepherds. All that
night they lay in the fields, and the next day they were not unmindfull of the
wonderworking Pan; but took the heegoat that was Captain and leader of the
flock; and when they had crowned him with pine-garlands, they brought him to
the Pine; and pouring wine upon his head, with benedictions and thankful
praise, they sacrificed him to Pan the preserver, then, the flesh, part roasted,
part boiled, they set upon banks of green leaves hard by, in the Meadow: the
skin with the horns themselves, they pegged to the Pine close to the Statue, to
a Pastoral god, a pastoral Anathema. They offered too, the Primitiae, or, the
first carvings of the flesh; Chloe sang, and Daphnis played upon the pipe.
These Rites performed, they sat down, and fell to feast. And it happened, that
Philetas the Herdsman came up to them, bringing with him certain Garlands to
honor Pan, together with grapes hanging still upon the branches. His youngest
Son Tityrus came along with him, a ruddy Lad, and gray-eyed, stout and fierce,
and of a nimble, bounding pace like a Kid. When they saw what the intention of
the good old Philetas was, they started up, and all together crowned the Statue
of Pan with Garlands, and hanged the palmits with their grapes upon the leaves
of the Pine; and then they made Philetas and Tityrus sit down to the Feast, and
be their guests, to eat and drink, and celebrate. Then, as old men use to do,
when they are a little whittled with wine, they had various discourses and
chats amongst them; how bravely in their youth they had administered the
pasturing of their flocks, and herds; how in their time they had escaped very
many invasions, and inroads of Pirates and Thieves; here one bragged, that he
had killed the hugest Wolf that ever came upon the fields; there another, that
he had bin Second to Pan alone in the skill and art of piping. And this was the
crack of Philetas. And therefore Daphnis and Chloe used all manner of
supplications to him, that he would communicate with them that Art of piping,
and play upon the Pipe at the feast of that god, whom he knew to delight so
much in the Pipe. Philetas promised to do it, although he excused himself by
the short breath of his old age, and so took Daphnis his Pipe.

But that being too little for so great an Art, as being made to be inspired by
the mouth of a boy, he sent his Son Tityrus for his own, the Cottage lying
distant from thence but ten furlongs. Tityrus flinging off his jacket ran
naked, swift as a Hind. But Lamo had promised to tell them that Tale of the
Pipe, which a Sicilian hired by him for a Goat and a Pipe, had sung to him.

This Pipe, That Organ which you see, was heretofore no Organ, but a very fair
Maid, who had a sweet, and musical voice. She fed Goats, played together with
the Nymphs, and sang as now. Pan; while she in this manner was tending her
Goats, playing and singing; came to her, and endeavored to persuade her to
what he desired, and promised her that he would make all her Goats bring forth
twins every year. But she disdained and derided his Love, and denied to take
him to be her Sweetheart, who was neither perfect man, nor perfect Goat. Pan
follows her with violence, and thinks to force her; Syrinx fled Pan, and his
force. Being now a weary with her flight, she shot her self into a Grove of
reeds, sunk in the Fen, and disappeared. Pan for anger cut up the reeds; and
finding not the Maid there; and then reflecting upon what had happened,
invented this Organ, and joined together imparil, or unequal quils, because
their Love was so imparil. So she who then was a fair Maid, is now become a
musical Pipe.

Lamo had now done his Tale, and Philetas praised him for it, as one that had
told them a Story far sweeter then any Song; when Tityrus came in, and brought
his Fathers Pipe, a large Organ, and made up of great quils; and where it was
joined together with wax, there too it was set, and varied with brass.
Insomuch, that one would have thought, that this had bin that very Pipe which
Pan the inventor made first.

When therefore Philetas was got up, and had set himself upright on a bench,
first he tried the quills whether they sounded clear and sweet; then finding
never a Cane was stopped, he played a loud, and lusty tune. One would not have
thought that he had heard but one Pipe, the Sound was so high, the consort so
full. But by little and little remitting that vehemence, he changed it to a
soft and sweeter tone; and playing with all the dexterousnesse of the art of
Music, he showed upon the Pipe, what Notes were fit for the herds of Cowes and
Oxen, what agreed with the flocks of Goats, what were pleasing to the sheep.
The tones for the sheep were soft and sweet, those of the herds were vehement;
and for the Goats, were sharp and shrill. In sum, that single Pipe of his
expressed even all the Shepherds pipes. Therefore the rest in deep silence sat
still, delighted and charmed with that Music. But Dryas rising and bidding him
strike up a Dionysia^, or Bacchus, fell to dance before them the Epilenion, the
dance of the Winepresse. And now he acted to the Life the cutting and gathering
of the grapes; now the carrying of the baskets; then the treading of the grapes
in the Press; then presently the tunning of the Wine into the Butts; and then
again, their joyful and hearty carousing the Must. All these things he
represented so aptly and clearly in his dancing, that they all thought, they
verily saw before their face, the Vines, the Grapes, the Must, the Butts, and
that Dryas did drink indeed. This third old man when he had pleased them so
well with his dance, embraced and kissed Daphnis and Chloe. Therefore they two
rising quickly, fell to dancing Lamo's Tale. Daphnis played Pan; and Chloe,
Syrinx. He wooes, and prays, to persuade, and win her; She shows her disdain,
laughs at his love, and flies him. Daphnis follows as to force her, and
running on his tiptoes, imitates the hooves of Pan. Chloe on the other side,
acts Syrinx wearied with her flight, and throws her self into the Wood, as she
had done into the Fenne. But Daphnis catching up that great Pipe of Philetas,
plays at first something that was doleful, and bewailing a Lover; then
something that made Love, and was persuasive to relenting; then an anacletic,
or recall from the Wood, as from one that dearly sought her; insomuch, that
Philetas struck with admiration and joy, could not hold from capering: then
kissing Daphnis, he gave him that Pipe of his, and commanded him to leave it to
a Successor like himself. Daphnis hanged up his own small one to Pan, and when
he had kissed his Chloe, as returning from a true unfeigned flight, he drove home
his Flocks piping all the way. Chloe too, by the same Music gathered together
her Flocks, the Goats stritting along with the Sheep, because Daphnis walked
close by Chloe. Thus till it was night they entertained one another with
pleasure, and agreed to drive out their flocks sooner the next morning. And so
they did. For as soon as it was day they went out to pasture; and when they had
first saluted the Nymphs, and then Pan, afterward sitting down under an Oak,
they had the music of Philetas his Pipe, in that stillnesse and solitude of
the early morning. After that, they kissed, embraced, and hugged one another, and
lay down both together on the ground, and doing nothing more then so, rose up
again. Nor were they incurious of their meat; and for their drink, they drank
wine mingled with milk. With all which Incentives being more heated, and made
more lively and forward, they practiced between them an Erotic Contention, or
an amorous Controversy about their Love to one another, and thereupon
proceeded to bind themselves by the faith of Oaths.

For Daphnis coming up to the Pine, swore by Pan, that he would not live alone
in this world without Chloe, so much as the space of one day: And Chloe swore
in the Cave of the Nymphs, that she would have the same death, and life with
Daphnis. Yet such was the Simplicity of Chloe, as being but a Girl, that when
she was out of the Cave, she demanded another Oath of Daphnis.

Daphnis, (quoth she) Pan is a wanton, faithless god; for he loved Pitys, he
loved Syrinx too. Besides, he never ceases to trouble and vex the Dryads, and
to solicit the Nymphs under the Appletrees. Therefore he, if by thy
faithlesnesse thou should neglect him, would not take care to punish thee,
although thou should go to more Maids, then there are quills in that Pipe.
But do thou swear to me by this flock of Goats, and by that Goat which was thy
Nurse, That thou will never forsake Chloe, so long as she is faithful to thee:
and when she is false and injurious to thee and the Nymphs, then fly her, then
take her, and kill her like a Wolf.

Daphnis was pleased with this pretty Jealousy, and standing in the midst of
his flocks, with one hand laying hold on a she-goat, and the other on a he,
swore that he would love Chloe that loved him, and that if she preferred any
other to Daphnis, that then in her stead, he would slay that heegoat. Of this
Chloe was glad, and believed him as a poor and harmless maid, one that was
bred a Shepherdess, and thought that flocks of Sheep and Goats, were proper
Numens of the Shepherds.

The End of the Second Book.
A Summary of the Third Book.
THe Mitylenaeans upon that Incursion, send Hippasus their General with
Landforces against Methymna. But the Quarrel is taken up. Daphnis and Chloe
take it heavily that they are parted by the Winter. Daphnis to see her, goes a
fowling before Dryas his Cottage, and looks as if he minded not her. Dryas
brings him in to the Feast of Dionysius. The Spring returning, they return to
their Pastoralls. Daphnis complains of his ignorance in the practice of Love.
Lycaenium cousens him, and Cuccolds Chromis. Daphnis, as the Mariners sail by,
tells Chloe the Tale of Echo. Many and rich Suitors are now about Chloe, and
Dryas almost gives his consent. Daphnis is sad as being poor: But by direction
of the Nymphs he finds a purse full of silver. He gives it Dryas, and Chloe is
contracted to him; only Lamo, because he was Servant to Dionysophanes, says
his Lord is to be expected that he may ratify the business. Daphnis gives
Chloe a rare Apple.

Daphnis and Chloe.
The Third Book.
BUt the Mitylenaeans when they heard of the arrival of those ten Ships, and
some of the Countrymen, coming up from the Farms, had told them what a
plundering and rapin there had bin, thought it too disgraceful to be born, and
therefore decreed, to raise Arms against Methymna. And having chosen out three
thousand Targettiers, and five hundred Horse, they sent away their General
Hippasus by Land, not daring to trust the Sea in Winter. He did not as he
marched depopulate the Villages of Methymna; nor did he rob the Farms of the
Husbandmen, or the Pastures of the Shepherds, counting such actions as those to
suit better with a La^ron, then the Grand Captain of an Army: but hasted up to
the Town it self to surprise it. But while he was yet an hundred Stadiums off
from the Town, an Herald met him with Articles. For after that the Methymnaeans
were informed by the Captives, that the Mitylenaeans knew nothing of those
things that had happened; and that the Ploughmen and Shepherds provoking the
young Gentlemen, were they that were the Causes of all; it repented them of
that expedition of Bryaxis against a Neighbor-city, as of an Action more
precipitant, then moderate and wise.

And these were the Articles of Agreement: To return all the Prey and Spoil
that was taken and carried away; To have commerce, and trade securely with one
another, by Land, and by Sea. Therefore Hippasus dispatches away that Herald
to Mitylene, although he had bin created the General of the War, and so had
power to sign as he listed. But pitching his Camp about ten Stadiums from
Methymna, there he attended Mandates from the City. Two days after, the
Messenger returned, and brought a Command, that they should receive the
plundered Goods, and all the Captives, and march home without doing the least
harm. Because Methymna, when War, or Peace were offered to be chosen, found
peace to be more profitable. And this quarrel betwixt Methymna and Mitylene,
which was of an unexpected beginning and end, was thus taken up and composed.
And now Winter was come on, a winter more bitter then war, to Daphnis and
Chloe. For on a sudden there fell a great Snow which blinded all the paths,
stopped up all ways, and shut up all the Shepherds and Colones. The very
Torrents were frozen and glazed with Crystal. The hedges and trees looked as if
they had bin clipped and cropped; and there was nothing to be seen but stumps. All
the ground was hoodwinkt up, but that which lay upon the fountains and the
rills. And therefore no man drove out his flocks to pasture, or did so much as
come to the door, but about the Cock's crowing made their fires nosehigh; and
some spun flax; some Tarpaulin for the Sea; others; with all their Sophistry,
made gins, and nets, and traps for birds. At that time their care was employed
about the Oxen and Cows that were fodder'd with chafe in the stalls; about the
Goats, and about the Sheep, and those which fed on green leaves in the
sheepcoats and the folds; or else about fatting their hogs in the styes with
Acorns and other mast.

When all was thus taken up with their domestic affairs, the other Colones and
Shepherds were very jovial and merry, as being for a while discharged of their
labors, and used to have their breakfast betime in the morning, when they had
slept long winter nights: so that the winter was to them more pleasant then the
Summer, the Autumn, or the very Spring. But Chloe and Daphnis, when they
remembered what a sweet Conversation they had held before; how they had kissed,
how they had embraced and hugged one another, how they had lived at a common
Scrip, all which were now as pleasures lost: how they had long and sleeplesse
nights, now they were always sad and pensive, and desired nothing so much as a
quick retrive of the Spring, to become their regeneration and return from
death. Besides this, it was their grief and complaint, if but a Scrip came to
their hands out of which they had eaten before in the fields; or a
Sillibub-piggin, out of which they had used to drink: or if they chanced to see
a Pipe laid aside and neglected, such as had bin not long before, the Gift of a
dear friend, or a Lover. And therefore they prayed to Pan, and the Nymphs, that
they would deliver them from these evils and miseries, and show to them and
their flocks the Sun again. Both praying the same thing, they labored too, and
cast about to find a way, by which they might come to see one another. Poor
Chloe was void of all counsel, and had no device nor plot. For the old woman,
her reputed mother, was by her continually, and taught her to card the fine
wool, and twirle the Spindle, or else was still a clocking for her, and ever
and anon casting in words, and twatling to her about her marriage. But Daphnis,
who was now at leisure enough, and was of a more projecting wit then she,
devised this Sophism to see her.

Before Dryas his Cottage, and indeed under the very Cottage it self, there
grew two tall myrtles, and an Ivie-bush. The myrtles stood not far off from one
another, and between them the Ivy ran, and so, that it made a kind of arbor
by clasping the arms about them both, and by the order, the thickness and
interweaving of its branches and leaves; many and great clusters of berries,
hanging like those of the Vines upon the palmits. And therefore it was, that
great store of winter birds haunted the bush, for want (it seems) of food
abroad; many blackbirds, many Thrushes, Stockdoves and Starlings, with other
birds that feed on berries. Under pretext of birding there, Daphnis came out,
his Scrip furnished with Country dainties, bringing with him, to persuade and
affirm his meaning, snares and lime-twigs for the purpose. The place lay off
but ten furlongs: and yet the Snow that lay unmelted, found him somewhat to do
to pass through it. But all things are pervious to Love, even Fire, Water, and
Scythian Snowes. Therefore plodding through, he came up to the Cottage, and
when he had shook off the Snow from his thighs, he set his snares, and pricked
his lime-twiggs. Then he sat down, and thought of nothing carefully, but of
Chloe and the birds.

There flew to the bushes many birds, and a sufficient number was taken to
busy Daphnis a thousand ways, in running up and down, in gathering, killing,
and depluming his game. But no body stirred out of the Cottage; not a man or
woman to be seen, not so much as a hen at the door; but all were shut up in
the warm house: so that now poor Daphnis knew not what in the world to do, but
was at a stand, as if he had come unluckily a fowling. And assuredly he would
have ventured to intrude himself, if he could but have found out some specious
cause, and plausible enough; and so deliberated with himself, what was the
likeliest to be said.

I came to fetch fire, and was there none within ten furlongs nearer to Lamo's?
I came to borrow bread, but thy Scrip is stufft with Cakes. I wanted wine; Thy
Vintage was but the other day. A wolf pursued me; where are the tracings of a
wolf? I came hither to catch Birds; And when thou have caught them, why gettest
thou not thy self home? I have a mind to see Chloe; but how can any body
confess such a thing as that to the Father and Mother of a Maid? Besides, the
Servants are at a deep silence, and all at home. But there is not one of all
these things that carries not Suspicion with it. Therefore it is better to be
silent. But I shall see Chloe at the first peeping of the Spring, since (as it
seems) the Fates prohibit it in Winter.

These thoughts cast up and down in his anxious mind, and his prey taken up, he
thinks to be gone, and makes away. But then, as if Love himself had pitied his
cause, it happened thus: Dryas and his Family had a Feast, the meat was taken
up, and divided to messes, the board was covered, the Crater set and trimmed.
But one of the flock-dogs took his time while they were busy, and ran out
adoors with a shoulder of mutton. Dryas was vexed, for that belonged to his
mess, and snatching up a club, followed at his heels as if it had bin another
dog. This pursuit brought him up to the Ivy, where he espied the young Daphnis
packing away with his birds on his back.

With that, forgetting the dog and the flesh, he cries out amain: Hail boy,
hail boy; and fell on his neck to kiss him, and catching him by the hand, led
him along into the house. And then it wanted but a little that Daphnis and
Chloe fell not both to the ground, when at first they saw one another: yet
while they strove with themselves to stand upright, there past salutations and
kisses between them, and those to them were as pillars and sustentations to
hold them from toppling into swoones. Daphnis having now got, beyond all hope,
not only a kiss, but Chloe her self too, sat down by the fire, and laid upon
the table his blackbirds, Stock-doves, and Thrushes: and fell to tell them, how
tedious the business of the house, and keeping within had bin to him, and that
therefore he was come out to recreate himself, and, as they saw, to catch
birds: how he had taken some with lime-twigs, some with snares as they were
feeding greedily upon the Ivy and the myrtle-berries. They on the other side
fell to commend and praise Daphnis, as if Apollo himself had bin their
stranger; and commanded Chloe to wait on them, and fill their wine. She with a
merry countenance filled to the rest; and after them, somewhat frowningly to
Daphnis: For she feigned a pretty anger, because that when he was there, he
would offer to go away in such a manner, and not see her. Yet before she gave
it to him, she kissed the Cup, and sipt a little, and so gave it.

Daphnis, although he was almost choakt for want of drink, drank slowly,
tickling himself by that delay, with longer pleasure. Dinner was done, and the
Table voided; and every body began to ask, how Lamo and Myrtale had done a
great while, and so went on to pronounce them happy folks, who had got such a
stay, and cherisher of their old age.

And it was no small pleasure to Daphnis to be praised so in the hearing of
Chloe. And when besides they said, That he must and should tarry with them the
next day, because it was their Sacrifice to Bacchus, it wanted but a little
that for very pleasure the ravished Lover had worshipped them, instead of
Bacchus himself; and therefore presently he drew out of his Scrip good store of
sweet-cakes, and his birds were ordered to be made ready for Supper. A fresh
Crater of wine was set, a new fire kindled up; and when it was night, their
second Table brought in: when Supper was done, and part of their time was spent
in telling of old Tales, part in singing some of the ditties of the fields,
they went to bed; Chloe with her Mother, Daphnis with Dryas. But then nothing
was sweet and pleasing to poor Chloe, but that the next morning she should see
her Daphnis again.

And Daphnis entertained the night himself with a fantastic, empty pleasure;
for it was sweet to his imagination, to lie but with the Father of Chloe, and
he dreamed to himself that even there he embraced, and kissed her. In the morning
it was a sharp frost, and the North wind was very nipping, when they all rose
and prepared to celebrate. With solemn invocations of Bacchus, Dryas sacrificed
a ram, and a huge fire was built up to roast the meat. While Nape was making
the holy bread, and Dryas rosting the Ram, Daphnis and Chloe had time to go
forth as far as the Iviebush; and when he had set his snares again, they had a
sweet Collation of Kisses without intermission, and then a dear Conversation in
the Language of Love.

Chloe, I came for thy sake. I know it Daphnis. It Is long of thee that I
destroy the poor birds. And am I nobody in thy account? Remember me. I
remember thee by the Nymphs, by whom heretofore I have sworn in yonder Cave,
whither we will go as soon as ever the Snow melts. But it lies very deep,
Chloe, and I fear I shall melt first. Courage man, the Sun burns hot. I would
it burnt like that fire which now burns my very heart. You do but gibe, and
cosen me! I do not, by the Goats, by which thou did once bid me to swear to
thee.

While Chloe was holding on her Antiphona to Daphnis, Nape called, and in they
ran, with more birds then had bin taken the day before. Now when they had made
a libation of the first of the Crater to Dionysius, they fell to their meat,
with Ivy Crowns upon their heads: and when it was time, having cried the
Jacchus, and Euous, they sent away Daphnis, his Scrip first crammed with flesh
and bread. They gave him too, the Stock-doves and Thrushes to carry Lamo and
Myrtale, as being like to catch themselves more while the frost and Ivy
lasted. And so Daphnis went his way when he had kissed the rest first, and then
Chloe, that he might carry along with him, her Kiss untoucht and entire: and
by other devices he came often thither, that the Winter might not escape away
wholly, without some fruition of the sweets of Love.

It was now the beginning of the Spring, the Snow was gone, the Earth
uncovered, and all was green, when the other Shepherds drove out their flocks
to pasture, and Chloe and Daphnis before the rest, as being Servants to greater
Shepherds. And forthwith they took their course up to the Nymphs, and that
Cave, thence to Pan, and his Pipe; afterward to their own Oak, where they sat
down to look to their flocks, and kiss, and clip insatiably. They sought*
about for flowers too to crown the Statues of the Nymphs. The soft breath of
Zephyrus and the warm Sun, had brought some forth; and there were then to be
found the Violet, the Daffodil, the Primrose, with the other primes, and
dawnings of the Spring. And when they had crowned the Statues of the gods with
them, they made a Libation with new milk from the Sheep, and from the Goats.
They began too to play on the Pipe, and to provoke and challenge the
Nightingales with their Music, and Song. The Nightingales answered softly from
the Groves, and resuming their long intermitted Song, began to jug and warble
their Tereus and Ity's again. Here and there not without pleasure, the blating
of the flocks was heard, and the Lambs came skipping and inclined themselves
obliquely under the damms to riggle and nussle at their dugs. But those which
had not yet teemed, the Rams pursued; and when with some pains they had made
them stand, one rid another. There were seen too the Chases of the he-goats,
and their lascivious ardent leaps. Sometimes they had battles for the she is,
and every one had his own wives, and kept them sollicitously, that no sculking
adulterer should set upon them.

The old men seeing such incendiary sights as these, were pricked to Venus: but
the Young, and such as of themselves did itch, and for some time had longed for
the pleasure of Love, were wholly inflamed with what they heard, and melted
away with what they saw, and looked for something far more excellent then kisses
and embraces were: and amongst them was Daphnis chief. Therefore he, as being
now grown up and lusty by keeping at home, and following easy business all
the Winter, was carried furiously to kissing, and stung with the desire to
embrace, and close; and, in what he did, was now more curious, and more rampant
then ever before. And therefore he began to ask of Chloe, that she would give
him free leave to do with her what he listed, and that she would lie naked with
him naked, and longer too then they were wont: For there was nothing but that,
remaining of the Institutes of old Philetas, and that he would try, as the
only Canon, the only medicine to ease the pain of Love.

But Chloe asking him, whether any thing remained more then kissing, embracing,
and lying together upon the ground? or what he could do by lying naked upon a
naked Girl?

That (quoth he) which the Rams use to do with the Ewes, and the he-Goats with
the She Is. Do you not see, how after that work, neither these run away, nor
those weary themselves in pursuit of them; but afterward how enjoying a common
pleasure, they feed together quietly. That -- as it seems is a sweet practice,
and such as can master the bitterness of Love.

How Daphnis? And do thou not see the she-Goats and the Ewes, the he-Goats
and the Rams, how these do their work standing, and those suffer standing too;
these leaping; and those admitting: them upon their* backs? And yet thou ask
me to lie down, and that naked. But how much rougher are they then I, although
I have all my Clothes on?

Daphnis is persuaded, and laying her down, lay down with her, and lay long;
but knowing how to do nothing of that which yet he was mad to do, lifted her
up, and endeavored to imitate the Goats. But at the first finding a mere
frustration there, he sat up, and lamented to himself, that he was more
unskilful then a very Top in the practice of the mystery and the Art of Love.
But there was a certain neighbor of his, a landed man, Chromis his name, and
was now by his age somewhat declining. He married out of the City a young,
fair, and buxome girl, one that was too fine and delicate for the Country, and
a Clown: Her name was Lycaenium; and she observing Daphnis as every day early
in the morning he drove out his Goats to the fields, and home again at the
first twilight, had a great mind to purchase the youth by gifts to become her
sweetheart. And therefore once when she had sculkt for her opportunity, and
caught him alone, she gave him a curious fine pipe, some precious hony-combs,
and a new Scrip of Stag-skin: but durst not break her mind to him, because she
could easily conjecture at that dear love he bore to Chloe. For she saw him
wholly addicted to the girl; which indeed she might well perceive before, by
the winking, nodding, laughing and tittering that was between them: but one
morning she made Chromis believe that she was to go to a woman's labor, and
followed softly behind them two at some distance, and then slipped away into a
thicket and hid her self, and so could hear all that they said, and see too all
that they did; and the lamenting untaught Daphnis was perfectly within her
reach. Wherefore she began to condole the condition of the wretched Lovers, and
finding that she had light upon a double opportunity; this, to the preservation
of them; that, to satisfy her own wanton desire, she projected to accomplish
both by this device. The nextday making as if she were to go a Gossipping
again, she came up openly to the Oak where Daphnis and Chloe were sitting
together; and when she had skilfully counterfeited that she was scared, Help
(Daphnis) help me, (quoth she) An Eagle has carried away from me the goodliest
Goose of twenty in a flock, which yet, by reason of the great weight, she was
not able to carry to the top of that her wonted high crag, but is fallen down
with her into yonder Cops. For the Nymphs sake, and this Pan's, do thou Daphnis
go in to the Wood, and rescue my Goose. For I dare not go in my self alone. Let
me not thus lose the Tale of my Geese. And it may be thou may kill the Eagle
too, and then she will scarce come hither any more to prey upon the Kids and
Lambs. Chloe for so long will look to the flock; the Goats know her as thy
perpetual Companion in the fields.

Now Daphnis suspecting nothing of that that was intended, gets up quickly, and
taking his staff followed Lycaenium, who lead him a great way off from Chloe.
But when they were come into the thickest part of the wood, and she had bid him
sit down by a Fountain:

Daphnis (quoth she) Thou do love Chloe, and that I learnt last night of the
Nymphs. Those tears which yesterday thou did pour down, were shown to me in
a dream by them, and they commanded me, that I should save thee, and teach thee
the secret practices of Love. But those are not Kisses, nor Embracing, nor yet
such things as thou see the Rams, and the he-goats do. There are other leaps,
there are other friskins then those, and far sweeter then them: For unto these
there appertains a much longer duration of pleasure. If then thou would be
rid of thy misery, and make an Experiment of that pleasure and sweetness which
you have sought, and mist so long, come on, deliver thy self to me a sweet
Scholar, and I, to gratify the Nymphs, will be thy Mistress.

At this Daphnis as being a rustic Goat-herd, a sanguin Youth, and burning in
desire, could not contain himself for mere pleasure, and that Lubency that he
had to be taught; but throws himself at the foot of Lycaenium, and begs of
her, That she would teach him quickly that Art, by which he should be able, as
he would, to do Chloe; and he should not only accept it as a rare and brave
thing sent from the gods, but for her kindness he would give her too a young
Kid, some of the finest newmilk-Cheeses; nay, besides, he promised her the dam
her self.

Wherefore Lycaenium now she had found the Goat-herd so willing and forward
beyond her expectation, began to instruct the Lad thus -- She bid him sit down
as near to her as possibly he could, and that he should kiss her as close and
as often as he used to kiss Chloe; and while he kissed her to clip her in his
arms and hugg her to him, and lie down with her upon the ground. As now he was
sitting, and kissing, and lay down with her; She, when she saw him itching to
be at her, lifted him up from the reclination on his side, and slipping under,
not without art, directed him to her Fancy, the place so long desired and
sought.

Of that which happened after this, there was nothing done that was strange,
nothing that was insolent: the Lady Nature and Lycenium showed him how to do
the rest.

This wanton Information being over, Daphnis, who had still a Childish
Pastoral mind, would presently be gone, and run up to Chloe, to have an
experiment with her, how much he had profited by that magistery, as if indeed
he had bin afraid lest staying but a little longer, he should forget to do his
trick.

But Lycenium intercepted him thus: Thou art yet Daphnis, to learn this
besides: I who am a woman, have suffered nothing in this close with thee, but
what I am well acquainted withal. For heretofore another Youth taught me to
play at this sport, and for his pains he had my maidenherd. But if thou strive
with Chloe in this list, she will squeak, and cry out, and bleed as if she were
stickt. But be not thou afraid of her bleeding; but when thou have persuaded
her to thy pleasure, bring her hither into this place, that although she should
cry and roar, no body can hear; and if she bleed, here is a clear Fountain, she
may wash: and do thou, Daphnis, never forget it, that I before Chloe* made thee
a man.

These advertisements given, Lycenium kissed him, and went away through another
glade of the Wood, as if still she would look her Goose. But Daphnis
considering with himself what had been said, remitted much of that impetuous
heat he had to Chloe. For he durst not venture to press her beyond his former
kissing and embracing; because he could not endure that she should make an
outcry, as against an Enemy, or shed tears for any grief or anguish from him,
and much less that she should bleed, as if she had bin slain by Daphnis. For
he himself not long before had had some experience of that when he was beaten
by the Methymnaeans, and therefore he abhorred blood, and thought verily that
no blood could follow but only from a wound. His resolution therefore was, to
do with her as he had done before, and imagine pleasure on this side the
traverse; and so he comes out of the Wood up to the place where Chloe sat
platting a Garland of Violets, and tells her he had rescued the Goose, and
killed the Eagle; then flinging his arms about her, and clasping her to him,
kissed her as he did Lycenium in that sweet sport that he was lately at: For that
he might do, because that seemed to have no danger in it. But Chloe fits the
chaplet to his head, and then kisses his locks as fairer and sweeter then the
Violets, and out of her Scrip she gave him of her Cakes and Simnels to eat, and
snatched it by stealth from his mouth again as he was eating, and fed like a
wanton, harmless bird.

While thus they eat and take more kisses then bits, they saw a Fisher-mans
boat come by. The wind was down, the Sea was smooth, and there was a great
Calm. Wherefore when they saw there was need of rowing, they fell to ply the
Oars stoutly. For they made haste to bring in a delicate sort of fish
newly-salted, to fit the palates of the richer Citizens of Mitylene. That
therefore which other Mariners use to do to elude the tediousness of labor,
these began, and held on, as they rowed along. There was one amongst them that
was the Celeustes, or, the hortator to ply, and he had certain nautic-odes, or
Sea-songs: the rest like a Chorus all together strained their throats to a loud
holla, and caught his voice at certain intervals. While they did thus in the
open Sea, the clamor vanished, as being diffused in the vast air.

But when they came under any Promontore, or into a flexuous, horned, hollow
bay, there as the voice was heard stronger, so the Songs of the Celeusmata, or
hortaments to the answering Mariners, fell clearer to the Land. The hollow
valley below received into it self, that shrill sound as into an Organ, and by
an imitating voice rendered from it self, all that was said, all that was done,
and every thing distinctly by it self; by it self the clattering of the Oars;
by it self the whooping of the Seamen: and certainly it was a most pleasant
hearing. The Sound coming first from the Sea, the Sound from the Land ended so
much the later, by how much it was slower to begin.

Daphnis therefore taking special notice of the music attended wholly to the
Sea, and was sweetly affected, endeavoring while the Pinnace glided by like a
bird in the air, to preserve to himself some of those tones to play afterward
upon his Pipe.

But Chloe having then had her first experience of that which is called Echo,
now cast her eyes toward the Sea, minding the loud Celeusmata of the
Mariners; now to the Woods, seeking for those who answered from thence with
such a clamor, and when, because the Pinnace was past away, there was a deep
silence in the valley, she asked of Daphnis, Whether there were another Sea
beyond the Promontore, and another Ship did pass by there? and whether there
were other Mariners that sung the same Songs, and all were whist and kept
silence together? Daphnis laughed sweetly at this, and giving her a sweeter
kiss, put the violet chaplet upon her head, and began to tell her the Tale of
Echo, requiring first, that when he had taught her that, he should have of her
for his wages, ten kisses more:

There are of the Nymphs (my dear Girl) more kinds then one. There are the
Melicae, there are the Dryades, there are the Eliae; all are beautiful, all are
musical. To one of these Echo was daughter; and she mortal, because she came of
a mortal Father; but a rare beauty, deriving from a beauteous mother. She was
educated by the Nymphs, and taught by the Muses to sing, to play on the Pipes
to strike the Lyre, to touch the Lute; and in sum, all music. And therefore
when she was grown up, and in the flower of her Virgin beauty, she danced
together with the Nymphs; and sung in consort with the Muses; but fled from all
males whether Men or gods; because she loved Virginity. Pan sees that, and
takes occasion to be angry at the maid, and to envy her music, because he
could not come at her beauty. Therefore he sends a madness amongst the
Shepherds and Goatherds; and they in a desperate fury like so many Dogs and
Wolves, tore her all to pieces, and flung about them all over the Earth her yet
Singing Limbs. The Earth in observance of the Nymphs, buried them all,
preserving to them still their musickproperty: and they by an everlasting
Sentence and decree of the Muses breathe out a voice, and they imitate all
things now, as she did then before a Maid, the gods, Men, Organs, Beasts: Pan
himself she imitates too, when he plays on the Pipe, which when he hears, he
bounces out, and begins to follow her over the Mountains, not so much to catch
her, and hold her, as to know what clandestin Scholar that is that he has got.

When Daphnis thus had told his Tale, Chloe gave him not only ten, but
innumerable kisses. For Echo said almost the same, and bore him witness that
he did not lie.

But now when the Sun was grown more burning, the Spring going out, and Summer
coming in, they were invited to new, and Summer pleasure. Daphnis; he swome in
the Rivers: Chloe, she bathed in the Springs: he with his Pipe contended with
the Pines; she with her voice strove with the Nightingales. Sometimes they
hunted the prattling Locusts; sometimes they caught the chirping Grasshoppers,
they gathered flowers, they shook the Trees for mellow fruits. And now and
then they lay together naked on a Goat-skin, That still they took along with
them. And Chloe undoubtedly had lost her maidenhead, but that Daphnis was
terrified with the thought of blood. And therefore fearing, lest one time or
another his Reason should be mastered by his Love, he seldom bid Chloe turn her
self naked to dally with him; which Chloe wondered at; but her bashfulnesse
would not let her ask him the reason of it.

That Summer Chloe had many Suitors, and many came from many places to Dryas to
get his good will to have her. Some brought their gifts along with them; others
promised great matters.

Nape was tempted by her hope, and began to persuade that the Girl should be
bestowed, and to urge, that a maid of her age, should not longer be kept at
home: for who knows whether one time or other, she may not lose her maidenhead
for an apple, or arose as she keeps the field, and make some unworthy Shepherd
a man, and her husband; and therefore it was better she should now be made the
Dame of the house, and when they had got sufficiently by her, it should be laid
up for their Son; for of late they had born a jolly boy.

But Dryas was variously affected with what was said; sometimes he was pleased:
for greater gifts were named to him by every one, then suited with a rural
Girl, a Shepherdess: sometimes again, he thought the Maid deserved better,
then to be married to a Clown, and that, if ever she should find her true
Parents, she might make him and his Family happy* then he defers his answer to
the Wooers, and puts them on from day to day, and in the interim has many
Presents.

When Chloe came to the knowledge of this, she was very sad, and yet she hid it
long from Daphnis, because she would not give him a cause of grief. But when he
was importunate, and urged her to tell him what the matter was, and seemed to
be more troubled when he knew it not, than he should be when he knew it; then,
poor Girl, she told him all the words, by which Nape incited Dryas to marry
her speedily; and how Dryas had not denied it, but only had put it off to the
Vintage.

Daphnis with this is at his wits end, and sitting down he wept bitterly, and
said, that, if Chloe were taken from him, he would die; and not only he, but
all the flocks that lost so sweet a Shepherdess.

After this passion Daphnis came to himself again, and took courage, thinking
he should persuade Dryas in his own behalf, and resolved to put himself among
the Wooers, with hope that his desert would say for him, Room for your Betters.
There was one thing troubled him worst of all; and that was, his Father Lamo
was not rich; that disheartened him, that allayed his hope much. Nevertheless,
it seemed best that he should come in for a Suitor, and that was Chloe's
sentence too. To Lamo he durst not venture to speak, but put on a good face,
and spoke to Myrtale, and did not only show her his Love, but talked to her of
marrying the Girl; and in the night, when they were in bed, she acquainted
Lamo with it. But Lamo entertaining what she said in that case very harshly,
and chiding her that she should offer to make a match between a Shepherds
daughter, and such a Youth as he, whose monuments did declare him a great
Fortune, and of high extraction; and one, that if his true Parents were found,
would not only make them free, but possessors of larger lands: Myrtale
considering the power of Love, and therefore fearing, if he should altogether
despair the marriage, lest he should attempt something upon his life, returned
him other causes then Lamo had, to contradict it:

My Son, we are but poor, and have more need to take a Bride that does bring us
something, then one that will have much from us. They on the other side are
rich, and such as look for rich husbands. Go thou and persuade Chloe* and let
her persuade her Father, that he shall ask no great matter, and give you his
consent to marry; for on my life she loves thee dearly, and had rather a
thousand times lie with a poor, and handsome man, then a rich Monkey.

And now Myrtale, who never hoped that Dryas would consent to these things,
because there were so many rich Wooers, thought she had finely excused to him,
their refusing of the marriage.

Daphnis knew not what to say against this, and so finding himself far enough
off from what he desired; that which is usual with Lovers who are beggars, that
he did. With tears he lamented his condition, and again implored the help of
the Nymphs. They appeared to him in the night in his sleep, in the same form
and habit as before; and she that was eldest spoke again: Some other of the
gods takes the care about the marrying of Chloe: but we shall furnish thee with
gifts, which will easily make her Father Dryas* That Ship of the Methymnaeans,
when thy Goats had eaten her cable, that very day was carried off by the winds
far from the shore. That night there rose a tempestuous* Sea-wind that blew to
the Land, and dashed her against the rocks; there she perished with all that was
in her. But the waves cast up a purse, in which there are three thousand
Drams, and that thou shall find covered with Ouse hard by a dead Dolphin,
near which no passenger comes, but turns another way as fast as he can,
detesting the stench of the rotting fish. But do thou make haste thither, take
it, and give it Dryas. And let it suffice that now thou art not poor, and
hereafter in time thou shall be rich. This spoken, they past away together with
the night. It was now day, and Daphnis leapt out of bed as full of joy as his
heart could hold, and hurried his Goats before him to the field; and after he
had kissed Chloe, and adored the Nymphs, to the Sea he goes, making as if that
morning he had a mind to bedew himself with Seawater. And walking there upon
the gravel near the line of the excursion and breaking of the waves, he looked
for his three thousand Drams. But soon he found he should not be put to
much labor. For the stench of the Dolphin had reached him, as he lay cast up,
and was rotting upon the slabby sand. When he had got that sent for his guide,
he came up presently to the place, and removing the ouse, found the purse full
of silver. He took it up, and put it into his Scrip, yet went not away till
with joyful devotion he had blessed the Nymphs and the Sea, For though he was a
keeper of Goats, yet he was now obliged to the Sea, and had a sweeter sense of
that, then the Land, because it had promoted him to marry Chloe.

Thus having got his three thousand Drams, he made no longer stay; but, as
if now, he were not only richer then any of the Colones that dwelt there, but
then any man that trod on the ground, he hastens to Chloe, tells her his dream,
shows her the purse, and bids her look to his flocks till he comes again.

Then stretching and stritting along, he busles in like a Lord upon Dryas, whom
he then found with Nape at the threshing-floor, and on a sudden talked very
boldly about the marrying of Chloe:

Give me Chloe to my Wife. For I can play finely on the Pipe, I can cut the
Vines, and I can plant them. Nor am I ignorant how, and when the ground is to
be ploughed, or how the Corn is to be winnowed and fanned by the wind. But how
I keep and govern flocks, Chloe can tell. Fifty She-goats I had of my Father
Lamo; I have made them as many more, and doubled the number (...). Besides, I
have brought up goodly, proper He-goats; whereas before we went for leaps to
other men's. Moreover, I am a young man, your neighbor too, and one that you
cannot twit in the teeth with any thing. And further, I had a Goat to my Nurse,
as yourChloe had a Sheep. Since in these I have got the start, and out gone
others, neither in gifts shall I be any whit behind them. They may give you the
scrag end of a small flock of Sheep and Goats, a rascal pair of Oxen, and so
much Corn as scant will serve to keep the Hens. But from me, look you here,
three Thousand Drams. Only let no body know of this, no not so much as my
Father Lamo.

With that he gave it into his hand, embraced Dryas, and kissed him.

They when they saw such an unexpected lump of money, without delay promised
him Chloe, and to procute Lamo's consent. Nape therefore stayed there with
Daphnis, and drove her Oxen about the floor, to break the ears very small, and
slip out the grain, with her hurdle set with sharp stones. But Dryas having
carefully laid up his purse of silver in that place where the monuments of
Chloe were kept, makes away presently to Lamo and Myrtale, to woo them for the
new Bridegroom. Them he found a measuring barley newly fanned, and much
dejected, because that year the ground had scarcely restored them their seed.
Dryas put in to comfort them concerning that, affirming it was a Common Cause,
and that every where he met with the same cry; and then asks their good will,
that Daphnis by all means should marry Chloe, and told them withal, that
although others did offer him great matters, yet of them he would take nothing;
nay, rather he would give them somewhat for him.

For they had bin bred up together, and by keeping their flocks together in the
fields, were grown to so dear a Love, as was not easy to be dissolved: and
now, they were of such an age, as says they may go to bed together. This said
Dryas, and much more, because for the fee of his oratory to the marriage, he
had at home three thousand Drams. And now Lamo could no longer obtend
poverty: for they did not disdain his lowness, nor yet Daphnis his age; for he
was come to his flowery youth. That indeed which troubled him, and yet he would
not say so, was this, namely, that Daphnis was of higher merit then such a
match could suit withal. But after a short silence, he returned him this
answer:

You do well to prefer your neighbors to strangers, and not to esteem riches
better then honest poverty. Pan, and the Nymphs be good to you for this. And I
for my part do not at all hinder the marriage. It were madness in me, who am
now ancient, and want many hands to my daily work, if I should not join to me
the friendship and alliance of your family. Oh how great and desirable a Good
is that! Besides, Chloe is sought after by very many, a fair Maid, and
altogether of honest manners and behavior. But because I am only a Servanr,
and not the Lord of any thing I have: it is necessary my Lord and Master should
be acquainted with this, that he may give his consent to it. Go to then, let us
agree, to put off the Wedding till the next Autumn. Those that use to come
from the City to us, tell us that he will then be here. Then they shall be man
and Wife, and in the mean time let them love like Sister and Brother. Yet know
this Dryas: The young man thou art in such haste and earnest about, is far
better then us.

And Lamo having thus spoke, embraced Dryas, and kissed him, and made him sit and
drink with him, when now it was hot at high noon, and going along with him part
of his way, treated him altogether kindly. But Dryas had not heard the last
words of Lamo only as chat, and therefore as he walked along, he anxiously
enquired of himself who Daphnis should be. He was suckled indeed and nursed up
by a Goat, as if the providence of the (...) had appointed it so. But he (...)
a sweet, and beautiful aspect, and no whit like either that flat-nosed old
fellow, or the musty old woman. He had besides three thousand drams, and
one would scarcely believe that a Goat-herd should have so many Pears in his
possession. And has somebody exposed him too, as well as Chloe? And was it
Lamo's fortune to find him, as it was mine to find her? And was he trimmed up
with such like monuments, as were found by me? If this be so, O mighty Pan, Oye
beloved Nymphs; it may be that he having found his own Parents, may find out
something of Chloe's too, who are so utterly unknown!

These moping thoughts he had in his mind, and was in a dream up to the floar.
When he came there, he found Daphnis expecting, and pricking up his ears for
Lamo's answer;

Hail Son (quoth he) (...) Chloe' s husband: and promised him they should be
married in the Autumn; then giving him his right hand, assured him on his
faith, That Chloe should be Wife to no body but Daphnis. Therefore without
eating or drinking, swifter then thought he flies to Chloe, and full of joy
brings her the annunciation of the Marriage, and presently began to kiss her,
not as before by stealth in a corner of the twilight, but as his Wife, and took
upon him part of her labor. He helped her about the milking-paile; he put her
Cheeses into the press; suckled the Lambkins, and the Kids. And when all was
done, they washed themselves, eat and drank, and went to look for mellow fruits.
And at that time there was huge plenty, because it was the season for almost
all. There were abundance of Pears, abundance of Apples. Some were now fallen
to the ground, some were hanging on the Trees. Those on the ground had a
sweeter sent; those on the boughs a sweeter blush. Those had the fragrancy of
wine; these had the flagrancy of Gold. There stood one Appletree that had all
its apples pulled, all the boughs were now bare, and they had neither fruit,
nor leaves, but only there was one Apple that hanged as if it were poised upon
the very top of the Spire of the Tree; a great one it was, and very beautiful,
and such as by its rare, and rich smell, would alone outdo many together. It
should seem, that he that gathered the rest was afraid to climb so high, and
therefore left it. And peradventure that excellent apple was reserved for a
Shepherd that was in Love. When Daphnis saw it, he mantled to be at it, and was
even wild to climb the tree; nor would he hear Chloe forbidding him: but she
perceiving her interdictions neglected, scutled away toward the flocks.
Daphnis got up into the tree, and coming to the place, pulled it in Chloe's
name, for Chloe; to whom, as she showed her anger against that adventure, he
thus spoke:

Sweet Maid, The fair Hours planted this Apple, and a Goodly tree brought it
up; it was ripened by the beams of the Sun, and preserved by the care and
kindness of Fortune. Nor might I let it alone, so long as I had these eyes,
lest if it should fall to the ground, some of the Cattle as they feed, should
tread upon it, or some poisonous Serpent should touch it, or time should spoil
it as it lay, when I had seen it, ripe, and fair! Venus for the Victory of her
beauty, carried away no other prize; I give Thee This the palmary of Thine. For
thou have as well as she, such witnesses to thy beauty. Paris was but a
Shepherd upon Ida; and I am a Goatherd in the happy fields of of Mitylene. With
that, he put it into her bosom, and Chloe pulling him to her, kissed him. And so
Daphnis repented him not of that boldness to climb so high a tree. For he
received a Kiss from her more precious then a Golden Apple.

The End of the Third Book.
A Summary of the Fourth Book.
A Fellow Servants of Lamo's brings word, that their Lord would be there
speedily. A pleasant Garden is pleasantly described. Lamo, Daphnis, and Chloe
make all things fine. Lampis the Herdsman spoils the Garden, to provoke the
Lord against Lamo, who had denied him Chloe in Marriage. Lamo laments it the
next day. Eudromus teaches him how he may escape the anger. Astylus their young
Master comes first, with Gnatho his Parasite. Astylus promises to excuse them
for the Garden, and procure their pardon from his Father. Gnatho falls in love
with Daphnis, offers to force him, but in vain. Dionysophanes the Lord, with
his Wife Clearista comes down. Amongst other things, sees the Goats. Where he
hears Daphnis his Music, and all admire his Art of piping. Gnatho out of his
Paederastie begs of Astylus, that he may carry Daphnis along with him to the
City, and obtains it. Eudromus hears it, and tells Daphnis. Lamo thinking it
was now time, tells Dionysophanes the whole story, how Daphnis was found, how
brought up. He and Clearista considering the thing carefully, they find that
Daphnis is their Son. Therefore they receive him with great joy, and
Dionysophanes tells the reason why he exposed him. The Country fellows come
in to gratulate. Chloe in the interim complains that Daphnis has forgot her.
She Is stolen and carried away by Lampis. Daphnis laments by himself. Gnatho
hears him, rescues Chloe, and is received to favor. Dryas then tells Chloe's
story. Her they take to the City too. There at a banquet, Megacles of Mitylene
ownes her for his Daughter. And the Wedding is kept in the Country.

Daphnis and Chloe.
The Fourth Book.
ANd now one of Lamo's fellow servants brought word from Mitylene, that their
Lord would come toward the Vintage, to see whether that irruption of the
Methymnaeans had made any waste in those fields. When therefore the Summer was
now parting away, and the Autumn approaching, Lamo bestirred himself to fit a
mansion for his Lord, that should present him with pleasure every where. He
scowred the Fountains, that the water might be clear and transparent. He muckt
the Cottage, lest the dung should offend him with the smell. The Garden he
trimmed with great care and diligence, that all might be pleasant, fresh, and
fair. And that Garden indeed was a most beautiful and goodly thing, and such
as might become even a Royal Family; for it lay extended in length a whole
Stadium. It was situate on a high ground, and had to its breadth, four Acres.
To a spacious field one would easily have likened it. Trees it had of all
kinds; the Apple, the Pear, the Myrtle, the Orange, the Pomgranate, the Figg,
and the Olive: and to these, on the other side, there grew a rare, and taller
sort of Vines, that bended over, and reclined their bunches of grapes among the
Apples, and Pomgranats, as if they would vie and contend for beauty and worth
of fruits with them. So many kinds there were of Satives; or of such as are
planted, grafted, or set. To these were not wanting the Cypress, the Laurel,
the Platan, and the Pine. And toward them, instead of the Vine, the Ivy
leaned; and with the Errantry of her boughs, and her scattered black berries,
did imitate the Vines, and, shadowed beauty of the ripened grapes. Within, as
in a Garrison, Trees of lower growth that bore fruit; thickets of various
shrubs, with their delicate, and fragrant berries, were kept. Without, stood
the barren Trees, enfolding all, much like a Fort, or some strong Vall, that
had bin built by the hand of Art. And these were encompassed with a spruce,
thin hedge. By alleyes, and glades, there was every where a just distermination
of things from things, an orderly discretion of Tree from Tree. But on the Tops
the boughs met, to interweave their limbs and leaves with one another. And a
man would have thought, that all this had not bin, as indeed it was, the wild
of Nature, but rather the work of curious Art. Nor were there wanting to these,
borders and banks of various flowers; some the Earth's own Volunteers; some the
structure of the Artist's hand. The Roses, Hyacinths, and Lillies, were set,
and planted by the hand: The Violet, the Daffodill, and Anagall, the Earth gave
up of her own good will. In the Summer there was shade; in the Spring, the
beauty and fragrancy of flowers; in the Autumn, the pleasantness of the
grapes; and every season had its fruits. Besides, from the high ground there
was a fair and pleasing prospect to the fields, the Herdsmen, the Shepherds,
and the Cattle feeding: the same too looked to the Sea, and saw all the Boats
and Pinnaces a sailing by: insomuch, that that was no small addition to the
pleasure of this most sweet and florid place,

In the midst of this Paradise to the positure of the length and breadth of the
ground, stood a Phane, and an Altar sacred to Bacchus, the Lord and Genius of
the place. About the Bomos, or Altar, grew the wandering, encircling, clinging,
Ivy; about the Phane, the palmits of the Vines did spread themselves. And in
the more inward part of the Phane, were certain pictures that told the story of
Bacchus, and his miracles: Semele bringing forth her babe: The fair Ariadne
laid fast asleep: Lycurgus bound in chains: wretched Pentheus torn limb from
limb: The Indians conquered; The Tyrrhenian Mariners transformed: Satyrs, and
dancing Bacchae, all about. Nor was Pan neglected in this place of pleasure,
for he was set up upon the top of a crag playing upon his Pipes, and striking
up a common Jig, to those that trod the grapes in the press, and the women
that danced about it. Therefore in such a Garden as this that all might be
fine, Lamo now was very busy, cutting and pruning what was withered, and dry,
and propping up the Palmits with his forks. Bacchus he had crowned with flowery
chaplets; and then brought down, with curious art, rills of water from the
Fountains, amongst the borders and the knots. There was a spring, one that
Daphnis first discovered, and that served rarely to this purpose of watering
the flowers, and in favor to him, it was always called Daphnis his Fountain.
But Lamo besides commanded Daphnis to use his best skill to have his Goats as
fat as might be; for their Lord would be sure to see them too, who now would
come into the Country after he had bin so long away. And Daphnis had a good
mind to it, because he thought he should be looked upon, and praised for them.
For he had doubled the number he had received of Lamo, nor had the Wolf raven'd
away so much as one, and they were all more twadding fat then the very sheep.

And because he would win upon the Lord to be more forward to approve and
confirm the match, he did his business with great diligence, and great
alacrity: he drove out his Goats betimes in the morning; and late in the
evening brought them home; twice a day he watered them, and culled out for them
the best pasture ground; he took care too to have the dairy-vessels new, good
store of milking-pales and piggins, and fairer Crates, or presses for the
Cheese. He was so far from being negligent in any thing, that he tried to make
their horns to shine with vernich, and combed their very shag to make them
sleek. Insomuch, as, if you had seen this, you had said it was Pan's own sacred
flock. Chloe her self too would take her share in this labor about the Goats;
and Daphnis thought 'twas Chloe's hand, and Chloe's eyes that made his flocks
appear so fair. While both of them are thus busied, there came another
Messenger from the City, and brought a command, that the grapes should be
gathered with all speed: and told them withal, he was to tarry with them there
till the Must was made, and then return to the Town to wait upon his Lord
thither, the Vintage of that Autumn now done. This Eudromus (for that was his
name, because he was a Foot-Page) they all received and entertained with great
kindness, and presently began the vintage; the grapes were gathered, cast into
the press; the Must made, and tunned into the Vessels; some of the fairest
bunches of the grapes, together with their branches were cut, that to those who
came from the City, a show of the vintage, and the pleasure of it, might still
remain.

And now Eudromus made haste to be gone, and return to the Town, and Daphnis
gave him great variety of pretty gifts, but specially what ever could be had
from his flock of Goats: Cheeses that were close pressed* a kid of the late fall,
with a Goat-skin white, and thick shagg'd, to fling about him when he ran in
the winter.

With this, Eudromus was very pleasantly affected, and kissed Daphnis, and told
him that he would speak a good word for him to his Master; and so went away
with a benevolent mind to them.

But Daphnis then soon after was full of anxious thoughts, and Chloe too not
free from fear: namely, that a Lad that had bin used to see nothing but Goats,
Mountains, Ploughmen, and Chloe, should then first be brought into the presence
of his Lord, of whom before he had heard nothing but only his name. For
Daphnis therefore she was very sollicitous, how he would come before his
Master, how he would behave himself, how the bashful Youth would salute him.
About the marriage too she was much troubled, fearing lest they might but only
dream of a mere chance, or nothing at all. Therefore kisses past between them
without number, and such embracings of one another, as if both of them were
grown into one piece: but those kisses were full of fear; those embraces very
pensive, as of them that feared their Lord as then there, or kissed, and clipped,
in hugger-mugger to him.

Moreover, then there arose to them such a distraction as this: There was one
Lampis an untoward, blustering, fierce Herdsman. And he amongst the rest had
wooed Dryas for Chloe, and given him many gifts too to bring on, and dispatch
the marriage. But perceiving, that if their Lord did not dislike it, Daphnis
was to have the Girl; he sets himself to find, and practice a cunning trick,
to enrage and alienate their Lord. And knowing that he was wonderfully pleased
and delighted with that Garden, he thought it best, to spoil that as much as he
could, and divest it of all its beauty. To cut the Trees he durst not attempt,
lest so he should be taken by the noise. Wherefore he thinks to ruin the
flowers; and when 'twas night, gets over the hedge, and some he pulled up by
the roots, of some he graspt and tore the stems, the rest he trod down like a
Boar, and so escaped unheard, unseen.

Lamo the next morning went into the Garden to water the flowers. But when he
saw what the mischievous rogue his enemy had done, and all the place now made a
waste, he rent his clothes, and called so loud upon the gods, that Myrtale left
all, and ran up thither; and Daphnis too, who now had driven out his Goats, ran
back again. When they saw it, they cried out, lamented, and wept. To grieve for
the flowers it was in vain: but alas, their Lord they feared.

And indeed, a mere stranger had he come there, might very well have wept with
them. For all the Venus of the place was gone, and nothing remained but a
lutulent soil: If any flower had escaped, it had yet, as it was then, a
half-hid floridnesse, and its glance; and still was fair, although 'twas laid.
And still the Bees sat thick upon them, and all along in a mourning murmur,
sang the Funeral of the flowers.

But Lamo out of his great consternation broke forth into these words:

Alas, alas, the Rosaries, how are they broken down and torn! Woe is me, the
Violaries, how are they spurned and trodden down! Ah me, the Hyacinths and
Daffodills, which some Villain has pulled up, the wickedest of all mortals!
The Spring will come, but these will not grow green again: it will be Summer,
and these will not blow: the Autumn will come, but these will give no Chaplets
for our heads. And did not thou Bacchus, Lord of the Garden, pity the
suffering of these flowers, among which thou dwell, upon which thou look,
and with which I have crowned thee so often. How shall I now show this Garden
to my Lord? What a Look will he give it? how will he take it? He will hang me
up for an old Rogue, like Marsyas upon a Pine! and perchance, poor Daphnis too,
thinking his Goats has done the deed.

With these there fell more scalding tears, for now they wept, not for the
flowers, but Themselves. And Chloe bewailed poor Daphnis his case, and wished
their Lord might never come, spending her days in misery, as if even then she
looked upon her sweet Daphnis under the whip.

But toward night, Eudromus came and brought them word, that their Lord would
come within three days, and that their young Master would be there to morrow.
Therefore about what had befallen them, they fell to deliberate, and took in
good Eudromus into their Council.

This Eudromus was altogether Daphnis his friend, and he advised, they should
first open the chance to their young Lord, and promised himself an Assistant
too, as one of some account with him; for Astylus was nursed with his milk, and
he looked upon as a fosterbrother; and so they did, the next day. Astylus came
on horseback, his Parasite with him, and he on horseback too. Astylus was now
of the first down, but his Gnatho, that was his name, had sometimes tried the
Barbers tools.

But Lamo taking Myrtale and Daphnis with him, and flinging himself at the feet
of Astylus, humbly beseecht him to have mercy on an unfortunate old man, and
save him from his fathers anger, one that was not in the fault, one that had
done nothing amiss: and then told him what had befallen them.

Astylus had pity on the wretched suppliant, and went with him to the Garden,
and having seen the destruction of it as to flowers, he promised to procure
them his Fathers pardon* and lay the fault on the fiery horses that were tied
thereabouts, boggled at something, and broke their bridles; and so it happened,
that almost all the flowers every where were trodden down, broken, and torn,
and flunder'd up.

Lamo returned him the benedictions of wretched men relieved, and Myrtale
prayed the gods would prosper him in every thing.

Soon after young Daphnis presented him with things made ready to that purpose,
young Kids, Cream-Cheeses, a numerous brood of Hen-and-Chickens, bunches of
Grapes hanging still upon their palmits, and apples on the boughs. And amongst
them, a Crater of the Lesbian wine, fragrant wine, and the most excellent of
drinks.

Astylus commended their oblation, and entertainment, and went a hunting, for
he was rich, and given to pleasure, and therefore came to take it abroad in
those fields.

But Gnatho, a man that had learnt only to guttle, and drink till he was
drunk, and minded nothing but his belly, and his lasciviousness under that, he
had taken a more curious view of Daphnis then others had, when he presented the
gifts. And because from the beginning he was struck with Paederastie (the Love
of boys) by the Terrestrial gods, observing him to be such a beauty as all
Mitylene could not show; he resolved to tempt Daphnis to the purpose, and
thought he had not much to do, because the Lad was but a Goat-herd.

When he had now thus deliberated with himself, he went not along with Astylus
a hunting: but going down into the field where Daphnis kept, he said he came to
see the Goats, but came indeed Spectator of the Youth. He began to palpe him
with soft words, praised his Goats, called fondly on him for a Pastoral Tune,
and said withal he would speedily impetrate his Liberty for him, as being able
to do what he would with his Lord. And when he had found the harmless boy
observant to him, when it was now grown somewhat dark, and Daphnis was to drive
home, he watched his time, and anon he ran at him, and lolled upon him; and when
he had kissed him over and over: he shuffled himself odly-behind him, as if he
meant to attempt something like the he-goats with the She Is.

But Daphnis at length perceiving it, and saying; That the hegoats rid the
she is, That was very right indeed: but that a he-goat rid a he, that was never
yet seen; nor the Rams, instead of the Ewes, to ride Rams; nor Cocks tread
Cocks instead of Hens: Gnatho then laid hands on him, and offered to force him.
But Daphnis flung off this drunken Sott, who scarce could stand upon his legs,
and laid him on the ground, then whipped away, and left him to some sturdy
Porter, as fitter to lead, or carry him, then a boy. Nor would Daphnis endure
it he should near him ever after, and therefore still removed his flocks,
avoiding him, and keeping Chloe carefully. And indeed Gnatho did not proceed to
trouble him further, for he had found him already, not only a fair, but a
stout boy: But he waited an occasion to speak concerning him to Astylus, hoping
to beg him of the Gallant, as one that would bestow upon him many, and better
gifts then that. But it was not a time to talk of it now. For Dionysophanes was
come with his Wife Clearista, and all about was a busy noise, tumultuous
pudder of carriages, and a long retinue of menservants and Maids.

After that he thought with himself to make a Speech concerning Daphnis,
sufficient for Love, sufficient for Length. --

Dionysophanes was now half gray, but very tall and well limbed, and able at
any Exercise to grapple in the younger list: for his Riches few came near him;
for honest Life, Justice, and excellent manners, scant such another to be
found. He when he was come, offered the first day to the president gods of
rural business, to Ceres, Bacchus, Pan, and the Nymphs, and set up a common
Crater for all that were present. The other days he walked abroad to take a
view of Lamo's Works, and seeing how the ground was ploughed, how swelled with
palmits, and how trim the Vineyard was, how fair and flourishing the Viridarie,
(for as for the flowers, Astylus had taken the fault upon himself) he was
wonderfully pleased and delighted with all, and when he had praised Lamo much,
he promised besides to make him free. Afterward he went into the other fields
to see the Goats, and him that kept them. But Chloe fled into the Wood, for she
could not bear so strong a presence, and was afraid of so great a company. But
Daphnis stood girt with a Zone from a thick shagg'd Goat, a new Scrip about his
shoulders, in one hand holding green Cheeses, with the other leading suckling
Kids. If ever Apollo would be hired to serve Laomedon, and tend on herds, just
so he looked, as Daphnis then. He spoke not a word, but all on a blush, casting
his eyes upon the ground, presented the rural gifts to his Lord. --

But Lamo spoke -- Sir, (quoth he) This is the keeper of those Goats. To me you
committed fifty she is, and two he is; of them he has made you an hundred now,
and ten he-goats. Do you see how plump and fat they are, how shaggy and rough
their hair is, how entire and unshatter'd their horns? Besides, he has made
them musical. For if they do but hear his Pipe, they are ready to do
whatsoever he will.

Clearista heard him what he said, and being struck with a longing to have it
presently tried whether it were so indeed or not* she bids Daphnis to play to
his Goats as he wonted to do, promising to give him for his piping a Coat, a
Mantle, and new shoes.

Daphnis when all the Company was fate as a Theater, went to his Beech, and
standing under it, drew his Pipe out of his Scrip. And first he blowed
something that was low, and smart: and presently the Goats rose up, and held
their heads bolt upright. Then he played the Nomion, the Pastoral, or the
grazing Tune: and the Goats cast their heads downwards to graze. Then again he
breathed a note was soft and sweet: and all lay down together to rest. Anon he
struck up a sharp, violent, tumultuous Sound, (the warning of the Wolf) and
they all rusht into the wood, as if the Wolf had come upon them. After a while
he pip't aloud the Anacletic, or Recall: and they wheeled out of the Wood
again, and came up to his very feet: never was there any Master of a house that
had his servants more obsequious to his Commands. --

All the Spectators admired his Art, but especially Clearista, insomuch that
she could not but swear she would give him the things she promised, who was so
fair a Goatherd, and skilled in Music even to wonder.

From this pleasure they returned to the Village to dine, and sent Daphnis some
of their choiser fare to the fields; where he feasted himself with Chloe, and
was sweetly affected with those delicates and confections from the City, and
hoped he had pleased his Lord and Lady so, that now he should not miss the
Maid. But Gnatho now was more inflamed with those things about the Goats, and
counting his life no life at all, unless he had Daphnis at his will, he caught
Astylus walking in the Garden, and leading him with him into Bacchus his Phane,
he fell to kiss his hands and his feet. But he enquiring why he did so; and
bidding him tell what was the matter with him; and swearing withal, to hear
and help him in any thing: Master, thy Gnatho is undone (quoth he:) For I who
heretofore was in Love with nothing but a plenteous Table; and swore nothing
was more desirable, nothing of a more precious Tang, then good old wine; I
that have often affirmed, That thy Confectioners and Cooks, were sweeter then
the boys of Mitylene; I shall now hereafter for ever think, that nothing is
fair and sweet but Daphnis; and giving over to feed high, as thou art furnished
every day with flesh, with fish, with banqueting; nothing could be more
pleasant to me, then to be turned into a Goat, to eat grass, and green leaves,
hear Daphnis his pipe, and be fed at his hand. But do thou preserve thy Gnatho,
and be to him the victor of victorious Love. Unless it be done, I swear to thee
by my god, that when I have filled my paunch with meat, I Will take this dagger,
and kill my self at Daphnis his door. And then you may go look your little
pretty Gnatho, as thou usest daily to call me.

Astylus a generous Youth, and one that was not to learn that Love was a
tormentous fire, could not endure to see him weep in such a manner, and kiss
his feet again and again; but promised him to beg Daphnis of his Father, to
wait upon him at Mitylene, and so to become Gnatho's Pathic-boy. But to please
himself, and hearten up Gnatho, he smiled upon him, and asked him, Whether he
were not ashamed to be in love with Lamo's Son, nay, to be mad to lie with a
boy that kept Goats? Besides, he thought the strong perfume of Goats was
somewhat abominable.

Gnatho on the other side, like one that had learned the wanton discourse among
good fellows in the drinking Schools, was ready to answer him better then ex
tempore, concerning himself, and Daphnis -- thus: We Lovers (Sir) are never
curious about such things as those: but wheresoever we meet with beauty, there
undoubtedly we are caught, and fall upon it. And hence it is that some have
fallen in Love with a Tree, some with a River, some with a Beast.

And who would not pity that miserable Lover, whom we know fatally bound, to
live in fear of that that is loved! But I, as I love the body of a servant, so
in that, the beauty of the most Ingenuous. Do you not see his Locks are like
the Hyacinths! and his eyes under the brows, like Diamonds burning, in their
golden Sockets! How sweetly ruddy are his cheeks, his lips rosy, and his mouth
rowed with Elephant pearl! And what Lover would not be fond to take from
thence, the sweetest red and white kisses? But if I love a keeper of flocks, in
that I imitate the gods! Anchises was a Herdsman, and Venus had him. Branchius
was a Goat-herd, and Apollo loved him. Ganymedes was but a Shepherd; and yet he
was Jupiter's rape. We ought not then to contemn the Youth, because he is a
keeper of Goats, to whom, we see even the Goats, for very love of one so fair,
every way obedient; nay rather, that They let such a beauty as that, continue
here upon the Earth, we owe our thanks to Jupiter's Eagles. At that word
Astylus had a sweet laugh, and saying, Oh what mighty Sophisters this Love can
make I began to cast about for a fit time to speak to his Father about Daphnis.

Eudromus hearkened what was said, and caught the Secret; and detesting in
himself that such a flower of beauty should be put into the hands of a filthy
fellow, be told both Daphnis and Lamo all that happened.

Daphnis was struck to the heart with this, and soon resolved either to run
away, and Chloe with him; or else to die, and take her with him to the Elysian
fields. --

But Lamo getting Myrtale out of doors, What shall we do, (quoth he) we are
all undone? Now or never is our time to open all that hitherto has bin
concealed; namely, the lone, forsaken place; the Goat, and all the other
Things. For, by Pan, and all the Nymphs, though I should be left alone to my
self, like an Ox forgotten in a stall, I will not longer hide his story; but
declare I found him an Exposed Child, make it known how he was nursed, and show
the Significations found exposed together with him. And let that rotten rascal
Gnatho know himself, and what it is he dares to love. Only make ready the
monuments for me!

This agreed, they went again into the house. But Astylus, his father being at
leisure, went to him, and asked his leave to take Daphnis from the Country to
serve him at Mitylene; for he was a fine boy, far above the clownish Life, and
one that Gnatho soon could teach the Citygarbe. His Father grants it willingly,
and presently sending for Lamo and Myrtale, lets them know, that Daphnis should
hereafter wait upon Astylus in the City, and leave his keeping Goats. But then
instead of him, he promised to give them two Goatherds.

And now when Lamo saw the Servants running together, and hug one another for
joy they were to have so sweet a fellowservant in the house, he asked leave to
speak to his Lord, and thus began:

Hear me, Sir, a true story, that an old man is about to tell you. And I swear
by Pan and the Nymphs that I will not lie a jott. I am not the Father of
Daphnis, nor was Myrtale so happy, as to be the Mother of so sweet a Youth.
Other Parents exposed that Child, having (perchance) enough before. But I found
him where he was laid, and suckled by a Goat of mine; which Goat when she died,
I buried in yonder skirt of the Garden, to use her kindly, because she had
played the part of a Mother. Together with him I found habiliments exposed, and
signs (me thought) of what he was. I confess them to you (Sir) and have kept
them to this day* For they make him of higher fortune, than ours has any symbol
to: Wherefore I think not much he should become the Servant of the noble
Astylus, a good Servant of a good and honest Lord. But I cannot endure to have
him now exposed to be injuriously and basely used by the drunken Glutton
Gnatho; and, as it were, be made a slave to such a drivell. Who now would have
him to Mitylene, there to make a Wench of him.

Lamo when he had thus said, held his peace, and wept amain. But Gnatho being
enraged by this, and threatening to cudgel Lamo, Dionysophanes was wholly
amazed at what was said, and commanded him Silence, bending his brows, and
looking stern and grim upon him; then again questioned Lamo, charging him to
speak the Truth, and tell him no such Tales as those, to keep his Son at home
by them.

But when he stood to what he said, and swore to it by all the gods, and would
submit to any Torture, if he did lie but in the least; he examined every
passage over again, Clearista sitting apart. What cause is there that Lamo
should lie, when for One, he is to have two Goat-herds? And how should a simple
Countrey-fellow feign* and forge such things as these? No sure; besides, it is
incredible, that of such an old Churl, and such an Urch in as his Wife, there
should come a child so fair! And now it seemed best to insist no longer upon
conjectures, but to view the monumentals, and try if they reported any thing of
a more noble splendid fortune.

Myrtale therefore went and brought them all to him, laid up safe in an old
Scrip. Dionysophanes looked first, and seeing there the Purple Mantle, the
Goldbutton, the Dagger with the Ivory heft, he cried out loud, Great Jupiter
the Governor! and called his Wife that she might see. She too, when she saw
them, cried out amain, O dear, dear Fates! Are not these those very Things we
exposed with our Son? Did we not send Sophrosyne to lay him here in these
fields? They are no other, but the very same, my dear! This is our Child
without doubt. Daphnis is thy Son, and he has kept his Fathers Goats.

While Clearista was yet speaking, and Dionysophanes was kissing those sweet
revelations of his Child, and weeping over them for joy, Astylus hearing it was
his Brother, flings off his Cloak, and over the Green away he flies, in an
earnest desire to be the first to entertain him with a kiss.

Daphnis seeing him make toward him so fast with such a Company, and hearing
his own name in the noise, thinking they came to apprehend him, flung away his
Scrip and his Pipe, and in the scare set a running toward the Sea to cast
himself from a high Crag.

And peradventure the newfound Daphnis had then bin lost, but that Astylus
perceiving it, cried out to him more clearly: Stay Daphnis; Be not afraid, I am
thy Brother, and They thy Parents, that were hitherto thy Lords. Now Lamo has
told Us all concerning the Goat, and showed the monuments thou had about
thee. Turn thee, and see with what a rejoicing, cheerful face they come along.
But do thou kiss me first of all. By the Nymphs I do not lie.

After that Oath he ventured to stand, and staid till Astylus came at him, and
then offered him a kiss.

While they were kissing and embracing, the rest of the company came in, the
Menservants, the Maids, the Father, and after him, the Mother. Every one kissed
him and hugged him in their arms, rejoicing, and weeping. But Daphnis embraced
his Father and his Mother the most familiarly of all the rest, and cling'd to
them, as if he had known them long before, and would not part out of their
arms. So quickly comes belief to join with nature. An oblivion of Chloe had now
begun by little and little to steal upon him.

And when they got back to the Village, they turned him out of his old clothes,
and put him in a gallant habit, and placing him near his own Father, they heard
him speak to this purpose:

I married a Wife (my dear Sons) when I was yet very young, and after a while,
as I conjectured. I should, it was my happiness to be a Father. For first I
had a Son born, the second a daughter, and then Astylus the third. I thought
there was enough of the breed, and therefore I exposed this boy, who was born
after the rest, and set him out with those Toys, not for the monuments of his
Stock, but for Sepulchral ornaments. But fortune had other thoughts and
Counsels about him. For so it was, that my eldest Son, and my daughter dyed on
the same disease upon one and the same day. But Thou by the providence of the
gods art kept alive and saved for Us, in design to make us happy by more helps
and manuductors to our Age. Yet do not thou, when it comes in thy mind that
thou wast Exposed, take it unkindly, or think evil of me; for it was not with
a willing mind. Neither do Thou good Astylus, take it ill, that now thou art to
have but a part for the whole Inheritance. For to any man that is wise, there is
no possession more precious then a brother is. Therefore esteem and love one
another, and for your riches, compare and vie your selves with Kings. For I
shall leave you large. Lands, Servants Industrious and True, Gold and Silver,
all that the fortunate possess. Only in Special I give to Daphnis, this
Manor, with Lamo, and Myrtale, and the Goats that he has kept.

While he was still going on in his Speech, Daphnis starting, It Is well
remembered, Father, (quoth he) It Is time to go and lead my Goats to watering;
They are now dry, and now expecting my Pipe; and I am loytering and lolling
here.

They all laughed sweetly at this, to see him that was now a Lord turning into a
Goat-herd again; and so another was sent away to rid his mind of that care. And
now when they had sacrificed to Jupiter Soter, the savior of the reposed
Child, they had a jovial rejoyceing Feast, and only Gnatho was not there; for
he was in a mighty fear, and took sanctuary in Bacchus his Phane, and there
he was a sneaking suppliant night and day: But the fame flying abroad that
Dionysophanes had found a Son, and that Daphnis the Goat-herd proved the Lord
of those fields: the ruralls came in with the early day, some from one place,
some another, there to congratulate the Youth, and bring their presents to his
Father. And amongst these, Dryas was first; Dryas, to whom Chloe was nursling.
And Dionysophanes accepting their expressions of Joy and exultation, made them
stay to celebrate the great feast of the Invention of Daphnis.

Therefore great store of Wine, and the finest Bread, was furnished out;
water-fowle of all sorts; sucking pigs; various curiosities of sweet cakes,
Wafers, Simnels, and Pies. And many Victims that day were slain and offered to
the Gods of Lesbos.

Daphnis then, having got all his pastoral furniture about him, cast it into
several Anathema's, his thankful Donaries to the Gods. To Bacchus, he
dedicates his Scrip, and Mantle: To Pan, his Whistle and his oblique Pipe: his
Goat-hook, to the holy Nymphs; and Milking-pailes, that he had made. But so it
is, that those things we have long been acquainted withal, and used our selves
to, are more acceptable and pleasing to us, then a new and insolent felicity;
and therefore tears fell from his eyes at every valediction to this and that;
nor did he offer the pailes to the Nymphs, till he had milkt into them first;
nor his Mantle, til he had lapt himself in it, nor his Pipe till he had pip't a
tune or two But he looked wistly upon all the things, and would not let them
go without a Kiss. Then he spoke to the She-goats, and called the He-goats by
their names. Out of the Fountain too he needs must drink before he goes,
because he had drank there many a time, and with his sweetest, dearest Chloe.
But as yet he did not openly profess to his Love; because he waited a season
to it.

And therefore in the mean time, while he was keeping holyday, it was thus
with poor Chloe. By her flocks she sat, and wept; and complained to her self,
and them, (as it was like) in this manner: Daphnis has forgot me. Now he thinks
of a Great fortune. To what purpose is it now, that after we had sworn by the
Nymphs, I would make him swear to me by the Goats? He has forsaken them and
me! And when the other day, he sacrificed to Pan, and the Nymphs, he would not
so much as see Chloe. Perchance he has found a prettyer Wench then I amongst
his Mothers Maids. Fare him well! But I must die; and will not live.

While thus she was maundring and afflicting her self, Lampis the Herdsman
coming upon her with a band of rusticks, ravished her away, presuming Daphnis
had cast off all thoughts of Chloe, and Dryas too to gape on Daphnis. And so
she was carried away, crying out most pitteously. But one that saw it, told it
Nape, she Dryas, and Dryas Daphnis.

This put Daphnis almost quite out of his wits; and to his Father he durst not
speak, nor was he able to endure in that condition, and therefore slinking away
into the circuit walks of the Garden, broke forth into lamentations.

Oh the bitter Invention of Daphnis! How much better was it for me to keep a
flock? And how much happyer was I when I was a Servant? Then I fed my eyes with
Chloe. But now she is the rape of Lampis, and with him she lies to night. And I
stay here, and melt my self away in wine and soft delights, and so in vain
have sworn to her by the Nymphs, by Pan, and by the Goats.

These heavy complaints of Daphnis, it was Gnathos fortune to hear as he was
sculking in the Garden; and presently apprehending the happy hour, to appease
Daphnis, and make him propitious; he takes some of Astylus his Servants, makes
after Dryas; bids him show him to Lampis his Cottage, and plucks up his heels
to get thither. And lighting on him in the nick as he was halling Chloe in, he
took her from him, and banged his band of Clowns. And Lampis himself he
endeavored to take, and bring him bound, as a captive from some War, but he
prevented that by flight. This undertaking happily performed, he returned with
the night; and found Dionysophanes at his rest; but Daphnis watching, weeping,
and waiting in the Walks. There he presents his Chloe to him, gives her into
his hands, and tells the story of the action; then beseeches him to think no
more of that injurious attempt upon him, but take him as a Servant not
altogether unusefull, and not interdict him the Table, to make him die for want.

Daphnis seeing Chloe, and having her now in his own hands, was reconciled by
that service, and received him into favor; then excused himself to Chloe, for
his seeming to neglect her.

And now advising together about their intended wedding, it was, they thought,
the best way, still to conceal it, and to hide Chloe in some hole or other,
then to acquaint his Mother only with their Love. But Dryas was not of that
opinion. He would have the Father know the whole business as it was, and
undertakes to bring him on. In the Morning betimes, with Chloe's monuments in
his Scrip, he goes to Dionysophanes and Clearista, who were sitting in the
Garden. And Astylus was there present, and Daphnis himself. And, silence made,
the old Goatherd thus began.

Such a necessity as Lamo had, compells me now to speak those things that
hitherto have bin concealed. This Chloe I neither begot, nor had any thing to
do in her nursing up. But some others were her Parents, and a Sheep gave her
suck in the Nymphaeum where she lay. I my self saw it done, and wondered at it;
wondering at it, took her home, and brought her up. And the excessive sweetness
of her face, bears me witness to what I say. For she is nothing like to Us.
The fine accoutrements she had about her make it more apparent too. For they
are richer then becomes a Shepherds Coat. Here they are, view them well, seek
out her kin, and so try whether at length, she may not be found, not unworthy
to marry Daphnis.

These words as they were not unadvisedly cast in by Dryas, so neither were
they heard by Dionysophanes without regard. But casting his eyes upon Daphnis,
and seeing him look pale upon it, and his tears stealing down his face,
presently deprehended it was Love. Then as one that was bound to be more
sollicitous about his own, then another man's Child, he falls with all
accuratenesse to reprehend what Dryas had said.

But when he saw the monitorie Ornaments; her mitre; and her mantle wrought
with Gold; her curious blankets, and her gilded shoos, he called her to him, bid
herb of good cheer as one that now had a husband, and erelong should find her
Father and her Mother. Clearista took her to her care, and from that time
trickt her up and made her fine, as even then her Sons Wife.

But Dionysophanes taking Daphnis aside, asked him, if Chloe were a maid; And he
swearing, that nothing had past betwixt them, but only kissing, embraceing, and
Oaths; his Father was much delighted to hear of that pretty Conjuration by
which they had bound themselves to one another, and made them sit down together
to a banquet brought in. And then one might presently see what beauty was,
when it had got its proper dress. For Chloe being so clothed, dressed in her
hair, and washed in Clearista's wash; did so outshine even all beauty, that her
own Daphnis now could scarce know her. And any man, without the faith of
monuments might now have sworn, that Dryas was not the Father of so fair a
maid. But he was there, and Nape, and Lamo, and Myrtale, feasting at a private
Table. And again, upon this invention of Chloe, were immolations to the Gods,
and Chloe consecrated her Trinkets; that skin she used to wear; her Scrip; her
Pipe; her Milking-pailes. She mingled Wine too with that Fountain in the Cave,
because close by it she was nursed, and had often washed in it. The Grave of her
Nurse shown to her by Dryas, she adorned with many Garlands; and to her flock,
played a little on her Pipe. Then she prays to the Goddesses that she might
find them that exposed her to be such, as would not mis-become her marriage
with Daphnis.

And now they had enough of feasting and holy days, in the fields; and would
return to Mitylene; look out Chloe's parents there, and speedily have a
wedding on it. In the morning betime when they were ready to go, to Dryas they
gave the other three thousand drams: To Lamo half of that Land, to sow,
and mow, and find him Wine, and Goats, together with the Goatherd; four pair
of Oxen for the Plough; Winter Clothes; and made his Wife free.

Then anon with a great Pomp and a brave show of Horses and Wagons, on they
moved toward Mitylene. And because it was night before they could come in,
they escaped the Cittizen's gapeing upon them then; but the next day; there was
a throng of men and Women at the door. These to give joys, and rejoice with
Dionysophanes who had found a Son; and their joy was much augmented when they
saw the excessive sweetness of the Youth. Those to exult with Clearista, who
had brought home not only a Son, but a Bride too. For Chloe's beauty had
struck the eyes of them, a beauty for its luster beyond estimation, beyond
excess by any other. In fine, the whole City was moved about the young man
and the maid, and now with loud ingeminations, cried, A happy marriage, a
blessed Marriage. They prayed too the maid might find her birth as Great, as
she was Fair; and many of the richer Ladies prayed the Gods, they might be
taken for Mothers of so sweet a Girl.

But Dionysophanes after many follicitous thoughts, fell into a deep sleep, and
in that, had this Vision: He thought he saw the Nymphs petition Cupid, to grant
them at length a license for the wedding. Then, that Love himself, his bow
unbent, and by his quiver laid; commanded him to invite the whole nobility of
Mitylene to a feast, and when he had set the last creater, there to show the
Monuments to every one; and from that point, commence, and sing the Hymenaeus.
When he had seen, and heard This, up the getts as soon as day, and gave order
that a splendid supper should be provided of all varietyes from the land, from
the Sea, from the Marshes, from the rivers; and at night had to his guests all
the best of the Mitylenaeans.

And when the last Crater was filled, and out of it a Libation poured to
Mercury the god of sleep; one of the servants came in with Chloe's Trinkets
upon a silver plate; and carrying them about in his right hand, presented them
to every eye. Of others there was none that knew them. Only one Megacles, who
for his age sat uppermost, when he saw them, knowing presently what they were,
cried out amain with a youthful strong voice:

Bless me! What is it that I see? What is become of thee, my little daughter?
Art Thou yet indeed alive! or has some Shepherd brought these hither, lighting
on them by mere chance* Tell me, for gods sake, Dionysophanes, How came you by
the dress of my Child? Envy not me the finding something after Daphnis.

But Dionysophanes bidding him first relate the Exposing of the Child; he
remitted nothing of his former tone, but thus went on:

Some years ago I had but a scanty livelihood. For I spent what I had, on
Plays, and Shows, and the public Galleys. In this condition I had a daughter
born. And despairing because of my want of an honorable education for her, I
exposed her with These monumentall Toys, knowing that even by that way, many
are glad to be made fathers. In the Nymphaeum she was laid, and left to the
Trust of the Resident Goddesses. After that I began to be rich, and grow richer
every day, yet had no heir; nor was I afterward so fortunate, as to be Father
but to a daughter. But the gods, as if they mocked me for what I had done, sent
me a dream, which signified, That a Sheep should make me a Father.

Dionysophanes upon that burst out louder then Megacles; and sprung away into a
near withdrawing room, and brought in Chloe finely dressed as curiosity could do
it. And in haste to Megacles, This (quoth he) is that same daughter of Thine
that thou did expose: This Girl, a Sheep, by the providence of the gods, did
nurse for thee, as a Goat did my Daphnis. Take her monuments, Take thy
daughter; then by all means give her Daphnis for a Bride. We exposed both of
them, and have now found them both: Pan, the Nymphs, and Love himself took care
of both.

Megacles highly approved the motion, and commanded his Wife Rhode should be
sent for thither, first to see her sweet Girl, then to have her sleep that
night in her lap. For Daphnis had sworn by all the Gods, he would not trust
her with any body else, no not with his own Father.

When it was day, into the fields they turned again. For Daphnis and Chloe had
impetrated that, by reason of the strangeness and insolence of
Cittie-conversation to them. Besides, for them, it was thought the best, to
make it a kind of Pastoral Wedding. Therefore coming to Lamo's house to
Megacles was Dryas joined assistant, Nape to Rhode. And by them all things were
finely disposed and furnished to the rural celebration.

Then before the statues of the Nymphs her Father gave Chloe to Daphnis, and
with other more precious things, suspended her Monuments for Anathema's in the
Cave. Then in recognition of Dryas his ear, they made up his number
ten-thousand dracma's.

But Dionysophanes (for his share) the day being serene, open, and fair,
commanded there should be Arbors of green boughs set up under the very Cave,
and there disposed the Villagers to their high feasting jollitie. Lamo was
there, and Myrtale, Dryas and Nape, Dorco's kindred and friends, Philetas and
his Lads, Chromis and his Lycenium. Nor was even Lampis absent; for he was
pardoned by that Beaurie that he had loved.

Therefore then, as usually when rural revellers are met together at a Feast;
nothing but Georgics, nothing but what was rustical was there. Here one sang
like the Reapers, There another prattled it, and flung about the Epilenion
flirts and scoffs, as in the Autumn from the press. Philetas played upon his
Pipes, Lampis upon the Hoboy. Dryas and Lamo danced to them. Daphnis and Chloe
clipped and kissed. The Goats too were feeding by, as part of that celebritie.

And this manner of entertainment of those from the City, was pleasing to
them beyond measure. Daphnis now calls up some of the Goats by their names, and
from the Arbors gives them boughs to browze upon from his hand, and catching
them fast by the horns, took kisses thence.

And thus they did not only then for that day; but, for the most part of their
time, held on still the Pastoral mode; serving the Gods the Nymphs, Cupid, and
Pan; and nothing for food, more pleasant to them then Apples, and Milk. But now
for the ceremonies of giving them their new names, it was appointed, Daphnis
should lie down under a Goat, and take the dugge; Chloe then, under a sheep:
him they called Philopoemen, her they named, the fair Ag^le. And so with them
those names grew old. The Cave they adorned with curious work, set up Statues,
built an Altar of Cupid the Shepherd; and to Pan, a phane to dwell in stead of
a pine, and called him, Pan Stratiotes, Pan the Lovers Soldier.

But this adorning of the Cave, building an Altar, and a Phane, and giving them
their names, was afterward at their opportunity. Then when it was night, and
Venus rising up the horizon, they all lead the Bride and Bridegroom to their
Chamber, some playing upon Whistles and Hoboyes, some upon the oblique Pipes,
some holding great Torches.

And when they came near to the door, they changed their tone, and gave a
grating harsh sound, nothing like the Hymenaeus, but as if the Virgin Earth had
bin torn with many Tridents.

But Daphnis and Chloe lying naked together, began to clip, and kiss, and
twine, and strive with one another, sleeping no more then birds of the night;
and Daphnis now did the Trick that his Mistress Lycaenium taught him in the
thicket. And Chloe then first knew, that those things that were done in the
Wood, were only the sweetest Sports of Shepherds.

FINIS.

