A VOICE From the Word of the Lord to those grand Impostors called QUAKERS.

Wherein is discovered their fleshly and filthy mindedness, together with the
judgments of the Lord attending them.

Also a word of caution to all that are called to be Saints in this Nation,
which may be of concernment to all people.

By JOHN GRIFFITH a Servant of Christ, and one that bears witness against those
wandering stars.

For this cause God shall send them strong delusions to believe Lies, that they
all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith in Flying-Horse Court in
Fleet Street. 1654.

A Voice from the word of the Lord, etc.
THe most high God that made the Heavens and the Earth, the Seas, and the
Fountains of water, Rev. 14.7. has moved me and stirred me up to bear witness
to the truth, and to witness against the abominable fleshly-mindedness, and yet
spiritual pride of those grand Impostors of these times, called Quakers, by
whose sorceries many are bewitched, and drawn from the simplicity of the
Gospel, to another Gospel; which is not another Gospel, but the vanity of
their own minds, and their own fleshly and corrupt thoughts which they cry up
as the Oracles of God.

To them I say, I am to direct my speech from the Lord; therefore thus says
the Lord to thee O Quaker, thou art fleshly minded, for thou look upon the
institutions of Christ with a fleshly carnal eye, witness Richard Hubberthorn
in his Antipathy between flesh and Spirit, where he says that the bread and
wine, which Christ commanded his Disciples to eat, and to drink in remembrance
of him, and to show forth his death till he come, is carnal.

O fleshly minded men, whom the god of this world has blinded, because you
believe not; thus says the Lord, Mal. 3.14. ye have said it is in vain to
serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and that we
have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, Mal 4.1. Behold the day comes
that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud; yea all that do wickedly shall
be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of
Hosts, that it shall leave them, neither root nor branch.

Yea, All that are spiritually proud, as you are that give out your selves to
be some great ones Act. 8.9. as Simon Magus did. Rev. 2.2. You say you are
Apostles, and are not, but have been found liars, you proud Pharisees,
Hyppocrits, that say you are Just, holy, humble, etc. The Lord says the poor
sinful Publicans are more justified then ye.

You that boast of your light within, Joh. 9.44. Thus says the Lord, because
you say you see, therefore your sin remains. For, for judgment is he, ver.
39, (Christ) come into the world, that they which see not, might see, and that
they which see, might be made blind.

If Christ, Joh. 15.22. had not spoke to you in his Word, you had had no sin,
but now you have no Cloak for your sin. Woe unto you Hypocrites, for you do not
only neglect the weightier matters of the Law (as one of them taught the 27. of
September, 1654 in my hearing, and many others that will witness it) but the
Law it self, teaching men so to do; for you say that she Scripture is no rule
of faith, and conversation, Matt. 22.29, You, err not knowing them, nor the
power of God? your carnal minds discern not the power and spirituality of
them.

Thus says the Lord, Joh. 6.63. My words are spirit, and they are life;
although they are the savor of death to you that perish, 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
The Scripture is able to make the man of God wise to salvation, and to furnish
him thoroughly to every good work, Romans 15.4. And what was before written, was
written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.

Therefore know this thou perverter of the right way of God, thou shall be
judged (...) the word that Christ has spoke, Hek. (...) How can thou escape,
that neglectest (...) salvation, which at the first began to be (...) by the
Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him.

Thus says the Lord, Joh. 13.48. He that rejects me, 2nd receives not my
words, has one that Judges him; the word that I have spoken shall judge him at
the last day, Joh. 12.48.

Quake and tremble at this; that word which you reject and despise, shall judge
you at the last day; for thus says the Lord, Mar. 8.38. Whosoever is ashamed
of me, and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also
shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with
his holy Angels; yea, 2. These. 1.7.8. when he shall come in flaming Fire, he
shall render vengeance to you who know not God, nor obey not the Gospel.

The Lord has spoken it, and it shall surely come to pass, Prove. 13.13. whosoever
despises his word shall be destroyed. O you blind leaders of the blind, both
of you will fall into the pit, Rev. 19.20. There is a lake prepared for you,
where the beast and the false prophet shall be, where you shall gnash your
teeth for pain, and be tormented day and night for ever; for you are those that
the Lord has before spoken of in his word (and therefore no marvel you would
not have men read it) 2. Pet. 2.1. (throughout the Chapter) which shall bring
in damnable herises, even denying the Lord that bought you, and bring upon your
selves swift destruction, and many shall follow your pernicious ways, by whom
the way of truth is evil spoken of; and though ye through covetousness make
merchandise of some, yet know that your judgment lingreth not, and that your
damnation slumbreth not.

For the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished; but chiefly you who
are fleshly, and despise government, being presumptuous, and are not afraid to
speak evil of dignities; but you as natural brute beasts, speak evil of the
things you understand not, and shall perish in your own corruption.

Wells you are without water, Clouds that are carried with a tempest, Prove.
25.14. To whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. for when ye speak
great swelling words of vanity, ye allure through the lusts of the flesh,
through much wantoness those which were clean escaped; from them who live in
error, while you promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

See thy portion, thy reward is destruction; you filthy dreamers, you raging
waves of the Sea, that foame out your own shame, that are wandering Stars, to
whom the blackness of darkness is reserved for ever, Jud. 8.13. So be it, quake
at this; the day of the fierce wrath of God is at hand.

You pretend to quake, it is true; you also pretend the example of the servants
of the Lord, as Moses at the thundering of the Lord upon the mount, O abominable
hypocrisy and dissimulation, what will that justify your shakeing; your hands
like Idiots, and your raving like mad men: Moses was a man in whom the dread
and the fear of the Lord was, who kept his Word, but you despise it; who loved
his law, but you reject it.

But what have you to do with Moses, Jeremiah, or Habakuk. they all served the
Lord, but you serve your fleshly lusts, there examples are without you, that is
therefore no light for you.

If you are true to your corrupt principles, seeing you say, it is the Light
within you, that you must walk by, and not any Light without you; It Is true, if
you served the Lord, and kept his word, it would make you tremble; as it does
those that fear him, and keep his statutes, and continue in the same all their
days; but you have rejected the Law of the Lord, and the word which the Lord
has spoken in his Prophets, by his Spirit.

The Lord shall break forth in indignation, and when he comes to shake terribly
the earth, shall he give you your portion in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone.

A word of caution to all that are called to be Saints in this Nation, which
may concern all people.
DEarly beloved in the Lord, we may rejoice that we live to see not only the
mystery of godliness ( Romans 16.26. which was kept secret since the world
began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets
according to the Commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all Nations
for the obedience of faith) but also the working of the mystery of iniquity in
the fleshly corrupt and sensual-minded men called Quakers.

I say, we may rejoice, and in nothing be terrified or removed, because the
Scriptures did foretell of such, so that the truth of those sayings of our
precious Lord and his servants of old are verified and fulfilled in these men,
even as the Scripture was in Judas.

Did not our Lord say, Matthew. 24.5. that many should come in his name, saying,
I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

And again, does he not say, Matthew. 7.15. that false Prophets shall come in
Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves.

And again, that blessed Apostle of the Lord Paul says, Acts 20.29, 30. that
grievous Wolves should enter in, not sparing the flock, yea that from amongst
themselves should men arise, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after
them.

Yea, and as Acts 13.8, 9, 10. Elymas the Sorcerer withstood Paul, so there
will be men full of all subtilty and mischief, children of the devil, enemies
of all righteousness, that will not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord.

The Lord likewise has foretold by the mouth of his servant Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1.
that as there were false Prophets amongst the people of old so there shall be
false Teachers amongst you, whose ways are pernicious. Yea and also Jude does
foretell of these, Jude 19. Cursed children who separate themselves (from the
true Church) who are sensual, not having the spirit.

And indeed we are fallen into the last times, yea those perilous times spoken
of by Paul, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. wherein as Christ says, Matthew.
24.12. Iniquity shall abound, and the love of many wax cold: yea the time is
at hand, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. that that wicked one that son of perdition
shall be revealed, who shall exalt himself above all that is called God, ere
that is worshipped, Daniel, 11.30.36.37 38. Who shall speak evil of the holy
Covenant; yea and against the God of Gods, who shall come with Signs and lying
wonders, and with all deceivabelness of unrighteousness in them that perish;
because they received not the truth in the love of it, that they might be
saved; but the Lord shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming: Now my
brethren seeing it is so, let us be filled with boldness, and let us contend
(being filled with all might) against these ungodly ones that are now risen. My
dearly beloved beware of men, believe not every spirit, nor be troubled or
removed, at every wind of doctrine: Oh remember how the Lord has forewarned
you; there shall such arise says he, but believe them not, take heed therefore
to your selves, grievous wolves are risen, Oh, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile
you of your reward, Rev. 3.11. Hold fast that you have, that no man take your
Crown, Phil. 3.2. Beware therefore of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of
the consition; yea, be ware lest any man, Col. 2.8. spoil you through
Philosophy, and vain deceit after the Traditions of men, after the rudiments of
the world; and not after Christ.

Oh, Consider that he that holds out to the end, only shall be saved, Mat.
4.13. He that overcomes shall ear of the hidden Manna, and shall sit with
Christ on his Throne, and shall rule the nations with a Rod of Iron, and shall
have the bright and morning Star, and shall be clothed in white Raiment, and
shall not have his name blotted out of the Book of life, and shall be confessed
by Christ, before his Father, and the holy Angels; it is he who shall have the
white Stone, and in it the new Name, which none can read, save they that have
it. Rev. 2.17.26.27.28. verse. But if any draw back, God's soul shall have no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. Oh remember Lots wife, and that it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God: for God is a consuming fire;
beware of Satan's baits; remember how he tempted Eve with higher enjoyments, she
(he said) should be as God; that temptation many a poor soul is caught with, at
this day, viz. High enjoyments, great revelations, and such like, and that
without, Nay above, and beyond the Scripture; how many have been taken in this
snare! Oh resist the Devil therefore, and all his children; they talk of that
which is besides the Scripture; but such light is deep, and thick darkness,
what has not such lights led men too? Even contempt of God, his Word,
Ordinances, yea, and all righteousness.

Now that you may be, not only warned; but also armed against these deceivers,
think on these following considerations. 1. Labor to see an excellency in
Christ. 2. In the Word of Christ, and 3. In the Church and Ordinances of Christ.


1. Labor to see an excellency in Christ, and that thou may remember the
never to be forgotten love of Christ to thee in laying down his life, and
shedding his precious blood for thy sins, for thee a sinner, a wretched person.
O how unspeakable is that love! How should this oblige thy soul to serve him,
to honor him? Who could have paid a price for thee, if Christ had not? Count
not then the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, no, but a precious thing;
the blood of Christ is, that which will cleanse thee from all sin, if thou walk
and continue in the true light.

Again, Christ is Gods treasury, Col. 1.20. In him are hid the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. It has pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell. Where then shall we go for wisdom and knowledge but to Christ? Say then
to him, Wnether shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. Yea, 1 John
5.11. Life is in the Son, he is the life of Saints; if thou forsake Christ,
thou do forsake thy life, Col. 3.4.

2. Labor to see an excellency in the Word of Christ, I mean the Scriptures,
make them the rule of thy faith and conversation, and not the vain notions of
men; for the Scriptures are so: they are able to make thee wise to salvation;
then they must be thy rule in point of faith; yea and they will furnish thee
thoroughly unto every good work, then a rule in point of conversation, also
undervalue not the Scriptures, for what is written is written for learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have hope.
Christ made use of the Scriptures, so did his Apostles, saying, Thus it is
written; yea Christ commanded the Jews to seach the Scriptures, John 5.39. they
were they that testified of him. Yea and the Bereans searched the Scriptures
daily, Acts 17.11. to see whether those things Paul spoke were so or no, and
for that cause were counted more noble than they of Thessalonica. Yea, the
mystery that was kept secret since the world began, was made manifest by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, by the commandment of the everlasting God made
known to all Nations for the obedience of faith.

There is a blessedness to them that read and hear the words of the Prophecy
of the Scriptures, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that teadeth, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein, for the
time is at hand. Col. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell in you richly, teaching
one another, etc. 1 John 4.6. They that are of God hear us, says the Apostle
John. If you are of God, you will hear John, Peter, Paul, and the rest that
were the servants of Christ, not the fleshly conceits of these or any other
men. My Sheep, says Christ, hear my voice, and a strangers they will not hear.

O prize the Word of Christ, Ephesians 6.17. its the Sword of the Spirit; and if
you deliver your Sword to your Enemy, he may easily overcome you.

Consider the sweet frame of that gracious soul, the Lords servant David, See
Psalm 119. What a high estimation he set upon the Word of the Lord; says he, O
how I love thy Law! its my meditation all the day; mine eyes prevent the
night-watches, because I meditate on thy Word. Read that 119. Psalm, and make
it thy meditation, there are many heavenly and soul-establishing sentences
therein.

3. Labor to see an excellency in the Church and Ordinances of Christ.

Consider, Psalm 87.2. that God loves the gates of Sion more than all the
dwellings of Jacob; the Church of Christ is the habitation of God through the
Spirit, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. God dwells there, Christ walks there. Psalm
26.8. It Is the place where Gods honor dwells: yea Psalm 87.7. All Gods
pleasant springs are in thee O Sion: The Church of God is the pillar and ground
of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. therefore, Psalm 84.4, 7. Blessed are they that dwell in
thy house, O God; they will be still praising thee; yea they go from strength
to strength, every one in Sion appears before God.

O therefore with David, Psalm 27.4. desire this one thing of the Lord, and
that seek after, that thou may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
thy life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple,
Psalm 84.10. for a day in his courts is better han a thousand: I had rather,
says he, be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness.

Lastly, as thou see an excellency in Christ, his Word and Church, so labor
to see Christ in his Ordinances, as Baptism, breaking Bread, and Prayer, 2 John
9. Continue in this Doctrine, for they that do so have both the Father and the
Son: and the more perverse speakers do arise, saying, In vain have we kept his
Ordinances, the more do you love them, and contend for them, meeting often
together, the Lord-will take notice of it, there shall be a Book of Remembrance
written, yea, and you be his in the day the Lord shall make up his Jewels, and
although they pretend never so much to holiness, and the like; yet let not your
hearts be drawn away after their delusions, but Ephesians. 6.7. as you have
received Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and
stablished in the faith, abounding therein with thanksgiving. 2 Cor. 11.13, 14,
15. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves
into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of Light; therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers be
transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to
their works. Therefore beware of them; such as bring not the Dectrine of
Christ, bid them not to house, neither bid them God speed, for he that bids
them God speed, is partaker of their evil deeds. The Apostle Paul says, Gal.
1.8. But though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

1 John 4.1. Believe not then every spirit, 2 Timothy 3.14. but continue in the
things you have heard; and 1 Cor. 15.58. be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord, 2 John 8. Look to your selves that you lose not the
things that you have wrought but that you receive a full reward: Blessed are
you if you endure temptation; Satan will be stirring up instruments against
you; but if you resist him he will fly from you: though he go about as a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour; yet resist him, steadfast in the faith;
the Lord will stand by you if you so do; for he will keep you in the hour of
temptation, if you keep the word of his patience. And again many are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them out of them all. O
let us watch then against Satan and his instruments, and remember that God will
render to every man according to his works, to them who by patient continuance
in well-doing seek for glory and honor, eternal life; but to them that are
contentious, indignation and wrath. And again, we must all appear before the
Judgmentseat of Christ, that every one of us may receive the things done in his
body, whether they be good or bad: be not deceived, God is not mocked; for
what a man sows, that shall he reap; he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting; but he that sows to the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption: but in due time you shall reap, if you faint not; this
is the Saints sowing-time; the time of Harvest will come, nay, it is not far
off, for he that shall come will come, and will not tarry: be patient therefore
unto the coming of the Lord, for it draws nigh. You have need of patience,
that when you have done the will of God you may receive the Promise, the Crown,
the Kingdom, even that Kingdom; that it is the good pleasure of your heavenly
Father to give to you his little flock. O therefore, if you will have right to
the Tree of Life that stands in the midst of the Paradise of God, and a part in
the holy City, you must keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus;
for, blessed are they that keep his Commandments, that they may have right to
the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. Sad would
it be if the gates should be shut against you, as they shall be against some at
that day, even some that shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, open to us; Nay,
though they shall say, We have prophesied in thy Name, yea, and done many
wondrous works in thy Name, yet shall he say unto them, Depart from me ye that
work iniquity, I know ye not; be not like the foolish Virgins, but have Oil in
your Lamps; let your loins be girt, and your Lights burning; keep your selves
in the love of God, let Christ be precious to you. Behold the beauty of the
Lord in his house: Say the Word of the Lord is precious in these days. Have
respect with David to all the Commandments of God, and walk in them, lest you
fall into the error of the wicked, and so fall from your stedfastness. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16, 17. Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions
which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle. Now our Lord Jesus
Christ himself and God even our Father which has loved us and has given us
everlasting consolation and good hope, through grace, comfort your hearts, and
stablish you in every good word and work.

Your Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace, JOHN GRIFFITH.

FINIS.

