Sir Charles Lucas HIS LAST SPEECH At the place of Execution, where he was
shot to Death.



Dept ye 7th London Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner, 1648.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
THE SUBSTANCE Of the first Speech by Sir Charles Lucas, After notice was given
Him that he must be shot to death.
Gentlemen Soldiers.
AS I am a freeborn Englishman, I desire that I may have the benefit of the
Laws of the Land: That I may see my accusers, and plead face to face: and have
liberty to put in my Answer, and be tried by indifferent Judges.

Was it ever known that a man did suffer in this kind in cold blood, by such
an order as this, after a surrender by Treaty, upon terms of Mercy, Oh what
mercy can there be in death, save only that one kind is not so bitter as
another.

I do humbly desire this favor (if it may be) that I may have the liberty to
speak with the Lord General, by whose power I am thus condemned to suffer
death: I have something which I would impart unto His Excellency, that I hope
may give him such satisfaction, as may cause this bloody cloud to be removed
from over my head.

Sir Charles Lucases last speech which He made at the place of Execution.
Good people,
I Am now to pay that debt which we all owe, every man must dye, that is most
certain, but how, or when is not known to any, It is my chance now, (though
unhappily in blood) none of you know when it may be any of your turns.

As for my offense it is (you all know) for maintaining His Majesty's Cause,
which has been according to my judgment, and I believe that I went the right
way, And I am sure I was firm to that Cause I undertook.

But seeing I must dye, and that there is no way to obtain mercy, but that I
must now finish my course in this way, to which I beseech Almighty God to
assist me, to dye with comfort in my Savior.

I bequeath my soul into the hands of my Maker, God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God; Oh! do thou my Lord God almighty (for
my blessed Savior the Lord Jesus sake) receive my soul to eternal glory.

I have lived a Protestant and a Protestant here I dye, in the faith of the
Church of England, that has been established so many years.

As for my body, I do desire you that it may be decently carried to my own
house, and that my friends my have liberty to interre it with my Ancestors, and
set it in the vault of the Church where they were laid before me; And in the
interim, that there be no incivillity offered to my body here, when I am dead,
and that my corpse may remain quiet without molestation when it is carried away.

As for these Soldiers who stand ready to shoot me, I yield my life to their
hands, and I pray God to forgive them, I do freely from my heart forgive them.
And so to thee O Lord I commend my soul, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Oh
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, receive my soul to thy mercy, Come Lord Jesus
receive my soul.

(And so being shot, he fell down and dyed.)

A Speech made by C. R. one of the Lord Generals Officers, in answer to Sir
Charles Lucas his first speech
Sir Charles,
You have surrendered this Garrison upon mercy, which word mercy you desired
might be explained, which was accordingly by your Commissioners and ours, the
explanation you well know was, that you should be rendered to us with certain
assurance of Quarter, so as the Lord General may be free, to put some
immediately to the sword, (if we see Cause) And do you now dispute the case
against your self, and your own Act.

His Excellency (you know) may execute you all (all the chief Officers among
you) And that he saves any it is mercy.

Now that he causes you, and some few others to be executed, and saves all the
rest, how can you call it cruelty?

A second Speech, Spoken by a private Soldier.
Sir Charles,
DO you not remember, that when we delivered up Froome Garrison (as I take it)
to your self, upon fair Quarter, you notwithstanding killed two of us with
your own hand, and of forty hanged fourteen more of us afterward,
notwithstanding the surrender, and your engagement to give Quarter.

FINIS.

