The Loyal Sacrifice: PRESENTED In the Lives and Deaths of those two
Eminent-Heroick Patterns,

For Valor, Discipline, and Fidelity; The generally beloved and bemoaned,

Sir CHARLES LUCAS, And Sir GEORGE LISLE, Knights.

Being both shot to death at Colchester, Five hours after the Surrender.

SEN: -- Noscere hoc primum decet
Quid facere victor debet, quid victus pati.
Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE LOYAL SACRIFICE.
Shoot Rebels.


Your Shot, your shame:
Our fall, our fame.

the deaths of Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle by Parliamentarians with
muskets

To the most Illustrious, CHARLES, PRINCE of WALES.
Sir,
HEre is presented to your HIGHNESS, in a very small Body, an ample Volume of
Loyalty. Two incomparable patterns for Valor, Discipline and fidelity. Two
who bestowed their choicest endeavors in the Service of His Sacred Majesty:
and Sacrificed their lives to confirm their constancy. High were they ever in
the esteem of your most Royal Father. Which makes this your most humble
Servant infinitely confident, that this Memorial of two such absolute spirits,
cannot choose but receive a gracious acceptance from His Son.

It is said of Darius, that cutting up a Pomegranat, he was asked by one, with
whom (though with a well beseeming reservancy of State) he was usually
familiar; what thing he would wish in the whole world, that might vye in number
with those grains or kernels in that fruit? O, quoth he, of Zopyrus's! Now
this Zopyrus was such a faithful Loyal Subject, as he had suffered himself to
be pitifully disfigured to improve his Commands, and make way for his
Victories. May your Graces Quiver in the management of your most Princely
Affairs be full of them; that Sedition may become a stranger to our Kingdom;
that your Crown, in the future fruition of it, may flourish: and ENGLAND, now a
spectacle of misery, become an object of emulation to all foreign States in
the admiration of her glory. This is, and shall be ever the constant and
incessant prayer of

Your most humble and Loyally-obliged Servant; PHILOCRATES.

To the Reader.
SOme Elegies (Candid Reader) with other indisposed pieces, have been lately
published touching this Subject. Whereas, here is presented to thy view the
whole Body of this Tragic An ampler discourse upon the Argument may,
perchance, come shortly to light: mean time, receive this Abstract of the
whole, being with that prespicuity and propriety contracted; as nothing may be
to inform your knowledge, with more clearenesse presented. Rendering a brief
but exact Account of all their actions, motions and Engagements: omitting only
(out of the Authors zeal to a choice reserve of City-Saints) the difficulty of
their passage over the River, in their remove from KENT to ESSEX; occasioned by
that peremptory denial of their Marching through the City. Which courtesy the
Army took so gratefully, as no doubt but within few weeks They mean to
requite it, in their entertainment by the City. Soldiers when they have no
Foes; to keep their hands in ure, must fight with their Friends.
Story limned to life. The LOYAL SACRIFICE of two Gentlemen of eminent rank
and quality. Faithful Servants to a distressed Master. Such, as never appeared
nor approved themselves more, then when His necessities importuned them most;
nor at any time more active, then when hopes of rewards presented then least.
You shall see them in their Educations, Actions, and Deaths. Where, in the
first you may find them full of promising hopes; In the second, variety of
gallant attempts: And in the last, their whole work crowned with a glorious
Evening. Which Task was principally undertaken for our National Vindication;
that such Foreign Countries as in these our sad seditious times, where
Division is the only Musical note that sounds harmoniously in the ears of
our Zimries: have thrown aspersions on our Nation of being so universally
disloyal; may by the Portrait or draught of these, ingenuously confess, that
ENGLAND brings forth Ayries of heroick-Loyall spirits as well as of inferior
Birds of prey.

For there is not that State nor Age that can produce two Persons for action
more daring; nor in the carriage of their designs more discerning: nor in both
more Loally-concluding. It were then to be wished that those who were Authors
or Actors in their fall; would fall into a due consideration of their own
deplorable condition: that their reflexe upon Their worth may work in them a
remorce for their injuriously-inflicted wrath: to which as desire of revenge
and thirst after blood gave heat; so incessant rivolets of penitential tears
can only cool: Which done, charity will wish that the infamy of that fact may
be in the same capacity of dying; as the perpetuity of these Royalists fame is
with all succeeding posterities of living.

Your affectionate PHILOCRATES.

In Honorem Doctissimi Authoris.
Why Stationer? do think that I can Paint
The Intellect? Or Beauty of a Saint?
Or add more Luster to the Daie's-Bright-Eye?
Or may I Circumscribe Eternity?
Then bid me Mount, and Penetrate the Skies,
And not Commend, but see the Sacrifice.
For, it is as possible to view their Glories,
As to Out strip the Author of their Stories:
And who so strives to set his Labors forth,
Contributes not, but 'bateth of his worth.
But if thou do desire the Book should Sell,
Fix thereunto his Name; and then it will.
G. W.

To his much valued Friend the learned Author.
THose who as guilty died, do here arise
(From inn'cent suffering) a true Sacrifice.
[Victims and Martyrs both, and yet we cry
Against Superstition, and I dolatry.]
Whose sparks from th Altar fled to Heaven, and there
Framed a new Gemini in the Regal sphere,
Are yet more blessed, 'cause Thou their Valor sings,
And sound'st their glories, on Heroic strings.
Making their Flames e'relasting, their perfume
Reach to Eternity; never to consume
With Time or Tempest. Thy essential I'en,
To a new life restores the dead again.
That Miracles were not to the Primitive Age
Confined, it is plain; thou show new in each Page.
What Nature could not lend, and Fate denies,
Thou do bestow; [their Perpetuities.]
And what our Choll'rick Chimists did Calcine
To Ashes, in their native Iustres shine
By the heat thou here apply'st; it does restore,
All that was Nobly good in them before.
And this so full, as if thou had walked about
With eithers Genius, to collect them out.
Briefly: their Loyalty could never live
Shrin'd in more glory, then thy Quill does give.
Which whosoever views, may smile with pitying scorn
To find all ancient suff'ers rather torn
A second time in Legends, since they there
Are lamely drawn: whilst thou (a Master) here
Giv'st Beauty and proportion its full due,
And Crowns those Saints which hence blessed Martyrs flew.
E. A.

To his much honored friend the Author.
Whose quill but thine so lively could express
The Valiant acts of Lucas and of Lisle?
Whose fame surmounts the Stars, and as I guess
Eternized are by thy life-giving style.
Both Valiant Knights! what pity it is they die,
And in cold blood by base ignoable foe:
Who often made death to start and turn awry
In many a bloody fight and duel too.
Their Births, their Valiant acts their Loyalty,
Their Deaths (imposed by Villains, cowards base,
Who from them once received in courtesy
A life of Alms, when in a quaking case)
Are to the life expressed in this thy Book:
A learned piece; strange kind of Chemistry,
As all men must confess, who thereon look;
For It makes the dead to live eternally.
J. H.

THE Loyal Sacrifice, etc.
NOble actions having relation to persons of eminent quality, have been ever
memorable to Posterity. Amongst which, none more remarkable then such as have
borne the face of Loyalty, and expressed their true native luster in defense
of the just Privileges of their Country, and conservation of a Viget. de mil.
discipl. l. 2. c. 4. Guic. in Hist. l. 1. c. 3. Polit. de regim. Princ. l. 3.
c. 5. Gesner. de jure regal. Cent. 4. c. 7. Riv. de Ord. Princip. sect. 2.
Arnob. de Magist. Civil. l. 6. Lampsach. de stat. Monarch. and tit. Imper.
sect. 3. parag. 2. Owin. in Anti-Parae.
Monarchical Sovereignty.

Many, indeed, and those singular Heroic Spirits, (whose names are to this day
recorded in the Annals of Fame) do our ancient Historians present unto us; who
have received no other guerdon then Ingratitude, from those parts where they
have best deserved. Carthage may satisfy you with an Annibal; Rome with an
African; Athens with a Phocion. Notwithstanding all this, the memory of their
surviving actions begot such a glorious emulation in their Successors, as that
unthankfulnes their Countries showed unto them: or aspersions which immeriting
spirits darted on them, even redounded more to their honor, then if they had
never suffered under the censure of a groundless popular opinion, or been
crushed by the votes of such State-commanding Imperialists, who maligned their
rising. I shall not labor to make any large Porch to my Mindian building; lest
some Critic tax me, as sometimes that Cynick did, that the City might run
out at the Gate.

We are here to present unto your view and un-interessed judgment, equally
poized to their merits, persons of quality, and patterns of Loyalty, who have
acted their parts bravely upon the Theater of Honor: whose Names, though the
memories of some men be apt to freeze in these distempered times, shall like
fresh and fragrant Odours breathe sweetness in the nosthrills of Those, who
hold Fidelity to be the best Cognizance for the Coat of a Subject. You cannot
choose but collect where I am like to lay my Scene, before I unfold my Story.
COLCHESTER must be the place; then which, none more memorable for continuance
of a Siege above expectance; nor more gallant in opposing of a powerful Foe
with a constant and cheerful resistance.

During which Siege, it is incredible, in what a prudential way and form of
Discipline, those who were designed Commanders and Managers of this weighty
action, bore themselves not only in animating those who were for them, but
ingratiating those (and that in a generous and graceful posture) of whose
affections they stood doubtful. But to omit the relation of these particulars
which deserve approvement and invitation from those who stand engaged in
actions of like quality: We will make it our work to acquaint you more
punctually with the descent, breeding, and condition of these eminent
Gentlemen, who closed the sundry passages of their loyal lives with a glorious
Evening: by sacrificing their blood for the honor of their Sovereign: and
easing their oppressed Country of an insupportable tyrannick burden.

First then, for the Family of Sir CHARLES LUCAS; none that knows it can
bestow any other style upon it then of lineall worth and Antiquity: A Stem
from whence sprung many emment Sciens, useful Instruments to their State and
Country. Amongst which, Not to omit that nobly-accomplished, and deservingly
honored, the Lo: Lucas, his Brother, a Gentleman singularly gisted in all
suitable Elements of knowledge: together with Sir GERVAS LUCAS, a valiant and
loyal Commander: (by which notion of Loyalty, true valor is justly dignified,
and from perfidious rashness distinguished) Sometimes Governor of BELVOIR
Castle.
this Noble Gentleman confers such an additament upon it, as the loyalty and
memory of his Person shall to succee ding times highly improve it. For his
Education, it was generous, having his youth sufficiently seasoned in
principles of knowledge, humane and divine learning, his Manhood for Discipline
in the Field. He was ever of an active disposition, accompanied with a resolute
spirit, and a suitable discretion to manage it. Albeit I am not ignorant how
rigid and severe Commanders be commonly less beloved by their Soldiers, then
those who are of more indulgent tempers.
Strict in his Commands without a supercilious severity, though some herein
have taxed him too censoriously. Free in his rewards to persons of desert and
quality. Since the first beginning of these distractions, all his Expresses
with what company soever he consorted, evermore tended to the advancement of
Loyalty; how odious and unjustifiable a thing it was to lift up an hand
against the power of Sovereignty, under what plausive pretense or color
soever, that adulterate face of Treason were disguised: being usually known to
deliver himself in these words, That he preferred the style of Loyalty,
before any dignity that earth could confer upon him. In his Society, he was
affable and pleasant; In his Charge, serious and vigilant: remiss in nothing
that might any way improve or expedite his dispatch in affairs of Government.
Those his sundry Fields, Martial exploits, and brave adventures wherein he was
ever personally engaged, and wherein he usually appeared (as was generally
observed) in the Head of the Army, were needless here to recount. Reserving
them for a more proper place in our discourse hereafter.
As his valor was well known, so was his native candor and clemency no
less approved by all such as in the close of his Conquest submitted themselves
to his mercy. So as, in this particular we may truly conclude, That during all
his time of Service, he was ever ready to afford what himself could not
receive, Free Quarter: no, nor so much as one days Reprieve for his better
preparation against his last voyage. This we purposely here have touched, to
vindicate his clear and Noble temper, from the injurious censure of those, who
in the freedom of their report tax him for being too violent and implacable in
this kind: Whereas that man breaths not who can justly accuse him in the whole
current of his actions or Commands, that he ever lay his impetuous hand upon a
submissive Captive in cold blood: or ever suffered any blood to be spilt, which
he might with honor, or without prejudice to his Commands, spare. But these
Critic Spirits, who are so apt to censure and traduce the clearest Actions of
honor, may be properly compared to the Camelion: that can assume any color
but white.

But the Foe must have something to speak in his own defense: yet when he has
produced all the reasons he can possibly allege, to wind up the Spider-woven
web of his Apology: He must appear to the whole World and succeeding
posterities after these distracted times, an Actor of a cruel and bloody
Tragedy. In one word, never did a more virile or undaunted Spirit harbor more
noble compassion; holding nothing more inglorious, then to dominere over the
misery of a subdued Foc. So as to bestow on him any ampler character: or
present him in a fuller Portraitture, were to give beams to the Sun: his
integrity being impaled with such honor, as it far surmounts the reach of
censure.

But to the pursuit of our discourse. After this gallant Gentleman had beat
many intricate paths, and traversed numerous Assaies, for the redress and
relief of his long restrained Master, our most gracious Sovereign, whereto his
Loyal thoughts were ever conscienciously bent, he himself with some other
persons of eminent and honorable quality, as NORWICH, CAPEL, and LOUGHBOROW,
etc. struck in to COLCHESTER: a Town inconsiderable, as was generally
conceived both by the enemy and adjacent parts of the Country, either to
receive by a provisionall way of relief, any great force into it: or by reason
of the indefensive and intenible condition of the Town, to stand out any time
upon their settling or planting in it. Yet so constantly courageous, vigilant,
and incredibly industrious were these Nobly and Loyal disposed Gentlemen, as
this Town, which in opinion by reason of her dis provision, could not probably
hold out against so powerful and formidable an enemy, the space of one Month;
continued three Months in a most resolute defiance and resistance of a
victorious Army, Sated with such fullness of Conquests, and supplied with such
fresh and constant Recruits, to bring their successive achievements to a more
absolute period. For during all this wasting and calamitous Siege, wherein the
Army deeply suffered in the loss of their daringst and experienced Soldiers,
that close City cubbe, the Armies most active Coyduck, Major SKIPPON, omitted
no opportunity wherein he might gratify his EXCELLENCE, whose Creature he
professed himself to be: so long as his disposition harmoniously tuned with his,
for suppressing a Monarchical power: and establishing a Levelling Democracy.
Neither wanted this State-diving Major useful instruments to accomplish his
designs: Sundry Jewish Anarchiall Synagogue Rookes (and those plumpe ones too)
for they were Clerks of the Treasury, and such as at a dead lift, could by the
Chimical application of a white cement, which they had ever in readiness,
strengthen the weak sinues of a decayed Army. And this they practiced nightly
to prevent discovery. By this you may judge, upon what disadvantage those
gallant Loyal Gentlemen stood engaged. Whatsoever force or Party they lost,
admitted no recovery: they were shut up from all visible appearance of relief
or recruit. Whereas the Army, though it were hourly sensible of the
incomparable valor of the besieged: yet by fresh Supplies, raised by certain
Citizens over-cramm'd purses, their losses be they never so numerous, were
repaired: and by the whole Country, whose pliable affections were molded in
the obedience and directions of the Enemy, of all necessary provisions so fully
stored, as no want could retard their designs, nor foreslow their Motion,
unless it were too much excess: and here I must ingenuously confess, their
fullness might become prejudicial to the Enemy, their own Party: for their
excessive feeding made their resty bodies so unweldy; as they never mounted our
Walls nor Works with that speed as they hastened down. But as it is the property
of some men to be better fed then taught: So these crammed Birds, enlivened
above a Soldiers garb with these eager incentments, stickt not so long as
their bloods were inflamed, to put themselves upon the desperatest assaies: but
they came off so blewly, as their undertakings ever redounded to the benefit of
the besieged, and their dishonor: for it was their usual costome either to
leave with them both their Arms and Bodies; or at least Arms without Bodies:
thanking God they escaped so well. Neither indeed, if we consider it rightly,
could it be any act of policy, to feed Soldiers so plentiously; for the
thought of that provision they left in the Almory, made them more neglectfull
of their service to the Army: desiring nothing more, then to leave those Walls
where they were entertained with no other Civilities, then fury and scarcity:
and to make retreat to their own Hutches, where they might be sure to find
plenty.

Now look upon our Forlorne-hope; never was more Gallantry less seconded; nor
from relief more divided. The strength of those adjacent parts, lying in Sir
CHARLES LUCAS his own native Country, which in reason might have obliged them
to more observance, and begot in him the more confidence; did not only desert
them, but became Besiegers of them: being enforced (for so we are in charity to
temper it) by the overawing power of a fearful Army, to be industrious
Assistants and Agents in the ruins of their own Natives: Yet I must tell them,
(howsoever their fear may seem to speak for them) that this their Agency
shall, in succeeding times, redound to their lasting infamy. It was bravely
concluded by the Poet, He knows not how to dye, Sen in Herc. furent.
who has the sense
To act, though forced against his Conscience.


And less then conscientious they could not be of the injurious breach and
violation of the Faith; engaging themselves by promise to be Assistants to
their distressed Countrymen; and afterward, through pusillanimity to desert
them, nay, become instruments in their ruin. But to omit these: such receding
and backsliding Subjects, who regulate their course to the motion of the time;
and hold their actions most secure, that draw their conformity from power,
deserve no longer relation then what ignominy may cast upon them. We have
learned better things, and are bound to practice them too, if we desire to
partake in the style of Loyal Subjects, or in humane society of Real Friends.

Thus have you briesly heard the many advantages of a powerful Enemy: with the
disadvantage of the Royal Party; from whence you may easily collect, and with
a compassionate candor, probably conclude: that no issue can be expected, by
the Besieged, but a fatal Catastrophe, after so many brave endeavors, Sallies
and assaies, gallantly performed: and to their succeeding honor memorably
recorded. And so the sequel was: for having eaten all the Horses, Dogs, Cats,
and whatsoever (though most reluctant to nature) could afford them nourishment,
yea, were it never so loathsome nor distasteful; So, as neither Vionua, Verona,
Rhodes, Belgrade, Bargam ap Some, Brada, no, nor Samaria her self could exceed
the miferies of this distressed Town, in the extremities of a continued Siege,
and a wasting Famine.
This unfortunate Town of COLCHESTER was surrendered after the continuance of
three Months Siege completely ended; with these strict conditions: The
Superior Officers to Mercy, and the Soldiery upon Quarter for life. But how
this express of MERCY was writ, like Draco's Laws, in Letters of blood, shall
be shown you afterward.

Now should it be demanded, what reason could there be for the Besieged to hold
out so long; and by their continued resistance, to bring both themselves with
the rest of the Inhabitants into such misery and fearful distress:
especially, seeing there appeared no hope at all of raising that lasting Siege;
nor of the Generals remove till he had finished his design; Besides their
pertinacy and aversion from such reasonable conditions as in the beginning were
proposed to them, could but highly incense the General, and bring them (as
afterward it did) to extreamer terms, upon intelligence of their necessitous
condition, that they might either be enforced to perish through famine, or
necessarily surrender the Town?

To this I answer, that there were two main reasons that induced them to stand
upon their own defense, to the defiance of the Enemy.

First was, that not only the County, wherein they were beleagred, but other
Counties too, had engaged themselves upon their fidelity, (a strong gage of
assurance amongst good men) that they would really join in assistance with
them, and stand in defense of their just Liberties; re-estating of their
Sovereign in His regal Throne; and disbanding of all onerous and unnecessary
Forces, pretensively levied in this Kingdom, with a resolute purpose of
laboring to suppress all Sects, Schisms, or Divisions, that might any way
darken the Light of the Church, or disturb the peace and tranquillity of the
State. But this strong engagement procured an easy dispensation. For these
faithful Assistants proved their mortal Assaylants. So as none were more
ready to lend an helping hand to the Enemy, after some braving menaces
delivered by the Army. So, as we may conclude here: all those firm hopes which
these Noble Gentlemen reposed in these diffiding Counties, were quickly thawed,
and resolved to nothing. This it is for persons of Quality, to ground their
reliance on the Egyptian Reeds; which will sooner pierce the hand of the
undertaker, then support him.

But this disease, in all these late distempers and distractions, (as never
State was farther out of her wits) has been so Epidemicall, as it may admit the
better excuse: for I have scarcely known any County that has not grievously
labored of this infirmity. The Motion and Action of Armies, got them alliance,
and fresh assistance what way soever they Marched: yea, and caused most
Counties to renounce their first Principles by no other Argument then the
brandish of a Sword.

Another reason to induce and till them on to the continuance of this Siege,
was their daily expectance of relief, not only from these neighboring
Counties, (whose joint promise had strongly engaged them to their assistance)
but from the North: neither were their hopes built on weak grounds; For a
person of quality; and an experienced, Vigilant and Valiant Commander; though
some late overtures have rendered him unfortunate, confidently assured them of a
speedy and expedite relief: as appeared by his Letter directed to Sir CHARLES
LUCAS, to this effect: being truly transcribed after the Original Copy.

Sir,
YOur Gallantry in Resolution and Action during that fierce and furious Siege
of COLCHESTER, has already confirmed in us, that noble opinion which we ever
retained of you in all your undertakings, both for Spirit and Knowledge. Valor
acquites it self best in extremes: Of this, your loyal prowess has given an
ample testimony. We here, who truly love and honor you, and who, with some of
our best and choycest Forces, hope in a very short time to Relieve you; could
not retain less then a deep resentment of the diversion of those
noble-disposed Royalists, who engaged their Persons (as their intendments
visibly appeared) for your Succor: with the premature fall of that active
spark of true Native Honor, the Lord FRANCIS VILLIERS: upon whose surprised
and disarmed Body, report informs us, that such inhumanity, by a Mechannick
hand was committed; as Barbarism it self would conceive Horror to be an Actor
in a Subject of such Cruelty. But what shall either you, or we collect from
these tragic overtures, but the implacable hate and heat of an odious
perfidious Foe, flaming from a furious desire of imbruing his treacherous hands
in the blood of all such as profess themselves faithful Servants in defense
of their Princes honor, safety of their Country, her just and ancient
Liberties! For which we Fight: and for preservation of which we shall ever hold
it a devotionall Loyalty to engage our persons, fortunes, whatsoever is most
dear unto us. The Cruelty they show to ours, might prescribe us a Rule what to
do, when it shall please God that we be (which we hope ere long to be) Masters
of the Field. But revenge in actions of cruelty, shall ever be as far estranged
from our thoughts, as theirs, since first these Civil unnatural Wars were
broached, have been from harboring Loyalty or compassion. Mean time, these
men's designs, who push at nothing lower then Crowns, (yet should you unlock
the Cabinets of their hearts, make Crowns their Objects) may afford both you,
and us, who stand in defense of a just Cause, and no private Interest, (as God
is our witness) this useful Lesson, Had Sir CHARLES, with his constant Loyal
friend Sir GEO: LISLE, observed this lesson, upon which they ever unanimously
fixed, and had to death pursued, if their resolution had not been by the Common
Soldiers, who make personal safety their only Object, with other treacherous
Instruments betrayed, they had not so experimentally tried the Mercy of a
remorselesse Enemy to be Cruelty. But if God have a Bottle for our tears, he
has surely in store a Vyal for our Blood so innocently shed: To him then let us
commit their Cause, who is the just Avenger.
Rather to sacrifice our Lives to a noble and memorable Fate; then to submit to
an imperious merciless Foe.

Hold out, brave Sir; continue your resolution; pursue your Sallies; let not
their numerous Recruites amate you, (give me leave for the true zeal I bear to
our Cause, and love to your Person, to enforce this needless advice:) you need
little doubt, but if SKIPPONS power of inlisting men be abridg'd, as we hear it
is: that these Recruites, or fresh Supplies can continue long. Sedition, have
it never so specious pretenses, nor powerful favorites; it will at one time
or other be unmasked, and show its own deformity; which shown. those who
followed her, and foolishly fawned on her, will become much ashamed, that their
misguided judgments should be ever taken with so deceiving a beauty.

Now to enliven the hopes of all that brave and honorable Cavalry there with
you; Think every Evening, how we are one days March nearer you then we were in
the Morning: and that our heartiest wishes go along with you; as we are
confident within few days, with our hands to assist you. And to confirm the
apparancy of these hopes, you may be pleased herewith to receive an Abstract of
our proceedings, together with the Order we observe, and success we receive in
our March toward you; which you may with assurance communicate to my Lord
GORING, E. of NORWICH, Lord CAPEL, Lord LOUGHBOROW; to whom I beseech you
present my affectionatest service, with all others of concern.


After this he descends to a relation of the manner and success of their
March, which for brevity sake as partly inconsisting with our present
discourse, I purposely omit: and fall upon the conclusion of this Letter.

Dear Sir,
hold out but a little, a very little space; your friends will visit you, and
bring you off with honor; and with joint embraces congratulate you, for making
Loyalty your Object of valor.


Now, upon a due and serious recollection of these, can any one judge that
their hopes were grounded upon a shallow foundation? No; it is not to be
doubted but that their speedy Relief was both intended and pursued, and had
been to purpose effected, if the Season of the year had afforded a convenience
for the conduct of their Ammunition and Artillery: which if it had been
expedited, as the time of the year though not the Season was for it, might have
easily prevented CROMWELS encounter: and brought on their Army with more
honor. For at that time, this Victorious Lieutenant, now highly swollen with
his late Scottish-rent, had employments enough elsewhere: so as of necessity
either the General might have been enforced to raise his Siege, which his
spirit could hardly have brooked, and so engage them: or have suffered them to
appear, in a full Body before COLCHESTER, which would have infinitely scared
him.

Neither am I ignorant how some, and those of approved experience and insight
in the deporment of these affairs; will not stick to impute the ground of this
deficiency, to the remiss March and retard of the Scots, whose desire was (for
the refuse and rascalry of them I may safely speak) rather to continue their
debate with their Presbyterian Clergy, touching the convenience, and
inconveniency of this War, and so by protracting their March, to save their
skin; then to expose theselves to the adventure of so hazardous attempt; by
receiving a bullet for an uncertain booty. It was never yet known, that the
blew Bonnet would enter lists upon the gilded promises of a Public faith, or
the Huxters cold hopes of best-be-trust. And when all this is done; be
confident, their hands will be more ready to receive it, then their hearts to
earne it. It has been ever observed of the Pesantry of that Nation, that they
could feed better then fight. Plundering was their only Masterpiece: which
they could finger with such dexterity, as if they had been nursed and bred up
in that Trade from their infancy.

Neither could the discipline of their General promise any great success, he
may profess himself a Soldier: but instance that place or exploit where he
came ever off with honor. Sundry Gentlemen of eminent quality have been
inveigled by large promises to engage their Persons and Fortunes for his German
Service: but as his arrival purchased him little above contempt: so his
distressed followers, (so many as were left unattach'd by famine or murren at
Castrene) returned back with tattered habits and heavy hearts, having
unfortunately wasted the remainder of their Fortunes in that useless and
thanklesse service. BUT set us look homeward and reflect upon our own State!
From what Agent may we more truly derive the Source of our present miseries;
whereon all Countries may with a compassionate horror fix their eyes, as on
some prodigious spectacle of State, which no preceding Age could ever
parallel? From whence I say more probably sprung the Origin of our woes, our
calamitous distractions, then from this Cloud-walking Politician; who ever made
his own intersts the Object of his actions: yet fell short of what he
intended, because the integrity of the Man was generally inspected? How many
fruitless Messages returned he in his agency betwixt the Scots and us? How
willingly did he spin out time, and pretend obstructive ways which never yet
came to discovery? Mean time, he omitted no opportunity that might advance his
own ends: but such perspective and preventing eyes were ever looking over him:
as his lime-twiggs would not hold, which afflicted his ayrie spirit not a
little. Now sum up these together; and what expectance could we have either
of settling State or Church Government by so timing and popular a General? Did
this great Duke, think you, compassionate our distractions? O no! His only
fishing was in troubled waters; where his hook could not be discovered, nor
his dangerous dark plots diselosed. Pray you, resolve me; was ever Army so
numerous and seemingly formidable so soon defeated? or so many Officers and
Commanders, who bare the countenances of men, so easily Captived? If this be
the issue of a Canopy-Generall; whose very port and magnificence in his March
promised wonders; nay the reduce of a distempered and mad-conditioned State in
a moment: what account is there to be made of such vading runnagade vanity,
that presents majesty in an imbrodred habit with a feverish heart? But believe
it, I cannot choose but remember, what his next Commander under him, spoke to an
intimate friend of his upon some expresses of joy which he perceived his friend
to be taken with, upon his nomination to be Lieutenant General. Dear friend,
said he, if you really profess love to me, moderate your joy; for it may fall
out that these my Commands may redound to my prejudice. For who knows, whether
my General and I, in this High Service, have not different ends? for the one
of us may direct the level of our aims at a King, the other at a Crown.
Implying preservation of Sovereignty in the one: Innovation in the other. This
struck home; and would have gone to the quick if the attention of such an
ambitious Spirit had given least ear to so tart and spiteful a whisper. But I
cannot compare this unbounded flame of ambition, (retain it never so much
heat) more properly then to our Chamber-Lawyer; who performs his practice
within doors: But though he contrive at home, his council receives life and
spirit abroad. Gyges ring would be an useful Signet for such a man's thumb:
whose desire clozeth in this, to see all men's actions; and not to be seen by
any. An excellent veil for an Ambitious Statist. Yet you shall generally
observe, how these Persons who have the extensivest aims; for most part lose
the Game either by shooting too far over, or too far short of their Mark. Too
far over by surprising themselves with their too much cunning: Or too far short
by the prevention of others, before they attain their end. Many of these two,
fail by confiding too much in their own abilities: or relying on those who
fall off in the pursuit of their designs. This our Scotch General had lately
sufficient proof of: when he stored his hopes in the valor of his Blew-caps
and their bordering Allies; all of like Size with them for prowess; as that
ancient Bard truly sung:

Calidoni socios elegere pares
Nec turpi fuga redeunt degeneres. Vat. Call.
The Scots chus'd such Allies without delay,
Who knew as well as they to run away.
These were not the men that could perform the work; High designs require
powerful means. For these be such Bats, as combat best by night. And indeed,
since their first Invasion of our unhappy Kingdom, they have been ever more
serviceable to our Saints (whose obsequious Creatures they sometimes were:) in
their number then prowess. O unfortunate Kingdom, when a servile irregular
people must be invited to bring us to Reformation! But these heartlesse
white-liver'd Boobies, repent themselves (poor starved Snakes) that ever they
undertook this last adventure: for they have lost more by HAMILTON then ever
they got by LISLEY. A pitiful Catastrophe, trust me. But what remedy? Pillage
and rapine can hardly hold out to a posterity. Thus has their zeal consumed
them; their cowardice confounded them; their General disserted them; and
himself of those hopes that invited him to conduct them hither. Yet in this
hard condition, they confess as a Curtsie of England, that they fare as well
here in Prison, as they did in Scotland, where they had freedom. But our
Counties will be shortly weary of such Guests. Neither can they do them a
greater displeasure then in sending them to the place from whence they came:
and so by their famished entertainment, to the place of Execution.

But, what trow you, will this Grand Captive General do, who yielded up
himself so tamely to his pretended Enemy? I shall tell you: He holds his
personal Security (the fabric of treachery) so precious an Object, that if he
come not off fair, he intends to make some fall off foul. He has a large List
of all such as were Inviters of his Dukeships egregious prowess, with his
Fugitives hither: and these he means to discover.

Now, will not this discovery be an unexemplary action of Honor: when he, who
professed himself prime Champion for His Majesty, shall accuse His well-wishers,
and impeach them for an Office of Loyalty? Yet hold up your heads, ye that are
guilty of the Bill; such course is taken as will crush this Design in the
shell. A Committee of their own Leven is to be sent down privately, to take
this Great Runnegado's examination; but nothing must be found of validity: They
are foolish Judges that will betray themselves: Only some well-cramm'd
Royalists (who be none of their Ayry) must be squeaz'd for example sake. And
for himself, whose Lodging is hung with Tapistry, a proper furniture for a
Prisoner, with a Bed valued at a thousand pound; being held more suitable for
his unmilitary Corpse then any Field-bed: He may have his liberty when he
pleases, if he have it not already; For there is an Ordinance a foot, which
speaks much in favor of the Scots. By the sinnewy strength of which
Ordinance, if these Scots at any time invaded this Kingdom, they were to be
holden only for Disturbers of the Peace: Whereas, if any of our English joined
with them in that active invasion, they were to be proceeded against as
Traitors.

So the Duke is secure enough, which is all He desires upon Earth but a Crown:
But if he fight no better then he did of late, He deserves to have his Crown
shaven, and (as the ancient custom of those Eliots was to their Slaves) be
disgracefully kicked for a Coward. Yet I must needs confess, he showed
himself more thankful in appearing less Valiant. For by whose means
obtained he his liberty, when he remained Prisoner for his treacherous Designs
at PENDENNIS CASTLE? Was it not, I pray you, by the special grace of our
Saintly Senate? Had our Prince any hand in his enlargement? Was it not then a
grateful part in him, (though it were to the betraying of his Trust, and
dishonor of his Country) to gratify CROMWELL with all his Horse and Arms; and
so requite their care by satisfying their desires, who were procurers of his
Liberty?

But what else could be expected by CALIDONIA Perfidiae Emblema; Justitiae
Auathcma; Injuriae Scaena; Nequitiae Plena; Amicitiae Aliena. Vid. Fabian. in
Chron. Frosard. Polid. Lanquet, in. Epit. Coopper. ib. Barc. in Icon. anim.
Pracipue, Muraet. in Calliop. Calid.
CALIDON, being by Chronologists rendered to be the Embleame of Disloyalty; a
Stranger to Equity; an Harbor for Injury; The Magazen of Iniquity; The
Counterfeit of Amity?

Truth is, had Lauderdaile, the Dukes sollicitous Agent, prevailed in his
message for bringing our Prince from the Downs (under a plausive pretense) to
be absolute General of the Scottish Forces, it might have produced such
effects as might have afflicted the Duke with the unexpected success of his
Army. But a Princes rising hopes to fall upon such an hazard was neither safe
nor probably secure, where men account no otherwise of Allegiance, then of a
politic pretense to obtain their own ends: and from an easy dispensation
with protests and vows (as if they were only ceremonious garbs of the time)
can appear personally most, where they are really least; it is dangerous I say,
for the hopes of a Diadem to be there lodged.

Honest and integrious breasts were ever held the Princes choicest Guardians.
His Alliance or whatsoever else he might privately intend, could not so well
secure him there by Land, as his Princely Commands may here by Sea.

But to our purpose: Though I might seem to have insisted long upon this
Subject (or what you please to call him, for I should wish that his thoughts
may ever acknowledge really that style:) yet I conceive this to be no
digression; seeing it holds such propriety and pertinency to the principal
discourse we have in hand. For I am confidently persuaded, had this Great man
shown that promptness of will, and expeditenesse in his March, whereto he was
so much importuned by our English General for our Northern Expedition; they
had neither (as I touched before) aspersed such a blemish of cowardice upon his
Honor: nor exposed poor distressed COLCHESTER to the Mercy of a merciless
Foe. Their relief could not have been so long a wanting: if his zeal and
allacrity to so gallant a service had not been retarding.

But leaving these to their Country, a place equally poor and suitable to their
ingenerous quality: I am to proceed in my discovery and discourse of Their
actions, who were Antipodes, at least Antithetes to these Straglers slavish
conditions.

WE may not without high ingratitude, silence the Actions of these absolute
Gentlemen in the whole course and pursuit of their gallant Service.

In this survey, we are in the first place (to omit engagements of less
consequence) to mount up the hill, near NEWBURY and ENBORNE Heath, the two
places where the most of that memorable Battle was fought; Where Sir CHARLES
LVCAS with sundry other worthy Commanders, bore themselves as bravely as any
men alive. In which Fight Sir CHARLES with other prime Officers was grievously
wounded. Here were his Characters of honor in a Crimson die, deeply stamped.

Here Lieutenant Colonel Sir GEORGE LISLE bravely led up the Forelorne-hope,
with such resolution, as his Valor had such influence on his Soldiers, as
the remissest spirit under his Command, in imitation of so gallant a Leader,
became infinitely active in the pursuit of their service.

We are to present to you likewise (for such Annals admit no period) Sir
CHARLES LVCAS his Valiant courage, upon the Rebels assault of CAWOOD Castle;
where with skill and Valor he forced his way through the Rebels Quarters to
such places as he thought convenient; and that with such confidence and
magnanimity, as his very name became a terror to the Enemy.

His Gallantry at MARSTON Moore; where it is thought (though I be better
opinion'd of his EXCELLENCE) that he gave our great General such a blow, as in
revenge cost him his life.

His valiant manage at NEWARKE; where he expressed himself a gallant Soldier
both in his discipline and personal action.

His brave and successful attempt, in his March from BERKLEY Castle with part
of his Regiment betwixt SLYMBRIDGE and BEVERSTON Castle upon Colonel MASSEYS
Garrisons.

His incomparable gallantry, in the pursuit of his Assayes at TEDBVRY.

FOR Sir GEORGE LISLE, look upon his brave deportment, in his engage at
BRAMDEANE Heath, where he was so generally approved, and admired, both for his
direction and resolution in actions of Valor, as it redounded to his lasting
honor.

Shall we return his express and gallant demeanure in that memorable service
betwixt NEWBVRY and SPINE? we will render it, as we have from a sincere pen
received it.

As for Colonel LISLE himself, we profess it troubles us; We want language to
express his carriage: for he did all things with as much judgment,
cheerfulness and present dispatch (admirable observances in one of his years)
as had special influence on every Common Soldier; taking particular care of
all except himself. The truth is, he gave the Rebels three most gallant
Charges; In the first, his Field-Word was FOR THE CROWN, and then ( to second
his Impreze with his Zeal) he beat them back, and knocked them down both with
Bullet and Musket-stock; In the second, his Word FOR PRINCE CHARLES, and then
he cut them off as they came on; and hewed them down sufficiently as they runnt
away; In the third, 'twas FOR THE DVKE OF YORK; and then he slashed them so
home, that they troubled him no more: for had they come again, he resolved (a
resolution suitable to so brave and undaunted a Spirit) to have gone over all
the Kings Children, till he had not left one Rebel to fight against the Crown,
or the Royal Progeny. In which service the Colonel had no Armor on, besides
Courage and a good Cause, and an Holland Shirt; for as he seldom wore
defensive Arms, so he now put off his very Buff-doublet, to animate his men,
as may be presumed, that the commonest Soldier might see himself better Armed
then his Colonel; or because 'twas dark, they might better discern him from
whom they were to receive both Direction and Courage.

However, it gave occasion to a Londoner that week in Print to say; The Irish
Papists in the Kings Army at NEWBVRY, had diverse Witches (as no Hagge more
fearful then valor to a Coward) among them; which many of CROMWELLS Soldiers
did plainly perceive to fly swiftly from one side of the Kings Army to another.

Which has thus much truth in it, that this Spirit or Ghost (call it what they
please) frighted all those guilty Rebels out of the Field, and made them run
for protection, to their Canon and maine Body, which got near to the Hill where
they quartered, above a mile from the place of Fight; leaving the whole pillage
of the Field to His Majesty's Soldiers without shooting one Musket to
disturb them.

And to manifest the care he took for his own in the close of the Conquest:
The very next day after the last NEWBVRY Fight, when His Majesty's Army was
drawn off, that Shy Earl of MANCHESTER went into Mr. DOLEMANS house in SHAW
(near NEWBVRY) where he found some wounded Soldiers; Colonel LISLE (who so
gallantly commanded those Guards the day before) left a note in the house
(observe his noble care) wherein he certified, that certain hurt men! (some
whereof were His Majesty's Soldiers, the rest were Prisoners, whom the
Colonel took in the last Fight) which could not at the present be removed from
that place, without hazard of the poor men's lives. Therefore he desired all
Gentlemen, Officers and Soldiers whom it might concern, to afford them
protection and assistance as he had done, for as much as the poor men were
unable to help themselves.

A pious compassion in a Soldier, and such as deserves ever to be recorded and
related to his honor.

Though such was the cruelty of an implacable Enemy, as in revenge of their
late defeat, this civil request was quickly slighted.

Were it not now a great pity, that These who have acted their parts with such
general applause on the Theater of honor; should be cut off by an imperious
censure: and be there doomed to death, where their actions merited so much
fame? yet must they undergo this Fate. One of them within the sight of his
own Family: The other before Those, who had amply tasted of his bounty and
clemency.

BuT now imagine (which cannot be conceited without a passionate tear) the
furious Enemy entering this forlorn Town; wherein if compassion could receive
impression in the bosom of a Foe; They might in every place take a view of
woeful objects; in every street Spectacles of famine; wherein the patience and
resolution of the besieged, could not be sufficiently admired in showing such
constancy, amidst the heavy extremes of such a long-continued Siege. Death was
writ in many of their countenances, yet did many of these Loyally-affected
Spirits smile at their sufferings; as if the goodness of their CAUSE had
fortifide them against all miseries. But amongst others who were eminent
sufferers, be it your honor principally to cast your eyes upon a pair of
gallant Souls, which we here discourse of: with the circumstance of the
Message of death brought unto them; and by whom: with their brave and
unexemplary deportment, at and before the time of their suffering.

IRETON, a prosperous Son-in-law under a Victorious Father, was the man that
brought them the News. Which could not be of sadder concern to the sufferer,
then it was infinitely relishing to the Messenger. Not so much for the delight
he took in their deaths, (for I hold the man to have more humane sense and
compassion in him) then to rejoice in such a spectacle: but rather for His rash
and inconsiderate censure, who was the prime Agent and procurer of their
deaths. For you must understand, that he had not only received from his wise
and politic NOL, a Wife, Offices, preferments and honors, which he had
liberally confirmed: but a pretty share of policy to boot. And this he had
never better opportunity to bring in execution then now. We know well, as there
is nothing that stamps or styles any one more truly Noble, then to remit
revenge when he may act it: and to moderate his Command, when he may to the
highest pitch extend it: so is there nothing that renders him more odious then
to exercise his revenge or insulting power upon a conquered or distressed
Enemy. Marccll. in Plutarch.
The Maxim of that brave and heroic Martiallist closes well to our purpose.
For valor to triumph in the ruins of valor, were an Antipathy to nature.

This it was, and nothing else which suggested to the active thoughts of this
gracious Son-in-law, a fair occasion of advancing his Fathers aims: by
bringing his Superior in style: and corrival in actions of honor, into a
disesteeme, both with the Peerage and Commanty: for lower it could not fall.
Was not this an excellent trick to catch the old one? He could not be less
then a cunning Enginier in affairs of policy, who infused these useful
Notions first in Ireton. But yet give me leave to acquaint you with some other
particulars highly conducing to the execution of this odious design: before we
descend to the last Scene of this Tragical Act.

There is small doubt to be made, but the General could have wished Sir
CHARLES LUCAS out of the way. But he held his honor to be highly concerned in
it: To dispatch an Enemy were he never so hostile to the State, being in the
capacity of Mercy; though it were in the power of the Conqueror to do it: yet
he might be sure to incur a general digust by it.

This made him more doubtful what to conclude in a business of that nature,
as it looked two ways at once; both on his revenge and honor. Revenge pricked
him on; but honor drew him off. In which demur, you may justly think that
there was no time for IRETON to omit so precious an opportunity.

Now, you are to understand how before the relation and aggravation of those
Crimes, publicly objected against Sir CHARLES LUCAS, several hints to
accelerate his dispatch, were given of certain Grudges, or inveterate heats
boiling in the breast of the incensed General, against that Noble Knight;
arising in the first place from a defeat, which (so retentive is the memory of
a passive disgrace) he gave him heretofore in the North; and now had put him to
so long a stand before COLCHESTER, to the apparent hazard of his honor, being
never before that time, so opposed; and the loss of the most considerable part
of his Army, there left for memorable Trophies under the Walls; And (perhaps) of
his EXCELLENCE too, if the shot had carried its intended level. These grounds
were sufficient motives for this formerly-instructed Colonel, to pursue his
aims. He tells him, it would argue too much remissness for him to raze forth
the memory of such indignities as he had received from so braving and
prejudicial an Enemy. If he did not wholly reflect upon his own honor; which
could not be too preciously tendered: Yet it highly concerned him, as he was
their General, to look upon the slaughter of his Soldiers; whose resolution
in actions of desperatest service, he had sufficiently tried. Besides those
affronts and scornful Messages received from him; which could not choose but
work upon the spirit of any Commander. Neither could it be expounded in the
strictest sense any act of cruelty; seeing there were more crimes publicly
objected against him, then any other assistants with him. His breach too, and
violation of Parroll? which, as this Colonel pressed, so highly trenched upon
his honor; as it admitted no excuse. These with many other incentments he
suggested to him: concluding, that there was more advantage in dispatch then
delay.

But these were preparatives only to kindle the flame: and exasperate the
General against him; in whose commanding power now it was, whether to Live or
Die. And lest these Irons wight cool, that were so purposely heated; These
Crimes were publicly objected; which we shall here produce in order; very
easily no doubt to be answered, if equal Moderators and unbyassed judgments
might have determined them.

1. That he was the head of the ESSEX Party, and the cause of drawing them
within COLCHESTER.

2. That he was harsh and rigid to the Towns people; deaf to their
complaints, and insensible of their wants; not regarding what misery he brought
upon the place of his Nativity.

3. That he did put two men to death (which deserved a retaliation) after
Quarter given, in cold blood.

But shall we untwist these objections; yea, and in the loosing of them find
such easy knots in a disloyal rush, as they be no sooner shadowed then
displayed?

To the First then, to branch them in their divisions; why could it be held
more criminal for him to convey his Army and Loyal contracted Forces thither;
then it has been formerly, upon occasions of equal necessity, to other parts
of the Kingdom? Neither was it his single Personal act (as if solely
interessed in it) but of the Council of War, by which you well know all Agents
in Military affairs, are usually regulated. And as for his being chief of the
Essex Forces, his inbred modesty sought it not, but was elected by them, as
his Camp approvements well deserved, with a general acclamation, at the first
Rendezvous.

To the Second, (as light in the skale as the first) it is Answered, and by
those that really know him, confirmed, that none looked upon the Town and
Country with a more tender eye then himself; in so much as his extensive
bounty to them, prejudiced the whole Garrison; enforcing them for want of
better provision to fall to their Horseflesh with other coorse fare, sooner
then otherwise they needed have done: For when the Soldiers were sent forth
into the Country at the beginning, and before they were straightly beleagred, to
drive in Cattle, such was his Noble compassion, as he would not suffer them to
drive in more then their present necessity enjoined them to use from hand to
mouth; till it was too late to improve their provision, the Town being blockt
up; and then all they got in, (to so small a proportion was their store
reduced) as it served not above ten days after. As for the Townsmen, such was
his commiseration of them, and liberality toward them, that he gave away to
the poor 300 quarters of Corn, for otherwise they had been in a condition to
have stood upon better and securer Terms, with those uncivil Mechanics, who
contrary to all rules of honor, and Martial discipline, would admit of no
conditions worthy the quality of Gentlemen and Soldiers; who during the
continuance of that wasting Siege, had behaved themselves so gallantly, that
they are admired for it in all parts of Christendom, where the fame of their
Actions have been, or shall be dispersed.

To the third, (a mere scandalous fable) touching Killing men in cold blood,
it is most false; it being Sir CHARLES his care, and express Command, that
Free Quarter should be given to all; though Their inhumanity to their; deserved
it not, for their hacking and hewing many naked men, after they had stripped
them; stifling and starving so many by imprisonment, that more dyed through
their cruel usage in Prison, then in the Field.

Thus have you heard the Charge laid against this Noble Knight, and with what
facility all such Objections might be answered in defense of his honor and
integrious carriage against all such groundless aspertions, as the malicious
endeavors of his implacable Enemies have injuriously labored out of the Forge
of their own brain to cast upon him. But if it were sufficient to accuse,
without proof of what the Party is accused, who could be innocent? Truth is, it
was easy to object, where the Defendant had no breath to reply: for you must
know, as it is the custom of this Age to be ever acting the Antipodes; both
this gallant Gentleman Sir CHARLES, and his Valliant friend Sir GEORGE LISLE,
whom we are to treat of hereafter; were both shot to death before these
Objections were ever produced. A singular and unpresidentall form of Justice;
to sentence him first, and accuse him after. Or as severe Sylla, used to
practice upon his professed Foes; first to adjudge them to death, and then to
invent such crimes as they were never guilty of, to attemper the quality of
their deaths, and convert his cruelty to an opinion of clemency: for inflicting
upon them, such easy deaths, for such heinous and heavy crimes.

There is small doubt, but these Horse-leaches, who never fall off till they be
sated with blood, have that old Maxim still in readiness. The Mercy that is
shown to the Wicked, is Cruelty to the Innocent. The Indulgence afforded
those, redounds to the prejudice of these. The sparing of the Evil, is the
spoiling and spilling of the blood of the Good. But what miserable times are we
fallen into, when these cruel and inhumane Actors must become our Censors,
when the success of Arms, be it never so prejudicial to the pursuit of a
safe and well-grounded peace, must determine the Cause: And an insuccessive
day, though it took spirit from clearer and juster rays, set in a cloud? But
these are secrets reserved for an higher Consistory; it is safer to admire
them, then too boldly to dive into the depth of them.

We will now briefly descend to such Objections (impertinences rather) as were
produced and pressed against Sir GEORGE LISLE; but not till such time as he was
dead: for then these impoysoned arrows may be the safeliest shot, when these
malicious Marks-men find the Archer at whom they aimed, disabled to return
his shot, or shaft upon them.

First then, to render Him his due Character; he was a Man, whose brave
undaunted spirit dignifi?d his Family, many stories high in the estimate of
Fame. One, whom these Civill-wars had sufficiently experienced and enabled for
any Field service. One, who to his higher honor, bestowed his approvedst
endeavors in testimony of his Allegiance. For his years, he was an excellent
distinguisher of Societies; using ever to consort with those most, where he
hoped to be improved best. These rising, nay, ripening thoughts could not choose
but beget envy with such as were Foes to Loyalty. For men's abilit es are
generally eye-sores to their Enemies. Notwithstanding all this, so clear and
unquestioned did his carriage appear, as he was accused only in general
terms of being a person of much mischief, debauched conversation, and of
burning the Suburbs. Calumnies all alike true. For his disposition, it was
generous, pleasing, and naturally bounteous; full of valor, without
ostentation; just and cheerful in his Commands, without a surly
imperiousness. Infinitely beloved and observed by his Soldiers; for so tender
was he of their safety: as never to the hour of his death would he engage them
in that action; wherein he would not hazard his own person. This might appear
by his gallantry at the latter Fight at NEWBVRY, where to animate his
Soldiers, and beget in them an Emulation of valor, so bravely represented in
their Commander; he marched before his men in his Shirt with his doublet put
off, to the face of the Enemy. Where he performed such admirable service, as
His Majesty took especial observation of him. And for a pledge of his future
favor, bestowed upon him the honor of Knighthood: with all other places
wherein he was in his Commands employed, and to his succeeding honor highly
approved. Secondly, for his burning the Suburbs: his accusers were the
principal Actors. For they began first, (when they despaired of taking the
Town by Storm) to fall to fiering of the Houses near one of the Gates, which
(as the wind stood) must have burnt down the whole City, had it not been
prevented by the assiduate care, and timely industry of the Soldiery.
Afterward (to continue their fury) they fiered many places, but all in vain:
being by the vigilance of the Garrisons, no sooner fiered then quenched. At
length, having sheltred themselves under Houses, and taken the Lord LUCAS House
(now pitifully ruinated and defaced) with many other about it, the several
Regiments being otherwise unable to make good and justrfie their Lines, were
necessitated to burn the adjoining Houses. In which action, neither Sir
CHARLES, nor Sir GEORG gave any orders or consent. And to satisfy the
jealousies of some touching this particular business, it is clear, Sir GEORGE
LISLE was no Actor in it, because on that part of the Town, where the Essex
foot lay, (whereof he was Majorgenerall) few houses were burnt. As for his
being mischievous (formerly objected, and fully answered) he was no more then
in his Actions as a Soldier: In which his Gallantry was unparalled, and
would have merited from an honorable Enemy, a more honorable entertainment
then to be presented a sufferer in so tragical a Story.

Now touching Colonel FAR, (though our discourse principally reflect upon
those two noble Gentlemen formerly mentioned) yet being an useful Assistant in
this Service, we are not, as we obviously meet with him, to neglect him.

He was accused for drawing the Trained-bands together, under pretense of an
ordinary Muster, not discovering to them, that they should engage in Blood.
This Accusation, weigh it seriously, and it may be answered with small
difficulty. For when the Ordinance of Indemnity was sent down from the House,
upon condition they would quit their Arms, Colonel FAR only read it in the
head of every Company, from the first to the last; and when he had read it,
demanded whether they would accept? But they all with one voice, and loud
shouts, (observe their promptness to this Service in their first entrance)
cried it down, not so much as one person disputed it, or consenting to it. Then
this Colonel seeing their joint Resolutions, with those apparent grounds of
Loyalty, whereto he adhered, declared himself, and not before.

This was no raising of Arms, but a proposing of their Ordinance: from which
if they dissented, it was not his fault, but the deep apprehension and
resentment of their wrongs. And blame them not; for when a wounded Patient
opens his wounds, and is rejected by that hand where he may be cured; he must
needs hold him either a negligent, or incompassionate Artist that leaves him
remediless, by suffering his sore to rankle or gangreene, when it was in his
power to allay his grief, or to cure it. This was the case of that County; They
opened their wounds, they discovered their griefs, they applied themselves to
the Parliament for redress; but their suite produced no cure. That usual
complement of thanks was returned them for their care: and so dimiss'd in no
better condition then when they came. Such fruitless effects did those County
Petitions return to their abused Patients.

This it was which commenced that quarrel: which if assistant Counties had
seconded, as they stood both by promise engaged, and their own interests
entrusted, might have redounded more to their advantage then any probable
opportunity (unless some successful influence be derived from this present
Treaty) will in an age afford them.

As for Sir BERNARD GASCOYN; they were to be commended for their civility, in
reprieving him, he being a stranger and an Italian. But never did any Savage
Nation, were it Turkish or any other Heathen, execute the like tyranny and
cruelty, upon such frivolous pretenses (as is well observed) in cold Blood. Now
the occasional motive of the Garrisons yiedling to Mercy was as follows;
Having made an end of all their Provision; nay even of those creatures which
Nature (had not a long Siege brought them to extreme indigence) would have
wholly loathed to make food on: and in this exigent, having no offer of
conditions from the Enemy (who had sufficient intelligence of their necessity)
but such as were most ignoble; the Officers being resolved either to purchase
their liberty in despite of the Enemy, or to sell their lives at as dear a
rate as they could, propounded to the Soldiers a resolution to break through;
which being approved by the greater part, they signed this ensuing Engagement.

We whose names are here Underwritten, do (in the presence of Almighty God)
protest against all conditions, that are or shall be sent by the Enemy, by
which our liberties may be infringed, and our honor blasted: And we do upon
our honors solemnly engage our selves, not to desert one another, nor the
Foot, till by Gods assistance, we have forced our passage through all that
shall oppose us, or to perish in the Act: Which we attest this 23 of August.
1648.

This conclusion reflecting so directly upon the preservation of their honor:
desiring nothing more then to make way for their safety by their swords: and by
that means to decline the surprise of a merciless Foe; was resolved to be put
in execution by the Council of War, on Friday night, Aug. 25. But when all was
in readiness, and nothing more expected then the pursuit of this attempt; Some
of the Greatest dissenting from that opinion, hindered the proceeding:
pretending that the design in hand might be acted with no less convenience
the next day. The reason whereof is diversely argued: for this frivolous delay,
and in their respects, highly prejudicial, might be imputed either to a
remissness of spirit; or a falling off in their affections from the Commanders:
So apt is the mis-guided zeal of some to distemper the best intentions.
Schisms in subjects of faith, have ever bred the greatest distractions in
resolutions or debates of State, whether publicly or privately grounded. We
shall ever find in these, such spirits of contradiction: as they affect nothing
more then to oppose, though they can render no other cause save only their
disgust to the person, who was the proposer. This the Poet quickly observed;
These mixed zeales do ever bring
Ruin to Subject, State and King.
LUCIL.

Dis-affection being ever a broacher of different opinions: and generally
seconded by as unhappy conclusions. The Besiegers, all this while, wanted not
their active Teazers and instruments within, to persuade the Common Soldiers
(whose highest pitch was personal safety) that the Gentry had resolved before
next morning to quit them. These suggested whisperings bred a most dangerous
Mutiny, which put the Gentlemen in that Engagement to such an ecstasy, being by
the divisions wholly deprived of all means of safety and hope by their Valor
to escape the Enemy: because it was not possible for Horse to break through the
Line without Foot, and Pioners; as they were constrained to yield (O
comfortless refuge!) after a twelve weeks Siege unto the Mercy of those
Merciless Foes, who sport themselves in the ruins and triumphs of honor:
Delighting to inbath their remorselesse hands in the purple streamings of this
unfortunate Island: and like eagre Nimrods, to hunt for the precious life, and
blood, (by the direction of their diametricall leavell) of all the Nobility and
Gentry of England.

Thus have you heard how these unsubdued spirits were enforced to yield by
means of that Mutinous rout: Neither indeed (to use the Comedians words) could
any thing less be expected; From a raw promiscuous rude
Vncivilized Multitude.
AFRAN.

Upon these particulars of this discourse we have insisted the longer,
purposely to return satisfaction to sundry persons of quality; who have
desired much to receive a certain relation not only of those occurrents
during their Siege: but of the reasons of their yiedling after so long debate
and joint resolution of fighting to the last man, and acquitting themselves of
the Enemy, or dye with honor.

Thus much may suffice, being received from one that was an Eyewitness, and a
Person of honor engaged in the business.

Now are we to descend to the last Scene of this Tragic Act. An Act of honor
to the Sufferers; but of horror to the Actors. And herein take a serious survey
of every passage and posture in these two Noble Knights before they took their
last farewell of the! world. What a chereefull and magnanimous resolution their
graceful deportment gallantly presented, upon their sudden doom to sudden
death! Though the Message of death be the terriblest Summons that can come to
Nature; yet you shall hear how bravely it may be entertained by Christian
Valor. Such fame-spreading Palms cannot be pressed so low, but they will mount
higher.

Ireton, that messenger of Ire, was the man which brought them the news. Upon
whose entrance and Message Sir CHASLES LUCAS with much cheerfulness and
alacrity demanded by what Autherity, whether by an Ordinance of Parliament, or
a Council of War, or the command of the Generell? IRETON answered, it was by
Ordinance of Parliament, declaring all such as should be found in Arms, to be
proceeded against as Traitors and Rebels, etc. Whereat Sir CHARLES replied
(smiling in scorn) Alas poor souls, how ye deceive your selves! As if the just
defense of the Ancient Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of a Kingdom: the
advancement of the style and Prerogative of our SOVEREIGN, were in the
capacity of TREASON or REBELLION! But We that are conquered must be What you
pease to make us. And desiring time but to live but till Tuesday morning, that
they might not enter the Lists before they were made ready for the encounter:
nor be thrust out of the World on a sudden with all their sins about them; it
was denied: Which no Christian heart endued with humanity would have done for a
world. Upon which denial Sir CHARLES replied; Do not think I wish this out of
any desire to live, or escape that death I am doomed to; for were life a
thousand times preciouser then it is, I should scorn the estimate of it, being
taken at your hands; But I have some addresses to make, some peace offerings to
present to God above; and also to some relations here below, if I might have a
little time; but since it will not be, the will of God be done and I am ready
for Execution. IRETON after such time as he had denied him this civil
courtesy; told him how he had brought a long with him the Generals Chaplaius to
advise, comfort and prepare him before his end; if he were pleased to make use
of them: But he ansered, he desired none of them; craving only for his
Spiritual help so much favor, that the Lord CAPELS Chaplain might be
admitted to him; to whom he could more freely communicate his thoughts, and
discover his griefs. Which was granted.
At seven a clock at night, they were both brought forth to be be shot; at the
place appointed they showed themselves of undaunted Resolutions. Their courage
and countenance the same, when the actors of their Execution presented
themselves before them. Ireton, These Assassinats, who triumph in the ruins of
honor; and imbrue their hands in the untainted blood of Loyal Valor; must
expect an heavy censure. For as they make humanity a stranger to their Nature;
So are they seldom known to die natural deaibs. God has already shown his
judgment on Rainsborough. Obsequies, be they solemnized with never so much
magnificence; though they bestow sumptuous Lodgings upon their Corpse; They
cannot expiate the memory of their crimes: nor with innocence cloathe a guilty
cause. The more God defers; the more he infers.
Rainsborough, and Whaley (who is reported to have shown himself more
generously disposed, (notwithstanding that former disgust betwixt him and Sir
GEORGE LISLE) in dissuading the General from this inconsiderate Act) came to
be Spectators as well as Actors in this inhumane Tragedy; whom Sir Charles
told, that he had often looked death in the face, both public and private, and
now they should see he was not afraid to die.

Having retired himself a while in prayer, with a pious and humble
commendation of his soul into the hands of God, he stood up, as one who meant
to entertain the stroke of Death with a resolute Station. And with a kind of
Religious indignation (for never was passion in such a spirit more sweetly
subdued) pulling down his Hat, setting his Arms a Kembow, (that was his
posture) and tearing open his Doublet, he exposed his naked Breast (wherein such
matchless Valor and Loyal Honor had been lodged) and crying out, Now Rebels
do your worst, he was immediately dispatched.

His sorrowful Servant, a sad spectator of his Death, was surprised with such
passion for the loss so dear a Master, as he earnestly besought those
Executioners to dispatch him too: for life was to him a torment.

A Gentleman of quality, and disciplined in Service and Commandes abroad, being
present at his death; upon his return hither to the City, protested in the
company of sundry persons of account; That he had in his time seen many die,
but never any with more Christian nor Souldierlike resolution. Adding these
words: That it Was a great pity that a Valiant man should fall into the hand
of such an Enemy, as preferred revenge before an act of mercy. Sir GEORGE
LISLE's turn was next; who beholding that sad spectacle, the dead Body of his
dearest friend, fell upon it and kissed it, as if he meant to breath into it
another soul: Not a passionate express, but bedewed with a Funeral tear:
with a free, but true relation of his virtues and indowments, of which this
ungrateful Nation was not worthy. Often would he redouble these words: In how
short a moment has a brave spirit expired! well; this priority was due to thee,
but I shall not be long behind thee: my death which is now at hand, shall
restore thee to me.

This, with the assured hopes I have in Him that made me, shall make my
translation cheerful. My divorce from such a friend injoynes me to hasten to
him.

It is not death I fear, had I a thousand lives, I should willingly Sacrifice
them all, to confirm my Lyoalty. After this, standing up, and taking five
pieces of Gold out of his pocket, (being all he had left) he gave one to his
Executioners, and the other four he sent to four friends in London. Then
turning to the standers by, he said; Oh how many do I see here about me, whose
lives I have saved in hot blood; and now must mine be taken away in cold blood
most barbarously! Sure the like was never heard of among the Goths and Vandals,
or the veriest Barbarians in the World in any Age. But what dare not those
Rebels and Traitors do, that have Imprisoned, and could willingly cut the
throat of their King? for whose deliverance from His Enemies; and Peace to this
distracted Kingdom, these my last Prayers shall be presented. -- Now then
Rebels and Traitors do your worst to me. After which words, and a few
invocations upon the Name of Jesus, he was also dispatched, as he stood in an
heroic posture, courting grim death with a spritely countenance, and a greedy
expectation.

Thus fell this matchless pair of Worthies; and in them Their Honor, who
adjudg'd them to so injurious a censure. For what inducing reasons there were
or might be alleged, to move their implacable Enemies to this un-Military
president of cruelty no intelligence, were it never so colourably palliated by
their own Favorites, could ever yet appear so real, as to return
satisfaction to any clear or equally-ballanced judgment.

So far as may concern their personal worth; they shall little need to be
either further displayed or distinguished: For Sir CHARLES, he was known to be
an accomplished Soldier; an high prizer of his honor; a perfect Master both
of the ancient and modern Militia; accounted as eminent in the Command of
Horse (a service wherein he had been ever employed, and singularly improved) as
the most experien'd Commander in Europe.

Being in a word, such a Man of men, and Pattern of active Loyalty, as he was
all, that Sir GEO: LISLE, in a gallant emulation aimed to be; whom, as he
dearly tendered, so he seriously imitated, and now in the end, nearly seconded;
being reputed a most knowing and obliging Commander for the Infantry: and of
such discipline and courage that he led them, as in a line upon any services,
through the greatest danger and difficulty. This was the ready way to make fame
the foundation of a Family: Seeing nothing can be properly said to be Ours, but
what takes life from the merit or repute of those actions of Ours: For
whatsoever is derived to us from Ours; is Others, and not Ours: Give me leave
then in behalf of this noble Pair, to sum up all with this positive
Conclusion: He shoots his shafts at the Moon, who out of a Malignant humor,
makes it his labor to darken the Splendour of goodness and honor.

It is said, when His Majesty heard the news of their Deaths; that out of a
pious compassion, and princely affection which He bare to their persons, He
burst forth into tears: which that Hebrew Intelligencer interprets softness
or effeminacy: as if it beseem'd no virile spirit to compassionate the loss of
a friend. Whereas if that seditious Rabbi had ever repaired to those Tents of
Israel, whereto he sometimes encouraged the People against their Sovereign; He
might have seen a David (that Conqueror of Goliath) shed tears for an Absolon
and a Jonathan. Our best Master for a Lazarus, and the approaching ruins of a
Jerusalem. Nay, if ever his small portion of learning would have suffered him
to have been versed in profane Histories: He might have found Marcellus eyes
dropping tears for Syracusa. That sweet-temper'd Tytus for the miseries of
Judea. Variety of Examples in all Stories, what singular arguments of Princely
compassion, eminent'st personages even in their greatest Victories have
expressed toward those Princes, or People whom they had Conquered.

But such as are not capable of sense in their pate, nor pen, may be held
excused, if they fall short in their apprehension of humane suffering, nay, of
common sense; They, whose incompassionate hearts are so congealed, as their
eyes know not how to resolve into tears, when they see real Professors of
Valor exposed to immerited censures; especially when a good Cause was the
Object of their resolution; partake too much of Savage to retein the Style of
Men. Seeing, as the Comic well observed, nothing that is humane, should be
estranged from humanity.

What uncivil and disgraceful affronts were pressed by the Conquering Party,
upon the poor Captives, I shall very sparingly relate: to pass by others, this
one Instance shall serve for all. A Gentleman of quality being presently after
Surprise of the Town, stripped of his Apparel to his skin: and poor ragged
clothes of a Common soldier given him in exchange. Nevertheless, in this
ungentile habit, he was advised by one who pretended himself his friend, to
repair to the General, where he promised him access, to petition his
Excellencies favor for his Parol, that he might, by that means, labor his
enlargement either by Exchange or Money. Thither he came in this tattered
habit, with an old brimlesse Hat, and Boots that had estranged themselves from
their Soales; which, when that brave insulting Conqueresse beheld, She was
pleased out of her feminine spirit to entertain this distressed petitioner
with this scornful Salute: Is this one of your Gentlemen of Colchester? when
the bosom of the softer and more compassionate 'Sexe became so steeled, what
might be looked for at their hands, with whom remorce had never acquaintance?

Now I appeal to your candid Censures, who scorn to be Servants to the Time, or
Shadows to unjust Conquests; what clemency could be expected by their Captives
from such imperious Enemies to be shown them in respect of their lives: whose
profane hands abstained not from violation of those just obsequious honors
done to the dead? Amongst our Ancient Heathens, this was a Crime admitted no
pardon. Yet observe one passage more, and you shall see with what impunity
these merciless times can dispense with the inhumanest actions. Not to hold
you in suspense, it was thus. The body of that noble and ever memorable Knight,
Sir CHAR: being to be buried with his Ancestors, (a civil courtesy which he
much desired before his death) and entered the Vault where his Predecessors had
been usually interred; Some of those insolent and inhumane Soldiers, upon
opening of the Monument, wherein diverse Bodies lay wrapped in lead, intending
(it seems) to discover their barbarism in the highest measure, forbore not
only to cut away the lead wherein those Bodies were infolded, but to pull off
the very hair (O matchless impiety!) which grew upon their Scalps; whereof
diverse among them, made them Hat-bands and Bracelets, which they no less
contemptibly then disgracefully wore; glorying (as it seems) in their pillage
of those native remains and Ornaments of the dead. This they did in a despite
and grounded hate to his Family, after such time as they had acted their cruel
tragedy. O inexemplary fury! If such brutish spirits be not timely subdued;
England will lose both name and nature, and become Barbarian. If the Memorials
of the Dead; those last houses, their Vrns, may not be secured from violence;
what safety may Civil societies presume to have! Exceptions are easily taken
by a Conquering hand; nay, pressed before occasion offered. If revenge be so
implacable as it cannot find satisfaction upon Earth; but it must dive into
the Earth to appease it; in what a securelesse condition be those placed, who
standing in defense of their Countries honor, and Title of a Sovereign,
expose themselves to their oversivelling power, who stand at distance with the
style of Sovereignty: and pronounce all such loyal affected hearts their
professed Enemies, who hold the contrary?

It is reported of that magnanimous Semiramis, amongst many other memorable
Observances, that she caused this Inscription to be written upon her Monument.
Whosoever he be that shall come this way, and by his repair to this place,
shall dig up this Monnment; let him be confident of finding an infinite mass
of Treasure under it. It was the fortune of Victorious Cyrus to arrive there;
and seeing this Inscription, he accounted himself happy in the purchase of
such a Booty. Having then commanded the Tomb to be opened and searched to the
bottom; He found no Treasure (as he expected) under it, but this wholesome
reproof subscribed: None but wretched worldlings, whose thoughts are cemented
to earth, would rake into the ashes of the Dead. This could not choose but
nettle Cyrus to be so deluded: yet caused he this Miles crat, qui unam
bracteolam furtim surripuit; quo reperto, contumeliosae mortis paenas luit. ib.
in Annal. pers. apud Polib.
Monument to be decently repaired; without expression of the least violence
upon the Ashes of this Semiramis; in revenge of so maine an affront. He made
good use of her admonition; preferring it (as he after professed) before all
that mass of Treasure which he expected under it. And was not this more
commendable in an Heathen, then for a malicious Christian, who pursues nothing
more eagerly then revenge, to lay his abusive hand upon the pious remains of
the Dead? These should rather have been motives to Mortification, then
occasions of pillage. But what small correspondency holds the furious hand of a
Soldier with the practice of piety! we will here leave him to better times, to
reclaim him.

After all these proceedings, swollen as high as enmity could make them; it will
not be amiss if we make one step to the House of Commons, (for that is the
Delphick Comitiall that cuts both ways) and observe what countenance is shown
there upon relation of this action, being done (as was pretended) without order
or direction from the House.

You may understand then that a Letter came to the House from that continuing
Conqueror upon the surrender of COLCHESTER; intimating, that partly for
Revenge (a reason that in discretion might have been omitted) and partly to
make satisfaction to the Town and Country (yet sought by neither of them) he
had executed a piece of Military Justice (as he called it) upon Sir CHARLES
LUCAS and Sir GEORGE LISLE and caused them to be shot to death: But that he had
given the Lords and many others Quarter for life; only he referred them to the
Mercy of the Parliament, (mark this congruity, first Life, and then Mercy:)
Upon reading thereof, up stood a resolute Gentleman, and said, Mr. Speaker, I
for my part know (whatsoever is pretended otherwise in this Letter) that,
neither the Town nor Country desired any severity toward those Gentlemen, nor
do they receive any content or satisfaction in it; and therefore I suppose this
pretense of Justice was wholly an Act of Revenge: and I fear, out of a more
private consideration, then public.

To this no Reply was made but Frowns and foul looks; implying their
disgust: And yet another Gentleman was so bold as to stand up and say, He was
of opinion that the executing these two Knights now, was done on purpose to put
an affront upon the Treaty, and to grieve and exasperate His Majesty.

But for fear honesty should grow too confident, and by that means, more
encouraged to speak then they were willing to hear; a debate was immediately
resumed, which way to dispose of, and proceed against those Lords, and the
rest, that were rendered to the Mercy of the Houses; And to clear the coast of
all those Lords and Gentlemen, up stood Dennis Bond, and after him pragmaticall
Prideaux, to second his zealous Brother in a Motion of such bloody importance:
A brace of thriving Tarriers, who had gained more since the Parliament began,
then all their Predecessors put them together, enjoyed before them. This
precious pair of State-soaking Senators moved, that those Lords and Gentlemen
might be referred back again to the General, to be tried and executed by a
Council of War. To this Sense the whole Kennell of the fiery-faction mouthed
it; not standing at all upon any considerations of Honor or Reason (being both
drenched in passion) and had carried it, but that others less thirsty after
blood, and better settled in their Wits, moved, that the General's Letter might
be read over again; which being done, it was urged, that seeing He had given
them Quarter for life, it could not be either for the honor of the Army to
take it away, or of the House to require it. And so in the end it was concluded
with much ado, that they should not be proceeded against by a Council of War,
but by way of Impeachment. Then they spent a deal of time in wrangling about
the names of the persons to be Impeached; and for that time, they agreed upon
none, but the three Lords, Norwich, Capel, and Loughborrow.

These proceedings, because formerly touched, we have with more brevity
contracted. It shall be now our Evening task to continue their living Memories
in an Elegy: though theit Actions were such surviving Lines, as posterities
shall sooner surcease to be, then they perish in the memories of posterity.

For 'Nobility, when it reflecteth on it self; and retains that priority of
goodness, which it challenges by Descent, or personal desert: holding that
honor but a tinsell luster, which from virtue derives not her splendour;
becomes an object of admiration to inferior Eyes.

To the living Memories of those Two Heroic Knights, Sir CAHRLES LVCAS, AND
Sir GEORGE LISLE.
Whose approved Valor renowned them living, and impaled them dying with
Honor.
AN ELEGY.
BRave Loyal pair, whose active worth was such,
No pen nor pencil can perform too much
To crown your Mem'ries: -- this it was to gain
Fame by your prowess, though you mist your aim
At long-beleagred-famish'd Colchester;
Expecting aid that never approached there.
Your Noble thoughts did ever set their rest
On Princely ends, no private interest.
Your care was how to cure, and to restore
This Phrentick State to th'Wits it had before.
Your task was how your Caesar might be shown,
Not in a Grate but on His Reyall Throne.
You could not hug the Time as many do,
Whose cringing garb may work their overthrow.
You scorned perfidious Juncto's, who do make
Use of the State to nim away the Stake.
Your conscientious ways abjured such men
As wish an end to Treaties, God knows when:
And such sly spinning Rookes we have no doubt,
Who seek naught less then what they go about.
Your hearts were sweetly temp'red with pure zeal
To your indeared Prince and Commonweal;
This made Death your advantage; and struck fears
In The bosoms of your Executioners
With such compastion, they could scarce forbear
From rinsing their Death-Bullets with a tease.
Hear thou, insulting Senate, whose desire
Is with fresh fuel to increase a fire
In this imbroiled State! Hear what a brand
Thy quenchless rage has brought upon this Land,
When Loyalty must suffer, and become
A Law-convicted person by thy doom!
When awful fury must suppress the good,
Wrath censure worth, and guilt she^ guiltless blood!
When just Allegiance must at Bar appear,
And stand condemned because a Cavaliere!
Who is he then values his vading breath
At such a rate as not to court pale Death,
Rather then groan in this tyrannick Age,
Where Invocence's a Sacrifice to rage;
Where Mercy becomes Cruelty: And Shame
Has lost both native color and her Name?
O Gallant Loyal Souls, thrice blessed be you
Who have paid Nature and your Caesar's due!
From our State stalkers ye secured are,
And with a Land of Peace exchanged your War.
The Lord of Hoasts will on his Host bestow
This peaceful plot while Rcbels march below.
For if Rebellion safely get a shore,
It is a passage never known before.
THeir Anniversaries are intended to be continued; that the Actions of Loyal
Subjects may be to succeeding times, for living patterns, recommended.

FINIS.
A TABLE, Briefly containing, and Methodically directing, to the principal
points and passages of this Tragical Discourse.
AN Introduction to the Story. Page 1. The Ingratitude of some Countries to
their Loyall'st friends. p. 2. The Cynicks scoff to the Mindians. p. 3. Sir
CHARLES LVCAS, his Family, Education, Disposition, Experience and Discipline in
Martial affairs. p. 5, 6, 7. His Loyal expresses in all Societies. ib. His
vindication for too much Severity. p. 8. The redress and relief of our most
gracious Sovereign, his long restrained Master, the Object of his Valor. p.
9. The reason why NORWICH, CAPEL and LOVGHBOROW, etc. with these two gadant
Gentlemen, struck into COLCHESTER: being a Town so inconsiderable, and in
judgment so intenible: With a reason of the omission of those difficulties, in
their passage over the River into ESSEX. p. 11. Who was the principal Agitator
for their Recruits, whilst the GENERAL with his Army lay before COLCHESTER. p.
12. How the Enemies too liberal seeding redounded to their prejudice. p. 12.
Those in whom the Royalists most confided; not only deserted them, but became
Besiegers of them. p. 14. Their just reproof. p. 15. The consequent miseries of
a continued Siege. p. 16. The Surrender of the Town, after three Months
Siege; upon these strict conditions: The Superior Officers to Mercy (an
expressewrit in letters of blood) and the Souldie ry upon Quarter for life. p.
17. Two maine reasons why they retarded their Surrender. 1. The Engagements of
these adjacent Counties. 2. The hopes they had of relief abroad; manifested by
a Letter from a person of quality and Honor. p. 18, 20.
The Letter sincerely transcribed after the Original Copy. p. 21, 22, 23, 24.
That long debate of the Scottish Army with the Pesbyterian Clergy, by
protracting their March, deprived the Besieged Party at COLCHESTER all hope of
relief. Which relief could not have been so long a wanting: if the Scotch
Generals zeal and allacrity to so gallant a Service, had not been retarding.
p. 27. The Pesantry of that Nation in a better capacity to feed then fight. p.
28. Plundering their only Masterpiece. ibid. Duke HAMILTONS portraicture in a
brief Character. As it has been ever his guize to walk in a Cloud, so has a
black Cloud hung ever upon all his designs: manifested by his ill success
both at home and abroad. p. 29. His contempt at Castrene; his late defeat at
Preston: his reproach in every Nation. ib. He colourably professed love to the
King, but really to his Crown; confirmed by his Lieutenant Generals express.
p. 31. This last action no less accompanied with disloyalty then
pusillanimity: As will shortly come to light upon Sir MARMADVKE LANGDALES
Declaration. p. 37, 38. Honest and integrious breasts were ever held the
Princes choicest Guardians. p. 39. Ambitious minds make private ends their
only aims. ib. HAMILTON, since his Cowardly defeat, but Courtly restraint at
ASHBY-DELAZOVCH, is ontertained more like a Prince then a Prisoner: being
furnished with all accommodations, even to his Buffoun HVGH PETER'S; a suitable
Pattern for such a Patron in Principles of Religion. p. 36. Persons who have
the extensiv'st aims; for most part lose the Game either by shooting too far
over, or too far short of their Mark. p. 32. The Dukes Solicitous Agency by
Lauderdale to bring the Prince to the head of the Army: whose presence,
contrary to the Dukes expectance, might have turned the stream of his
treacherous designs. p. 38, 39. But a Princes rising hopes to fall upon such
an haazard, could not be probably secure, where men account no otherwise of
Allegiance, then of a politic pretense to obtain their ends. p. 39. To
gratify our Senate, of whom he held in Capite for his Liberty from PENDENNIS
CASTLE; he means for his own security to make a discovery of all such as
invited him hither: which, if it beget in some of our guilty Senators a fever:
A course is taken to crush this Design in the shell. A Committee of their own
Synodall must be sent down presently: and take his Examination privately. The
Consuls must appear no Inviters: Only some well crammed Royallists for want of
an Advocate, must be squeezed for example sake. p. 36 The Duke with his
Fugitives though Invaders, by a late Ordinance in favor of their Nation,
exempted from Treason. Disturbers, no Traitors. p. 37. The Duke secure enough;
being all he desires upon Earth but a Crown. ib. The Definition and
Description of CALIDON, according to our ancient Chronologers. p. 38. Loyal
Subjects are Antipodes, to these Scottish straglers. p. 41. A survey of the
gallant service done by Sir CHARLES LVCAS, and Sir GEORGE LISLE during these
Civil Wars, in several places; As, NVBVRY, CAWOOD Castle, MARSTON Moore,
NEWARKE, SLYMBRIDGE and BEVERSTON Castle; TEDBVRY. His single Engage near
SVNDERLAND by that Lieutenant General of the Scottish Horse, and with what
Honor he came off. p. 41, 42, 43. Sir GEORGE'S brave deportment in his engage
at BRAMDEANE Heath. His gallant demeanure betwixt NEWBVRY and SPINE. His
several Field-words or Impreze's: what terror he struck in the Enemy; by his
Valor and Discipline routing them utterly. p. 44. His March to the face of the
Enemy in his Shirt; partly to animate his Men by his Valor: partly to give
them better direction (being dark) by distinction of his habit. p. 45. What
fear the Enemy was in; and in what disorder, has been already published by
their own relators. ib. Sir GEORGE'S care and compassion of weak wounded
Soldiers; whether they were his own Men, or his Prisoners; as appeared after
the last NEWBVRY Fight, in his provision for them: With the pitiless usage
which the revenging Enemy afterward showed them. p. 47. The Enemies entering
into COLCHESTER. p. 48. IRETON that Messenger of Ire, employed to bring them
News of their Death. p. 49. The reasons that induced Ireton to importune the
General so solicitously for their dispatch. p. 50. The General reflects upon
two Objects in this Action revenge and honor: Revengepricks him on; but honor
draws him off. p. 52. Ireton pursues his Moives, and prevails. ib. Objections
produced and pressed against Sir CHARLES (but never till, he was dispatched)
evinced and cleared. p. 55, 56, 57, 58. A singular unpresidentall form of
Justice, to sentence a petended Delinquent first, and accuse him after. p. 60.
The like Objections (equally frivolous as the former) pressed against Sir
GEORGE, answered and cleared. p. 61. His undaunted spirit dignified his Family:
raising his worth above the reach of calumny. p. 62, 63. A just defcate of
Colonel FAR in his proceedings and proposols to his Traine-bands. p. 66. The
grounds of those complaints offered to both Houses by the County of ESSEX.
Petitions presented by remiss spirits, are satisfied with Thanks. p. 57.
Their Civility shown to Sir BERNARD GASCOINE an Italian, in reprieving him,
deservingly approved: but their execution of cruelty in Cold-blood, highly
condemned. p. 68. Their solemn joint Protest not to desert one another:
attested and Signed, 23 Aug. 1648. p. 69. How their Resolution by Spirits of
contradiction, fomenters of jealousies and divisions, became diverted. p. 70,
71, 72. He descends to the last Scene of this Tragic Act. An Act of Honor to
the Sufferers; of Horror to the Actors. p. 74. These two gallant Gentlemen,
after such incomparable Expreesss of their vowed Loyalty; adjudg'd to die; the
One within the Ken of his own Family: The other before Those who had amply
tasted of his bounty and clemency. Sir CHARLES demands by what Authority They
were adjudg'd to dye? Ireton replies, by Ordinance of Parliament: Sir CHARLES
his discreet Answer to that Reply. p. 57. Sir CHARLES desires so much civil
courtesy that they might live till next morning; in respect of their Addresses
to heaven, and disposure of their affairs upon Earth. Which was denied him,
his brave Answer to that uncivile denial. p. 75, 76. IRETON presents him with
the Generals Chaplains for his better preparation: But he craves the Lord
CAPELS Chaplain may be admitted to him for his Spiritual help, which is
granted him. p. ib. Ireton, Rainsborough, and Whaly Spectators of their Death.
An useful caveat to Ministers of cruelty. Divine Justice may sleep, but
cannot slip. Gods Judgment upon Rainsborough. p. 77. THEIR Words, resolution
and posture at their Deaths. p. 78, 79, 80, 81. Sir GEORGE beholding the sad
spectacle of the dead Body of his in deared Friend, falls upon it and kisseth
it. p. 79. His gallant expressions before his Death. p. 80, 81. A Gentleman's
testimony of quality and known Discipline, touching their Christan courage and
carriage at their Deaths. p. 79. Both their Characters in brief: Sir CHARLES
was accounted as eminent in his Command of Horse, as the most experienced
Commander in Europe: And Sir GEORGE a most obliging Commander for the Infantry.
p. 82, 83. His Majesty's Princely-compassion upon the news of their Deaths:
accounted effeminary by that scurrilous Hebrew Intelligencer: but a Royal
testimony of affection, balanced by equal judgments, confirmed by Authors
Divine and Hnmane. p. 83, 84, 85. The scornful salute of that Conqueresse to
a Gentleman, being a COLCHESTER Prisoner and Petitioner to the General for his
Parol. p. 86. A violation of Sepulchers by their Soldiers inhumanely
practiced: by the Heathens abhorred. Instanced in Semiramis and Cyrus his
Justice upon a Soldier for his injurious plunder. Annal. Polib. p. 89, 90. A
LETTER from his Excellence to the House touching the Surrender of COLCHESTER,
and the Execution of those two Gentlemen: with his conditions to the Lords and
other Prisoners: How it was entertained, debated and carried. p. 91, 92, 93,
94, 95. Their conclusion, for Norwich, Capel, and Loughborow to be impeached.
p. ib. A Funeral Elegy to the living memory of those two Gentlemen; who were
an honor to their Country, for their constant resolutions, discipline and
fidelity. ult. An Advertisement of the continuation of their Anniversaries. ib.

