SUSPENSION REVIEWED, STATED, CLEARED AND SETTLED UPON PLAIN Scripture Proof.

Agreeable to the former and late Constitutions of the Protestant Church of
England AND OTHER REFORMED CHURCHES.

Wherein (Defending a private sheet occasionally written by the Author upon
this subject, against a public pretended Refutation of the same, by Mr W. in
his book, entitled, Suspension discussed.)

Many important points are handled; sundry whereof are shortly mentioned in the
following Page.

Together with a Discourse concerning private Baptism, inserted in the Epistle
Dedicatory.

By SAMUEL LANGLEY, R. S. in the County Palatine of Chester.

LONDON; Printed by J. Hayes for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in
Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

The following Discourse contains these things (among others.)
HOw far Prudentialls are to be admitted in Church Government, Ch: 2.. 2. A
strict consideration of the Scripture Texts, whence the doctrine of
Excommunication is to be gathered; and deductions therefrom, Ch: 3.. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. Excommunication cuts not off Chruch-membership, Ch: 3.. 6. Degrees of
Excommunication; greater and lesser; manifested by Scripture light, Ch: 3.. 7,
8, 9, 10, 11. How far the Presbyterian suspension, is suitable to the Rules
appointed under the late Episcopal Government, Ch: 4.. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ch: 14.. 1.
Digress. 3. The distinction of negative and positive Believers considered; and
how far its of use in this Controversy, Ch: 5.. 3, 4, 5, 6. A justified
Believer as easily discovered to, and known by others, as a dogmatical
Believer, Ch: 5.. 5. The maine conclusion, viz. that the Lords Supper ought not
to be administered to unbeleevers who are such, in respect of actual notorious
disobedience to the Gospel, Ch: 5.. 2. Proved from Mr. W. his concession,. 7.
From the suspension of some from the Passover, not ceremonially unclean.. 8.
From parallel Cases,. 9. From the form of administering; Eat this in
remembrance Christ dyed for thee,. 10, 11, 12. From the consideration of the
qualifications required in the adult, as necessary conditions of their
admission to Baptism, Ch: 6. throughout. The maine conclusion aforesaid
cautioned, Ch: 7. wherein especially is showed, how an habitual sincere
believer, may be unpardoned and so liable to condemnation for actual
wickedness not yet repented of,. 2. The great and strongest objection, against
the foresaid Conclusion, taken from the supposed general admission to the
Passover, considered and answered, Ch: 8.. 4, 5. Ch: 9. Ch: 10. Particular
scruples and objections answered, and mistakes removed, Ch: 11. Romans 4.11.
strictly considered, Ch: 12.. 6. etc. Where is proved that the Sacraments are
seals of the mutual Covenant, i. e. on Gods part, and man's part also.
Exceptions answered in the following Chapters. Notorious wickedness visibly
continued in, without repentance, is (and ought) to be taken (in the judgment
of the Governing Church, or where there is no Governing Church, in the
judgment of the Minister officiating) as equivalent to word-rejecting of
Christ; and therefore equally renders a person incapable of having the Lords
Supper administered to him, Chapter 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. By immediate though
notoriously ungodly suspended or excommunicate parents, a right may be
conveyed for the Baptism of their Infants, Ch: 19.. 4, 5, 6, 7. A discourse
about Examination, or taking an account of persons confession of the faith,
before their first admission to the Lords Supper, Digress. 3. An observation
concerning the name Antichrist, Digress 12. The right mean betwixt
unwarrantable separation from and undue admission to, the Sacrament, Digress.
14. Romans 3.19. opened and vindicated, Digress. 19, 20. An Argument from Act.
15. proving that select Brethren (not Ministers) may authoritatively act in
Ecclesiastical Government, Digress. 22.
TO THE REVEREND LEARNED and GODLY Dispencers of the Mysteries of God (and more
especially those of the Classical Association in the Eastern parts) of the
County Palatine of Chester: Together with the Reverend and most endeared Mr
Simeon Ash Minister in the City of LONDON.
As also To the truly judicious and experienced Physician, his highly honored
Friend Mr WILLIAM BENTLEY. The Author wishes all grace and peace to be
multiplied.
WORTHY SIRS;
It Is no intent of mine in prefixing your Names to the ensuing Treatise, to
engage you in the patronage thereof. Let it stand or fall at the bar of right
Reason. What the Learned Wotton, in his Epistle before his accurate book de
Reconcil. peccat. says to Kings College, that do I mean to you in this thing;
Reum apud vos agere (viri ornatissimi) non clientem, and vos mihi non patronos
qui pro me dicant comparandos, sed qui de me sententiam ferant, judices
constituendos esse decrevi. Nor do I think so low of you, or so highly of my
discourse, as to judge it deserving of this joint dedication. But considering I
am not likely to appear again in print, I judged it honest, to divide these
my goods (though never so small) among you, rather then to appropriate them to
any of you singly; having cogent Reasons for this Address to you all in this
business.

To you the Renowned Aesculapius of our County, that I might hereby publicly
testify the engagements of my self and family to you both as a Friend and
Physician; more especially that I might signify a grateful sense and
remembrance of your long continued, succesfull and careful (though unfeed)
Advice for the health of him whom I was endebted to for my being and wel-being.
And your urging me to this service had no small influence upon me, so that
you may rightfully challenge a share in the fruit of my pains therein.

And you dear Sir, a bright Star of the first magnitude in the Metropolitan
firmament, may not be excluded hence. For when I call to mind your former
Respects to me in both Universities; the precious precepts and fervent prayers
you favored me with, at and in mine Ordination; And the most endeared,
cordial, long continued intimacy which you had with my Father (of blessed
memory) who ever bore you upon his heart with the greatest tenderness; and who
before he was taken from us, in commending the service of this book to me,
forcibly commanded me the same: (These things, I say, considered, not to
mention other,) I find my self deeply engaged, as the heir of your most
loving Friend, as well as upon my own account otherwise, to testify here my
singular gratitude to you, with submission of these my studies to your grave,
quick and judicious, yet most candid Censure.

And ye my Bosom Friends and Brethren of that Classical Association, wherein
my lot is fallen (at present) to make up a number, are not only concerned in my
cause, but injuries also. Would it be believed if I should tell you the
Gentleman I have to deal with, intends you the contemptuous language he
bestows on me? Yet such is his brow, that he has taken up a conceit, (ask me
not whence, I am not of Council with him who taught him it,) That my
Associated Brethren were accessory to the paper he endeavored to disgrace.
These are his words to me; Your notes (probably) were not of such private
concealment, as you would make us believe; but were showed to diverse Divines of
your own party, for advice and approbation. Thus it is reported. And there is
strong probability for the truth of this report. For its not likely, you would
pass a business of that nature to a professed Antagonist, without consultation
first with your Associates, whom the grand design of your notes concerned as
intrinsecally as your self. The falsenesse of which his self magnifying and
insolent conjecture, is known to your selves, and may appear to others by the
Account given, Digress 21.

And truly, Gentlemen, As this his affront to you, ministered just cause of a
greater indignation against his incivilities, so the publishing that he
intended you as well as me, I account a sufficient disparagement to his
calumnies; which will not be fastened on your Names, how ever they might more
easily have stained mine, if I had been singly bespattered by him. Yet in
making this advantage of your company under his abuses, I do not in the least
attempt, to shelter the weaknesses and defects of my paper, or its defense,
under the covert of your protection. The interpellation of you in these lines,
designeth only a public testimony of the precious esteem I have of you,
whose unanimous and studious persevering in the work of the Lord
(notwithstanding the sad and never too much lamented loss we have lately
sustained in the decease of that pair of most grave, venerable and unblemisht
Divines, as also of a third, though not so ancient, yet very useful and able
Minister, who were lately the strength and ornament. the Horsemen and Chariots,
not only of our Classis, but County and Province also; I say, notwithstanding
this discouragement, your continued pious endeavors together and apart) are
and shall be no less the joy of many, then they seem to be the envy of some.

And you my much honored Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry of this County,
I cannot omit in this Dedication, as having been moved by many of you to the
work here undertaken, which now I humbly lay at your feet; obliging my self to
be thankful for any of your learned faithful Animadversions, you may be
pleased to afford me, in what I may be conceived by any of you to have erred:
assuring you that such oil (if not inflamed with passion) shall be of most
precious account with me for the healing the wounds you may discern in my
head.

This Controversy which some have enlarged by the introducing of many things
not conclusive herein, is here reduced to this point; wherein, indeed the
stress lies, viz. Whether the word of God gives any warrant to administer
either to such as are visibly in the ways of wickedness, inconsistent with
the exercise of justifying faith? Or to such as have not in their own persons
understandingly, and before competent witnesses, professed their owning of
their baptismal engagements, which in their infancy were laid upon them? In
this the whole controversy is contained; the former being asserted and proved
establishes suspension, the latter non-Admission, as is showed in the third
Digression about Examination. All acknowledge believers only have right to the
Lords Supper. But then the Question will be, whether all believers who are so
called in any sense, particularly in regard of their having been baptized, and
positively engaged to believe? This cannot be granted, for then no Apostate,
though excommunicate, could be debarred of necessity, therefore we must allow
some qualifications necessary, to make one capable of the Sacrament, over and
besides his baptism, and having been positively engaged to the Christian
faith. And this the Brethren for general admission seem to confess, when
they in stating the Question still limit it to persons adult and intelligent,
and that in respect of the usual exercise of understanding, and actual
freedom from drunknnesse, etc. which should make them incapable of exercising
reason during their intoxication. Their Antagonists have often urged them to
give a Reason, why these may be debarred who have not the foresaid
qualifications, and not the notoriously profane? It has been answered: 1. In
respect of the drunk, that they are fit for no ordinance, and so not for the
Lords Supper; which is a satisfactory Answer in it self. But not upon their
principles, who 1 plead for an actual right in all to receive whose duty it is
to receive; and 2. that Church Membership entitles (or proves a title) to all
Ordinances in the Church. For the drunken Christian is not disobliged from his
duty in reference to this or other ordinance, nor dismembered, by his
drunkenness at present. 2. In reference to Minors, and the unintelligent, as
to the ordinary exercise of Reason; it is answered, that they come not under
the command to receive, as being innocently unable to examine themselves; but
the profane are unfit only through their own fault: and so they say, there is
as much difference between these, as betwixt [will not] and [cannot]; the
latter excuses, not the former. This I confess is somewhat, but it reaches
not the matter wherein the knot lies. For the Question is not intended only,
why Minors and the unintelligent are secluded from the Lords Supper? (to which
the Reason given is an Answer.) But also, why they are secluded from the Lords
Supper, when they are not secluded from other ordinances of public prayers
and preaching in the Church? And this the foresaid Reason touches not. For if
innocent incapacity as such, excuses and so secludes from the Sacrament, it
would according to our Brethrens principles excuse and seclude from other
ordinances of equal sanctity (as they speak) and wherein as much knowledge
and other graces (they say) are necessary to be exercised to an acceptable
performance, as in celebrating the Lords Supper. And therefore the Reason of
excluding the innocently incapable from the Sacrament, will lie in this,
because they are visibly incapable, in general, as some profane persons may
be; not in this in particular, that they are innocently incapable; And then the
exception stands still in force, viz. that they produce no Reason for debarring
the unintelligent from the Sacrament, whiles they are admitted to other
Ordinances, which will not serve us for debarring the profane from the
Sacrament, though they are not debarred the prayers and hearing the word in the
Church. But the Gentleman I have to deal with in this reply, seems more
liberal in this matter. For he describes his positive believer, that is, one
who is positively obliged to Christianity, who is with him capable of the
Sacrament, by many other qualifications, p. 50, 51, 57. which I have mentioned
in the Treatise following, Chapter 8.. 3. As 1. that he is one who is professedly
of the Christian persuasion. (But what if he be an Arrian, is he no Christian?
then he is no heretic? so we are at a loss, how far this qualification will
be extended, to be professedly of the Christian persuasion.) 2. That he
frequent our Assemblyes. 3. Hear our doctrine with reverence and attention. 4.
Visibly submit to the outward means of reformation and amendment. 5. Not
justifying his miscarriages. 6 One who gives us visible testimony of his assent
to our doctrine. Now if the absence of these render a person debarrable; It
will not sink into my dull head, that Mr. W. or any one else can gratify us
with any scriptural Reason, for the same; (as to debar him who comes not to
Church ordinarily,) which will not debar any profane swearer, drunkard or
unclean person, notoriously appearing so to be. And if any would favor me with
a clear Reason from Scripture, why an unintelligent person (though baptized
adult, etc.) may be debarred the Sacrament, as they hold he may, although not
debarred other ordinances: I say if any would give me a proof of this, without
manifestly overturning thereby, the maine props of that structure, which the
Brethren for general Admission have laid, I shall pawn my promise before you,
to be much engaged for such a discovery; which I must profess is not within
the reach of my present understanding.

There has bin much spoken in the discussion of this subject, about polluting
holy things, casting pearls to swine, not distinguishing betwixt the precious
and the vile, etc. which the other party will I think yield are pertinent, if
first it be proved, that the persons pleaded for are unwarrantably admitted.
And unless this be soundly evinced, they who use those passages must
acknowledge they have no edge against their Antagonists. For certainly to
dispense Ordinances to them whom the word warrants us to dispense them to,
cannot justly be loaded with any of those aggravations. For Scripture is the
Rule of purity. And so, on the other hand, the Arguments for the general
admission contended for, taken from Christ's command to administer to Disciples,
Believers, that the Sacrament is a converting Ordinance (in some sense) etc.
will, I suppose, be granted by those who make use of them, to have no force
against us, if this be once cleared to them, that the Disciples and Believers
to whom the Lords Supper belongs, are not all such Disciples or Believers, as
are so called in respect of their professed entrance into Christ's school, and
positive engagement to believe in him, (which no Apostate Arrian, nor Mohammedan
can loose or put off from him) but those only who are such visibly in regard of
serving Christ and abiding in his ways: the proving hereof is the design of a
maine part of the Treatise following. And though herein I may seem too strict;
it may be I shall be censured on the other hand, by some when they read how
favorable my judgment is in the judging and discerning who are visibly in a
way of disobedience inconsistent with the exercise of justifying faith. For
there I think charity has its place; not in widening the Rule, but in
application of the Rule to particular persons. But I shall not anticipate your
perusing the book, (as you may have leisure) by a tumultuary mentioning of the
contents thereof here. But I most earnestly desire your serious studying the
Question, which is weighty and of practical continual importance. And this I
crave, not only in reference to your selves, and those to whom you are guides
in your particular Congregations, but also with some respect to my self, who
may hope to receive benefit by the imparting your digested apprehensions
concerning this Argument. For by a brotherly, private, impartial discussion of
a controverted point, I should think peaceable Dissenters from each other, may
most probably and effectually receive satisfaction; which then might be made
public (if they saw cause) by mutual consent of both parties, all
impertinencies and mistakes on each hand discovered, being first lopt off.
Whereas Disceptations in print at the first dash, are usually full of mistakes,
and great Temptations to the Authors thereof.

From you therefore, my much honored Fathers and Brethren, wherein any of you
do or may dissent from me, I shall readily receive rational correction. And if
I approve my self to you truly studious of truth (without bitterness to such
as may be of different judgment from me herein;) I shall have little cause to
be sollicitous about the Rejoinder to me, which my Gentleman Publisher has
already talked of, in his printed Apology. If he rationally convince me of the
faultiness of the main parts of my discourse, I shall endeavor to let you and
others know my sense thereof: if not, you may conjecture by my silence.
Controversies must not be endless; and I will not contend with him for a
scowlds prize, to have the last word.

Some of you and others may (perhaps) think this Treatise too long ere it came,
and now too long when it is come forth.

In reference to the latter, I desire the weightinesse of the subject, which in
the main is treated upon, may be considered, and the necessity of taking in
some extravagancies mine Antagonist had with much noise cast in my way. At
least comparatively, I hope I shall be excused. For since Mr. W. spent 9 sheets
in answering my one; If I had taken a proportionable liberty, I should have
taken up 9 times 9 (81) in a reply to his. The like may be considered for some
satisfaction to the former complaint. If those months he had for his answer to
my sheet, be multiplied by 9 times so many months, due to me for returning a
reply to his nine, I shall be found much to have prevented the day I might have
taken on that account. But its known to Diverse, that I was long before I could
be persuaded to entertain a resolution for such a business, considering how
unhandsomly he had proceeded. And when I began to look more seriously on it, I
must acknowledge it was not quickly, that I could read his book without
disturbance; which necessitated me to lay it aside, till I perceived my self
composed to peruse it calmely, as if I felt not my self scarce at all
personally concerned therein. And then the heavy affliction which befell me
June 1. 1657. (which I doubt not, many of you had a share in) will easily be
supposed by you a great discomposure of my studyes for such a service as this.
I mention not my other employments, ordinary and extraordinary. The Treatise
was ready before Michaelmas, and sent up to London the week following. Let the
rest be imputed to my dullness and slownesse, and if you will to (that Mr. W.
has spyed in me) my timorousness.

I deferred the dispatch of this Epistle till I saw some sheets of the book
printed, which I did not till the last week.

And now you will expect I should cease to be further troublesome to you. And
such of you as are already tired, have the law in your own hands to help your
selves by leaving off here if you please. But presuming that some of you will
afford me your patience a little longer, I shall make bold (at the urgent
request of some whose judgment is not to be slighted) here to annex a short
discourse concerning the privacy or publiquenesse of administering the other
Sacrament, viz. of Baptism, which will not be unsutably joined with the main
subject of the discourse following. And this challenges its place here,
because it so particularly concerns the Ministry, and is therefore to be
submissively presented to your serious consideration, and candid censure. Let
this then be the Question to be discussed before you, viz.

Whether (or if at all in what cases) Baptism may be now administered privately
not publicly?

To public is sometimes opposed in Scripture that which we render, from house
to house, especially in that text, Act. 20.20. But I humbly conceive the phrase
so rendered, viz. (...) and (...) is not equivalent to private or per singulas
demos, as Erasmus in Act. 2.46. renders the phrase, for which he is justly
blamed by the Learned Beza. The phrase and the importance thereof is worth a
strict enquiry. In Paul's farewell speech to the Elders or Bishops of the Church
of Ephesus, Act. 20. (for to them only he there speaks, and if [from house to
house] be to be understood of private houses, its manifest it must relate only
to the private houses of the said Bishops, not the private houses of the
people) he avoucheth his integrity in the discharge of his Apostolical
Ministry, as in other Instances thereof, so especially in that he says, ver.
20. I have kept back nothing from you that was profitable for you; But have
showed and taught you publicly and from house to house, (or at the houses,
(...)) testifying both to Jews and also to the Greeks repentance toward God
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. This adverb (...) (as also (...))
seems to signify not only publicly but openly, popularly, and agrees to an
action exposed to open view and cognizance of the people and multitude, without
distinction of Christians from Jews or Heathens (and that with or pretending
to the State authority, Act. 5.18.) the word is translated openly, Act. 16.37.
They have (says Paul) beaten us openly, i. e. exposed us to open shame before
the promiscuous multitude, Act. 18.28. Apollos mightily convinced the Jews,
and that publicly (in their Synagogue, verse. 26.) that Jesus was the Christ.
And being here opposed to the Christian houses, it denotes, the Temple,
Synagogue, Market places, or such open conventions, to which persecutors and
enemies as well as Christians had a free access; and then (...) signifies not
mere private houses, but the Church Assemblyes which used to convene in
several houses appointed for that purpose; which are therefore opposed to
[(...)] because they were not built nor appointed by any public act of the
State; and 2. because here was not a reception of the people, friends and foes
promiscuously (at least not at all times) but of the brethren joined together
in ecclesiastical Christian society. For the clearing hereof I shall show, 1.
that this phrase (...) in the N. T. (though sundry times there used) is ever
appropriated to the signifying of the Church meetings in their houses; 2. And
always (I take it) some other phrase is used to denote such as are in a mere
private house. This latter may be seen in Act. 16.32. (...), 1 Cor. 11.34. and
14.35. (...), Gal 2.2. (...), etc. The former I shall more insist upon; for the
demonstration whereof I shall produce all the places of the N. T. where the
phrase is used. Romans 16.5. Greet the Church in their house, (...). 1 Cor.
16.19. Aquila and Priscilla salute you with the Church (...). Col. 4.15. Salute
-- Nymphas and the Church which is at his house (...). Philemon verse. 2. to the
Church (...). That this phrase in these Texts signifies the Church meetings,
and Christian Assemblyes is demonstrated already by the learned Mr. Mede above
all contradiction. I shall only quote one passage or two of his for this, which
he has in his discourse called Churches, i. e. appropriate places for
Christian worship, p. 22. Unless (says he) this should be the meaning, why
should this appendant be so singularly mentioned, in the salutation of some and
not of others? and that not once but again, if the same names be again
remembered, as of Aquila and Priscilla. Had none in those catalogues of
salutation christian families, but some only who are thus remembered! It is very
improbable; nay if peruse them well, we shall find they had, but otherwise
expressed, as in that prolix catalogue, Romans 16. we find Aristobulus and
Narcissus saluted, with their household; Asyncritus, Phlegon, etc. with the
brethren which are with them, etc. Others with the Saints which are with them,
2 Timothy 4.19. the household of Onesiphorus; this therefore so singular an
appendix must mean some singular thing, not common to them with the rest, but
peculiar to them alone: And what should this be, but what I have showed; thus
that happy Interpreter. There are only two more places where (...) is used in
the N. T. both which comply with the forementioned sense of Church meetings in
houses, Act. 2.46. Breaking bread (...) (compared with ver. 42.) referring to
the love feasts which they had in common, (to which the celebration of the
Lords Supper was sometimes annexed) in several houses appointed among them for
that purpose; see Beza on the place. Act. 5.42. the Apostles daily in the
Temple and (...) ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ; where preaching
in the Temple promiscuously is opposed to the preaching in Church meetings of
the Christian brethren, as it was in the text last quoted, and therefore is
fairly interpreted to the same sense here as it was there. I shall only add one
thing more, which makes it probable that (...) in Act. 20.20. should denote the
Church Assemblyes, rather then the private houses of the Ephesian Elders as
such; One design of Paul's speech appears to be the confirming the Ephesian
Elders by his example of constancy and boldness in the Christian faith, and his
function, notwithanding all persecutions, v. 19. Yet says he, v. 20. (...). I
have not through fear or cowardice withdrawn in any thing needful (see the
importance of the word as its used elsewhere, Gal. 2.12. Heb. 10.23, 25. comp:
with ver. 38.) his boldness is instanced in preaching both publicly or
openly, before friends and foes, and at their Church Assemblyes,
notwithstanding the danger of coming thither; which made some to withdraw
themselves, Heb. 10.25. Now to instruct privately in Christian families, was no
such instance of boldness, as this was. -- The perusal of this phrase may be
otherwise useful, (which has invited me to this strict consideration of it.)
At present this use is to be made hereof, that when we speak of private
Baptism in private houses, it is not to be understood according to the sense
of the phrase (...), as its used, Act. 20.20. though it seem there to be
according to our translation opposed to publicly.

But as public baptism is that which is now performed in the public place,
where public ordinances are usually administered, the accustomed signs being
given for the assembling of the Congregation there, at such time when it is to
be celebrated; so private baptism on the contrary, is that which is done
either in the place of public Assembly, when no public notice is duly given
for the Congregation to resort thither, or in a private house, where although
many are present, yet it is not free, or at least its generally supposed it
would not be civil, for any Christian that will, though uninvited, to come to
the ordinance of Baptism there administered.

Now that we may better discern what is incumbent upon us in reference to this
circumstance of administering Baptism, we shall peruse Scripture instances, and
see what direction they may afford us herein, in these following Theses.

(Thesis 1.)
The Baptism of John was not privately administered, according to the senses of
private before mentioned, Matthew. 3.5, 6. Then went out unto him ( viz. to the
wilderness of Judea) Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about
Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins. So says
Mark. 1.5. And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their
sins. And v. 7. And he preached, saying, there comes one after me mightier
then I, etc. Ver. 8. I indeed baptize you with water, but he with the holy
Ghost Luke says, Ch 3. ver. 2, 3. The word of God came to John in the
wilderness, And he came into all the Country round about Jordan, preaching the
Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. And v. 7. Then says he to the
multitude (which Matthew says he said to the Pharisees and Sadduces that came
forth to be baptized of him, Mat 3.7.) O generation of Vipers, who has warned
you to flee from the wrath to come? Its related, Joh. 1.25, 28. They asked him
why baptizest thou, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that
Prophet; John answered, I baptize you with water, etc. -- These things were
done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing, etc. From this
harmony we may observe, 1. That he baptized where he preached ordinarily, and
as openly. 2. That multitudes came to him to be baptized, to whom he preached,
expostulating with them; and they confessed their sins, when (probably before)
they were baptized. Now this was not confession before John alone, as our
Divines show against the Papists, who would hence infer auricular confession;
but it rather was an open renouncing of former wickedness, as those did, Act.
19.18, 19. who being converted to the christian faith, confessed and showed
their deeds, and some brought their books of curious arts, and burned them
before all men. There is no other passage concerning John's Baptism which
seems to intimate privacy, or that it was not done according to the tenor of
the former Scriptures; but rather comply therewith, Luke 3.12. Mark 11.30. Joh.
3.23. and 4.1. Luke 7.29 Act. 1.21, 22. Act. 10.37. Peter in this last
Scripture speaking of the Gospel, says it was that word which you know was
published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the Baptism
which John preached. Which phrase further cleeres it to us, that John first
preached to the people concerning the nature and use of his baptism, before he
baptized them; which hints his baptism as public as his preaching. There is
only one instance more to be considered concerning John's Baptism, and that is
his baptizing Christ. Mat. 3.13. Mark 1.9. In this, 1. there is nothing against
the publiqueness of it, and therefore it may fairly be supposed to be
administered as publicly as in the former Instances. 2. Yea there is probable
proof of the publiqueness of it. For 1. Christ was pleased to come to John at
Jordan, Mat. 3.13. (at which place John was preaching to, and baptizing the
multitudes spoken of in ver. 5, 6. of that same chap.) Christ did not send for
John to some private place (as some now would have Ministers come to their
houses) and Luke 3.21. relates Christ's and the peoples baptism as done
together. 2. At this time Christ was to be solemnly inaugurated unto the
manifestation of his office (as our Divines say) and that declared by a voice
from heaven. Now it was of infinite concernment and use, that his baptism
should be public, and that there should be many witnesses thereof; whereby
also it might publicly appear that Christ approved of John's Baptism, that by
his example others might be moved to submit thereunto.

(2)
The baptism administered by Christ's disciples before Christ's death, seems
rather to have been public as their preaching was, then private. Job. 3.22.
After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them and baptized (although Jesus baptized not but his
disciples, Chapter 4.2.) whereupon Chapter 3.26. John's disciples tell John of it, that
Jesus baptizeth, and all men come unto him.

(3)
The examples after Christ's ascension are divided, some administered in
public, some privately, and one doubtful to which sort it is to be referred.
I shall begin with the public. We have a notable example of public
baptism, Act. 2.41. when the same day (that they had heard Peter's Sermon, and
probably of other Apostles) there were added 3000 souls who were baptized. Act
8.12. When they ( viz. of Samaria) believed Philip preaching the things
concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized both men and women. Here baptizing was as public as preaching. Now
the preaching was public where all had free admission, ver. 5, 6. At this
same time one is particularly mentioned, ver. 13. Simon, who believed Philips
preaching and miracles, as the former persons did, and was baptized at the same
time, so Act. 18.8. Another example occurres, Act. 10.44, 47, 48. in like
manner described. That Is a notable one, Act. 16.13, 14. On the Sabbath (says
the text) we went out of the City by a river side, and we sat down and spoke
to the women, which resorted thither, and v. 14, 15. Lydia was there converted,
and its probable, baptized and her household. For after she and her household was
baptized, she invited the Apostles home to her private house, ver. 15. Now if
it had been the use to baptize ordinarily in private, its likely she would have
invited them to her house before, that she and her household might there have
been baptized.

(4)
There are two manifest Instances of private baptism, the one of the Eunuch,
Act. 8.35, 36. the other of the Jailer and his household, Act. 16.33.

(5)
That of Paul's baptism is more doubtful, Act. 9, 11, 17, 18. and 22.16. The
probabilities ^^me rather to cast it among the Instances of public baptism,
according to the opportunities of those times; which appear by laying these
circumstances together. 1. Paul was miraculously converted in his going to
Damascus, and struck blind near to Damascus, to which place he was led. 2. In
Damascus there was a brotherhood of Christians, (a Church) at this time, Act.
9.19. 3. This miraculous conversion of Paul could not be concealed from these
brethren there; For there were diverse with Paul, when he was miraculously
converted, who heard the voice from heaven, who were likely to speak of it: the
very novelty and wonder of the matter would make them divulge it: besides also
they being Paul's companions on his journey, and probably assisting to him in
his persecuting design, could not be insensible of their concernment, in the
voice speaking, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? which would be an
obligation on them to give God the glory of the vision by declaring it. And
what story could they make in Damascus to satisfy them who should enquire
concerning Paul's blindness who was led by them; but they must tell the truth?
the weightiness and strong influence of the present providence, not permitting
a dissimulation of the matter. And the same may be said over again, much more
to show that Paul himself was not likely to conceal this thing. 4. Paul was
three days blind at Damascus before Ananias came to him. 5. Its very probable
Paul after his conversion being now under the terror of his former cruelty
against Christ in his members, and at present blind, would desire to be
conducted to the house of some disciple at Damascus, or at least send for some
disciples to him. 6. And as probable it is, that many disciples would flock in
to him, hearing of the mighty work of God done on him. 7. Its also noted that
he fasted the three days and three nights of his blindness; and that (likely)
for a religious end, and then he would join solemn prayer therewith, (to which
I suppose the voice speaking to Ananias especially refers, which says of Paul,
Behold he prays, i.e. now he is praying or joining in prayer, having set
himself seriously to be humbled for his former sin.) 8. And now its not likely
he spent 3 days in prayer all alone, Its probable therefore there were the
Disciples in Damascus gathered to him, into the house of Judas, whither Ananias
was instructed to go to Paul, and where he baptized him. Neither may it be
forcibly objected, that because of his former rage against Christianity, the
disciples in Damascus would not so soon trust him as to come unto him. Upon
which account, some time after, the Church at Jerusalem durst not receive him
into their company. For these at Damascus who heard of his vision, and might
see him humbled under his blindness, would hereby be made fearlesse of
receiving hurt from him. And yet the Disciples at Jerusalem, who wanted those
advantages of confidence, might prudently scruple at a sudden admission of him
into their society. If all these taken together will not amount to a
probability, that here were with Paul a considerable number of Christians, and
a free invitation of them hither (which in those times might be such an
assembly as used there solemnly to join in public ordinances) who might be
present when Paul was baptized by Ananias, yet I think more will hardly be
said for a probability of the contrary; and so I leave it.

(6)
It appears then, that in all cases it was not unfit, much less unlawful to
administer Baptism privately; yet there seem to be but two clear undoubted
examples thereof in Scripture, when as all the persons baptized by John, and so
probably those baptized by Christ's Disciples before Christ's death, seem to have
been openly baptized. And we have perused 5 Scriptures which speak of many,
multitudes, thousands, baptized after Christ's ascension, whose baptism, was as
publicly administered, as was the preaching of the word ordinarily in the
Christian Churches. Hence I think I may reasonably conclude,

(7)
That public baptism is according to the ordinary common Rule, and private
is the Anomalon, or an exception in some peculiar extraordinary Cases. These
two conclusions are to be handled distinctly; and first of the first.

(8)
Its according to the ordinary common Rule of the N. T. that baptism be
administered publicly, i e. as is aforesaid, according to the opportunity of
the times, and so that it be as public as ordinary preaching in the Church
assemblyes is. This I shall further illustrate and show in these Reasons hereof
ensuing.

1. The nature of this ordinance, is a public seal of the covenant of grace,
and so annexed to the Gospel; therefore its fit it should be annexed to the
preaching of the Gospel, and be as public, as that is ordinarily, Matthew.
28.19, 20. 2. One effect of Baptism, is the solemn admission of Christians
into the visible Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. Therefore its fit to be done ordinarily
in the face of a Congregation. I say solemn admission, (for they are Christians
before) now the solemnity requires publiquenesse so far as may ^^e. 3. The
great use and benefit of having this ordinance publicly, pleads against the
private administration thereof, where it may be public. (1) In ^egard of the
person baptized, to have the prayers of (...) Congregation. (2) With respect to
the parents, that they may be more quickened by the solemnity of the ordinance,
in renewing their covenant with God on this occasion. (3) For the whole
Congregation to be minded of the nature of this ordinance, and the engagements
which have been laid upon them herein, for themselves and their children they
have formerly in baptism devoted to God. (4) And lastly, the Minister herein
has opportunity to approve himself publicly in the administration hereof,
in a right manner, and to subjects capable of the same according to Gospel
Rule. 4. The horrible abuse formerly and now in some places, making many
baptismes private transactions (with a few women only present besides the
Minister and Father of the infant baptized;) as also the observation that this
is generally the employment of scandalous Ministers; should make us less free
in complying with them herein; least we bring contempt on our persons,
function, and Ministry. 5. The contempt in our days cast on this sacred
ordinance by many, and the aptness we see in diverse of our people to make it a
matter of state and formality for the entertainme^t of friends, not regarding
the prayers of the Congregation, rather then a business of serious devotion,
should provoke us to labor after a greater solemnity in the administration
hereof. 6. The exceeeding great snares and inconveniences which private
baptism brings on the Minister, when he baptizeth some privately and not
others, may dissuade us from gratifying any herein, unless we would comply
with all who may desire it; and then I think (in some places) we should have
few baptized in the public Congregation. What grudges and surmises of
partiality this may beget, we cannot be ignorant. 7. Either baptism is a
private or public ordinance; If private, then it needs not at all to be
administered publicly. If public, then it ought not to be administered
privately, where it may be publicly and that fitly. I say fitly, for
sometimes even solemn preaching may be in private places, but not when it may
fitly be in public: so is the case here. 8. If private baptismes be admitted,
I see not how private communions in the Lords Supper will be rationally
avoided: which yet are now exploded, and I think justly according to 1 Cor.
11.22. For which see also Mr Medes discourse of Churches for Christian worship
in the primitive times, p. 4.9. Private baptism would be too near a
symbolizing, with the Papists, who lay the stress of salvation upon baptism,
Necessitate medij; and with the Separatists, who leave our public Assemblyes
and retire into corners for the performing of public ordinances. 10. Lastly,
The judgment of the Churches of God, especially the Church of England, may
dissuade from private baptism. Zepperus de polit. eccl. l. 1. c. 12. says;
Baptismum in primitiva ecclesia Catechumenis adultis qui e gentilismo vel
Judaismo ad christum transibant -- non nisi ferijs paschalibus, pentecostes and
natalitijs Domini administrari solitum, idque magno cum apparatu, and solenni
omnium piorum laetitia, ex illorum temporum monumentis manifestum est. Nunc
quia alia ecclesiae ratio est, illaque ex christianorum parentum liberis fere
constat and colligitur, quotiescunque publici ecclesiae Caetus ordinary
habentur, christianorum parvuli testimonio and sigillo Baptismi, christo
ejusque ecclesiae inferentur, and quidem patre ipso ad Infantis sui baptismum
praesente atque astante. This is evidenced by the ancient custom of sponsors,
who were to make promise before the Church for the instruction of the baptized
in the christian faith; Fideijussionem (says he) and sponsionem, susceptores
apud baptismum coram Dei and ecclesiae ipsius facie sacrosancte praestant. The
learned Beza in libello Quaestionum and Responsionum christianorum, speaks
home to this business; Q. An de loco baptismi nihil statuendum putas. R. Imo,
quum omnia decenter and ordine fieri in ecclesia oporteat, sit autem evangelici
Ministerij pars Baptismus, eundem locum and verbi and sacramentorum ministerio
attribuendum censeo, ut in coetu Ecclesiae, and communibus precibus adjunctis
Baptismus administretur, neque istos nescio quos necessitatis casus temere
admiser^.

I shall only hereunto add the determinations of the English Liturgy, and the
Directory. Though in some cases of great necessity (as the Common prayer book
speaks) it permit private baptism, yet if the child live, it is to be brought
to the Congregation, where the Sponsors shall make solemn professions, as in
the order for public baptism; and the Congregation being so satisfied, the
child is publicly to be declared solemnly received into the Church. Now how
shamefully do many of our corner Baptizers, who pretend much for the Episcopal
Government and Common prayer book, offend against this Direction?

The Directory (which I suppose is owned as a considerable Authority humane,
especially in a doubtful case, in this County, most of the Ministers names
whereof then resident here when the Presbyterial Government was first commended
to us by the Parliament, I have by me, subscribed with their own hands, to a
profession of their judgment for that way, and resolution to put the same in
practice) it orders expressly thus: Baptism is not to be administered in private
places, nor privately, but in the place of the public worship, and in the
face of the Congregation. There is but one, I know of, professing the
Congregational way, who comes to private houses in the Country, and with the
parents and a few women, baptizeth, and this I think is offensive to the
Ministers of the same way he professes, as well as to others of us his
neighbors. Now we all profess to be studious of peace. But how shall we make
it appear, if in such a thing which all I think acknowledge lawful, we comply
not with the Directions of the former constitutions of the State and Church of
England, and the present Rules commended to us by the Parliament, with the
assistance of so Reverend an Assembly, as they had herein? which yet respect
only our uniform practice, and tie us not to an opinion of necessity, that
Baptism should be ever administered thus publicly. Should not those
Scriptures, Romans 14.19. Phil 3.15, 16. and such like, have some impression upon
us, as to this matter? I leave it to the consideration of the peaceably
Judicious. Now I come to my second Conclusion I deduced probably from the
perusal of the forementioned examples of Baptism, viz. That

(9)
From the ordinary Rule of public Baptism, there is some exception in some
special cases. That there is such an exception is already proved, by the
Scriptures produced. But to set down a perfect enumeration of such cases
wherein that exception has place, I dare not profess ability to undertake;
but I shall endeavor somewhat herein according to my poor measure, 1
Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.

(10)
Diverse things are pretended as of weight, when they occur, to challenge an
exception from the common Rule of public Baptism, which I humbly conceive are
of no validity for the same. 1. The child's weakness, and danger of death, is
no sufficient reason for private Baptism, (this is the only exception allowed
by the Common prayer book.) Indeed this seems rather a reason for the denying
of private Baptism, then granting it, least they who demand it should be
strengthened hereby in the conceit of the necessity of Baptism for salvation of
the infant, ratione medii. They should rather by our preaching and practice be
informed in the right doctrine of the Sacraments. It Is true some of the
Ancients in the heat of their opposition to the Pelagians, who denied original
sin, went so far, as to lay stress of salvation upon Baptism. But others were
more sound, who teach, that not the defect or want simply, but the neglect of
them is the crime. Now there is not a neglect, where the first opportunity is
taken for solemn public Baptism, no more then there is a neglect of the Lords
Supper, although it be not received by him who cannot come to the Congregation,
who yet is ready and desirous to lay hold on the first opportunity he can, to
join himself in the public Communion of the Church in that Ordinance. 2. Nor
is the gratification of men's (or rather women's) humors, a sufficient reason
for private Baptism. For then it should be denied to none who demand it on that
account, one man's humor being of as much validity as another; and this will
not weigh down the Disswasives from a private celebration, before rehearsed.
And then again, a sick man's desiring the Communion should be a sufficient
reason for our private administering of the Lords Supper unto him in a private
house, where the Church has not free access, of which there is no footsteps
(that I know of) in the holy Scriptures. 3. Nor is the pretense of a custom to
have feastings and entertainments (which may not fitly be on the Lords day) a
sufficient reason for private baptism; for that custom ought rather to be
altered, then the ten former inconveniences of private baptism should be
admitted. And it is altered easily in some places (by the Ministers persuasion)
that they have their feastings on a week day (where they are of ability to have
them) when the baptism is on the Lords day. But it is known experimentally, that
many invited to such entertainments (in Country Villages) do not use to come to
the Church to be present at the baptism, as making this the least part of their
business at such a time. And upon the same pretense last mentioned, two or
three (perhaps more) Lords days, or other opportunities for public baptism
are neglected, till they be prepared for their dinnerings, which I suppose is a
fault in the Parents; agreeable to what the fore-praised Zepperus in the
Chapter mentioned, quotes out of Augustine, in his Sermon, de immolat. Isaac.
Rogo vos fratres, ut quicunque filium aut vernaculum suum baptizari desiderat,
jam nunc Ecclesiae eum offerre non differat (that phrase suits best to public
baptism) Quia non est justum, ut res quae tam magna, tam praeclara creditur,
negligenter aut tardius quam expedit, requiratur. I now proceed to speak
positively to the point under consideration, by laying down this Rule.

(11)
Private baptism then has place when the case is such as the expediences
thereof for the general good of the Church do over-weigh the forementioned
inconvenicies. More particularly, as 1. In the first gathering of a Church,
since they who are to be members thereof, are to be solemnly made disciples by
baptism, there may be a necessity that some who are the first fruits of the
place must be baptized privately: for Church order supposes a Church existing,
wherein it should be exercised and observed. But where a Church is constituted,
there this has no place. 2. In times of persecution, when there cannot be set
solemn Assemblie^, but Christians, as they may catch at an opportunity of
convening; It Is a greater inconvenience to the Church that Baptism should be
omitted, then that it should be celebrated privately. But I did not need to put
in this case, unless the persecution be raised against this Ordinance, rather
then preaching, for as I have stated the Question, baptism is not to be called
private, which is as public as the ordinary preaching in the Church is at
that time. 3. A like case hereunto is that, in times of gross defection and
Idolatry in the Church, where this ordinance cannot be publicly administered,
without superstitious or heretical mixtures, as in Popish Countries. 4. There
may possibly occur some Instance, wherein, an eminent respect to Gods glory,
propagating the Gospel, and the good of the Catholic Church, may warrant
private baptism; that being to be preferred to the advantages of a particular
Congregation in some respects. This I suppose was the case of the Eunuch, to
whom Philip was directed by the extraordinary dictate of the Spirit, who being
on his journey to his own (remote) Country, was converted, and then instantly
baptized: of whom Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history. lib. 2. c. 1.
(according to Hanmers translation) says; He was the first of the Gentiles,
which obtained of Philip the holy mysteries, by the inspiration of the heavenly
word; he was made the first fruits of the faithful throughout the world. And
as it is reported, after his return unto his native soil, he preached the
knowledge of the Universal God, which gives life unto men, and the coming of
our Savior, whereby the prophecy was fulfilled, which said, Aethiopia shall
stretch her hand before unto God: so he. And so this instance falls also under
the first case for private baptism. That example of the Jaylors baptism and his
household, comes under the first and second case; that being a time of
persecution, and Paul and Silas then imprisoned, and knew not when they might
hope to be released; much less when they should have an opportunity of
assembling the Church in that neighborhood. And its not altogether improbable
that many other Christian prisoners might be there, and then there might be a
solemn assembly agreeable to the allowance of those troublesome times. What
other cases there may be of like exigence as to private baptism, I refer to
the disquisition of better judgments.

(12)
None of these singular cases wherein baptism was privately administered, do
(for any thing I know) occur in the present times among us. If there be
conceived to be some analogical or proportionate to these, as to this matter,
it concerns them who think so, to name them, and to prove the same; the three
fore pretended ones I have already showed not to be such. And I know none else
pretended, except, (1) the gratifying Separatists, some whereof would suffer
their children to be baptized at home with a select company of their own only
present, but separate from our public Assemblyes, as no rightly constituted
Churches: (2) And very rarely (perhaps) one convinced of the error of
Antipedobaptisme, who has been tainted therewith before, seems inclinable to
have his children baptized at home, but is loath to honor God so far as
publicly to appear in the devoting his seed to God in this ordinance. But if
we comply with the former we wrong our Churches, and seem to take upon our
selves the disparagement they lay upon us in their unwarrantable separation.
And the humouring the latter, seems to be a wrong to baptism it self: the
honor whereof had need to be carefully preserved in these times. And the
Question in this case seems to be, whether the real honor of Gods holy
ordinance, or the imaginary supposed though indeed) false honor and credit of
these people should be most respected

I have now plainly laid down before you my apprehensions in this matter, and
shall add nothing more herein, save that upon a review I conceive it may be
needful to express my self more fully, in one thing which has been hinted
already, viz. What we shall call public baptism? to which I have answered,
that such a place and convention of Christians as is judged meet for the
ordinary exercise of ministerial public preaching, is a place and society to
administer baptism in, if we would have it to be public baptism. According
to which rule, more particularly I say. 1. Baptism in a private house is not
public though many be there present, because this would not (in times of
freedom) be counted a fit place for ordinary conventions of the Church for
preaching. 2. Baptism on the week day, at the place of public assembly,
where there is not so considerable a number present, as it would be counted
expedient for a public Sermon to be made to, is yet but private baptism. 3.
I suppose it also requisite that the Congregation on the Lords day before have
notice of the time of a baptism intended there, the week following (unless
there be some known lecture or exercise there at that time, or at least we may
probably expect a considerable number of Christians then) that they may freely
repair unto the Word and Sacrament then to be dispensed; the usual signs
being given for warning a public transaction. 4. Yet if it be judged unfit,
frequently to call an assembly of the Church, I suppose at such time when we
cannot urge a considerable number of our Congregation to attend in public,
nor blame their absence, we may not appoint a public ordinance for them to be
present at. For this seems little better then a prevaricating with them. 5. To
conclude, Hence it follows, that its not this or that number present, which is
necessary to the making a baptismal administration public in the place of
public Church meetings; For then we should be at a loss, what should be the
least number necessary: But the administering it at such a time, and in such a
place, where and when the Congregation may freely and is obliged to attend. We
may (in some Parishes or Chappelries) suspect sometimes on the Lords days, and
upon other special and important occasions for preaching on other days, when
we call an assembly, that few will be present, yet do we then preach publicly
though to never so few, because its not our fault that the Church is so empty.
But if it were our fault that so few are present, by taking inconvenient times,
either of the days of the week, when their occasions call them another way; or
of the hours of the day, which are not usual nor commodious for an assembly;
or lastly, if we should call them to attend preaching so frequently, that we
could not reasonably expect the attendance of a considerable Congregation: I
suppose in these cases we should offend in pretending to the exercise of
public preaching before so small a number. And the same should I say
concerning public baptism. For this is my maine direction, that these
ordinances of public preaching and administering Baptism ought to go parallel
one with another, in regard of the publiquenesse of dispencing the same..

It remains now, much honored Sirs, only to crave your pardon for this
overtedious interpellation of you, your courteous acceptance of my unfeined
respects to you, and your earnest prayers at the throne of grace for me, the
which I hope you will be more fervent in on my behalf, by your observing of
the many weaknesses clogging me in this present service. And now its my humble
petition for you who are called to the weighty function of the Ministry, that
the Father of mercies may ever direct and prosper your precious labors in his
vineyard, for the honor of his name, the edification of his Church, and the
joyful refreshment of your own spirits! And for you Sir, who are honored to
be an Instrument for preserving of natural life in many, my hearty request at
the throne of grace is; that your soul may live the life of grace here, in the
exercise of godliness in the power of it, (which you have seen in a precious
instance most nearly related to you, is the sure and unshaken foundation of
unspeakable comforts and peace passing all understanding in life and at death)
that so you may live the life of glory hereafter.

In testimony of which my cordial and uncessant prayers for you all, I
subscribe my self with all readiness;

December. 15. 1657. Your assured and affectionate servant in our dear Lord and
Savior, SAMUEL LANGLEY.

To the Reader.
I Have here in the following discourse endeavored rightly to state and clear
the doctrine and practice of suspending notoriously profane and scandalous
persons from the Lords Supper; and to vindicate the same from
Misrepresentations and exceptions made against it. And although I could rather
have desired to have performed this in my own method, yet I was advised, in
reference to these parts, where a book entitled Suspension discussed is spread
and taken notice of, to accommodate my discourse in way of refutation of that
book, which pretended to answer a private sheet I had occasionally written.
(Concerning which an Account is given at the latter end of this my defense.)
Yet have I not so confined my self thereunto, as not to take in other things I
apprehended of most importance in this subject, especially such as I had seen
least spoken to by others who have owned the same Conclusion with me. And
although I have not particularly and expressly answered all the objections I
have found in some Authors against me (fearing least the book should swell too
big under my hand, and perceiving the most of them sufficiciently answered
already by others,) yet I have (as I humbly conceive) given in those grounds
which are fitly applicable for the easy expedite and clear solution of them;
as the peaceably judicious I hope will discern. I like Augustines counsel;
contra lit. petil. Don. l. 1. at the conclusion. Diligite homines, interficite
errores; sine superbia de veritate praesumite; sine saevitia pro veritate
certate; orate pro eis quos redarguitis atque convincitis, etc. And before my
Reader judge me to have transgressed this Rule in the following sheets, I must
desire him to observe, 1. Whether there was any one tart expression in the
paper, which the Author of Suspension discussed, answers? 2. Whether he does
not uncivilly trample upon me in his answer, and not me only, but the Reformed
Churches, with the Reverend Assembly, yea and the Parliament, which commended
the Presbyterial Government to us? 3. Whether there is not a mean betwixt a
sheepish insensiblenesse (whereby further abuses should be invited) and a
passionate return of such calumnies and reproachful revilings on my
Antagonist, as he has bestowed on me, (which I have touched upon, Chapter 20.. 4.
and Digress, 12.17?) And then, I trust, the equal Reader will allow me without
condemning my self to say to my Answerer, what the formentioned Augustine said
to Petilian, l. 3. Si and ego tibi vellem pro maledictis maledicta rependere,
quid aliud quam duo maledici essemus, ut ij qui nos legerent, alij detestatos
abijcerent sana gravitate, alij suaviter haurirent malevola voluntate. And
because the Gentleman I stand on my defense against, has told me, that he
favored me sufficiently in concealing my name in his book, setting L for it;
I shall not be wanting in retaliation of the like courtesy; and therefore that
double letter he has made the character of himself in his dealing with me,
shall still stand for his name in the discourse following. And now Reader, thou
may next peruse a true Copy of my paper, which he gave thee depraved, with
his pretended refutation thereof; and then my defense, which is Christianly
submitted to thy impartial judgment. I shall not, in the least, go about to
court my Reader into a compliance with me, I wish him not to take one step to
accompany me in an error appearing so to be; nor will it be for his advantage
to refuse any compliance which the light here offered may rationally require
from him. I leave the whole entirely before him, desiring the Father of lights,
by his holy Spirit to guide him into, and preserve him in the ways (or rather
way) of peace and truth.

Suspension Reviewed; CLEARED and SETTLED upon plain Scripture Proof.
THe Argument Mr W. impugneth was thus managed in my Manuscript.

It is said by some, Timpson has in his Answer to Collins, p. 2.

For the better understanding of this position,

1. The Question which is at present under consideration, Thesis,

2. etc? or to the community of a particular Congregation? or to one single
person? whether a Diocesan Bishop, or a Minister?

3. power of order inherent in a Minister, as such? or by the power of
jurisdiction? etc. But the Question is only concerning the lawfulnes of the act
of suspending the foresaid persons, by any person or persons whatsoever; in
whatsoever capacity they are, or by whatsoever kind of power it may be exerted
by them or any of them.

4. not excommunicate, and one not excluded from (or warned to depart) the
public Ordinances of hearing and praying and singing in the Church, are of
equal importance.

5. excommunicat, such as are fully and completely, with solemnity
excommunicate. For they cannot be ignorant that our Divines, who hold
suspension (when it is a censure) take it to be a degree of excommunication,
and therefore call it excommunicatio minor: And it is exclusio sive suspensio,
vel abstinentia a coena Domini, qua interdicitur peccator ad tempus coenae
participatione, as Trelcatius, Trelca. Instit. l. 2. Bucan. loc. com. 44. qu.
10. and 16. Polan. Syntag. Theol. l. 7. c. 18. To the like sense speaks Amesius
med. Theol. l. 1. c. 37 and de conscientia, l. 4. c. 29.
Bucanus, Polanus, and others express it. Aretius deny this for ought I can
find: I know in his common places he says Excommunication is larger then
Suspension from the Communion of the Lords Supper, according to the Scriptures.
But I suppose he says not any where (there I am sure he does not, nor (I
think) in his Commentaries) that its unlawful to inflict the censure of
excommunication by degrees. Unless therefore our Admissionists do take
excommunicate for fully excommunicate, they trifle egregiously. major and
minor.

6. That passage in Amesius I judge very remarkable in this Question, which he
has in his de conscientia lib. 4. c. 29. Suspensio ab usu coenae and similibus
ecclesiae privilegijs, nihil aliud est quam gradus excommunicationis, and ideo
vocari solct A Multis excommunicatio minor, quamvis non ex singulari Christi
instiruto, ex aequitate tamen et rei ipsius natura praecedere debet, and
aliquandiu continuari, ubi scandali ratio far potest moram.

7. universal negative, that none such may be debarred. Now one particular
affirmative destroys a universal negative. viz. that there is no such
ordinance of suspension in the Church approved by Christ. not more plain in it
self (and what can be plainer?) then it is useful and necessary to be
remembered in this dispute. I shall therefore further illustrate it, by a
familiar similitude. If one should say that no flagitious Englishman, who is
not cut off from the freedom of the Corporation where he is a member, may
legally be whipped; I need not to contradict him, prove, that all flagitious
English persons not deprived of their freedom aforesaid, may be whipped; but to
prove that some may, in some cases, is a sufficient contradiction to him who
says none may in any case: so is the present case in reference to
Ecclesiastical polity.

In opposition therefore to the foresaid position, That it is lawful for some
persons in some cases to debar by disswasion, suspending their own act of
administering, or by Ecclesiastical Censure (I say to debar) some persons from
the Lords Supper, who are baptized, and not warned to depart (or kept) from
other public Ordinances, of hearing, praying, singing, etc. in the public
Congregations of the Church.

Arg. 1. Ergo some baptized persons at years not fully excommunicate, may be
suspended from the Lords Supper.

The major is clear, visibly, I mean such as are proved and appear so to be
by Scripture Characters. And now the major is not likely to be denied: Because
God has placed a power somewhere in his Church,

The minor is thus proved.

Those who by word openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ, Ergo some baptized
persons at years not fully excommunicat, may be visibly such to whom the Lord
would not have the Sacrament administered.

The major here again I think will not be denied.

Those who are visibly unbelievers (I mean who ought to be judged and taken to
be unbelievers) are visibly such to whom (according to the word) the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper ought not to be administered. But those who by word openly
renounce the Lord Jesus Christ, ought to be judged and taken to be unbelievers.
Ergo those who by word openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ are visibly such,
to whom (according to the word of God) the Lords Supper ought not to be
administered.

The first of these is clear.

If to the minor of my second Syllogism (which was this;

Excep. 1. That no baptized person at years not fully excommunicate, tendering
himself to receive, will or does ever so openly by word renounce the Lord
Jesus Christ. I answer.

Ans. 1. The case may yet be supposed, yea it may happen; to occur, if that
which my Antagonists in this Question so much commend, and which they say was
happily exercised under the Episcopal Government in England, should be revived
and brought again into practice among us, viz. That all baptized persons of
years should be required under a (purse) penalty to communicate once or twice
in the year; then many open rejecters of Christianity, and who profess against
the same, (and aver there is no Christ without them, etc.) might, to escape
the penalty, tender themselves to communicate. I have been credibly informed
concerning the Atheism of an eminent person, London, who on his deathbed told
his friend, who urged him to receive before his death, That to gratify him he
was willing to communicate; but yet with all professed he looked for no good
from such things. Whereupon the Bishop who was there to have given him the
Sacrament turned away from him. But what speak I of one? These times declare
that there are hundreds, I fear thousands, who are above all Ordinances, and
count the Sacraments carnal things, and say so; who yet, its probable, to
escape a penalty would come to ask the Sacrament.

2 Excep. viz. their owning of Christ.

Ans. q. d. I desire to do as others do in receiving, but I am resolved at
present I will not now receive the commands of Christ, nor part with my lusts
which Christ bids me fly from. (I would I had not known such a sad case as this
occur!)

3 Excep. be fully excommunicated, and may be, as well as suspended.

Ans. Whereunto I return. But there may not (ordinarily cannot) be power in
that particular Congregation,

4. Excep. Furthermore, If it be pleaded,

Ans. I answer, Its no needless point of wisdom, That some baptized persons
at years not fully excommunicate may be suspended, for that needs not this
addition. But for the improving the argument to further usefulness, I shall (I
say) further add, That this case already proposed,

The consequence I prove thus; as word rejecting of Christ is; or else because
the Officers in the Church have some good Rule, according to which they may
dispense with (or not deny the Sacrament for) deed-rejecting of Christ, rather
then word rejecting of Christ. But neither of these do enervate the
consequence, nor any other Reason. Ergo its good and valid.

Not the latter, Titus 1.16. 1 Cor. 5. Math. 18.15, 16, 17. Rev. 2.2. Validior
est vox operis quam oris. Where there be two cross-witnesses, the Testimony of
the more credible witness justly prevails against the other. So when deeds
cross words in the present case, the Deeds may be more credible Testimonies and
signs of a persons rejecting Christ, then his words are of the contrary. And
therefore this deed-witnesse is to prevail against the word witness. I have
heard from a great Lawyer, that in our common Laws, they have this Rule, that
Actions speak either assent or dissent. And shall not the Church make use of
the same means naturally subservient to the discerning of persons, who are to
be admitted to, or rejected from the Sacraments?

Furthermore,

By all this which has been said as an Appendix to this Argument, an openly,
and by word professed, Infidel, may be suspended in any case when there is a
bar against his then full excommunication: then at least in the like case,
some scandalous livers in the Church may be suspended. And therefore because so
much depends upon the former, I have so largely insisted on the proving and
clearing of the same. Salvian. Qui Christiani Nominis opus non agit,
Christianus non esse videatur. And Infidelis sit necesse est, qui fidei
commissa non servat. Agreeable whereunto is what I find quoted from Tertull.
apolog. cap. 44. who speaking of the Heathens prisons says, Nemo illic
Christianus nisi plane tantum Christianus; aut si and aliud, jam non
Christianus.

There was another argument in my paper for the taking off the imputation of
novelty which is charged on suspension. But not above a fourth part of it is
printed by Mr. W. and the rest, not answered by him. So I shall not here
transcribe it. Perhaps diverse things therein will occasionally fall in to be
mentioned elsewhere. And I have no such conceit of my writings as to trouble
the Reader with any more of them then I am in a manner forced unto. I shall now
apply my self to the consideration of Mr. W. his pretended refutation of the
argument mentioned; and I shall intend to omit nothing material he has
produced, yea I shall take in much more then I apprehend pertinent alleged by
him. But the most of the Digressions as about examination, Elders, and the
like, I shall design to speak to by themselves, that the discussion of the
argument, be not made too confused by the intermixture of those heterogeneals
therein. And there are few things but are mentioned by Mr. W. many times over,
and therefore though I sometimes lightly pass over some things he has in his
first or second, perhaps third or fourth speaking of them, I must entreat the
Readers patience, and hope before I make an end, he shall find I have not
neglected any thing considerable of his allegations. And where I apprehended
most need, I have enlarged and confirmed my argument in the most important
parts of it. So that the judicious I hope shall discern sundry arguments
wrapped up in the prosecution of this one. I have also noted the particulars of
the argument as managed in my paper he answers to, with (1) (2) (3) (4) to 50
etc. in the margin, to save the labor of transcribing them again in the
following discourse, and that it may not grow too big; I shall easily by help
of these numbers refer the Reader to the particulars there, which he may
turn back to as there may be occasion all along, at least very frequently. And
the discourse following falling into 22 Chapters, I shall for the composing my
own spirit the better, annex at the end of each Chapter one part of the 119
Psalm done into English according to the Acrostical conceit of the Original,
which I trust will not be altogether ungrateful to the Reader, having been
never that I know of done before. And let these be our crumbs of comfort, in
stead of Mr. W. his crumbs of merriment which he intimates as needful for our
refreshing in so unpleasing an argument.

CHAP. I.
. 1.
AFter his Preface (the which by parcels is, most of it, sundry times repeated
beneath) he thus begins. p. 4. The contents of your paper, I shall now set
down in parcels under the letter [L] and mine answers thereunto under the
letter [W] And to put the more life into the matter in agitation, I shall call
upon you, (as if you were present) to relate your own words, and shall (the
Lord assisting) in mine own name subjoyne mine Answers thereunto. And now Sir I
pray begin.

I am credibly informed that Mr W: told one who asked him what [L] stood for in
his discourse, that it might stand for Libeller. And he himself in his Epistle
to the judicious Reader (for to him he directs his book, though his Title Page
say it was for the satisfying of weaker consciences) thus speaks concerning my
paper. At first, says he, (there being no name subscribed to it) I put it back
as a Libel. And why a Libel? Is every writing a Libel which has not a name
subscribed to it? A great part of holy Scripture and many other most excellent
writings shall then fall under the imputation of being Libels. I am sorry to
see this Gentleman so transported with passion in the very entrance. This cloud
now rising which seems no bigger then a man's hand, I am afraid will grow to
such an extension and thickness as to darken his following discourse, and fill
it with storms and tempests. When the Staffordshire hills have an angry and
gloomy cap or cover on their heads in the morning, we in Cheshire are wont to
expect no very fair weather the day following.

Salvian concealing his name in the Epistle he wrote to the Catholic Church
of his time, gives this account of it to Salonius a Bishop. In omni volumine
profectus magis quaeritur lectionis, quam nomen auctoris. Et ideo si profectus
est in lectione, and habet quisquis illud quod potest instruere lecturos, quid
ei cum vocabulo, quod juvare non potest curiosos? -- Cum enim nullus profectus
sit in nomine, qui profectum in scriptis invenit, superflue nomen scriptoris
inquirit. And after among other things he adds this for the concealing his
name in that Book, Scilicet ne auctoritatem salubribus scriptis, personae suae
parvitas derogaret: omnia enim admodum dicta tanti existimantur, quantus est
ipse qui dixit. Siquidem tans imbecilla sunt judicia hujus temporis, ac pene
tam nulla, ut hi qui legunt, non tam considerent quid legunt, qua^m cujus
legant; nec tam dictionis vim atque virtutem, quam dictatoris cogitent
dignitatem. Idcirca scriptor ille abscondi and latitare omnibus modis voluit,
ne scripta quae in se habent plurimum salubritatis, minora forsitan fierent per
nomen Auctoris. I might have thus ^xcused my self if I had published that
paper without adding ^y name to it. But I made no matter of it, he to whom it
was ^ritten knew my hand well enough; and when it was showed (...) Mr. W. and I
heard he excepted against the want of my ^^me being subscribed to it, I gave
order to his Parishioner, ^ho by frequent entreaties had extorted that paper
from me, ^^at he should (if that would do any good) put my name to it. ^^^t if
that be a right Etimology of Libel, that its a ly, as with ^^bell rung abroad,
I think he that has published sundry notorious untruthes and calumnies
concerning me, as that I in ^^aching acquitted the Pope from being Antichrist,
etc. and ^^th done more against me in that way, then if he had posted (...) up,
in every Market Town in this, and the neighbor ^unties, for a Thief; he, I
say, who has thus abused me, (...) will appear beneath) will appropriate this
brand to him^^^^e, with which he would stigmatize another, yet for my part
^^^orne to put the term upon him. But now to put the more life (...) the
matter, he will call on me to relate my own words. Such (...) abusive piece
very fitly fetches its life and soul from the (...), and it would be very dull
indeed if this did not seem a (...) to quicken it. And now he calls the
parcels of my paper, (...) commands them to appear and they appear, to speak
(...) they speak, and when he pleases they are silent; and he (...) his
business so bravely and imperiously all along, that it can hardly choose but
make one merry sometimes, to see (as the gallant that often looked back, and
said, do not my spurs jingle) how much he seems to please and applaud
himself in his affected triumph and command over the poor paper, he has
captived and detained to be the object of his scorn and indignation. Solusque
in sicca secum spatiatur arena.

. 2.
To that noted with number (1) in my paper, he returns, p. 5. Why begin you so
abruptly, with an [It is said by some] As if it were rather the verbal saying
of some, then grounded upon just warrant. See Reader whether I am like to
please this Gentleman? It may be I should have begun thus; Some affirm, hold,
maintain and teach, as Mr. W. sounds it out, p. 127. saying, will not serve
his turn, he will not be said. If I write they say this or that, I disparage
them, as if they did only say it, and could not prove it; and yet when I had
stated the Question I would discuss, and then added (at number (20) I assert
that its lawful, etc. he seems angry that I should so much as say what I
held, before I proceeded to prove it immediately afterward; and thus chides me
for it, p. 31. And at length as a triumphant opposer of our assertion, you
manfully oppose us with an (I Assert:) a pretty charm to delude the simple. But
if he had no design to delude the very very simple ones, he needed not to have
mentioned Oxford and Accademical and School-order so often; all others know (in
their own reason, or by observation of others practice,) that both the Opponent
and Respondent declare which part of the Problem each takes, before they
proceed to any disputation thereupon.

. 3.
And this leads me to the answering his next exception, p. 6. which is made
against my paper at (number 2.) wherein I proposed to note several things for
the stating the Question I intended to discuss. He says, Its not the custom
with us at Oxford for the opponent to state the Question. And further adds,
Your method is unaccademicall; you might have spared the pains of your
needless inventions: your stating the Question we look upon as a declining of
the Controversy, as a mudding of the clear water, as consciousnesse of
inability to refute the pretensions of the Assertor. However I must follow you
in your Extravagancies, lest any poor soul should be seduced by your noise of
words.

Reader, thou see the Clouds gather more, I hope thou will be armed for foul
weather. To his exceptions I reply.

1. There is nothing more usual in polemick Authors, then in their answering
the pretensions of their Antagonists upon any point, to state the Question and
set down what is granted and denied, and often to tax their Adversaries with a
wrong stating of the point to be discussed. There Is none who have read Chamier
against the Papists, nor Chemnitius against the Council of Trent, or any such
like Authors, but must observe how ordinary this is with them; and yet the
Papists were never (that I know of) so silly as to charge them with an
unaccademical procedure in their disputations with, and refutations of them.

2. It was not Mr Timpson only that I assaulted, though I mentioned him rather
then others because I heard he was then (as he is since in print) much cried up
by Mr. W. And they are not agreed among themselves about the stating of this
Question. Some allow a disswasive debarring of some, who yet, they think, may
not juridically be kept off, though notoriously wicked, if not (in their sense)
excommunicated. Others granting a debarring of those who are ipso jure,
excommunicate, though not ipso facto. And others allow only the debarring of
the actually ipso facto excommunicate, and that in their sense of it, as was
said, to wit, as it denotes the separation of persons so censured from all
public ordinances in the Church, as well as from the Sacraments. And I matter
not though it be not concealed, that as I disliked not all in the writings of
those who were against suspension, so I could not comply with all I found in
the writings of them who were for the suspension pleaded for. Was it not
necessary then that I should freely impart my opinion concerning the point
which I was desired to give some account of? which indeed is such as partakes
of both parties, and is not wholly included in the proposals of either of them.
And Mr. W. might easily see by my stating the Question, that though I held a
conclusion contrary to the maine assertion of those Gentlemen who have written
against suspension; yet I have by the putting in of the term fully or not fully
excommunicate, altered somewhat of the manner or method necessary for the
defending or overthrowing the same.

3. I wonder not that Mr. W. is so hot against these limitations I gave for our
question, since so much he had to say was concerning Examination, Ruling
Elders, Prudentials in Government, excluding for ignorance, etc. for these all
were by my limitations casheered the present dispute; one point being enough at
one time to handle. Its the known way of the Quakers, and such like people, in
their writings or Disputes to jumble many things together, and they will not be
gotten to speak closely to one thing by it self. Let the Reader judge whether
Mr. W. in his discourse do not by his example too much patronize that their
roving and looseness? The order of the whole Controversy I take it lies thus.
1. Whether any persons baptized at years intelligent not fully excommunicated
(or if you will, not secluded from other Ordinances) may be debarred the
Sacrament? 2. Whether they may be debarred by disswasion only? 3. Whether by a
juridical act? 4. In what cases or for what crimes they may be debarred? 5. By
whom that juridical act may be exerted for the debarring of them? In the first
of these would be considered; whether a sentential debarring one the Sacrament,
be not really an excommunication? 2. Whether there is not a further degree of
excommunication then this? 3. Whether its not lawful to exert the first when
the latter is not? And in the fourth, It might be enquired further: How far
ignorance may be a cause of suspension? 2. Whether the refusing of them who
have never testified their understanding aright of their Baptismall engagements
by a verbal profession thereof before the Church, or some appointed by the
Church to receive the same, or at least before some public Minister of the
Church; whether, I say, the refusing of them be any suspension properly? or if
only non admission, whether it be lawful? and here would come in the business
of examination. But I expressly limited the Question first to be discussed to
an enquiry, whether in any case the parties above mentioned (baptized adult,
and not fully excomminunicated) may be debarred the Sacrament, expressly
secluding from our present dispute those inquiries, by whom and what power, and
for what offenses they may be debarred. And yet Mr. W. calls these my
Limitations and explanations of the Question, Extravagancies, and needless
Inventions; when as their design was to keep from extravagancies; and if he
who took upon him to answer that paper, had duly observed them (as was meet)
his discourse would have been much better, although much shorter, then it is.

. 4.
My first limitation (which may be seen at numb. (3) and (4) in the copy of my
first paper,) Mr. W. (I think) pretends to answer or except against, or some
such thing, I suppose, he designs, in his p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. where he
discourses about divine obligation to receive, baptismal regeneration,
toleration, examination, Church-constitution, etc. If in these words p. 8. The
seed of regeneration was (as to us) sown in their Baptism; he take
regeneration for sanctification by inherent gracious qualities infused, at the
time of Baptism, I should be desirous to see him prove what he asserts. As
regeneration denotes in Scripture, adoption, justification, and so our relative
state, I can close with the doctrine of sacramental regeneration, yet in a
sober and wary sense. But Mr. W. his expression concerning the seed of
regeneration, I fear is not capable of that meaning. But this point has no
influence considerable, that I can discern upon our Controversy; therefore I
shall not launch out into it. The other things Mr. W. here has in these pages,
will occur more then once beneath.

. 5.
In my second note, (numb. 5.) I secluded from the present Question the
consideration of the subject of the power of suspension; and Mr. W. in answer
hereto, supposes there is no need to enquire after the subject thereof, p. 13.
Why might we not then here have agreed? But even in this place he will fetch in
(though by head and shoulders) the mentioning of, illegal usurpation, flat
Brownisme, Rebaptization, etc. What is the secluding, the consideration of the
subject of suspension, from our present question, is this usurpation, flat
Brownisme, Rebaptization? If not, how come these in here? But such terms as
these serve for general Arguments (to them who are so silly as to be moved with
them) and so will thrust in any where, as being indifferently calculated to fit
every turn.

. 6.
My third note or limitation of the Question (number 6.) secluded also from our
present question, the consideration of the kind of power, whether of order or
jurisdiction, requisite for suspension. To this Mr. W. answers, p. 14. They (he
means my Antagonists) hold there is no such kind of suspending power as you
stand for, prescribed in the word of God, for refusing to submit to your
examination. -- It is your usurped kind of suspension they except against, as
you your self might have scene, had you read their works through, as you
snatch at a piece.

1. See now how nimble our learned Gentleman is, to evade the question if he
could. Is our question, Whether persons may be suspended for resusing to submit
to examination; not that I refuse to speak to that in its due place; but first
we enquire whether in any case, for any crime, the persons before mentioned may
be debarred? and that was Mr. Timsons position before rehearsed, viz. No
unregenerate, or ignorant and scandalous members in the Church; being baptized,
and of years not excommunicate, may be debarred the Lords Supper, etc. It was
not, none may be debarred for ignorance, or refusing to submit to examination.
But none though never so scandalous members in the Church may be debarred. And
this I opposed; which Mr. W. should have defended, as he took upon him.

2. Is not this a pretty stating the question Mr. W. here teaches and informs
me in? viz. Whether is an usurped kind of suspension lawful? This is even
like to the question, Quot sunt quinque praedicabilia? But what are we the
better for agreeing in that question, when as it presently occurres; whether
there is any suspension not usurped?

3. But indeed I see no Antagonist who is so silly as to state the question on
that fashion; though Mr. W. say if I had read their works through, I might have
seen, it is our usurped kind of suspension, that they except against. Alas!
good man! how industrious is he to make the world believe I am a man of no
reading? I will not go about to persuade them of the contrary. Yet I must
needs say I had read through diverse Authors against suspension, and
particularly Mr. Timpsons books, before I drew up those lines which Mr. W.
has assaulted. I would not have told this, but that I apprehend it will be no
matter of glory and commendation to me; and it affords an argument somewhat
probable in mine opinion to evince that Mr. W. is not infallible, who
insinuates (elsewhere as well as in this place) my not reading Timsons works
through, but snatching at a piece. I hope he will not be offended at our
catching the piece of the Psalm following for our solace a while.

PSALM. 119. PART 1. A. 1 ALL such are blessed, who perfect are,
whose fect Gods ways do pace.
2 About his Laws they take most care;
with whole hearts seek his face.
3 Also, they do nothing unjust,
But Gods good paths frequent.
4 As thou (Lord) bid'st strictly we must
keep thy Commandment.
5 Ah! that sound guidance might me teach,
to keep thy statutes high!
6 And then foul shame shall never me reach,
who all thy Laws do eye.
7 A right heart in me shall thee praise,
taught in thy judgments just;
8 And I will keep thy statute-wayes:
O leave me not poor dust!

CHAP. II.
. 1.
IN my fourth note (at number 7, 8, 9.) I said that my Antagonists by
[excommunicate], understand them who are debarred from all public Ordinances in
the Church, as hearing, praying, etc. And therefore if: I prove the person
spoken of in the question, not debarred from these, may yet be debarred the
Sacrament, it cannot be denied I shall rightly conclude against their assertion;
wherein I do not declare any thing of my own judgment concerning
Excommunication, but speak only ad hominem.

And here though Mr. W. has not a word against the Contents of this Note, he
carries it as if he would seem to confute it, by 1. rendering extra communionem
ejectio, an ejection out of the common union (as if there were not degrees of
communion, and so not of an ejection out of communion). 2. by rambling about
the Jus Divinum, without any occasion at all ministered by any thing I had
spoken here in this note. for his mentioning the same. 3. By concluding thus:
But for your full overthrowing of our assertion, we shall believe it when we
see it. We believe you cannot, I am sure you do not: What needed this vapor
here? The man is prodigal of them being sufficientiy stockt for the largest
expense of them. I boasted not of a full overthrow of their assertion, but
said, That if I prove a person baptized, adult, intelligent, and not debarred
the public Ordinances of hearing, praying, etc. in the Church, I shall then
fully overthrow their assertion which holds none baptized, adult, intelligent,
and not excommunicated may be debarred. The which Mr. W. does not deny, yea he
grants it in several passages of his Book, expressy or by consequence. But the
former particular about Divine right, he is often upon: and he so often (as
disturbed if not intoxicated with passion) reels into discourses concerning
prudentials, and Jus Divinum, charging me for excluding all prudentials from
Church Government, that his importunity will force me to trouble the Reader with
some short account of my apprehensions concerning these things, he so pitifully
raves upon throughout his Book.

2.
1. The Laws of Christianity are given to men supposed not altogether
destitute of right Reason, some beams of the Image of God, some remains of that
signature imprinted on man at his first creation, still continuing upon him.
And men are not called to lay aside any of their natural right Reason in their
becoming Christians; but rather by Christian helps to attain to an higher
improvement, to a more noble elevation and use thereof. And therefore
whatsoever right Reason does dictate in respect of government in general,
agreeing to all government as such, (as it does in many things) Christians are
to make use thereof in reference to Ecclesiastical government. Always
provided, that that must not be accounted right Reason, which thwarts the
blessed Scriptures, which should ever prevail against any conceit of our own.
Right Reason it self teaching us, that God is infinitely wiser then we, and
that Christ's laws must be obeyed, not disputed, when once they appear to be
his laws. But the light of Nature (the spirit of man, that candle of the
Lord,) does direct in many wholesome things, for the due ordering of any society
in a suitableness to the end for which the association thereof is lawfully
made; whether Civil, in Families, Towns, Kingdoms, States; or Ecclesiastical
in particular Churches, or in the associations of particular Churches, greater
or lesser

2. Yea, the law of Nature, or Natural Reason, is part of Christ's law, whereby
he rules his Church. And therefore Christians not only may, but ought to act
prudentially in the administration of Church affairs, as well as in other
things, and to make use of all the light of Reason in pursuing that general
Rule, Let all things be done decently, and in order.

3. Yet in Ecclesiastical government Christ the King of his Church has given
us many positive Directions in his Word, partly by express preceptive Rules,
and partly by obligatory presidents and examples, such especially as were not
suited to any temporary account of those times, and the condition thereof; but
whose ground and reason still continues in all the succeeding ages and
conditions of the Church. These are Ecclesiastical constitutions on a Divine
right simply and strictly. From these we may not digress upon any pretense of
Reason whatsoever. Yea because we must act rationally, therefore we must close
with all these the directions of wisdom it self; and deal with all our
conceits and humors making insurrections against the same, as with mutiners
which are in rebellion against their Lord and Master.

4. In a larger sense also a government may be said to be by Divine right, not
only in reference to its compliance with the foresaid positive Scripture rules
and binding examples, but also in respect of its rational suitableness to
godly prudence, for the order and edification of the Church, in things not
particularly determined in the Scriptures, and yet neither expressly nor by
consequence thwarted by the same. And thus (I suppose) who ever have owned a
Church Government, they have thought it by Divine right, that is, that it was
according to the Scriptures, and not contrary thereunto.

5. And thus I was satisfied to comply with the constitutions of the
Presbyterial government (the government in substance upon the matter of all the
foreign Protestant Churches in Europe) composed by a learned, pious, and
judicious Assembly, imposed by authority of both Houses of Parliament, when I
first settled in this County, and by their Ordinance of Aug. 29. 1648. still
continued as much in force (for ought I know) as any other law, at least as any
other Ordinance of Parliament, diverse whereof are acknowledged to be still in
force. Upon the apprehension, I say, of the lawfulness of the said government,
partly upon a strictly Scripturall account in the main things, and partly, viz.
in lesser matters, upon a rational, prudentiall account not contrary to the
Scripture, I did and do submit unto the same. And I doubt not if it had been
faithfully pursued according to the religious design and intention of the
imposers thereof, the excellent fruits thereof through Gods blessing. would
have been so great, as might have silenced the most of its considerable
adversaries

. 3.
In my fifth note. (at Numb. 10.11, 12, 13, 14.) I hinted the ordinary and
common distinction among reformed Divines, of the greater and lesser
Excommunication. Here Mr. W. crows over me, as flying to the authority of men
of so late a standing, for proving the abstention pleaded for. Whereas any one
(yea one whose brains are as ill marred as he tells the world he fears mine are)
may easily perceive that I quoted them not to prove suspension, but to show
that they called Suspension Lesser Excommunication. And therefore those who
oppose the debarring of the suspended, should not have stated this question,
simply concerning the unexcommunicate without distinction. And yet for all Mr.
W. so much blames me for this, he himself quotes Peter Martyr, who (says he
page 18.) being as great an Antiquary, and as great a reverencer of true
Antiquity as any of you, says, That though degrees of excommunication may
easily be proved from the writings of the Fathers, yet no such thing can be
proved from Scripture. And Mr. W. gives his own judgment thus, page 20. 21. We
deny not degrees unto excommunication, nor in excommmnication unto further
degrees of severity in case of persistance in obstinacy against the authority
of the Church. To both which I answer, 1. Comparisons are odious. Does Mr. W.
know, that none who assert suspension, do excel Peter Martyr in knowledge and
esteem of Antiquity? Belike he thinks his tongue is his own, and he may talk at
random. Our renowned Usher has a glorious name in foreign Countries as well
as in these Nations, for the Prince of Antiquaries, who has merited such an
Epitaph as Doctor Hackwell in hs Apology for Gods providence, l. 3. c. 6.. 2.
says was bestowed on that Phoenix of learning, Johannes Picus Earl of
Mirandula. Johanes jacet hic Mirandula caetera norunt,
Et Tagus and Ganges, forsan and Antipodes.
Yet has this our most learned Doctor and Bishop pleaded for Suspension, and
that as grounded upon the holy Scripture, in his Body of Divinity, page 435. 2.
Did the Fathers think their degrees of excommunication, which they admitted,
were not regulated within Scripture-bounds? 3. If that degrees of
excommunication may be proved from the Fathers, how come those who now plead
for degrees of excommunication, to be charged with novelty and innovation? and
how came it to pass, that Mr. W. in his Epistle passed his word to the
judicious Reader, that all men of reading know how much the Church government
mentioned in, or collected from the Fathers, and in use in their days, differs
from our men's present Model? Immediately before these words Mr. W. exclaimed.
High language! It may very fitly be the Title and Epithete of these his words
following: What was Grotius no man of reading? and was he not a man confessedly
impartial in this matter? who yet asserts the ruling Elder from antiquity.
Imper. sum. potest circa sacra. c. 11. quoted by Mr. Blake. Covenant sealed,
cap. 7.. 16. Was our renowned Cambridge Professor Doctor Whitaker no man of
reading? who in his Defense of his answer to Campions ten Reasons against
Dureus, London. 1583. l, 9. de Sophismatis. p. Mihi. 807. says, Ita es ignarus
ut esse in Christi Ecclesia presbyteros nescias, qui gubernationi tantum, non
verbi aut sacramentorum administrationi operam darent? Art thou such an
Ignoramus, as, to be ignorant that there are Elders in the Church of Christ,
who should be employed only in governing, not in the administration of the
Word and Sacraments? And he quotes 1 Timothy 5.17. and Ambrose on it. And ( p.
820) he tells the Papists that Luther, Zuinglius, Bucer, Oecolampadius, and
many others of our Reformers, were Presbyters ordained by Popish Bishops, and
then (to prove against them the lawfulness of our Ministry) that these being
Presbyters, might ordain other Presbyters. Tum si Presbyteri erant, and sunt
presbyteri, jure Divino iidem, qui Episcopi, alios etiam Ecclesiis presbyteros
praeficere potuerunt. Yet he adds, Sed nolim existimes a nobis vestros ordines
tanti fieri, ut sine illis nullam esse legitimam vocationem statuamus, etc. Or
is it the business of Suspension [the pretended subject of his Book] which he
says, all men of reading know differs much from the Fathers; why then has he
acknowledged by Peter Martyrs mouth, that degrees of excommunication may easily
be proved from the Writings of the Fathers? For there is no question, I think,
but suspension will be allowed to be one degree, if degrees be once granted.

. 4.
But Aretius quoted by me as not against suspension as a lesser excommunication
(at Numb. 11.) Mr. W. takes himself specially concerned in, though yet he
says, page 19. that he never engaged Aretius as opposite to our suspension.
The reason of my mentioning Aretius, was an information I received from him who
desired my paper, that Mr. W. quoted Aretius against suspension. And how easily
might Mr. W. have certified his Parishioner of this mistake, without troubling
the world with it in Print; since he does not disprove in the least, what I
alleged concerning that Author: Yet that he may seem not to say nothing, he
will show that Aretius uses not, nor pleads for the distinction of greater and
lesser excommunication; which thing it is manifest I did not affix on him.

But he has here another, (and that belike no small) quarrel. I cited Aretius
his Common places, and Mr. W. says, He knows no such Piece. I should have
said his Problemes, as if his quarrelsomness were not more to be blamed then
such a mistake supposed. O how exact will Mr. W. have us to take him in the
very names and editions of Books! But why may not Problemata be rendered in
English Common places, my most severe Master? Aretius himself I hope may be
allowed to give us the meaning of his own words (to save a labor of turning to
Holy-oke under whose leaf recubans sub tegmine, Mr. W. beneath ( p. 137.) would
shelter himself) In my Book Edit. Lusannae. 1578. the first page thus begins.
Problematum s^u locorvm theologicorum pars altera. And it is likely Mr. W. his
Book is of the same Edition, because his quotation of page 48. which he has p.
20. agrees with the 48. leaf of mine. If I should tell him I find no such thing
as he quotes in the 48 page, but it is in the 48 leaf, should I not be
ridiculous to him? and yet he might then see his own weakness in mine.

. 5.
But the substance and design of my fifth note, was to show, that (as I
apprehended) mine Antagonists do deny the distinction of greater and lesser
excommunication: and in special they deny suspension or abstention to be one
degree of excommunication, which may lawfully be exerted by it self against any
person. And therefore in their asserting, that the persons spoken of in our
question, if not excommunicate may not be debarred, by [not excommunicate] they
mean not cut off in our sense of full excommunication; and that otherwise they
should but trifle. viz. if they took [excommunicate] for such as were under a
lesser degree of excommunication in our sense. The which is so manifest, that I
see not how any man of reason can deny it. Now to this Mr. W. answers, page 23.
Why put you your nonsense upon us, and say we egregiously trifle, unless we
admit of degrees of excommunication in your sense? What shall one do with a man
who heeds not what he says? He charge me with putting and affixing on my
Antagonists, the distinction of greater and lesser excommunication, unless they
would be guilty of nonsense: whereas I did flatly remove from them that
distinction, and said, they did not acknowledge degrees of excommunication,
particularly not this of Suspension, adding, that if they did own them in this
question (as they hold it) they should but trifle. And yet Mr. W. will needs
face every body down, against the evidence of plain words before their eyes.
And he talks his pleasure of Sophistry and Imposture, and at last apeals to
the judicious Reader, under whose eye I willingly leave him with the paper he
pretends to be answering. In the interim I will step aside to take a little
refreshing in the

PSALM 119. 2d part. B. V. 9 By what shall you ths ways cleansed be?
By heeding holy Writ.
10 Behold my whole soul has sought thee:
Let me not err from it.
11 Because I would not sin, thy word
I hid in heart and will.
12 Blessed art thou most mighty Lord,
Teach me thy Statutes still:
13 By my lips have declared bin
The Judgments of thy mouth.
14 By Riches none more mirth can win
Then I have by thy Truth.
15 Busied in thy Precepts I muse,
And all thy ways respect,
16 By them all joy to me accrues,
Thy Word I Will not forget.

CHAP. III.
. 1.
THe terms of Excommunication full, or not full, sundry times do occur in the
following Argument. These Mr. W. rejects as adokima's, as fooleries, as not
considerable, etc. and in a fume piping hot, he fancies the bag-pipes when he
hears them named ( p. 151) Such arguments as these must be his apodicticall
proofs against them, in refuting whereof belike his friends think I shall be
hard put to; and they conjecture not amiss, I shall hardly devise a reply weak
enough to bear a fit protion to such sorry pretensions. But in stead thereof I
shall judge it requisite to offer somewhat concerning excommunication, and that
distinction of it, submitting the same in all humility, to the sober and
judicious; as follows.

1. The consideration and strict perusal of the places and phrases of
Scripture treating on this matter, is the best foundation of a right knowledge
and discerning hereof.

2. Yet some places speak of an excommunication which is not pertinent to our
times, or at least not to our present controversy. I mean that excommunication
by way of Anathematizing and cursing an incurable offender; to which kind
Polanus ( Syntag. l. 7. c. 18.) referres, Gal. 1.8. and Romans 9.3. which he
calls the simplex anathema, and 1 Cor. 16.22. called Anathema maranatha. And
that cutting off mentioned Gal. 5.12. (not to speak of Hierome and Grotius
their interpretation of it, for the smoothing or dismembring the parts of those
Heretics who so much pressed circumcision) It is by the learned Doctor Hammond
made parallel to that of 1 Cor. 16.22. viz. (as he says on the place) as an
expression of excommunication of the highest degree, answerable to the SHAMATHA
among the Jews; which he explained on 1 Cor. 16.22. to be excommunicated from
the hope of the Lord, and as leaving the offender to Divine vengeance
(agreeable to the denunciation of Enoch, Jude v. 14.) which is denounced
against them who love not Christ, that is, as he excellently expounds it, who
fall from Christ, by renouncing of him to avoid persecution, especially if
teachers of others, so to do, and justifying the thing as lawful, as it is
said the Gnostics did. See Doctor Hammond in Apoc. 21.8. denying the Lord
(before men) who bought them.

3. That phrase also of [delivering to Satan] though a tolerable sense of it,
may be, and is accommodated to the ordinary excommunication still in use in the
Church; yet many, if not most, learned Interpreters think, it had a further and
more peculiar sense in those Apostolical times, which the Church does not now
look at nor expect, viz. the external buffeting the offender by Satan.

4. There are two other passages, which though they are by diverse referred to
some excommunication, yet I think we can build little or nothing upon them, in
the explication of this point The first is, (...), to be cast out of the
Synagogue, used John 9.22. and 14.42. and 16.2. Now this is applied only to the
Jews their wicked practice against them who owned Christ; and the phrase is no
where (that I know of) justified by Christ or his Apostles. And me thinks we
have little reason to seek for the nature of Christ's Otdinance in the vile
practice of his enemies taken by it self.

The other passage is in 3 John 10. where Diotrephes is said to cast the
Christian Jews out of the Church, that is, a Church of the Gentile-Christians.
Let us a little peruse the Text, which runs thus, (...).

1. I would ask, Who are these he cast out of the Church? Not those who would
entertain the Jewish Christian strangers, there is no probability any would be
so sottish, as to excommunicate them for their will, desire, or intention to
have entertained those guests: and if those he is said to have cast out, were
the guests themselves called the brethren, then excommunication cannot be here
meant, because they were not under the jurisdiction of that Gentile-Church, nor
any Officer thereof, and so could not be cast out of that particular Church in
which they were not before. 2. It cannot be proved that Diotrephes was any
Church Officer in that Church. (...), may signify one who seeks inordinatly,
or assumeth dignity, as well as one that uses immoderatly the same, and it is
very probable (says Doctor Hammond, that this Diotrephes did this without
having any real authority in the Church, as a presumptuous, confident bold
person, and then his act in casting any out of the Church, would not be
accounted a sentential excommunication. 3. The word (...) is frequently used in
the New Testament to signify any hindering, although it be not by any act
authoritative forbidding, nor pretend thereunto, and is rendered to hinder, Luke
11.52. and to withstand, Acts. 11.17. and to let. Romans 1.13. and therefore that
passage wherein this Diotrephes is said to forbid, or hinder, and withstand
them, who would be more hospitable then himself, does not invite us at all to
interpret the following words of any authoritative Ecclesiastical censure.
Upon the whole matter I humbly conceive, that this passage here, [He casts them
out of the Church] does denote nothing else, but his thrusting out the Jewish
guests from being kindly harbored, telieved and accommodated in that Church,
he by his factious and pragmatical endeavors (taking upon him to be thought
some body more then ordinary,) labored to draw the Church to join with him in
that inhospitality, wherein he had among many too good success. But I shall
not contend in this, only I have signified the probabilities which incline me
to conceive that Ecclesiastical excommunication is not strictly signified by
the phrase of [casting out of the Church] here used; at least that it is so
dubious, that it will be no foundation stone in the Doctrine of Excommunication.

. 3.
I shall now proceed to consider the less questionable and more plain phrases
and passages in the New Testament, whereby excommunication is intimated, which
are such as these.

Let him be to thee as an Heathen and Publican, Matthew. 18.17. that is in some
respects, as to thy behavior toward him, and esteem of him, as generally the
Interpreters I meet with do understand it.

To bind on earth, v. 18. does also relate to the same thing. That fifth
chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, has most in it concerning
Excommunication, of any one chapter in the Bible. Here are several phrases
signifying the same thing. v. 2. That he who has done this deed, might be
taken away from you. So also v. 13. Put away from among your selves that wicked
person. The phrase of delivering to Satan, used verse. 5. and 1 Timothy 1.20. so
far as it may signify what is yet of continued use in the Church, is commonly
interpreted by the words of Christ before mentioned, Matthew. 18.17. Let him be
to thee as an Heathen and Publican. Satan being visibly the God of the Infidel
world, and of the manifestly and notoriously profane and wicked men, as the
Publicans though Jews, were accounted by their own Nation. But there are in
this chapter two more expressions concerning excomunication, which we must
somewhat more insist upon, especially the former, which will help to clear the
later. The one of these in v. 9. and 11. (...), I wrote to you in an Epistle,
not to keep company with fornicators, etc. the meaning whereof he cautions
against mistake, v. 10. yet not altogether with Fornica-tors of this world.
(...) may be rendered not at all, as 1 Cor. 16.12. or in no wise, as Romans 3.9.
or (taking (...) for an Adverb of confirming) not surely, as Luke. 4.23. Act.
18.21. and 21.22. and 28.4. And (...) is not found in that ancient manuscript,
which the profoundly learned Doctor Hammond has given us an account of, in
what it differs from the other received Greek Copies. Quasi dicat, What I wrote
to you concerning your not keeping company, or not being mingled with
fornicators; In that word [Fornicators] I meant, not at all, or surely I meant
not, or (at least) I did not altogether mean the Fornicators of this world,
etc. For ye must needs go out of this world. For with Calvin I so understand
those words, (...), q. d. Quid opus est, vobis praeclpere de fili is seculi,
quando ut semel renunciastis mundo it a oportet vos ab ecorum onsortio
subducere; totus enim mundus in maligno positus est, says Calvin on the place.
Neither does it at all prejudice this interpretation, that (...) here seems to
be left out. For though sometime it signify and is rendered Then, as Matthew.
12.42. 1 Cor. 7.14. yet it is also elsewhere but an expletive particle,
signifying no more then nempe, to wit, so, Act. 7.1. 1 Cor. 15.15. And (that I
may further pursue this sense) 1. I humbly conceive the Corinthians could
scarce need such an admonition and instruction, viz. that their separation from
the world obliged them not to a total separation from all persons not of the
Church. 2. Diverse learned Interpreters think that in this tenth verse, the
Apostle referrs not to any Canonical. Epistle of his now lost: but to the
second verse of this chapter, where he had admonished them concerning their
duty of withdrawing from Fornicators. And the vvv, or none in the beginning of
the eleventh verse, is but an ordinary transition. 3. The phrase (...), is used
in Scripture but rarely: and then it is used to signify the Churches
withdrawing from a brother offending. So it is manifestly taken 1 Cor. 5.11.
and 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. and it is never else used in the New Testament save in this
ninth verse (...), therefore here it must be so sensed, unless there were some
cogent reason for the contrary, which to me appears not. And being thus sensed
in v. 9. the (...) in the beginning of verse 10. must be read, not at all, or
to that purpose, and not, [not altogether,] whereby the (...), should be in
part referred to the not keeping company with heathens, which is to Church or
Ecclesiastical withdrawing by way of censure.

4. According to the sense our translation has of the tenth verse. (which many
other learned Interpreters comply with) it should seem but a temporary
monition, of not altogether avoiding the company of Heathens. viz. so long as
the altogether avoiding them would necessitate the believers to go out of the
world, or to have almost no converse with men. And then in a Christian Nation
we might have no converse at all with a heathen, which no one will assert.

5. What an harsh Ellipsis is there in the sense of our translation? I wrote to
you not to keep company (or to be mingled) with Fornicators, yet [here we must
supply, I wrote not to you not to keep company] not altogether with the
Fornicators of this world. But if you take it with the most excellent
Interpreter Calvin, it runs easily, referring (...), not to (...), but to
(...), the very last word before, q. d. I wrote to you not to keep company with
Fornicators [we may either leave out [And] as the Kings M. S. Copy does, or
else translate it but! (...) being frequently an adversative particle, put for
(...), as Stephanus shows in diverse instances. See his Graeco-lat. Concord.
Nov. Test. in the word (...)) But not at all the Fornicators of this world --
for ye must needs depart from the word: as if he should say, I meant not the
heathen Idolaters and fornicators, when I warned you not to keep company with
fornicators: those I was not speaking of, for [or since that] ye ought to go
out from them, the Church being called out of the world, and therefore ye ought
not only to shun their sinful ways, but that personal converse with them
which might countenance them therein, or endanger your selves thereby. This I
thought not needful to admonish you of, you knew it well enough before. But
now I have written to you, not to keep company with a wicked brother, etc. And
thus I have showed (in clearing the context) that (...) is peculiar to
Ecclesiastical withdrawing, or excommunication, as it is used in the New
Testament.

. 4.
The other intimation of excommunication, we have in the later end of the
eleventh verse of this. 1 Cor. 5. not to eat, which as all agree, includes
exclusion from the Lrods Supper; so it is very probable it must be extended so
far further, as to leave the wicked brother censured under as great a
separation from the private familiarity of the church, as the heathen was. see
the phrase elsewhere used, Luk 15.2. Acts 11.3. Gal. 2.12. I suppose there is
little difference betwixt the import of this and the other last mentioned. But
here that is expressed proverbially, or Symbolically, which there is more
plainly. A persons eating with another, when he does it upon choice and design,
being a symbol of intimate friendship, and voluntary complacential communion
with him. At least so it seems to have been in those times of Christ and his
Apostles, Matthew. 11.18, 19. The whole significancy of the phrase as to the
present point, is grounded on the opinion and custom of the time and place,
where eating with any as aforesaid, is notoriously reputed to be an owning of
the courses of them with whom we eat or drink, and a testification of that
complacentiall respect to them which may probably harden them in their
wickedness, and encourage others in the same: there not to eat is a necessary
withdrawing or not mingling our selves. But where eating with, is not a
probable sign of countenancing of them, as aforesaid; and there are more
evident sighs of discountenancing them manifested at that time, I suppose that
phrase then and there cease to signify the withdrawing mentioned in this
chapter. The learned Doctor Hammond thus paraphraseth on this eleventh verse
But the purpose of my writing is only to interdict you that free encouraging
converse with Christian professors guilty of any of these sensual heathen
sins, used by Idolaters: and to command that with such an one, you enter not
any friendly commerce, so much as to eat with him; much less to admit him to
the Sacrament, or the feast that attends that, until he do reform.

. 5.
Another phrase is used, Romans 16.17. Mark them who cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them. It must be confessed,
some learned Interpreters make this exhortation parallel to that of our
Saviors, Beware of false prophets -- and that Christ his sheep should not
hear, but fly from the voice of the stranger and salse shepherd. But others
interpret it of discountenancing those seditious persons, by shunning communion
with them. "From such ye are to separate, that others may not be deceived, by
taking them for men as orthodox as any, as Doctor Hammond paraphraseth it. And
Paraeus says, Hos igitur, observari and vitari, hoc est, ab Ecclesiae
consortio excludi monet Apostolus. And he parallels it with Titus 3.10. A man
that is an heretic after the first and second admonition, reject. Which is
another Scriture phrase referring to the casting of a person out of the
communion of the Church.

In the 2 Thessalonians. 3. There are two other phrases, both relating to the denying
some communion to disorderly Christians. Many think these, especially the first
of these, belong not to any authoritative sententiall excommunication
pronounced and declared by the Officers of the Church, but show the duty lying
on all Christians to use their own discretion to discern and separate from
these offenders, so far as concerned them in their places and stations. The
first of them is at verse 6. We command you brethren to withdraw your selves
from every brother that walks disorderly. And the later is at verse 14. If
any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company
with him that he may be ashamed, yet count him not as an enemy, etc.

That also is a denying of some Christian communion, which the Apostle exhorts
to in the third Epistle of John, verse 10, 11. If there come any to you and
bring not this doctrine (that is, a doctrine contrary to the doctrine they had
received before mentioned) receive him not into your house, nor bid him god
speed. For he that bids him god speed is partaker of his evil deeds, the
which Doctor Hammond interprets of the wicked and Apostatizing Christian
Gnostics, who taught men to deny Christ in time of persecution.

. 6.
From these hints the Scripture gives us about withdrawing communion from
wicked Christians, duly perused, we may gather,

(1.) That Excommunication is no Scripture word, but is used by the Church to
signify all that just Ecclesiastical severity, which over and besides
admonition, is to be used toward a wicked brother in respect of the Churches
behavior toward him, for the reclaiming of him, and freeing the Church from
the pollution of his intimate society. For this description does agree to the
texts before mentioned, as is manifest; and therefore if excommunication do
signify what is the sense of those texts, we shall not in the description
aforesaid, misconceive the importance of it.

That it is a part of Ecclesiastical severity no one doubts, all the texts
mentioned do evince that. That it is all that Ecclesiastical severity the
Church and members thereof do make use of, besides admonition, will not, I
think, be questioned; because so generally Authors do make Admonition and
Excommunication the only divident members of Church censures in general: and
because also neither the texts quoted, nor any other, do give ground for adding
a third part of Ecclesiastical censure distinct from these. The rest of the
description also is so plain in the texts, that I shall not insist upon any of
the particulars thereof, viz. that the object of Excommunication is a wicked
Brother; that it is inflicted by the Church, and the members thereof, and that
for the ends mentioned. It is employed in just Ecclesiastical severity, that it
is done according to the appointment of Jesus Christ.

(2.) Excommunication is nothing else but a Suspension of a person at present
from personal privileges; and not a cuttig him off simply from the Church. But
(as I said) a suspending him from the privileges, which as an orderly
Churchmember he might rightfully enjoy. Mr. W. renders extra communionem
ejectio, an ejection out of the common union. p. 15.

But though some excommunicate persons are to be dealt with (in some eminent
respects) as if they were cut off from, and were none of the Church, in
reference whereto it is ordinary for Divines to speak of them as cut off. Yet
they are not simply cut off from all union with the Church thereby, nor are so
to he reputed; which may be evinced from the forementioned Scriptures.

For 1. he that is most excommunicate according to those Scriptures, is to be
but as an heathen, therefore not an heathen. Simile qua simile non est idem.
Now if he were simply cut off he should be an heathen, and not only as an
heathen.

2. Some excommunicate are to be accounted as Brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
Therefore they are not reputed no Church Members.

3. The Pastors are to have a pastoral care over the excommunicate, and they
and other Church members are still to admonish him as a brother.

4. He is only as a sick person under cure and Church remedies in order to his
recovery. 1 Cor. 5.5. Mat. 18.15. 1 Timothy 1.20. Now there is no physicking of a
member simply cut off.

5. He is obliged to hear the word as a Churchmember, and to receive
admonitions in public and private. For he is tied by virtue of the baptismall
Covenant he has professedly entered into, to exercise himself in all the
ordinances of Christ he has opportunity for, as he has for hearing the word
as well as an heathen, with hope of receiving good thereby; and for some other
ordinances it is said that he loses at present possessionem rather then jus,
as Mr Rutherford expresses it, and explains it by the similitude of a man
having three houses, who is for some offense confined to some one of them, and
sequestered from the other, so as he may not make use of them.

6. If he were made no Churchmember by excommunication, he should upon his
repentance be rebaptized: and so the Donatists rebaptized those who came into
their Societies, which was reasonable enough upon supposition that they were
before no members of the visible Church, as Mr. W. speaks. page 22. 23. and
passim alibi. But the excommunicate when readmitted are not to be rebaptized,
therefore they were not reputed simply no Church Members whiles they were
excommunicate.

7. All (say they) are cut off but conditionally, if they do not repent;
therefore they are not cut off till that condition be fulfilled, which cannot
be before their death, for ought we know; the sin against the Holy Ghost, or
the sin unto death, I suppose can hardly (if at all) be known to be committed
by any individual person, so as that the Church should conclude him absolutely
irrecoverable. To say a person is cut off conditionally, includes he is not
simply and absolutely cut off, whiles that condition of his final impenitency
is not existent and accomplished. Doctor Ricard Field of the Church, lib. 1.
chapter 13, 14, 15. shows how those three sorts of men who go out of the Church,
viz. Schismatics, Heretics, and notoriously wicked persons who are
excommunicate, do yet all of them remain still parts of the Church of God. And
concerning the last of them he thus speaks chapter 15. Excommunication does not
wholly cut off the excommunicate from the visible Church of God. For they may
and often do retain the entire prosession of saving Truth, together with the
Character of Baptism, which is the mark of Christianity, and so far forth
notwithstanding their disobedience, still acknowledge them to be their lawful
Pastors and Guides, by whose sentence they are excommunicate, that they would
rather endure and suffer any thing, then schismatically join themselves to any
other communion. So he. And in the same chapter speaking of suspension, he
says, The lesser excommunication excludes only from the Sacramental
pledges, and assurances of Gods love; which when it is pronounced against them
that stubbornly stand out, and will not yield themselves to the Churches
direction and disposition, is properly named Excommunication.

I have the rather insisted on this, because of two consequences which will
naturally and easily flow from this doctrine, viz. 1. That the scruple hinted
by Mr. W. p. 133. and insisted on by others (in opposition to our abstension,
or suspension) is manifestly frivolous and groundless. They say, if a parent
turn not his children out of doors, he will not deny them bread; and apply
their simile, that in like manner, those who are not excommunicated, or not
cast out of the Church, should not be denied the Sacramental bread in the
Lords Supper.

2. That Church Membership (taken at large) does not give right to persons of
years, to the Lords Supper. For then they who are cut off by any
excommunication, should be admitted; they being still parts of the Church of
God, as Field calls them.

. 7.
(3.) Since excommunication is a withdrawing or rejecting of one from
communion, hence it follows, that as communion is more or less, so this
withdrawing (and therefore excommunication) is capable of degrees, to be more
or less. And some more notable degree may be denominated by one name, and
another by another. Thus it was among the Jews, the common nature of whose
excommunication was, a withdrawing from some communion, as ours is. Many of the
learned have described theirs, in the three special degrees of it: as
Schindler pentaglot. in voce (...). Gerrard. harm. Evang. c. 178. gives a
summary account of them out of several Authors. The first was truly a
separation, or withdrawing. But the second was more solemnly such. Qua quis
solenniter in totius Ecclesiae conspectu -- exclusus est. The word solenniter
some such man as Mr. W. would catch and cavil at; as he does p. 18. against
such a passage in my papers. What (says he) is your Suspension such an
Apocryphal business that it deserves no solemnity in the managing thereof?
Unto such inconsiderable flirts I shall not trouble my self nor the Reader with
any answer. But I insist not in describing wherein the several sorts of their
excommunication did consist (there being much difference among the learned in
that. See Dr. Hammond on 1 Cor. 5.) But that there were several sorts; and in
those, that one was a severer degree of exclusion or separation and withdrawing
from, then another. The four degrees or steps in the censure of excommunication
among the Greeks formerly, are mentioned by most who have written on this
controversy. The stantes, succumbentes. audientes and plorantes. But the
Gentlemen who oppose us allege, that those were steps in readmission of the
excommunicate, not steps or degrees in excommunication. But (though I confess
this is an ingenuous answer, yet) methinks we may rationally infer the
lawfulness of proceeding by steps in excommunication, from that supposed
lawfulness of admitting several steps of delivering out of excommunication.
Sure I am, there is as much ground in Scripture, (and reason too as I
apprehend) for the former as there is for the later.

And that conceit of excommunication under the notion of a dismembring, and
turning out or cutting off from Church Membership, being (I conceive)
sufficiently and clearly refelled in the foregoing Section; this inference
will appear much more evident and convincing. But I shall offer here these two
considerations, for the further confirming of gradual excommunication, or
putting out of Ecclesiastical communion.

1. If there be nothing in the nature of excommunication it self, which is
against a graduall procedure in excommunication, nor any Scripture prohibition
of it, and if it be not contrary to the general Rule of doing all things in
the Church orderly and to edification; then it is lawful: But the former is
true; therefore the later also. That there is nothing in the nature of
excommunication against it, has been showed, in that withdrawing communion,
which expresses the nature of all excommunication is capable of degrees. That
there is no Scripture prohibition hereof is to be reckoned upon, till some
Scripture prohibition be produced, which I could never yet see, nor hear, so
much as pretended by any. Nor is it contrary to the Rule of orderly and
edifying transaction of affairs in the Church: since courses of mildness and
gentleness are most likely to edify, when they thwart not Justice and Right,
as those do not which are not contrary to the Word, the Rule of Right and
Justice.

2. Again, if a person may have no right to, yea ought to be debarred the
Sacrament, who yet ought not to be turned out of all that private Christian
communion, which some excomunication deprives of; then there may be degrees of
excommunication, or putting one out of Ecclesiastical communion, and
particularly one degree of abstension or suspension, preceding (for some time)
the withdrawing of private Christian communion. But the former is true;
therefore the later. The Consequence I suspect not the denial of; the
Antecedent stands firmly upon these two pillars, viz. 1. That no Christian
notoriously under gross and scandalous wickedness, has any right to the
Sacrament, nor has the Minister any rightful commission from the Donor or
author of the Covenant and Seals thereof, to administer or give the Sacrament
unto him. As suppose in point of faith, a notorious Heretic who denies a
fundamental of the Christian Creed; or in point of manners, suppose one has
committed whoredom, and it is notoriously known; both these remaining visibly
impenitent, are incapable of having the Lords Supper lawfully given unto them.
And yet 2. an offender though so notorious as in the forementioned cases, ought
not forthwith to be rejected and turned out of all that Christian private
communion, which some excommunication deprives of. For the proof of the former
of these two propositions, I must crave the Readers patience, and (God willing)
in the following discourse he shall find it (I hope) clearly and convincingly
confirmed. The later of them I know none that deny. And there is
Scripture-evidence for it. The heretic, Titus 3.10. is not to be rejected and
cast out of all that private Christian communion, which some excommunication
deprives of, till after the first and second admonition, which are not to be
given together and at one time, as all acknowledge; but at some distance. And a
person is not thus to be rejected, till obstinate: Now obstinacy in wickedness
(referring to faith or manners) cannot be suddenly manifested, but requires
several admonitions being to be rejected by an offender, before he can be
declared obstinate.

. 8.
(4) There are sundry sorts of persons in sundry capacities, concerned and
exercised in withdrawing from a scandalous brother. 1. The Ministers, the
Stewards of the Mysteries of God. 2, The people. 3. The whole Church of
Officers and people together. These ought to be distinctly considered, and not
confounded, as too usually they are.

1. The Minister are exercised herein, by the power of Order, which enables
them to take cognizance of their capable or incapable subjects of any of their
administrations, as in reference to the reproof and admonition of scorners, so
epecially in reference to the Sacrament; (especially where there is no
governing Church which might over-sway their particular judgments of
discretion.) And they are to bind and retain sins. not only by preaching the
Word, and denouncing the judgments of God against such as walk in wicked
courses indefinitely, Matthew. 16.19. John 20.23. but also by withholding the
sacramental pledges of Gods favor (so far as concerns their office and
administration thereof) from such as are manifestly and notoriously impenitent,
though not yet declared obstinate in such gross wickedness: And much more are
they to deny the Sacrament to them who are by Ecclesiastical juridicall
procedure manifested to be obstinate in such scandalous profaneness: this is
included in (though not the whole of) those texts directed to the Apostles and
Ministers, Matthew. 18.17, 18. Titus 3.10. being compared with other Scriptures
which authorize them to administer the Sacraments only to obedientiall
believers (of which we must treat beneath) and therefore do inhibit their
administering to any other.

Of this excommunication I suppose they especially speak, who sometimes
deseribe it with reference only to a withdrawing from sacramental communion.
So Camero in one of his Epistles, inter opuscula mifcellanea, page (mihi) 532.
col. 2. thus speaks, Haec una est legitima excommunicatio, quare sic defin^o:
Excommunicatio est sententia peecatori impenitentiam profitenti, vel reipsa,
vel etiam verbo, denuncians peecata ejus non esse remissa, proindeque
abstinendum esse illi sacramentorum usu, quae sigilla sunt remissionis
peccatorum. And Calvia has a passage to the like purpose, in his 278 Epistle.
Qui suspensi a sacra coena proterve judicium Ecclesiae respuunt, declarant se
extraneos, ac proinde nihil senioribus restare video, nisi ut Magistatum
exslimulent ad cos durius coercendos: nam in poenis Ecclesiasticis ultima est
excommunicatio. On this account I suppose it is, that Chrysostom so much and
vehemently warns Ministers, that they admit not such as they know to be under
gross wickedness, to the Lords Table. Chrysostom. Hom. 60. ad populum
Antiochenum de sumentibus indigne divina and sancta mysteria. Let no cruel, no
unmercifull, no impure one any way approach. Haec tam ad vos qui communieatis,
quam ad vos qui ministratis dicta esse volo -- No small punishment hangs over
your heads, if ye suffer any one to partake of this Table, whom you know under
wickedness: For his blood shall be required at your hands. If a Captain, if the
Consul himself, if he who has the Diadem, approach unworthily, do thou hinder
and restrain him. -- This he amplifies by one having the charge of keeping a
Well clean. -- And a little after the same Father adds, But thou will say, How
shall I know this or that man, what he is? I dispute not what sins are unknown,
but what are known. Dico horribile quoddam atque tremendum: non est ita malum
demoniacos intus esse, sicut istos qui peccatorum sordibus polluuntur. Illud
enim pessimum est, sicut Paulus ait, Christum conculcare, and Testamenti
sanguinem ducere communem, and spiritus gratiam contemnere. Multo igitur
Demoniaco pejor est, qui petccati sibi conscius accedit. -- Let us therefore
exclude all whom we see come unworthily etc. And that speech of Chrysostom is
known sufficiently, I will sooner give my life, then the Lords body to one
unworthily: And I will sooner endure my blood to be spilt, then I will allow
that most holy blood to any but the worthy. So also in Cyprians time, to give
or deny the communion was all one, as to give or deny the Churches peace. See
his Epistle 54. Cyprianus, Liberalis, Caldonius, etc. Cornelio fratri.

9.
2. Private Christians in the Church (wherein also are included the officers,
considered in their private capacity common to them with other members) are
concerned and exercised in excommunication or withdrawing communion. For to
them as such, seem those instructive directions and precepts to belong, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14. Romans 16.17.3 Ioh. verse 10.11. to withdraw from and avoid, and
not entertain some notorious offenders: yea, and that whether these offenders
are censured and declared to be such by the governing Church or no. Indeed it
is most orderly, that the Guides and Officers go before and direct the people
concerning such as are to be avoided. yet are not the people excused in their
neglect of withdrawing communion (in their places and stations, viz. as to
private encouraging intimate communion) from notorious obstinate offenders,
although their spiritual Governors enjoin them not this withdrawing from the
foresaid obstinate notorious offenders. For these Scriptures do absolutely
command this withdrawing, and give no such dispensation to the people in case
of the negligence of their guides. And when the people follow the injunctions
of their Officers herein, (as being thereby and therewith satisfied concerning
the obstinate wickedness of such particular offenders) they do close therewith
not merely because the governing Church requires this, (for then they should be
bound so to withdraw from any whom their leaders may warn them to avoid;) but
especially because they are satisfied in their opinion of the integrities and
abilities of their guides, or by their personal knowledge of the parties
censured, or by some other way, that these particular persons whom they are
warned to avoid, are such as the Scripture commands them to withdraw their
foresaid intimate and encouraging communion from.

3. The Officers and people of the Church conjunctly are to withdraw communion
from some offenders. For to them as together, the Directions for this purpose
are prescribed, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 13. When the Church is met together.
Whether it refer to any parricular congregation met, among the Corinthians, or
to a classical meeting of sundry congregations, comes to one pass as to the
present point. For in a classical Church-meeting, there are (as there were in
that Synod, Acts 15.2, 22, 23) besides the Ministers, others of the brethren,
delegates from the rest, and therefore representatives of their whole
congregations respectively, and with respect to the transaction of a
withdrawing by these, excommunication is thus described, as Aretius has it.
Problem. Theol. de Excommunicatione. Excommunicatio est alicujus prosessi
religionem nostam a consortio fidelium, in sacris and prophanis rebus exclusio,
facta in nomine and virtute Christi, per ordinarios Ecclesiae ministros,
consentiente reliqua Ecclesia, and facta emendandi peccatoris causa, and ad
liberandum a contagione peccati Ecclesiam And thus in Cyprians time it is
manifest, great respect was had to the people, or brethren as such, in the
management of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and especially in matters of
Excommunication or Absolution of their members; and they had so great a stroke,
that they had a negative voice, and scarce any thing done without, or at least,
against their will, in these great affairs. Remeant quotidie (says Cyprian
Epislola 55. Cornelin sratri) and ad Ecclesiam pulsant; nobis tamen a quibus
ratio Domino reddenda est, anxie ponderantibus and solicitee x aminantibus, qui
recipi and admitli ad Ecclesiam debeant. Quibusdam enim, aut crumina sua
obsistunt, aut fratres obstinate and firmiter renituntur, ut recipi omnino non
possint, cum scandalo and periculo plurimorum. Neque enim sic putamina quaedam
eollig^nd a sunt, ut quae integra and sana, suntvulnerentur; nec utilis ac
consultus est pastor, qui ita morbidas and contactas over gregi admiscet, ut
gregem totum mali cohaerentis afflictione contaminet -- ut gaudent and
laetuntur, cum tolerabiles and minus culpabiles redeunt: ita contra, fremunt
and reluctantur, quoties immendabiles and protervi, and vel adusteriis vel
sacrificiis contaminati, and post haec adbuc insuper and superbi, sic ad
Ecclesiam remeant, ut bona intus ingenia corrumpant. Vix plebi persuadeo imo
extorqueo, ut tales patiantur admuti. And even in the weighty business of
installing or ejecting Ministers. ( Epistola 68. Cyprianus, Caecilius, Primus,
Polycorpus, and Felici Presbytero, etc.) it is said, Propter quod plebs
obsequens praeceptis dominicis, and Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposiio
separate se debet, nec ad sacriledgi sacerdotis sacrificia miscere, Quando ipsa
maxim habeat potestatem, vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos
recusandi -- Instruit and ostendit ordinationes sacerdotales non nisi sub
populi assistentis conscientia fieri oportere, vel plebe praesente, vel
delegantur malorum crimina, vel bonorum merita praedicentur, and sit ordinatio
justa and legitima, quae omnium suffragio and judicio fuerit examinata.

. 10.
This joint act of the Ministers and people (or the major part thereof)
declaring according to the word of God, a notorious (and not only so, but)
obstinate flagitious brother to be as an Heathen and Publican, and so to be
removed from that Ecclesiastical communion, which an heathen may not be
admitted unto; (This I say) I take to be the greater or full Excommunication:
which yet is not simply a cutting off the excommunicate from the Church, but in
some respects only, viz. in regard of the suspending them from some privileges
of the Church, as Maccovius says. Loc. com. c. 84. Non igitisr penitus e
corpore gladio hoc (excommunicationis) amputatur, sed quoad certas quasdam
communicandi rations per sacramenta and familiarem consuetudinem. This
withdrawing in these two respects ( viz. 1. in respect of sacramental
communion. And 2. such inward encouraging familiarity as might not be afforded
to an obstinate heathen) being declared and denounced by the Church as
aforesaid, against an offender, I conceive includes the utmost which is in any
excommunication now in use in the Church of God. I know some extend it further,
both for the exclusion from the word and prayers of the Congregation, and from
almost any civil communion, except in some cases of very near relation to the
excommunicate; yea, and then too, from praying with them, that the wise might
not join in prayer with the excommunicate husband. But this severe Doctrine I
know not how to prove, and therefore must not assert it. I find indeed an
Antichristian excommunication, Revel. 13.17. That none might buy nor sell, save
he that had the mark of the Beast. But it is dangerous (as one faith) to sweep
Christ's floor with Antichrists besome. I know some of the Ancients speak of
the excommunicate as deprived of the suffrages and prayers of the Church. But
then I think their meaning is, that they are not prayed for as the faithful
are; not but they were prayed for under the notion of impenitents, that God
would give them true repentance, as the Church prays for the conversion of the
heathens. Some were thrust out of the place of the Assembly, but then mostly
those places were (I conceive) private houses where the Church had their
meetings; of their coming to which there is not the like reason as there is of
their liberty to come to our assemblies, where the excomunicate may have a
civil right to a seat as well as others. And where there were seats for the
excommunicate distinct from the faithful; there also were such like distinct
seats for the Catechumens and Heathens; whereby as it appears they were not
excluded from the hearing of the Word, so it is also manifest they were not
excluded any more then Heathens were, which is all contend for in this matter.
The reverend Vindicator Mr Humsreys, Vindic. p. 149. is so ingenuous as to
acknowledge, he thinks there is reason to come to composition with his worthy
Antagonist about the admitting the excommunicate to the Word and Prayer, from 1
Cor. 14. I could be willing (says he) to compound the matter with one
distinction: Exclusion is either real or relative. I shall leave it to him
that will dispute with Mr Drake how the Church can exclude the excommunicate
really from being present at the Word and Prayer; and it shall suffice me that
they are excluded cluded relatively however, so that though they may be present
as heathen, yet are they cut off from all their interest in them, still as
members; so here. But why will not this handsome distinction be applied, to the
receiving the excommunicate to the Sacrament also really, though not
relatively, if that this excommunication did not essentially contain in it a
withdrawing from communion in the Sacrament, and not so in other Ordinances?
And why should our Brethren check us for making such a difference as they say
we do betwixt Ordinances of equal sanctity, viz. the Word, Prayer, and
Sacraments; when they themselves are here forced (as to admission to them) to
do the same thing? Exclusion from the Word and Prayer, I doubt not may be
exercised on an excommunicate (and so on heathens) where no civil right he has
hinders not; in some cases as prudence may direct. But then its an accidental,
and was not intended in the sentence of excommunication considered in it self.
That great mistake of taking excommunication for a cutting off from
Church Membership has been sufficiently, I hope, manifested in the sixth
section of this Chapter.

. 11.
I shall only add one thing more concerning this full excommunication. As the
consent of the particular Congregation, whereof one is a member, is necessary
for this his excommunication, because else it cannot have its execution; and
therefore cannot be inflicted, where the major part of that Church are against
it (though the Officers are never so urgent in it). So also because in a
neighborhood and association of Congregationall Churches, this excommunication
passed in some one of them, is not likely to be effectual for humbling the
offender, unless the rest also comply therewith: And it cannot be expected they
should, unless they have satisfaction concerning the justness thereof.
Therefore we judge it requisite that where a Classis may be had, this
excommunication be managed with their advice and consent, that so other
Ministers and Churches may not admit an excommunicate of any one, to their
Communion among them; either sacramental, or that private encouraging
fellowship, which by excommunication he is justly debarrd from, at home.

. 12.
(5) Lastly, from the Texts before mentioned, it may also appear, that there
is an excommunication ipso jure as well as facto, that is, 1. where the Law of
God determines who are to be withdrawn from, and its left to the discretion of
the Church Officers and private members, to determine who those persons are,
who by the Law are so excommunicate, upon a notorious manifestation thereof.
And 2. where there is required the juridical sentence of some Ecclesiastical
Judge to determine that such a person is to be excommunicated. This latter none
doubt of. And the former is proved by 2 These. 3.6. and 3 John ver. 10, 11. That
learned Gentleman Mr. William Morice, quotes Estius, saying, that, If the crime
be so notorious that by no gainsaying it can be denied, it seems not that the
sentence of the Judge is to be expected, in order to the avoiding of the
offender. This quotation he has in the 147 page of his book, which he has
entitled, Caena quas^ (...). The new Enclosures broken down, and the Lords
Supper laid forth in common for all Church Members, having a dogmatical faith,
and not being scandalous. Which position, if it be limited to Church members
adult, who have duly once made a personal recognition of their baptismal
Engagements. And if herein he exclude not the profession of a justifying faith,
as if it were not necessary to be joined to, and with the dogmatical faith he
speaks: I say, if that position of his be so understood (as I see not but it
may according to the tenor of his discourse following) I find nothing therein
to be gainsayd. For all such Church members are to be reputed and dealt with,
as justified sincere believers.

. 13.
In my sixth particular concerning the state of the Question (in the M S. numb.
15, 16.) I made use of Ames his words to express my mind, viz that the lesser
degree of excommunication which consisted in suspension, has place in the
Church, not by any particular express Institution of Christ, but from equity,
and the nature of the thing it self. There, first Mr. W. flouts me as quoting
so low an Authority, and adjudgeth me to be styled a private man for it. I had
been more private but for him. But its evident I built nothing upon the
authority of Ames here, no more then Mr. W. does on the Author of charity
mistaken, or Tornesius which he quotes in his Epistle. Next, he gives us his
observations concerning the time and order of Ames his works; and that (in
part) I think to show my quotation of him to be amiss. And though he after
mention his Transcriber of my copy; his diligence he commends, that none of the
faults may be taken off my self; Let him excuse his Transcriber as he
pleases, my paper quoted Ames, de Consc: lib. 4. cap. 29. But who could think
this lofty Eagle would deigne to catch at such poor flies as these. But he had
leisure enough it seems, and a mind to say any thing, so it might be against
me. And then because Ames is not of my mind in all things about the subject of
the power of excommunication, he tells the world I wrong Ames, in quoting that
passage from him. When as our dispute was purposely and expressly separated from
the Question about the subject of this power. Numb. 5, 6.

. 14.
My seventh and last note was to this purpose, One particular affirmative
overthrows an universal negative, and therefore if I prove some in the
Question, in any case may be suspended, I attain my end. The which is so
manifestly true to every fresh man, that Mr. W. has not the face to deny it;
yet he chides about it extremely, but most impotently, as if he would challenge
our Wych-wallers to a scuffle with him. Your majesticall severity -- in a bead
roll of words, as if you would charm the senses of the vulgar with your rare
skill in Logic. -- to delude the simple, by fraudulent and illogical arguments,
etc. Thus his tongue runs at random, and he has confuted me fluently, if his
Reader will but do him this small, very little favor, as to believe him
without proof. But in the midst of this ranting fit, he interweaves two
impertinent Questions, Page 31. The first is this; Why all unregenerate,
ignorant and scandalous members should not be debarred as well as some? seeing
they all (as well as some) do stand guilty of the same notorious cause of
exclusion. To which I answer. 1. Some may be unregenerate, who are neither
ignorant nor scandalous. 2. There are degrees of ignorance and scandal, and
therefore some may be more debarrable than others. 3. I no where say that any
notoriously ignorant or scandalous should be admitted; but its sufficient for
the overthrowing their universal negative, None such may be debarred; if I
evince any may, let him look to it whether all such may; my present province
not putting me on the proof thereof.

His second Query is; Whether your pretented flagitious Burgess may lawfully be
whipped, before be he carefully convented or convicted, or after; If before, tell
us by what Law, if not till afterward, Then you no ways contradict our
Assertion. As if I had brought this simile to prove suspension, when as I used
it only to show, that a particular affirmative overthrows an universal
negative, viz. that if some flagitious Citizen may be whipped, then its false
that none such may; so it some scandalous Church Members may be suspended, then
its false that none such may. The matter he queries as to some excommunication
of scandalous persons notoriously such, although no juridical sentence of an
Ecclesiastical Judge has passed on them to be such, has been answered in the
last section. And now having dispatched his cavills against my explication of
the Question, and the management thereof; I shall attend him in the argument it
self. But first let me take a little refreshing.

PSALM 119. part 3d. C. 17 Choice bounty show, that whiles I live,
Thy Word I keep with awe!
18 Clear up my dim eyes to perceive
The wonders of thy Law!
19 Conceal not from me thy Laws high!
I am a stranger here;
20 Care breaks my soul, whiles all times I,
Long for thy Judgments dear.
21 Cursed are the proud, whom thou do blame.
Who from thy precepls stray.
22 Cast not on me Reproath and shame!
For I have kept thy way.
23 Crowned Princes against me sat and spoke;
But on thy Laws I thought.
24 Certain delight in these I take,
And from them counsel sought.

CHAP. IV.
. 1.
TO my first syllogism (at numb. 21. of the Copy of my M S.) he answers p. 33.
1 by quarrelling with my conclusion; and that in two respects. (Besides his
exception against the phrase [fully excommunicate], which has been reselled
above) 1 that there is left out of it [They expressing their desire to receive,
and offering themselves:] But how vain is this cavil, expressing the desire
he has to receive any evasion that offers it self? For 1. will he grant we
may suspend them who do not profess their desire to receive, and do not offer
themselves? If so, then Church Membership alone does not give right to the
adult for the Sacrament, and so his cause is marred. And he a little before,
and in his Epistle, puts in the limitation of intelligent persons at years,
who only with him are admittable; so that if they are not intelligent, they are
to be debarred, though they express their desire to receive, and offer
themselves. Now let Mr. W. show what Scripture debarrs these from the
Sacrament, and not from the prayers and other public ordinances of the
Church? But that he attempts not to do. If he had, it were ten to one, the
same proofs would bring in more limitations as well as that. But its
sufficient for him, for his part to cavil against others. 2 Again, my
argument proceeds concerning the law of Christ debarring a visible profane
person; and then who sees not that it concludes against him, whether he desire
and offer himself to be admitted or no? And yet with these shifts it seems he
non-plust my paper, when he and it were together, and tells it he could stop
its course here, and since it brisled not again, he is heartned to let the
world know, how brave acts he could do, if he would. 2 The other quarrel he
has against my conclusion is, That its a Tautology; and that is means that
some baptized persons at years suspended may be suspended. For (says he) by
[not fully excommunicate]. we understand your meaning to be [suspended.]
Suspending may either denote the sentence of debarring, or the execution of
that sentence. To say some persons censured with abstension or suspension, may
be suspended, that is, have the Lords Supper denyd to them is no Tautology, no
more then to say, a person censured with full excommunication, may be debarrd
all public Church ordinances (according to their sense of it). But the
pofition I undertook after stating the Question was this; viz. That its
lawful to debar some persons the Lords Supper, who are baptized, and not
warned to depart or kept from other public ordinances, of hearing, praying,
singing, in the public Congregations of the Church. And immediately after
this I began my argument, the conclusion whereof was, Some baptized persons at
years not fully excommunicated, may be suspended from the Lords Supper.
Whereby its manifest, that by [not fully excommunicate] I meant [not kept from
all public ordinances in the Church] which is their sense of excommunication.
And is this a Tautology, some baptized persons not kept from all public
ordinances, may be suspended from the Lords Supper? My own judgment concerning
full excommunication has been showed before in the last Chapter. But what a
pitiful business is this, that Mr. W. so much quarrels at the state of the
Question, and sometimes says, I say what he holds himself in it; and yet he
would never rectify the same in a line or two, though desired (as I am
informed) so to do, if it pleased him not, that we might have been agreed on
that, before we proceeded to dispute upon it. But he seems to imitate the
crafty Gunner, who would always say he aimed at that which he hit, but would
never agree before he shot, what should be the mark he would shoot at. Thus
much concerning the conclusion of my Syllogism. Now he comes to the premises.

. 2.
The major he says p. 35. he grants with my elucidation thereof in such
general terms as they stand. Yet after he bethinks himself, and will (as he
seems to me) grant it upon condition that the granting of it may do no hurt to
his own opinion. Whether this be not the sense of his p. 36, 37, 38. let the
Reader judge who will peruse the same.

The proof of my Minor (which the Reader may receive if he please to turn back
to the Copy of my paper M S. at numb. 24.) Mr W. sets down in his p. 39. and
gives us words upon it, p. 40, 41, 42, 43. without distinguishing upon, or
denying any proposition therein. He talks much of Accademicall disputings. Be
it known to him I am not ignorant of the method of Disputation used in both our
Universities. But if the Respondent (as he here makes himself) should in stead
of giving a short answer (as he ought) by denying or distinguishing upon the
terms of either proposition, run out into such extravagancies as he here does,
he would (and that most deservedly) be hist out of the Schools. He raps again
at the distinction of greater and lesser, fully and not fully excommunicate;
but impotently, without any proof offered against the same. And then lest the
practice of the Church of England formerly used, should give any countenance to
the distinction, he endeavors to clear the Church of England, who manifestly
used that distinction. But the great fault is, that it is now used by us; and
what in them he excuses, in us Presbyterians is a crime, he can hardly find
terms of aggravation and disgrace bad enough to put upon it.

. 3.
Let us then first see what was the practice of the Church of England herein.
And then how Mr W. takes us off from pleading that, and I shall give my reply
thereto. And first let us observe what was required by the Church of England
formerly, in reference to the manifestation of the knowleledge of such as were
to be admitted to the communion, and their understanding owning of the
Christian faith.

In the order for Confirmation, it is thought good, that none be confirmed, but
such as can say the Articles of the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten
Commandments, and can answer to such questions of the Catechism as the Bishop
(or such as he shall appoint) shall by his discretion appose them in. And this
order is most convenient to be observed for diverse considerations: First,
because that when children come to years of discretion, and have learned what
their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in baptism, they may then
themselves with their own mouth, and with their own conseat, openly, before the
Church, ratify and confirm the same: And also promise, that by the grace of
God, they will evermore endeavor faithfully to observe and keep such things as
they by their mouth and confession have assented unto, etc. And at the end of
the Confirmation it is ordered, And there shall none be admitted to the holy
Communion, until such time as he can say the Catechism and be confirmed.

Here is the substance of what is required among us, Let any who come to
communicate, show that ever since they came to years, they thus personally
owned the Christian Faith, and I know no bar in the Presbyterial Government to
their admission. The Ordinance of Parliament no where requires that all should
be examined now in order to their admission. But that the ignorant are to be
excluded; and that implies not (as some have over-hastily concluded) that all
are to be now examined. But only that all not examined sometime before, are to
be examined now, and they only; unless there be proofs (or at least strong
presumptions) of any their apostasy from (or losing the knowledge of) the
faith they have sometime personally professed.

. 4.
Secondly, for scandal; the order of the Church of England was manifest, that
the scandalous should be suspended, though not then fully excommunicated, or
excommunicated majori excommunicatione, as the Canons speak.

In the Rubric before the Communion, it is thus ordered, If any of those who
intend to communicate, be an open notorious evil liver -- the Curate shall
advertise him, in any wise not to presume to the Lords Table, until he have
openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended his former naughty
life, etc. -- The same order shall the Curate use with those betwixt whom he
perceives malice and hatred to reign, not suffering them to partake of the
Lords Table, until he knows them to be reconciled. And if one of the parties
so at variance, be content to forgive the other from the bottom of the heart
-- and to make amends for that he himself has offended, and the other party
will not be persuaded to a godly unity, -- the Minister in that case ought to
admit the penitent person to the holy Communion, and not him that is obstinate.

The first exhortation which is ordered to be read at certain times, when the
Curate shall see the people negligent to come to the holy Communion, is
mostwhat verbatim and altogether in sense, what Mr, W. has prefixed before his
Book under the name of Dr Peter Martyr, and why he might not have quoted the
Common Prayer Book for it as well as Peter Martyr, I cannot certainly tell; but
the Reader may easily guess somewhat shrewdly at it. And for answer thereunto,
as I see nothing therein against the suspension pleaded for, so those who
framed the Common Prayer, thought it no way thwarted their suspension and
lesser excommunication; if they had, they would not have contradicted
themselves so grossly, as to insert it in the Communion, where they so
expressly give order for the debarring the ptophane, as you have already heard.
And in their next exhortation to examine themselves, repent and amend, they
add, For otherwise the recieving the holy Communion does nothing else but
increase your damnation. And especially in their third Exhortation. It Is said
thus, Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer of God, an hinderer or flanderer
of his Word, an adulterer, or be in malice, or envy, or any other grievous
crime, bewayl your sins, and come not to this holy Table, lest after the taking
of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into you as he entered into Judas, and
fill you full of impiety, and bring you to destruction of body and soul.
Whereby it is evident, the first exhortation to come, was made to them only,
who were supposed obedient believers; and here they who were disobedient are
warned to keep off, whiles so wilfully disobedient; and those who were
notoriously such, were to be kept off by the Minister. But yet certainly the
Curate did not fully excommunicate all them whom he was not to suffer to
partake of the Lords Table, though in part he did ecclesiastically withdraw
from them; as is more evident in the Canons of the Synod held at London in the
first year of King James.

. 5.
The title of the 26th Canon is, Notorious offenders not to be admitted to the
Communion. And in the Canon; No Minister shall in any wise admit to the
receiving of the holy Communion, any of his cure or flock which be openly
known to live in sin notorious, without repentance, nor malicious persons not
reconciled, nor unfaithful Churchwardens, etc. Can. 27. The title is;
Schismatiques not to be admitted to the Communion. The title of Can. 57. is,
The Sacraments not to be refused at the hands of unpreaching Ministers. In the
Canon it self its ordered; Those who leave their own Parish Churches in that
respect, etc. they are from the Ordinary to receive punishment by
Ecclesiastical Censures -- that is, Let them (persisting in their wilfulness)
be suspended; and then after a months further obstinacy excommunicated. In
Can. 59. Enjoining Ministers to catechize every Sunday; Its decreed, if the
Minister do neglect, he is to be admonished -- and if he wilfully offend
again, suspended; and if the third time, then excommunicated; and others
concerned to come themselves, or send theirs to be catechized, are in the same
Canon, in case of their neglect herein, to be suspended by their Ordinaries (if
they be not children) and if they so persist for the space of a month, then
let them be excommunicated. Can. 68. the title whereof is, Ministers not to
refuse to christen or bury. But in the body of the Canon there is this proviso;
Except the party deceased were denounced excommunicate majori excommunicatione,
for some grievous and notorious crime, and no man able to testify of his
repentance.

These three last Canons I have quoted, show how clearly they owned a degree of
Censure, called by the name of suspension; though it was in those cases to be
inflicted by the Ordinary. But the former quotations show how far the
Minister also was entrusted with a debarring from the Communion, notoriously
profane persons, who might tender themselves to receive. Now we are to hear,
what Mr. W. alleges to cut us off from our present pleading this order of the
Church of England: The suspension (says he) taken up in the Church of England,
in case of obstinacy in some notorious crime, was the public act of the
Church and State, not inherent in a Minister (as a Minister) but derived to him
by deputation; and cannot now be pretended to, the Common prayer book (which
gave the power) being now abolished. So he, p. 41.

. 6.
First; Its to be observed that Mr. W. here speaks of the suspension taken up
in the Church of England, as if it were only in case of obstinacy in some
notorious crime; whereas its manifest, most of the passages before rehearsed
out of the Canons and Common prayer book, clearly evince, that suspension was
inflicted for several crimes without respect to obstinacy therein, and then
obstinacy and continuance in those crimes, without visible repentance and
reformation, was punished with greater excommunication, as the Canon it self
speaks.

2. But as to the substance of his exception, I answer briefly thus for the
overthrowing of it; Either the Common prayer book was not abolished by a
lawful authority sufficient for the nulling and abrogating of that sanction
whereby it was formerly established; or else it was. If it were not, then
Ministers by virtue of the Common prayer book, may (as opportunity is offered)
suspend according to the Directions therein given them; which remain still in
force, if not nulled by a sufficient authority. But if the Common prayer book
was abolished by a lawful authority, sufficient for the abrogating that
sanction whereby it was formerly established, then certainly, they who had such
power to abrogate that government and order, had power also to establish our
suspension. It belonging to the same power or authority to null as to make a
law. And then the same suspension (in substance) is delegated to Church
Officers still, in the Ordinance of 48 for Presbyterial Government where this
is appointed, by the Lords and Commons, by whom only the Service book was
abrogated.

I have the rather hinted this for the satisfaction of some godly persons who
have not been well satisfied with the State proceedings, in reference to Church
Government; who yet have an high esteem of the former constitutions of the
Church of England: And, me thinks, where the same thing for substance is
appointed and practiced, they should not reject it. And now let the Reader if
he please, judge, whether M. W. or we behave our selves most like Ministers of
the Church of England, (in reference to the degrees of excommunication, and
specially in reference to suspension) the neglect whereof, he (out of Mr. P.)
charge us with. Mr. W. proceeds to carp at [may be] in my syllogism, when as
yet [may be] was in the position I opposed. And the question was, whether such
cases may occur, not whether they did occur, wherein the persons spoken of
might be suspended, as appears in my M S. at numb. 6.17. But our Doctor
resolutissimus and absolutissimus, descends not so low as to observe the state
of the Question; he had rather, it seems, be showing his Logic to his weaker
consciences (for whose satisfaction his title page designs his book) and
telling them, p. 43, 44. which are the subjects and the predicats in the
Propositions, and the medius terminus in the syllogism: they will (it may be)
applaud their Doctor, with an Egregiam vero laudem. But if any of his weaker
consciences meet with these lines, I am of opinion they will not so far
admire those logical terms as to refuse the plain and wholesome provision I
now offer them to share with me, in the

PSAIM 119. Part 4. D. 25 Down on the dust my sad soul stays.
Let thy truth life afford!
26 Declared to thee I have my ways.
Thou heardst: Teach me thy Word!
27 Disclose thy Precopts-way to me!
Thy wondrous works I Will tell.
28 Deep grief my soul melts; strengthen me,
After thy Word right well.
29 Drive lying ways from me; thy Law
Grant to me graciously!
30 Duly, I chose thy Truth, and saw
Thy Judgments with mine eye.
31 Dearly thy witnessed Truth I hold
From shame Lord me discharge.
32 Daily in thy ways run I would
If thou my heart enlarge.

CHAP. V.
. 1.
THe confirmation of the Major Proposition in my second syllogism, (at numb.
25. in my M S.) Mr. W. repeats in his p. 44. where he has such jejune and
lanquid exceptions, against some explications being inserted in Parentheses,
and so separated from the syllogism it self; that I judge it needless to make
any defense against them. There being none (I think) who manage a dispute in
writing, who do not use the like. Although its true, in disputations face to
face, there is less need of them; any mistake which might occur about the
meaning of the terms, being soon rectified by explication thereof. The like
frivolous complaint he makes of some various equipollent phrases used, viz.
[visibly unbeleevers] and [such as ought to be judged and taken to be
unbeleevers] when as I had expressly signified the equipollency of them, numb.
25. The proposition I was to prove was, Those who by word openly renounce the
Lord Jesus Christ, are visibly such to whom the Lord would not (according to
the revelation of his will in his Word) have the Lords Supper administered. Now
my conclusion in the syllogism I brought to prove this, was; Those who by word
openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ are visibly such, to whom (according to
the word of God) the Lords Supper ought not to be administered. An ordinary
Reader, I think, would see no difference betwixt [them to whom (according to
the word of God) the Lords Supper ought not to be administred], and [them to
whom the Lord would not, (according to the revelation of his will in his word)
have the Lords Supper administred]. But Mr. W. that he may seem to see further
into a millstone than another can do, has spyed the disagreement. He was
(belike) at a great want for exceptions who takes up these; and considering his
necessity, he may be better excused. Its better to pick strawes than to do
just nothing.

But at last he has unbutton'd his eyes, and can perceive some strength in my
proof when it has been (he thinks) beholding to him for a better dress, p.
46. where he thus forms it; Those who are visibly unbeleevers, are visibly
such to whom the Lords Supper ought not to be administered. But those who by
word openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ, are visibly unbeleevers. Ergo,
Those who by word openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ, are visibly such to
whom the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought not to be administered.

2.
Well, now he has the honor (as he speaks) to be opponent himself, I hope
he will be more civil in his answer, and not be captious against his own
creature. Wherein now (says he, p. 47.) does this argument advance your
pretensions, or disparage ours? and then explaining that Question, or showing
that he is not at a want of other artificial words to say the same thing
again as pompously, he adds, What evidence does it artificially and
intrinsecally give for you or against us? My conclusion was [those who by word
openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ, are visibly such to whom (according to
the word of God) the Lords Supper ought not to be administred]. The conclusion
he has made for me is [those who by word openly renounce the Lord Jesus Christ
are visibly such, to whom the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought not to be
administred]. Let the Reader judge what material difference there is betwixt
them. Yet he grants the latter, when he quarreld the former. But then as
bethinking himself, that the argument is mine, though the dress be his, he
will now have another thrust at it, and denies the Minor: yet not absolutely
but with distinction; now he attempts to play the part of a Respondent indeed.
But what he might have said, as befitted a Respondent in a few lines, he must
spend many leaves upon (though not altogether) in the following part of his
book.

This being the very point of my argument, and this place most fit to consider
it more thoroughly, I shall here make my reply to him upon it, once for all.

. 3.
Visible unbeleevers is not taken (says he, p. 47.) in the same sense in the
Major and Minor. In the Major according to the ancient and famous sense of the
Catholic Church for pagan Infidels, for men without, for non-receivers of
Christian doctrine, but positively standing under the delusion of some visible
Idol or Idols. In the Minor, according to your modern Brownisme (that's one
of the flowers he uses to dress me a garland with) and private sense, for
Christians within the Church, baptized and adult; but manifestly defective in
their Christian Ethics, though orthodoxall otherwise in all points of faith,
and frequenters of our Church Assemblyes and solemnities, as professedly of our
Protestant persuasion in point of Religion and divine worship.

By the way I might reply, What if these baptized adult persons are not
orthodox in faith, nor frequenters of our Church: assemblies and Solemnities?
Are they then unbelievers in the first sense? or must there be a third sense
devised for them? The Reader will observe this confusion. But if he had applied
this distinction such an one as it is, he had done somewhat becoming the place
he has taken upon him. But that he leaves at large. Well, since one good turn
requires another, I will endeavor to make out his Answer as he (ere-while)
thought to do my Argument. And it may be this: Visibly unbelievers may be taken
in a twofold sense. 1. For Pagan-infidels. 2. Morbid-Christians, [under which
term I suppose he will contain scandalous and notoriously-prophane Christians,
or else he says nothing to the question.] Now, take visible unbelievers in the
former sense, for Pagan-Insidels, and then I grant the Major. Those who are
visibly unbelievers, that is, Pagans, are such to whom the Lords Supper ought
not to be administered. And then I deny the Minor. All who in word openly
renounce Christ, are not visibly unbelievers, that is, visibly Pagans.

But take visible unbelievers in the later sense for Morbid-Christians, and
then I grant the Minor. Those who by word openly renounce Christ, are visibly
unbelievers, that is, Morbid Christians: But then I deny the Major, and say,
That those who are visibly unbelievers, that is, Morbid Christians, are not
such to whom the Lords Supper ought to be administered. I appeal to any
judicious Reader, whether I wrong Mr. W. in this guessing at the application of
his distinction and answer thereupon to my Argument. And indeed this elsewhere
he gives us in as his sense, many times over and over. p. 50. says he, You
mis-judge in taking the Morbid Church members of our Parochial Assemblies to be
unbelievers and Infidels positively, as Pagans, etc. So p. 51, 52, 53. and
passim alibi.

. 4.
Here Mr. W. asserts, that to use the word Infidel, or unbeliever for any but
Pagans (who never took on them a positive obligation to the service of the true
God) is Brownisme. And that the Scripture and Catholic sense of the word,
does only denote Pagans. But how hastily was this asserted by him, shall be
showed in the following observations concerning the Scripture use of the word.

1. Christ said to Thomas, John 20.27. Be not thou (...), be not an unbeliever,
but a believer. Was not he now in a possibility (ex natura rei) though
baptized, to have become an unbeliever by apostasy from the principles of the
Christian faith, especially this, that Jesus is the Messiah?

2. Those two Texts, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Be not unequally yoaked with unbelievers
-- What part has a believer with an Infidel? and Titus 1.15. To the
unbelievers nothing is pure, etc. are both expounded by Dr Hammond (whose
reasons are worth weighing) to be understood of the Gnostick Heretics, called
there Infidels, or unbelievers, in that their doctrines and practices made so
great an opposition to the Gospel.

3. And on Matthew. 24.51. he makes those two words, hypocrites and unbelievers
of equal importance, i. e. says he, Knaves, false, deeeitfull persons,
expressed by S. Luke in setting this down, chapter 12.46. by (...), unbelievers, or
unfaithful. And he renders the (...), Rev. 21.8. unfaithful, that fall off
from Christ.

4. The Jews, after Christ's ascension, who received not Jesus for their
Christ, or Messiah, were unbelievers in Scripture-sense. Act. 14.2. and 17.5.
yet were they not then Pagans, under no positive obligation of worshipping a
false God. And an excommunicate person, who has been baptized, and still
professes the Christian faith, is to be dealt with, as an Heathen, yet he is
no Pagan, nor absolutely cut off from the Church, as has been showed above.
And the Apostle tells us, that the Jews were broken off by unbelief, though
they were Church Members before,, Romans 11.23.

5. Belief, does ordinarily in Scripture-sense, denote such a professed
acceptance of the Gospel-call, as includes sincere obedience; and visible
believing, visibly sincere actual obedience. (And on the contrary, unbelief
and unbelieving, may in Scripture-sense denote wilful disobedience and
rebellion against the Gospel, and visible unbelief, such visible notorious
rebellion or actual disobedience.) Therefore some disobedient within the
Church, may be termed unbelievers. For the Concrete is rightly denominated from
the abstract; a just man from justice, so an unbeliever from unbelief
prevailing. The Antecedent is manifest in many Scripture-instances. 1. That
believing to which justification and pardon of sin is annexed, is a sincere and
obedientiall believing, 2. And so also is that to which salvation is promised;
But to a Scripture-believing is annexed justification, Act. 16.39. and pardon
of sin, Act. 10.43. And also to it is promised salvation, and that most
frequently, Act. 16.31. Romans 10.9. 1 Cor. 1.21. Gal. 3.22. Ephesians. 1.19. 2 Thessalonians.
1.10. Heb. 4.3. and 10.39. John 3.15, 16, 18, 36. and 6.35, 40, 47. and 11.25,
26. and 12.46. Romans 1.16. and 9.33. Mark 16.16. 1 Pet. 2.6. 1 John 5.10. 3. It
may also be observed, how Abraham is called the Father of believers, in respect
of that eminent and exemplary faith of his, which was truly justifying and
saving, and included in it sincere actual obedience, Romans 4.3. Gal. 3.6. So
not to believe is not to obey, Romans 15.31. Romans 10.16. They have not all obeyed
the Gospel. For Esaias says, Lord who has believed our report. And this is
referred to the Jews, who were Church Members, at least before Christ's death.
And those in the later time, who should depart from the faith, may be called
unbelievers; those departers from the faith mentioned 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4. the
learned Mr. Mede does show, are meant of Papists, and the grand apostasy of
the Antichristian Man of Sin. So those who draw back from the truth, either in
respect of doctrinall or practical apostasy, are opposed to them who believe,
Heb. 10.38, 39. Therefore those who apostatize, do not believe, and so are not
believers in some Scripture-sense: which also agrees with the usual
signification of the word. Budeus Comment. Ling. Graec. says, (...), cui credi
debet, and fidem faciens verbo suo. And Scapula explains (...) to be
incredulus, qui fidem non adhibet. Item infidus, cujus suspecta est sides; cui
fidendum non est. Item perfidus.

6. I acknowledge the words believe and not believe; belieliever and
unbeliever, are used more largely sometimes in Scripture, as I shall perhaps
show beneath. But that some Church Members, (that is, such men on each as by
their positive engagements and promises, are obliged to believe in Christ, and
forsake their sins,) may yet by their notorious disobedience, become visibly
unbelievers in some Scripture-sense, is all that I here contend for. And
therefore my reverend brother comes off (me thinks) but blewly, who puts so
great an honor on Brown, as to call this the Brownisticall sense of
unbeliever, opposing it to the Scripturall and Catholic sense of the same.

. 5.
2. Now I proceed to the application of the foresaid distinction, and the very
stress of our controversy will lie on this point, Whether to those who are
visibly unbelievers in this sense (I have proved to be a Scripture-sense of the
word, that is, as are visibly in the way of actual notorious disobedience to
the Gospel, whether to these I say) the Lords Supper ought not to be
administered, though they be baptized, adult, intelligent, and not excluded
other public ordinances in the Church? I explicated [visibly unbelievers] by
[such as are according to the word of God to be judged and taken to be thus
unbelievers.] Such explications Mr. W. cannot endure. Oh! how he puffs and
storms at them! p. 60, 61. and in very sad earnest calls them Bombast, etc. But
let us leave our brother to cool at his leisure, and calmly consider the thing
it self now before us. And herein I shall design, 1. To premise some
considerations, as introductory to what follows. 2. To determine and prove
against Mr. W. the negative of the question last proposed. 3. To annex some
cautions at the later end, for the further clearing and preventing mistake in
this doctrine I must insist upon.

The considerations to be premised are these.

1. It is certain, that a distinction ought to be made betwixt Believers, and
those we are to account and deal with as in the way of believing actually. The
same is to be said of the difference to be put between unbelievers, and those
we are to account and deal with as in the way of notorious disobedience and
unbelief.

As to the habit of faith, or unbelief, and the denomination a person may
receive from the existence or predominancy of either of them; we cannot
certainly know, that any (besides our selves) are so believers or unbelievers.
But we may know who are visibly in the way of faith or unbelief. And therefore
I own and comply with the substance of what Mr. W. says concerning the
impossibility of our knowing who are true believers in respect of the habit, p.
55, 57. etc.

2. Yea, I do not only grant this in respect of the habit of justisying and
saving faith, but in respect also of a dogmaticall faith, that is, assent to
the propositions of the Christian faith, as truths, such as the Devils may
have, and the damned, who doubt not of the truth of the Gospel. And if this be
made out, I hope the Disputes may be somewhat allayed, which are at present on
foot, betwixt very learned and godly men, viz. Whether a dogmaticall faith, or
justifying faith entitle to the Sacraments? The one may with like reason be
granted as the other, and both are attended with equal difficulties or
inconveniences supposeable. I may as certainly know whom I am to account a
justified believer, as whom I am to account a dogmaticall believer; yea, and
most commonly (perhaps) as easily too. Is a persons professing his assent to
the Articles of the Creed, or owning the Scriptures, a sufficient character of
his believing dogmatically or historically? So, is his professing consent, and
cordial submission to the doctrine of the Gospel, as sufficient and ready a
note to us, of his being a justified believer? yet we cannot be certain he is
of that persuasion in the Articles he professes assent unto; no more then we
can be assured he sincerely consents to the same, according to his profession
of sincerity. Is (on the contrary) a persons disclaiming the principles of the
Christian faith, a sufficient token whereby we may be directed in accounting
him dogmatically or historically no believer? so his professed renouncing of
subjection to Christ's Laws, [ quasi dicat, I will not yet forsake my lusts
that I may obey Christ] is a sufficient note whereby we are to account him at
present as out of the way of actual justifying faith: Is a persons denying
Christ's divinity, a note to us that he is not a dogmaticall believer, though
yet he profess he believes the Scriptures to be true and so contradicts
himself? So is a persons disobedience to, and actual rebellion against the
Commands of Christ, when notorious, a sufficient token to us that he is not in
the way of actual justifying faith, although he does profess in word that he
believes sincerely and obedientially, and so in this contradicts himself. But
of this we shall have occasion to say somewhat more beneath.

. 6.
3. Sometimes persons are called holy and Saints, and perhaps may be believers
too, and such like titles attributed to them, whiles here alive in this world,
on the account of their being positively obliged (by their own promise) to
holiness, faith, and the service of the true God; so as the Heathens and other
Nations were not. Thus all the nation of the Jews, who were devoted to God by
their professed acceptance of the Covenant of God tendered to them, were an holy
people, children of the Kingdom, the Church of God, etc. And so all those
persons alive are now Saints, and holy, and believers, who have solemnly taken
an engagement upon themselves, by their promise made, to believe in Christ; and
they are in Covenant, that is, they have by their own promise covenanted with
God, and bound themselves thereby unto his service, so as Pagans are not. And
no one can be sure that that promise was not in sincerity, and therefore we
cannot say absolutely of any such (though never so wicked, and censured too)
that he is no Churchmember; that is, that the has not devoted himself to
Christ in truth. But now an heathen has not (visibly) devoted himself at all
to Christ, and therefore cannot be a Churchmember; yea though he be of Gods
Elect. But for those who have visibly devoted themselves to Christ, this
indelible character remains on them, though they are apostates from the
Covenant they have professedly entered into; whether in respect of doctrine or
practice. Christ speaking to the rebellious Jews says, John 8.54. It is my
Father that honors me, of whom ye say that he is your God; when yet he had
told them before, that they were neither Abraham's children, nor had God for
their Father, nor were of God, as they pretended, verse. 39, 41, 42.47. The
branches broken off visibly from the olive (in some respects) are thus holy
still, Romans 11.16, 17. and so are such as are excommunicated, and suspended
from the personal privileges of orderly and uncensured Church Members. They
are brethren in this sense still, 2 These. 3.15.

A Churchmember really is one who is sincerely devoted to Christ, and we must
account all such against whom we cannot prove, that they never were so
sincerely devoted to Christ's call. And then I think none alive must be
rejected absolutely from being Saints, believers, Christians, Disciples, and
Church Members, who have been positively engaged to Christ; unless we could
tell who had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, or had sinned unto death
in St. John's sense; the which is so difficult if not impossible to discern, in
particular persons, that I need not have much respect thereto in this matter.

4. In this last sense its true we may be certain (in reference to many or
most) who are believers, and who are not. But that this is not the character
and Rule of admission to the Sacraments, will appear in the ensuing arguments;
which I now hasten to.

. 7.
In the second place I designed to prove this Conclusion; That to those who are
unbeleevers in respect of actual notorious disobedience to the Gospel, (whiles
such) the Lords Supper ought not to be administered.

1 And my first Argument shall be grounded on Mr. W. his concession, and the
Introductory considerations before evinced. Mr. W. grants that believing is the
Rule for admission, p. 56, 57. You say (says he) that knowledge who are
believers, or who are not believers, must be the loadstar of our administering
or not administering the Lords Supper. We say in thesi, the same. And I have
proved that neither a persons being a believer habitually is the Rule of
admission, for that cannot certainly be known; nor yet his being a believer in
respect of positive obligation laid on himself to believe, though that may
certainly be known; for then none could be debarred who have ever been
baptized, yea or who otherwise have entered into a positive engagement to
Christianity. For the Jews were Gods people and holy, not only by
Circumcision, but by the renewing of that Covenant, afterward to take the Lord
for their God, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18, 19. and 29.10, 11, 12, 13. Now hence it clearly
follows, that the knowledge who are visibly in the way of believing or
obedience to the Gospel they have positively (especially by Baptism) obliged
themselves unto, is the Rule of admission to the Sacrament. For the two former
being removed, no other but this can be assigned, that I know of. And then none
can doubt that to those who are unbeleevers in respect of notorious
disobedience to the Gospel, the Lords Supper ought not to be administered.

. 8.
2. If such were to be excluded the Passover, who were in visible notorious
disobedience to the Law they were debtors positively unto by their
Circumcision, and other obligations; then the Lords Supper ought not to be
administered to them who are in a visible notorious disobedience to the Law they
are debtors to by Baptism and other obligations. But the former is true;
therefore the latter also.

The Consequence, at least (ad hominem) to the men concerned in this dispute,
holds firmly.

The Assumption shall be proved by Instance of the parent-Proselyte, who though
circumcised himself, yet, might not eat the Passover lawfully, if he wilfully
neglected his duty in circumcising his males. And this was not such a merely
ceremonial bar, as is pretended to have been the only bar (among the Jews)
from the Passover.

The place is Exodus 12.48. When a stranger shall sojourne with thee, and will
keep the Passover to the Lord; Let all his Males be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it. (...) veaz, et tunc, (...) says the LXX (a phrase
of like importance with the (...), 1 Cor. 11.28.) the Syriack reads it, After
that all his males are circumcised, then shall he come near and keep it. And
he shall be as one that is borne in the Land. For no uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof. By the geer here is not meant the advena, verse. 45. but the
stranger within the Covenant, distinguished from the stranger within the gate
only, who did but dwell among them as Ains worth shows; and so the LXX render it
by (...), and the Latin version of the Chaldee Paraphrast, has, aliquis
proselytus. Now he was not a Proselyte but by Circumcision; and yet (we see)
before he might be permitted to eat the Passover, all his males must be
circumcised. Both were his duty, yet the neglect of circumcising his males
barred him the Passover. For says Ainsworth, he was yet in his sin, whiles
his children were (through his default) uncircumcised, Genesis 17.12, 13, 14.
Exodus 4.24.26. And thus (says he out of Maimony) the Jews have interpreted
this place, that as the circumcision of himself (if it be omitted) debarreth
him from doing the Passover, so does the circumcision of his sons, and of his
servants, etc. and if he kill it before he does circumcise them, it is
unlawful.

Its added in the Text; For no uncircumcised person shall eat hereof. I
confess it may be rendered [And no uncircumcised person, (...) vecol, et omnis
praeputiatus] with which agree the Chaldee Paraphrast, and the Latin
Interpretation of the Syriak version; and the LXX leave out [And], and says
only, No uncircumcised person shall eat it. But if it have reference to the
preceding part of the verse, as our Translators seem to have conceived, (and
doubtless vau is frequently used as a causal or rational conjunction, as
Schindler shows in Pentaglott. and so is rendered Psalm. 60.11. For vain is the
help of man. Esa.' 64.5. Behold thou art wroth, for we have sinned,) And then I
do not see how it can be accommodated thereunto, unlosse we conceive, that
[uncircumcised] is here taken for [one notoriously disobedient to the Laws
which his circumcision had obliged him unto], as in special in this of
circumcising his males; and that not only in regard of the disobedience in this
neglect considered in it self, but as it argued other disobedience
accompanying the same; as we heard out of Ainsworth; he was yet in his sin,
while his children were uncircumcised. This accords with those words, verse. 43.
of this 12 Chap. No strdnger shall eat thereof; as the Chaldee Paraphrast
renders it; Omnis filius Israel, qui fuerit Apostata, non commedet ex eo; no
son of Israel, that is an Apostate, shall eat thereof. Thus we have an instance
of debarring the Passover for a pollution not ceremonial which should make him
unclean ceremonially, so as to separate him from the company of others
civilly. And this we shall have occasion (I think) to improve further beneath.
Mr Cotton in his grounds and ends of childrens Baptism, p. 11, to show the
hainousness of the sin of a baptized parent, who neglects to baptize his
Infant, quotes this place, and says, Surely in the old Testament a man was
accounted of God as uncircumcised himself, if his children were uncircumcised.
And according to the analogy Mr. W. proceeds upon, (and reasonably enough) in
his solving the Question why Infants are not admitted to the Communion; taken
fromthe not partaking of the Jews Infants at the Passover, p. 131. I say on
the same analogy we may more particularly argue, If a circumcised person
formerly might not eat the Passover if he circumcised not his males, then a
baptized parent now may not eat the Lords Supper, if he bring not his infant to
Baptism; and indeed supposing the command as clear now for the baptizing of
Insants, as it was before for circumcising of male Infants, the argumentation
is strong enough.

. 9.
3. I thus argue in the third place; The Sacrament ought not to be administered
to them, whom we are no wise called, nor obliged to administer to, upon the
account of administering to believers. But we are no wise called, nor obliged to
administer the Sacrament to unbeleevers, who are such in the sense, and in
respect of notorious disobedience to the Gospel, upon the account of
administering to believers. Ergo, the Sacrament ought not to be administered to
unbeleevers, who are such in the sense, and in respect of notorious
disobedience to the Gospel. The Major is manifest; the Minor I thus confirm.
If in other like cases, where duties are incumbent on us, respecting our
behavior toward others, as so and so qualified, the obligation to those
duties of our behavior toward persons cease when they are not visibly so
and so qualified; then we are no wise called, nor obliged to administer the
Sacrament to unbeleevers, who are such in the sense and respect of notorious
disobedience to the Gospel. But the former is true; therefore the latter also.
The Consequence is clear; For paria arguunt fidemque faciunt.

The Minor may be showed in sundry like instances. The Scripture enjoynes us
several duties in our behavior toward the wicked and godly, the righteous and
unrighteous, although we cannot certainly tell who these persons are habitually
and inwardly. But all agree (I think) that those are to be taken and dealt
with by us as such, who are visibly in the ways of godliness or impiety. David
describing the practices of an holy man, Psalm. 15. among others reckons this,
ver. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honoreth them who fear
the Lord: we must shun the company of the wicked, Psalm. 119.115. we are to give
to him that needs, and not as in a way of charity and necessary relief, to
them who need not. But we know not ever who needs, that craves our alms; he
may counterfeit; and if it appear he does counterfeit, we are not obliged, nor
called to give unto him what belongs to the needy. We must know persons to be
Christ's Disciples by their loving one another, yet such love cannot certainly
be known to us to be in others. John 13.33. So also we are commanded, Luke
17.3, 4. If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent
forgive him.

But how shall I know when he repents? It follows, verse. 4. If he trespass
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee saying, I
repent, thou shall forgive him. There is a twofold forgiveness, 1. that which
is opposed to hatred, grudges, and unjust desire of revenge against him who
has wronged us. Thus we are to forgive him who trespasseth against us, whether
he repent or no; we are to love our enemies remaining such. 2. That which is
opposed to the not receiving him into familiarity, and tokens of intimate and
encouraging friendship as formerly. And thus we are not bound to forgive,
unless he who has trespasled do repent; that is, do manifest his repentance;
and his saying he repents, may be a manifestation thereof sufficient to us,
that we may so far acquiesce therein, as to be obliged to forgive him in this
later sense. But here Calvin's caution is useful, Addendum est (says he on the
place) Christum non privare fideles judicio, ut slulte ad verbulum unum creduli
fint; sed tantum velle aequos esse and humanos, ut resipiscentibus manum
porrigant, si modo apparet ipsos ex animo sibi in peccat is displicere -- sed
quoties probabile Agnum conversionis dederit peccator, admitti vult Christus ad
reconciliationens, ne repulsae fractus deficiat. Now he who has taken away my
goods, and says he repents, and yet will not, having them in his hand, restore
them to me; by his wicked and wilful detention, overthrowes the credibleness
of his verbal profession; and his saying, I repent, obliges to this sort of
private forgiveness I have mentioned, no otherwise, then as it is a probable
token of his serious repentance. Nay, though he is a wise son (as the proverb
goes) who knows his own father, yet is every child obliged to honor both his
parents. So manifest is it, that we may be, and are obliged in several duties
to those persons as so and so qualified, whom we cannot certainly know to be
such, under the notion whereof we tender those respects to them. But as our
Savior says, He that receives a Prophet, or Disciple, in the name of such
(that is, who probably appears to be such) shall have his reward: so here in
these and such like cases. But when persons appear to be in a way visibly
contrary to these qualifications on which is founded any offices in sundry
respects, who doubts that our obligation to perform such offices to them, then
cease? When therefore such as by baptism have bound themselves to believe,
that is, to receive and obey the Gospel, do yet notoriously appear to be
unbelievers in respect of their actual disobedience to the Gospel, we are not
obliged to administer the Sacrament to as believers: As on the contrary, when
baptized persons owning their baptismes, appear not to be in a way of
notorious disobedience to the Gospel, we are bound to administer to them as
believers, whether they are really and inwardly so or no.

. 10.
4. A fourth argument may be grounded on the form of administration, wherein
the Minister says to the Communicants according to 1 Cor. 11.24. Take, eat,
this is the Body of Christ which is broken for you. So Luke 22.19, 20. And this
Cup is the New Testament in Christ's blood which is shed for you. In the
Common Prayer book it is, Take, eat this, in remembrance that Christ died for
thee. Drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee. The
Directory says in Paul's words, This is the body of Christ, which is broken for
you. Whence I argue, The Lords Supper ought not to be administered to them to
whom these words may not be spoken particularly in the administration of it.
But to such unbelievers as are such in respect of their notorious visible
disobedience to the Gospel, these words may not be spoken particularly in the
administration of the Sacrament: Therefore to them the Lords Supper ought not
to be administered. The Major is above exception: For those ought not to be
admitted, to whom the Minister may not say what he ought to apply to the
communicants. The Minor I shall further insist upon, and labor to clear. In
order whereto I must enquire into the meaning of the foresaid words to be used
in the form of administration.

It must be acknowledged, that these words considered absolutely and in
themselves, may be interpreted more generally either, 1. of Christ's being
sacrificed for the redemption of all the world of mankind, the genus humanum;
and that not only sufficienter (for that which is paid for the redemption of
persons, is not strictly a price, because it is sufficient in its own nature to
be a worthy and valuable consideration to redeem them) but conditionally by way
of Christ's intention also to redeem mankind, that is, upon the condition of
believing: So that this Gospel may be preached to every humane creature (not so
to any lapsed Angel) He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. God so
loved the world, etc. Or, 2. (if this please not, the fuller explication
whereof may be seen in learned Camero, and the larger disquisition of it in the
acute Amyraldus) Christ dyed for all, in that he bought all, to be Lord and
Ruler over them, as Mediator in the Kingdom he has received by dispensation
from the Father to be Lord of all. Or, 3. as he procured some common benefits
for all. But I conceive it is manifest, these words of administration considered
as words of administration in the Sacrament, and so with special relation to
the Sacrament, cannot be understood in so large a sense, q d. Christ died for
thee if thou will believe, or on condition of thy faith; or Christ died for
thee, or was broken for thee, that he might have power over thee as Lord and
Judge, or to purchase some common benefits for thee, as he did for all mankind.
For so they might be applied to heathens, yea to the most wicked of heathens,
and such as are visibly in the most nototious opposition of, and apostasy from
the very name of Christianity; and so this should be no more an application of
comfort to the visibly most worthy receiver, then is applicable to the vilest
Mahumetan on the face of the earth.

. 11.
There is another as narrow a sense put on the words, as the former is large,
and that is to restrain them, to the application of the benefits of Christ's
death absolutely to every receiver. q. d. This is the body of Christ, in which
thou have saving interest. As surely as thou receivest the outward signs, so
certainly is the inward grace there also. But this cannot be the meaning here,
because no Church nor Minister can certainly tell who those are who are sincere
believers, who only are partakers absolutely of the remission of sins
purchased by Christ's broken body, and his blood made over unto them. There
remains only a third sense (that I know of) which is a mean betwixt the two
former. And this is to be founded on the manifest sense of other such like
passages in Scripture, and the nature of the Lords Supper it self. Paul says
to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.11. But ye are washed, but ye are are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our
God. And to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.1, 8, 19, 20, 21, 22. You has he qu ekned
who were dead in trespasses and sins; by grace ye are saved through faith,
chap. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.
Abundance of such passages there be in Scripture, where it is manifest the
Apostle applies to them the comforts and benefits of sincere believers, as
theirs; and yet he knew not their sincerity absolutely. It must needs then be,
that according to his knowledge of their sincerity, so was the application he
makes to them of the privileges annexed only to sincerity, that is, according
to the judgment of the Church which received them as such probably. If they
were such as Ecclesiastieally they appeared to be, then all these benefits were
really theirs. And hence the baptized are said to be illuminated and
sanctified, because in the judgment of the Church they were such, who were
admitted to baptism, who if they were really what they were by the Church
esteemed to be, were certainly sanctified and enlightened. so I humbly conceive
the meaning of these words, This is the body of Christ which is broken for you,
is this. q. d. If thou be really what the Church taking thee into her
fellowship judges thee to be (whiles it being in a capacity to judge, has not
judged thee contrary) then thou art certainly partaker of the inward grace of
this Sacrament. All the saving benefits flowing from Christ's blood, are thine.
If thou art sincere, as the Church or Minister hopes and judges of thee in
admitting thee, then Christ is thine really. Not if thou will believe Christ is
thine; but if thou now do sincerely believe as thou now appearest to do;
which supposes that he is taken for one who does sincerely believe by them who
regularly admit him, (the governing Church or Minister alone in some cases.)
How incongruous would it be to say to a rebel who was erewhile visibly in
Arms, and was breathing out treason against his Sovereign, and has not yet
visibly recanted the same, and therefore is still visibly in the way of
treason, how incongruous would it be to say to such a one, If thou art a good
subject, the King is thy friend? And it is manifest in part by what has been
before quoted from the Common Prayer book, and Canons, that the Church of
England, which used that form of administration, Christ died for thee,
understood it as to be applied only to the visibly justified believers,
because they excluded the notoriously disobedient (though not fully
excommunicated) and warned all to refrain who lived and allowed themselves
wilfully in secret sins, which the governors of the Church could take no
cognizance of. Thus in the third Exhortation, after the warning of the wicked
persons, that they come not to the Lords Table. In the invitation following,
those only are called who are truly penitent. To them it is said, Draw near and
take this holy Sacrament to your comfort. They never seemed to call or
encourage the profane to come to be converted from that their wickedness,
although God may work such an effect by the Sacrament, even in an heathen if he
were (though finfully) admitted.

. 12.
All Divines, I think, have held, that in the Sacrament there is an application
of comfort to the communicants particularly. As the Minister is to give each
their portion in due season, and so is prudently to hold forth and apply the
promises to those he judges humbled, and capable of having them fitly and
sately applied to them; and not to the visibly impenitent in that stare (except
so as to encourage them to repent, that they may be capable of them.) So in the
ministration of the Sacrament, comfort is applied to the communicants, upon
supposition of their being in such a capacity for it really, as to the Church
they are apparently

In short, if the delivering the Sacrament to a communicant in this form,
Christ dyed for thee, or the like words, be an application of the richest
Gospel-promise to him, at that instant for him to lay hold upon for his present
comfort, and is so intended by the ministrator of the Sacrament to him, then he
is supposed in the judgment of the Church which receives him, or in the
prudentiall judgment of the Minister (where there is no governing Church to
involve his particular judgment in theirs) that he is one who at present is in
a capacity to believe that he has saving inrerest in Christ's body and blood
exhibited there unto him sacramentally and signally, which they must judge of,
not by his being a Churchmember in the largest sense, (from which
excommunication does not simply cut him off) but by his being visibly (to them)
in the way of actual obedience to the Gospel he professes. So much for this
Argument.

Before we pass to the next, it will not be amiss to take a little repose in
the fifth part of the 119 Psalm.

PSALM 119. Part 5. E. 33 Eternal God, teach me thy way!
Which I shall keep to the end.
34 Endue me with that wit I may,
Thy Law with whole heart tend!
35 Ever me guide in thy Laws blessed!
For therein I rejoice,
36 Estrange not my heart from thy hests,
But from vile avarice!
37 Engage me not to see vain woe!
In thy way quicken me!
38 Establish now thy word, unto
Thy servant, who fears thee!
39 Early prevent my feared disgrace!
For good thy Indgements be.
40 Each word of thine I did embrace;
In just grace quicken me,

CHAP. VI.
. 1.
I Proceed to my fifth and chief Argument, in the management whereof we shall
derive clear light from the holy Scriptures. And it may be thus framed; The
Lords Supper ought not to be administered to them who do visibly and notoriously
want that faith which is necessarily required to be visibly present in them who
may be lawfully admitted thereunto. But such as are unbeleevers by notorious
disobedience to the Gospel, do visibly want that faith, etc. Therefore the
Lords Supper ought not to be administered to them. The Major is undeniable: The
Minor I thus confirm. Such as visibly want that faith which is necessarily
required, to be visibly present in the adult, who may be lawfully admitted to
Baptism, do visibly want that faith which is necessarily required to be
visibly present in them who may be lawfully admitted to the Lords Supper. But
such as are unbeleevers by notorious disobedience to the Gospel, do visibly
want that faith which is necessarily required to be visibly present in the
adult, who may be lawfully admitted to Baptism. Therefore unbeleevers by
notorious disobedience to the Gospel, do visibly want that faith which is
necessarily required to be visibly present in them who may be lawfully admitted
to the Lords Supper.

. 2.
The major proposition here is proved by the analogy (which diverse have showed)
betwixt the two Sacraments; there is the same Covenant sealed in both, and the
same benefits conferred (at least) on the adult in both. And if any make any
difference herein, the advantage is given to the Lords Supper, and so our
argument is more strong, a minori ad majus. But I shall not siay on this; since
the learned and ingenuous Mt. Humphreys (the strongest opposer of the
suspension our controversy is now about, that I have seen) has granted that
Adult is eadem est ratio utriusque sacramenti. And in his explication of that
Rule (that it may suit with his own hypotheses the better), and explicating
himself thereupon, Rejoynd. sect. 5. p. 65. he says; You must take the
meaning thus: There is cadem ratio, but not in omnibus. It holds in the maine,
that the same says which will admit one of age to be baptized, will also admit
him to the Lords Supper; and that is an historical faith only in profession;
yet as for making that confession, though it be needful in Baptism, in
admitting them to be Church Members, seeing we have Scripture for it; yet not
at this Supper, where we have none. For when men are Church members already,
their very coming is their profession. So he.

. 3.
Here are indeed some passages I am far from consenting to; as that Baptism
admits persons to be Church Members, when as the great argument for the
Baptism of children goes upon a contrary position, viz. That Church Members
(whom no barring crime is charged upon) may be baptized. Therefore they are
Church Members before Baptism; though in that their Church Membership is
solemnly signified and publicly acknowledged. And his concluding it not
needful to have this confession made before a person be (first) admitted to the
Lords Supper, as it was before persons adult were admitted to Baptism, will
not hold: unless he could show, where persons baptized in infancy, were (or
ought to be) in Scripture admitted to the Lords Supper, without a personal
recognition of the Christian faith. But because this is not particularly
determined in any Scripture example, we must needs argue by analogy to Baptism
about it. There is the same reason for requiring a profession of faith from one
baptized in infancy, before he is first admitted to the Lords Supper, as there
is for requiring it from the adult for their Baptism; especially such as
Augustine and others, who were many years Christians in profession before they
came to be baptized; and the Jews, who were Church Members before their being
baptized. But to let these things pass here. Mr. Humphreys grants the Rule, so
far as I intend now to make use of it, viz. that it holds in the maine, that
profession of faith (historical says he, but most lamentably wrong) is the
Rule for admission to both Sacraments; only in the baptism of the adult it was
verbal profession, and at receiving, he says, their very coming to receive is
their profession. Though he makes the manner of testifying the faith required
in adult persons to be baptized, different from the manner requisite for
testifying the faith required in him who is to be admitted to the Lords Supper;
yet he grants (if I understand him) that what faith was the condition of
applying Baptism, is the condition of admitting to the Communion; which is all
I require. And therefore the visible want of that faith is a bar to his
receiving, which would be a bar to the baptism of the adult.

. 4.
It now remains that I prove the Minor which was this: Unbeleevers by
notorious disobedience to the Gospel do visibly want that faith, which is
necessarily required to be visibly present, in them who may be lawfully
admitted to Baptism; and the truth of it, is thus made out; If it were a
visibly actual justifying and saving faith, which was necessarily reqired in
Scripture as the condition of persons adult, their admission to Baptism, then
the last recited minor proposition is true. But the Antecedent is evident,
therefore the Consequent must be granted. I suspect not that any will deny the
consequence; my work will lie in demonstrating the Antecedent; the which I
shall thus endeavor.

1. Such a visible faith as is joined with a true and saving visible
repentance, is an actual justifying faith visibly. But the Apostles so required
such a visible faith as is joined with a true and saving visible repentance.
Therefore they required a visibly actual justifying faith, necessarily as the
condition of admission to Baptism. Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized for the
remission of sins; that was the condition Peter tendered to them; and that it
was visibly closed with by them is manifest, upon which they were baptized.
ver. 41. Then they who gladly received his word (especially the doctrine of
repentance he had preached to them, for their crucifying Christ, and of faith
in Christ as the true Messiah) were baptized. Here is the application of
Baptism to them, upon that condition supposed to be visibly performed by them;
which therefore excludes them who close not visibly with this condition. If any
say (as its usually said) who can know a sincere believer? Let them say how
Peter could tell who repented, yea and not only who received the word, but
gladly received it; such as visibly did so, he must take for such, or deal with
as such; who can honor a godly man to love him; or who repents to forgive him?
Those who are such apparently, must be treated as such really, as has been
before said.

. 5.
2. That which Philip required in the Eunuch as a necessary prerequisite for
his admission to baptism, is the necessary condition of persons adult their
admission to Baptism. But a visibly actual justifying faith, was required by
Philip to be in the Eunuch as a necessary prerequisite for his admission to
Baptism, see Acts 8. where an express account is given us of the baptismal
terms, ver. 35, 36. Philip preached unto him Jesus; and as they went on their
way, they came to a certain water. And the Eunach said, See, here is water,
what does hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou beleevest with all
thy heart thou may. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God -- and so he baptized him. A reverend Divine has objected two
things; 1. that Philip required more then was necessary to Baptism; As we
require all graces to be acted in Communicants, though yet we cannot deny them
for coming short in some things they-ought to do. And (says he) we require in
persons to be married, that they give up themselves to the Lord, and marry in
the Lord; yet cannot deny marriage to them for want of saving grace. And 2.
that the Eunuchs answer, in which Philip acquiesced, shows it was but a
dogmatical says, which might be short of justifying.

. 6.
To these I answer: 1. jointly; That one of them destroys the other. For if it
were only dogmatical faith, the same Divine pleads, that that is necessary for
admission to Baptism, And then Philip required not accessories besides
necessaries; of necessity therefore he must renounce one of his exceptions
before he can rationally pitch upon the other positively. Yet 2. I shall answer
severally to them. And first of the latter. Exc. 1. If thou believe with all
thy heart, i. e. visibly professest so to do [the heart was not searched into
by Philip]. The meaning of this should be according to this grave Divine (in
one of his exceptions) q. d. if thou believe with all thy understanding, with
whole assent, as he (explicating himself) says the Devils do believe, really,
upon clear convictions.

I shall consider the like phrase used elsewhere, whereby we may most certainly
discern, whether it is to have that sense or no. Math. 22.37. Thou shall love
the Lord with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy mind; which is
interpreted (and must needs be so) with the will, aftections, and
understanding. Here the whole heart, denotes the whole will, distinguished from
the whole understanding. The same we have, Mark. 12.30. Love the Lord with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength.
This last clause being added to what was in Matthew, denoting the outward
endeavors in testification, and as a fruit of the inward bent and energy of
the whole inward man, denoted by the three former. Here then again the phrase
with all thy heart, denotes with all thy will, and distinguished from the
phrase, with all thy mind, denoting with all thy understanding. So also verse.
33. the same phrase is in like manner used for the whole will; only in that
verse, there is some alteration of the order before used; in stead of (...), we
have here (...); but that is all one as to my present purpose, for which the
text is quoted. In the same signification is the phrase with all the heart,
repeated Luke 10.27. And these are all the places, I take it, where the phrase
is used in the new Testament do a thing with all the heart, besides the text
under consideration. Therefore (sure) it must be taken so here, unless there
be some manifest Reason in the context, to withdraw it from its usual, (and
always elsewhere used) signification; which is not produced, nor I believe can
be.

. 7.
Besides, If we look back to the original of the old Testament, from whence
this phrase in the new Testament is fetched; It will further appear, that to
believe with the whole heart, is most fitly interpreted of believing sincerely
and affectionatly. The text the Gospel refers to is Deuteronomy. 6.5. In verse. 4.
Hear O Israel, etc. Ajin the last letter of the first word, and Daleth the
last letter of the last word in the verse, are extraordinary great letters in
the Hebrew, to cause heed and attention to the Commandment following, which is
that called in the Gospel the great Commandment; as noted by its great
letters: and thence (by the way) most fitly Christ represents the less
Commandments in the esteem of the Jews by pricks or tittles, and least pieces
of letters. But the Hebrew phrase here used answering to (...), or (...), is
(...) Becol leb. which is ordinarily, if not constantly, applied to the doing
of a thing affectionatly, unfeinedly, willingly, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.13. That he may
try you whether ye love the Lord with all your heart and soul. The latin
Interpretation of the Arabic version in our London Bibles says; (...)
appareat utrum vos sitis amici sui sinceri, ex cordibus et ani^^abus vestris,
Deuteronomy. 26.16. and 30.6. Josh. 25.5. 1 Samuel 12.20. Scrve the Lord with all your
heart; further explained, verse 4. Serve him in truth with your whole heart. So
to do any thing with the whole heart; is to do it willingly and sincerely; and
applied to duties, it denotes the doing them, in a right manner, as to praise
the Lord with the whole heart, Psalm. 86.12. to swear with the whole heart, 2 Chronicles. 15.12. To seek God with all the heart, 2 Chronicles. 15.12. and 22.9. To
turn to the Lord with all the heart. Deuteronomy. 16.10. 1 King. 8.48. Jocl. 2.12. To
follow the Lord with all the heart, 1 King. 2.4. and such like. Now if the
phrase in the Hebrew used there, do relate to the whole soul, and therein
especially to the will, and the Greek phrase coming from thence, not used in
the new Testament elsewhere, but manifestly in this sense, then according to the
safe Rule of interpreting Scripture by Scripture, we must take it here, to
denote, sincere, affectionate believing, in a right or acceptable manner, which
was required visibly in the Eunuch, as a necessary prerequisite to his
Baptism. And that the rather, because of the Apostles explication of believing
with, or in the heart, Romans 10.8, 9, 10. of an undoubted saving faith.

. 8.
Having thus showed (I think convincingly) that Philips proposal of believing
with all the heart, as a condition of Baptism, did intend more then a bare
historical, dogmatical faith, which may be, and is in Devils. Now, I think, it
will not be bogled at, That the Eunuch his profession of faith, was apprehended
by Philip as coming up to that demand, and though the Devils often said the
same or like words, as the Eunuch here expresses his faith by, and wherein
Peter made that glorious confession, which Christ so much magnifies, Math.
16.16, 17, 18. and on which Christ will build his Church; Yet there is no doubt
Peter's faith in that, was more than dogmatical, and what might be in Devils:
and the acknowledging of the (then) hardest Article of the Christian faith, to
wit, that Jesus was the Christ or Messiah, was a probable testimony, that the
men who professed this, would not stick at taking him for their Savior. And
therefore such assent to Christianity is spoken of in Scripture to denote, that
entire faith which is justifying and saving, as in the Epistles of John and
elsewhere.

. 9.
Thus much for answer to one of the exceptions made against the force of our
present argument; The other is, that Philip requires more then was necessary to
his admission to baptism, as has been before explained. To this I answer.
There are clear testimonies that Philip required this believing with all the
heart, as a necessary prerequisite condition of the Eunuchs admission to
baptism, if we will but allow Philips and the Eunuchs words to be the
Interpreters of their own minds, without miserable torturing and forcing of
them to abuse their Masters. For,

1. The Eunuch says, What hinders me to be baptized? To this Question Philip
answers, If thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou may: Therefore in
answer to the Question is employed, If thou do not believe with all thy heart,
thou may not; and then no more but necessaries are here required. (I have
often enough explained this to be meant of visible believing with all his
heart.)

2. The Eunuch says, Here is water, what hinders me to be baptized? He
enquites therefore, if there were nay such defect now as should so bar his
being baptized, as the want of water would have done, if that had not been
there then; therefore the Eunuch enquires, If there were any effectual bar now
against his baptism.

3. To which Philip answers as we have heard; If thou beleevest with all thy
heart, thou may, viz. be baptized: now there is water at hand, and Philip an
Evangelist, (no doubt Commissioned to dispense this Sacrament) There Is nothing
now to hinder, except there should be a want of a visible sincere and hearty
believing, and that should hinder thee. If this do not (but rather thou by thy
profession approvest thy self thus to believe) thou may. I appeal to any
Judicious Reader; whether this be not the genuine, fairest and easiest sense of
the words; and how tortured and strained is that the Exception puts upon them.
As if a man coming to one authorized to marry people, should say; Sir, here is a
fit match for me, what hinders me to be married; and then the Commissioner
should say, If ye both are agreed with all your hearts ye may. Is not this
their appearing serious agreement, signified (whether they do inwardly and
sincerely so agree or no, the marrier looks not after,) the necessary
prerequisite condition, which being visibly wanting, would hinder his attompt
to marry them. And if he should say, (as the Reverend Objector supposes,
parallel to this text) If ye fear the Lord, ye may marry; how unsuitable would
it be to the Question proposed by them?

4. If such plain words as these [What hinders me to be baptized? If thou
beleevest with all thy heart, thou mayst] may be expounded, q. d. [To that
Question of thine, What hinders me to be baptized? I answer, Though thou do not
visibly believe sincerely, thou mayst]. I know not what security we shall have
for the sense of almost any Scripture; especially where no absurdity forces us
to depart from the manifest genuine usual proper sense of the words.

I shall leave it to the Readers serious thoughts, whether I have not proved,
that Philip required a visible (believing with all the heart, or) justifying
faith, as the necessary condition of the Eunuchs admission to Baptism; and
then it follows that a persons believing in respect of such a faith as connotes
visible obedience to the Gospel, is the Rule of admission of the adult to
Baptism, and by consequence of such only to the Lords Supper, as are visibly
so qualified. One thing more I shall observe, before I pass this, viz. that the
Eunuchs Question was (as seems) directly and primarily an enquiry, upon what
terms Philip would baptize him, and so refers to his right to baptism in soro
ecclesiae; and therefore I have interpreted the believing with all the heart in
Philips answer, to be meant of a visibly sincere believing, according to the
Rules Philip was to judge by, who were to be treated as sincere believers. And
to refer it to the forum Dei, as distinguished from the sorum ecclesiae, is not
(so far as I can discern) proved nor encouraged by the context.

. 10.
When I had dispatched thus much of this argument, and had considered several
other texts to be annexed, proving the same thing, as Romans 6.3, 4. Col. 2.11,
12, 13. Gal. 3.27. etc. upon which I should and intended to have argued; At
this time (I say) there came to my hands Mr Richard Baxter his late learned and
accurate book, containing five Disputations about right to the Sacraments.
Upon the perusal whereof, I perceived he has so plenteously by many arguments
proved the visibility of saving faith to be the title on which only Baptism
and the Lords Supper too may be administered, That I shall spare the labor of
adding any more here, but refer the Reader to receive (thankfully) that
plentiful harvest, there prepared for his further satisfaction in this thing.
I found indeed, he also had the texts I have made use of here, viz. Act. 2.38.
and 8.35, 36. Yet I let them stand still; hoping that my improvement and
management of them, somewhat differing (though not dissenting) from that
Reverend Author, may be no prejudice to the cause, nor imputed for presumption
and arrogance to my self.

I shall now hasten to the third task I undertook in the method above proposed,
for the evincing that such Christians as are unbeleevers in respect of their
notorious disobedience to the Gospel, ought not to have the Lords Supper
administered to them. And that was to annex some Cautions for the further
clearing and preventing mistake in this doctrine; but this may have a distinct
Chapter; and because the matter is difficult let us pawse upon it, and crave
divine assistance in the ejaculations of

PSALM 119. the 6th part. F. 41 Freely on me thy grace power out!
Lord save me by thy Word!
42 For so shall I answer each flout,
My trust is in the Lord.
43 From me never take thy Truth, for I
Hoped in thy Judgments store.
44 Flying all vice J'le keep truly
Thy Law for evermore.
45 Freedom is that blessed path I tread,
While I thy precepts seek.
46 Fear not my soul, Gods Laws to spread,
And of them to Kings speak.
47 Filled with the love of thy Commands,
Therein my Joy I Will choose.
48 Full gladly to them I my hands
Lift up, and on them muse.

CHAP. VII.
. 1.
CAution 1. When I speak of visible saving faith, which I explain to be a
visible conformity or obedience to the Gospel, I do not refer (primarily) to
the habit of saving faith, but the actual exercise thereof. And the visible
unbeleefe, on the contrary, refers not to the habit of it, but the prevailing
present actings and fruits thereof. For we cannot judge every one has not the
habit of saving or justifying faith, who is at present visibly in a way
inconsistent with the exercise thereof. But as in the Sacraments, especially
remission of sins is sealed: so those are supposed at present capable of it,
who are admitted unto them. Now as Remission of sins is promised to us, (to us
I say, not now considering what is promised to Christ for us) only on the
condition of faith and repentance; so the continuance of remission or
justification, may be expected only, on the same terms, According to our
continued Petition, Math. 6.12. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive our
debiers. Which our Savior reiterates, positively, v. 14. If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your Father will forgive you: and negatively, v. 15. But if
ye (ye my Disciples, though at present justified ones) forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you. So that judicious
grave Divine Musculus says, loc. com. de remissione. p. (mihi) 26.2. Ut
remissio peccatorum sine vera resipiscentia non obtinetur, ita obtenta sine
constanti illius custodia non retinetur: and frustra remittitur quod post
remissionem iteratur.

. 2.
I confess upon this doctrine here occurres a great Question; Whether David
whiles actually impenitent under his gross sins, was unpardoned, and so
unjustifyed? since all pardon and the continuance thereof is to be expected
only on the condition of faith and repentance. It must be acknowledged, this is
a point of great difficulty, to speak to it clearly and consistently: The
obscurity whereof has occasioned different thoughts in the godly learned for
the explication of the same.

Some have said, those gross sins do extinguish grace, and are inconsistent
with the very habit of faith, and so null pardon; which they apply to the case
of Peter and David, till they did repent, and so the work of regeneration was
begun anew again in them, as it was in their first conversion. To which they
think that passage, Psalm 51.10. affords some illustration. Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. but although it may be
so to their sense, and the same omnipotent power of Gods grace is to be put
forth for their recovery, as was for their first conversion: (Which two reasons
may be some account of the Psalmists expressions;) yet I conceive, it is plain,
that the feed of grace is never totally destroyed in them, but is immortal,
although it may as winter-corn, lie (we know not how) long under the clod.
Others say, all the sins of the godly are sins of infirmity (the persons
committing them, being not dead in sin, as an unrogenerate man is, but only
diseased and wounded, and because they are not committed with full consent; The
habitual resolution and frame of their souls, being against those sins which
they are sometimes overborn with. But this seems contrary to many plain
Scriptures, Ezekiel. 18.24, 26. Matthew. 18.3. Romans 8.13. 1 John 1.6, etc.

. 3.
Between these two extremes some have labored to find a middle way more safe.
I shall also adjoyn my poor endeavors in the following particulars.

1. I take it for certain, that there is in the godly a seed, or habit of
sanctifying grace, which (when they are at the lowest ebb, in regard of the
fruits and acts of it) is never totally extinguished, John 10.28. and 17.20,
21. Luke 22.32. And this is an active principle, ready to put them on to
actual faith, repentance, love, and obedience. In regard whereof, the habitual
frame of David's heart was fot God more then for sin, even when his sin hindered
the actings of grace, therefore he never ceased altogether to be a penitent and
believer; and therefore was never altogether cast out of the state of pardon
and justification by those sins (though heinous) which he did not finally
continue in.

2. Notwithstanding this their state of justification and pardon continued, yet
the godly may fall, and be under actual guilt by gross sins whiles not
particularly repented of. And that not only such guilt as may oblige them to
temporal judgments, (which often are for the same inflicted on them, 1 Cor.
11.29, 30, 31. 2 Samuel 12.14.) But also the present actual guilt of eternal
wrath and damnation. For he may fall into such sins, wherein if he finally
continue, he cannot expect to be saved, but is bound to think he shall perish
continuing therein, Matthew. 18.3. and 2. wherein, afterward he repenting,
acknowledges God might justly have cast him off in his sin, and damned him for
it; notwithstanding his former interest in Christ. Now these accusations of
Conscience are true, grounded upon the threatenings of the word of God against
such as are (any while) particularly impenitent under such sins. Therefore the
guilt of conscience charged on him, was really on him at that time.

3. And he may fall into such sins, as the Church may justly retain and bind
(as it is conceived the incestuous Corinthian was godly before,) and these are
bound in heaven: therefore their sins at that present are not remitted in
heaven.

. 4.
3. How these positions (both which seem manifest in Scripture) should agree
together, and not contradict one another, is the great difficulty. That learned
Divine (before named) most happy in solving of difficulties, though he
ingenuously confess himself much in the dark here; yet inclines to this
answer, viz. That pardon belongs not only to actual repentance and faith, but
to habitual. And so David was actually pardoned on the condition performed of
his habitual faith and repentance, which kept the interest of Christ, most
prevailingly in his soul, when he was so foiled by actual wickedness. Which he
is driven to hold, as he says, because he supposes a godly man may die in
gross sins not particularly repented of. But then methinks, it would follow
hereupon, that David after his rising again by actual repentance, was pardoned
only as to his sense, being really and actually pardoned before (even in the
committing the crimes) on the condition of his habitual faith: which yet I
think that Mallcus, and happy confuter of the Antinomians, will not grant.

4. Some distinguish of habitual and actual pardon, according to their
habitual and actual faith and repentance. And so David should have the former
before he was recovered by repentance, not the later. But this distinction may
not be granted, because though there be habits of sanctifying grace insused
into, and inherent in us, distinguished from the actual exercise thereof, yet
grace justifying and pardoning, is wholly without us, and is Gods act; and
therefore I see not how any can be said to have habitual pardon.

. 5.
I shall now cast in my Mite for explicating this matter, by propounding,
explaining, and applying these two distinctions.

4. Distinguish betwixt virtuall pardon, and the formal application of pardon.
The terms of the distinction (after I had in my thoughts pitched on them) I
found in Ames, Medul. lib. 1. c. 27. though he explain them in a sense
different from what I intend to signify thereby. Per formalem applicationem
(says he) remittuntur peccata praeterita, sutura autem virtuailter. Praeterita
in se, futura in subjecto vel persona peccante. The fore-praised Mr. Baxter
also, in his Method for settling Peace of Conscience, p. 266. speaks of virtuall
justification, which David did not lose, and actual, which he did at present
lose by his sin. And of (which comes to the same effect) imperfect and more
prefect justification. But I mean by virtuall pardon, and the formal
application of pardon, an actual and potential pardon, not only in potentia
remota, but proxima. As the fruit is virtually contained in the seed: so where
there is a seed of habitual faith, there is a principle certainly (through
Gods grace promised) productive of actual particular repentance for particular
gross sins, in due time. The kingdom of heaven (true grace) is thus compared to
a grain of Mustard seed.

The virtuall or potentiall pardon is acquitting from sin on such a condition,
which is inchoatly in the sinner, viz. in regard of the seed of it, certainly
productive of actual particular repentance for those gross sins: not only as
what shall be in respect of Gods Decree (which has no condition) to which Ames
seems to refer, (if there were such a pardon or justification in respect of
Gods decree to pardon, a man might be said to be justified before he is born)
but especially, in that, there is that habitual faith and repentance in the
sinner, which will certainly produce actual before death. And thus David was
virtually or potentially inchoatly pardoned, as to those gross sins not yet
particularly and actually repented of; and so he was not out of the state of
justification then (as out Divines express it.) But yet he was not formally
pardoned, till upon actual repentance he had attained actual reconciliation
with God, especially in reference to those particular sins, whereby he was
disobliged from Gods wrath due to him for the same. For this forgiveness is
not to be expected but upon actual repentance, 1 John 1.7, 9. Prove. 28.13. And
if it were otherwise, a godly man could not presume.

. 6.
2. Distinguish the way God has confined us to, wherein only we may expect
pardon, from the way God out of his Royal prerogative may take for pardoning a
sinner. The way prescribed in the word, wherein only we may expect pardon
through Christ, is in performance of the Gospel-condition of actual faith and
repentance, for all sins in general, for more particular gross sins
particularly; and in the continuance hereof Now God ties us, not himself: If
any of the elect should die before actual particular repentance, they having
not oppotunity for such repentance, as in the case of self-murder upon a
violent temptation, or the like, God may acquit them from the guilt of that
particular sin upon their habitual repentance for it. But this we cannot
expect, nor build upon, having no Rule for it, that God will do so, though we
cannot say he never will. Besides, we know not what actual repentance God may
give to such in the instant before death, such secret things belong not to us.
And therefore as we cannot judge others, as to this, so neither may we vary
from the Rule of actual faith and repentance, in order to our expecting the
obtaining and continuance of pardon and justification unto life and salvation.

The Reader will (perhaps) say, To what purpose has this perplexed question
about the state of a Christian, under some notorious sins, been here spoken of?
I answer. Because it is, as I suppose, much conducing to the clearing of the
caution we have in hand, that it is not the visibility or probable appearance
of habitual faith primarily that is requited, which should authorize the Church
or Ministers to admit a person to the Sacraments, but a visible actual faith
showed (probably) in a present conformity and obedience to the Gospel. For
since habitual faith and repentance cannot (according to the rule we must
expect to be ordered by) entitle a person to actual pardon, or the formal
application of pardon; it follows that that habitual faith isnot enquired for
primarily, in order to admission to the Sacraments, which are instituted to
seal actual remission of sin, and are so designed by the ministrators thereof.
It is true, where we require actual faith, habitual is supposed: but
habitual is not sufficient, though we could be assured thereof, being not
sufficient (in its kind as a condition) for the obtaining of pardon of sins.
And this leads us to the second Caution, which is this.

. 7.
2. That a person is not judged by the Church, or Minister, to be destitute of
grace, no not visibly and apparenter, necessarily upon the account of their
debarring him from the Sacrament; but only that he does not live in the
visible actual exercise of faith, but walks in ways inconsistent therewith:
And which therefore bring him under guilt at present; so that his sins are
retained in heaven, that is, unpardoned as well as on earth in the Church. As
by the preaching of the word they are retained in soro interno, or
poenitentiali; so by the Churchcensures, in foro externo and juridicali, Matthew.
16.19. and 18.18. As in preaching (I say) the threatenings or comforts, men's
conditions are manifested to their own consciences; so in Church Censures
inflicted on offenders, and in Ecclesiastical restoring of them, there is a
solemn application of the threats or promises of comforts to particular
persons, upon credible evidence of their states, being such as may require the
same respectively, either the one or the other. Now a godly man may have need
of having the threatenings applied to him, supposing his fall into any gross sin
not particularly repented of. And so may have his sins retained by the Church,
not only he who has the habit of saving faith inwardly (and undiscernably, as
to others;) but also he of whose habitual justifying or sincere faith, the
Church or Ministers have probable hopes at that very time. As suppose in David's
case, one who had long known his former upright life, might by that have had
more probable grounds whereupon to judge and esteem him habitually holy, then
from his present crimes to judge or esteem him destitute of true holiness. The
like is the case of some few of the Quakers, and such notorious heretics in
our days, who upon the account of their former holy conversation a long time,
are hoped to have a seed of grace in them, which will in due time (through Gods
mercy) exert it self, for their conversion from their present blasphemies (as
it has done in some.) Yet what sober person can doubt that at present they are
in such ways of actual infidelity and wickedness, as to be rejected (as they
are) by our Churches.

. 8.
The third Caution that must be here remembered, which was hinted before, viz.
That it belongs primarily to the governing Church to judge what persons are so
unbelievers, in respect of their notorious disobedience to the Gospel, as that
the Lords Supper may not be administered to them; this being confessed by all to
be one instance of Ecclesiastical punishment, or rather castigation; viz. in
exclusion from the Sacrament. And then (where the Church is in such a capacity
to judge) I humbly conceive the Minister (while he is their Minister) is to
administer according to their judgment, yea although their public judgment
thwart his own opinion. For in such a case the question is not, whether
unbelievers by notorious disobedience to the Gospel, should be admitted; that
he cannot recede from to gratify any: but whether this or that person be such
an unbleliever, which is regularly in a Church under Ecclesiastical government
to be determined by a public judgment, wherein particular persons are (and an
Officer considered as a single person is) concluded, so as it may not be
resisted by him alone, (though he has the liberty of appeal as opportunity is
offered.) As when a Judge acquits one upon the verdict of the Jury whom he
thinks ought not to be acquitted. The question there is not, whether the
guilty should be acquitted, that may not be done by him upon any terms, but
whether that person is guilty; and here without any injustice he submits his
own opinion to the public judgment of them whom the Law makes Judges (in some
sort) of the fact in such cases. I said while the Minister continues to be
their Minister, he is obliged thus to comply; but in some gross and palpable
male-administrations, it is thought the Minister (and so the Judge in the
former instance) should leave his place, rather then continue to execute the
wicked determinations of the public judgment aforesaid; As Hooker in the
Preface to his Ecclesiastical Polity says, Calvin did in such a case;
preaching his farewell Sermon upon such a wrong judgment passed by the
Consistory of Geneva for the admission of a notorious offender to the Sacrament.

. 9.
4. But when the Church is not in that capacity, there being not a governing
Church, nor can be procured, I suppose it is devolved to the diseretion and
prudence of the Minister for suspending his own act of delivering the Sacrament
to such as are openly wicked and profane, and (as it were) ipso jure
excommunicate. For the proving hereof, or what is tantamount, that reverend
Divine Mr. Blake has given us his ren reasons in his Covenant sealed, chapter 7..
16. well worthy of consideration, and answered objections made by Mr. Jeanes
against the same. To which, (if it would not be counted too much presumption) I
would add. There is no one (I think) doubts, but a Minister, if cast among
heathens, to whom he preaches the Gospel, and they tender themselves to
baptisin, might make use of his prudence and judgment of discretion to direct
him in administering or not administering baptism to those he discerns capable or
incapable, who are fit Catechumens, and who not; who seem to profess the
Christian faith seriously, and who saying the same words, do yet manifestly
scorn what in words they profess. And where he has no governing Church, to
whose public judgment he should have recourse; I see not but the case as to
this, is of the same exigence: either he is to administer to all that come, or
he must discern and judge who are to be refused and who embraced. Now there is
no public judgment for him to be guided by. But none (sure) will say the
former. The Minister is greatly concerned to do his endeavor in keeping the
manifestly incapable from participating even where there is a governing Church,
much more where there is not, and so agreater burden is cast upon him. Cyprian
in his 54. Epistle Cornelio fratri, after advising him to admit the penitent to
the communion, says, Si autem (quod Dominus avertat a fratribus nostris)
aliquis lapsorum fefellerit, ut pacem subdole petat, and impendentis praelii
tempore communicationem, non praeliaturus accipiat, seipsum fallit ac decipit,
qui aliud cord occultat and aliud voce pronunciat. Nos in quantum nobis and
videre and judicare conceditur faciem singulorum videmus, cor scrutari, and
mentem perspicere non possumus. De his judicat occultorum scrutator and
cognitor, cito venturus, etc. And that by accipere communicationem, he means to
receive the Lords Supper, is evident by his words a little before, where he
urges to entertain the lapsed penitents, Cum ad hoc fiat Eucharistia, ut
possit accipientibus esse tutela -- Nam quomodo docemus aut provocamus eos in
confessione Nominis sanguinem fundere, si eis militaturis Christi sanguinem
denegamus? Aut quomodo ad Martyrii poculum idoneos facimus se non eos prius ad
bibendum in Ecclesia poculum Domini jure communicationis admittimus?

And in his 61 Epistle Euchratio Fratri. To him who had enquired his judgment
de histrione an talis debeat communicare nobiscum? Cyrian answers; Puto nee
majestati divinae, nec evangelicae disciplinae congruere, ut pudor et honor
Ecclesiae, tam turpi et infami contagione soedetur. And Chrysoslom, Ad populum
Antiochen. hom. 60. de sumentibus indigne divina et sancta mysteria: says, Nos
ministrorum tenemus locum, qui ver o sanctificat ea et immutat, ipse est nullus
itaque Judas assistat, nullus avarus; si quis est discipulus adsit. Nam tales
mensa non sascipit; ait enim, Cum discipulis me is pascha facio, etc. And that's
a famous place in Justin Martyr, in his second defense of the Christians, ad
Antonium pium. (Johanne Lang q Interpret) where about a little after the
middle, relating the manner and order of the Christians service, and divine
worship or Liturgy; he says, Porro, alimentum hoc, apud nos appellatur
Eucharistia, quod nulli alij participare licitum est ((...)) quam veram esse
doctrinam nostram credenti, et lavacro propter remissionem peccatorum, and
regenerationem abluto, and ita ut Christus tradidit viventi. -- And then that
the Lords Supper be not administered to the appatently scandalous, (as these
quotations say it ought not) should be the special care of them who are to
dispense the same. Let a Minister think with himself, if he shall neglect to
reprove a wicked man appearing such, whether he think he may safely excuse
himself before the Lord with saying, There was no governing Church where I was
Minister, by whose sentence he might have been declared a wicked man, If there
had, I would have reproved him as such? and then see whether the using a
notorious wicked person in the Sacrament as if he were an orderly Christian,
will be excused with, saying, I wanted Prelates, or a Classis, or an Eldership,
by any of whose authoritative judgment he should have been declared a wicked
liver? And if this were well weighed, what a mighty burden lies on the
Minister in this thing, where there are no Church Governors besides; I think
it would quicken Ministers in more serious laboring for assistance in the work.

. 10.
5. Lastly. I would by way of caution note, that though the Rule for
non-admission or suspension before asserted may not be infringed; yet there
ought to be much charitable candor, rendernesse, and wisdom in the application
of it to particular persons.

I shall not take upon me to give particular Directions in this matter, what
crimes may now denominate one scandalously profane, that is, in ways of
wickedness and unbelief, inconsistent visibly, with any exercise of saving
faith. Only in general I shall say, It is my opinion. 1. That such
miscarriages as are not more heinous and scandalous, than those are which are
generally acknowledged to be incident to the godly, (I mean to them who walk
godly) will not be marks to us of any particular persons unbelief in the sense
aforesaid. I will not be particular here in making comparisons betwixt neglect
of admenition, and neglect of ordinary family duty, betwixt backbiting
censoriousness, and some vain words, containing in them an unnecessary
attestation, by faith, truth, and the like. But the judicious Reader may (if he
please easily) bethink himself of many such Instances to be compared. 2.
Those crimes which are visibly inconsistent with the exercise of faith at
sometimes, may not be so at other times; as polygamy in the old Testament,
compared with the New Testament times. 3. The like variation may be rational
in respect of persons, considering the difference betwixt one and another, in
respect of temptations, helps, warnings, convictions, company, and the like. 4.
Where a multitude are enwrapped in some crime, commonly the Ringleaders are
much more deeply guilty than the rest, drawn in by the company, example,
persuasions of their leader.

. 11.
5. To conclude, in point of ignorance I think few can be thus judged of,
where the Ministers do what they may for their instruction. Fundamentalls are
very few and plain. And I hope upon good encouragement in sundry Parishes in
my neighborhood, we shall not have one debarrable upon the account of
ignorance, as indeed I think there are few, very few (comparatively) already,
through Gods blessing upon our endeavors for private and personal instruction;
which oh that all Ministers would set upon! We find great encouragement, even
among those aged people we suspected would have been most averse. They
generally thank us, when we come to their houses, or elsewhere confer with
them. Which I mention that none may discourage themselves with supposed fears
of the untractableness of any, whom they have not first tried, after a loving,
tender, and gentle application of themselves to them for their instruction.
Much wisdom is needful, herein (oh that God would give us a greater measure
of it!) but the design is of noble tendency; and I hope many a soul will and
does bless God for the zeal of that Worcestershire burning and shining light,
and his Associates, which have provoked many to this unquestionable good work.
And in point of practical miscarriages, we have Directions given us in the
Ordinance of Lords and Commons, after advice had with the Assembly; which may
justly bear some sway with us, as to the discerning what persons are
debarrable upon their notorious miscarriages visibly inconsistent with the
exercise of sincere faith.

. 12.
Upon the whole matter I conclude that there are few (comparatively) in the
Parishes I am acquainted with, who may lawfully be judged by us, to be in such
ways of wickedness, as are inconsistent with the exercise of godliness; either
because (through Gods mercy) such wickednesses do not notoriously appear, (and
de occultis non judicat ecclesia) or because, upon their being admonished
thereof, they are ready to condemn themselves, and professing repentance to
promise reformation. The maine obstacle lying in this is that some notoriously
guilty of wickedness publicly known (through the nature of the crime it self
they have committed) are unwilling to profess publicly their repentance for
the same. And yet in my experience this does rarely happen. And I humbly
conceive, that learned Gentleman Mr Maurice, has done an acceptable service to
the Church of God, in opposing the practices of some Ministers in his
neighborhood, who associated with some few of their members in one Church, to
administer the Sacrament there; neglecting it wholly in their own proper
Churches. Its better to be too charitable (if I may so speak) in judging them
capable who are not, then too censorious in judging them not capable who are
so. Better it were that some have what belongs not to them, than any should be
deprived of their due. I conjecture by the places I know, that there are few
places in England, where a Minister can sufficiently excuse himself in neglect
of administering the Sacrament to his charge; by the pretense of want of a
competent number of visibly capable Communicants. And that the want of Elders
is no plea sufficient, has been proved by many pens, which I heartily assent
unto; and therefore would earnestly desire Ministers not to neglect the
celebration of the Sacrament in their own places, upon such pretenses,
although in such want of government a greater burden must needs lie upon their
own shoulders. In short, I would be as charitable as might be in judging and
discerning who are in ways of wickedness, visibly inconsistent with any
exercise of faith, (And yet to prevent abuse of this doctrine, it must be
remembered, that we are to judge our selves by a stricter Rule in discerning of
our conditions, than others may make use of in probable discerning concerning
us. And 2. we may have strong suspicions and jealousies concerning others, (so
as to admonish them sharply) whom yet we cannot judge ecclesiastically (and
use) as such whom we fear them to be. But that such as are notoriously thus
wicked, have any right, or may be regularly admitted to the Sacrament, I flatly
d^ny, upon the Grounds and Reasons before memioned.

But its now high time to take our refreshing.

PSALM 119. part 7th. G. 49 Grant to thy servant that good word,
Whereon I hope by thee!
50 Great joy this does in straits afford;
For thou have quickened me.
51 Graceless proud men in scoffs waxt hold,
Yet kept I thy Law sound.
52 Good Lord, I mind thy Judgments old,
And therein comfort found.
53 Grim horrors seas'd on me, because
Men break thy Statutes sage.
54 Glad songs to me have been thy Laws,
In the house of pilgrimage.
55 Grave thoughts I had of thy Name, Lord,
By night, and thy Law kept.
56 Guiding my steps after thy Word:
This blessed fruit I have reap't.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1.
THese three last Chapters being duly weighed by the attentive Reader, and
compared with Mr W. his discourse from page 47. to 62. I hope he shall not want
an answer for most there alleged, pertinently to the matter we are upon.
Extravagancies we shall not now deal with. Yet some more particular Answer
shall be given to what remains any thing considerable in those pages of his.

He often harps upon one base. You mis-judge (says he) in judging the morbid
members of our parochial Assemblies to be Infidels and unbeleevers positively
as Pagans, p. 50. Give over your herterodoxall brownisme (such words as this
and mormo, and mormonize, fill his mouth completely) and honor the Christian
Religion, by putting a divinely positive difference, between the unbeleevers
among us, and the unbeleevers of Pagans, p. 53. And (I know not how) many times
over does he in such like expressions inform our dullness, that there is a
difference betwixt our unbeleevers; and Pagans; and with great vehemence
persuades us to believe that Pagans were not baptized, nor do they profess the
Christian faith as ours do. As Augustine said to Cresconius, l. 2. contra
Cresconium Grammaticum, ne quisquam vel nimis acutus, id quod semel breviterque
dixisses interpretari aliter conaretur: etiam obtusis auribus et cordibus tuam
curasti immergere atque inculcare sententiam. One would be apt to think I had
denied this which he urges so hotly; or else that he has such a stomach to
confute me, he will beat a brat that no body owns on my back. Did ever any one
deny to put a difference betwixt baptized persons, and unbaptized, yea those
who are but catechumens? But if the Question be whether Unbeleever, is a name
applicable (by Scripture warrant) to some baptized persons, I have answered it
already, (when I routed his sorry distinction) and showed that it is, in diverse
Instances. And if further the Question be, what kind of believing is the
condition of visible title to sacramental admission? I have showed that it is
that believing which does connote visible actual saving faith and repentance.
And that the due administration of the Sacraments does necessarily suppose in
the judgment of the Church or Minister, that the person to whom they are
dispensed is a sincere believer, and a converted person, is a position wherein
I think I shall never see Mr Baxter answered; though he have so grave and
learned an Antagonist engaged against him therein. And indeed Mr W. and I might
well have been silent, to have heard our Betters argue the matter. That's my
opinion, I cannot say it was his.

. 2.
P. 50. Mr W. will needs show us how they who are ignorant and disorderly can
be believers; and says, The very best of us are sinners and Saints but in a
diverse respect; sinners ex peccato remanenti, Saints ex gratia renovantis; or
sinners quoad reliquias vetustatis, Saints quoad primitias spiritus. i. e. (if
I may english his latin, because he does not) to this sense; we are sinners
because of sin in us, and Saints because of grace in us.

Well now, what will he do with this distinction? he tells us; So our morbid
Church members are in a diverse respect believers and unbeleevers. Believers
positively, as soederally and professedly of the Christian persuasion.
Unbeleevers negatively, as in works they practically deny the faith under which
they positively and professedly stand by baptism, and visible submission to
the outward means of faith and reformation, not as aliens, but as of the
household of faith, putting themselves under the Churches cure, not justifying
their miscarriages, but coming to our solemnities as to the means of better
carriage, professedly hoping in Christ for salvation, and in no other. And then
he shows how some of the children of Israel were Rulers of Sodom by their
sinful practice, yet children of God, and of the Prophets, and the Church, a
severed and holy people, by the holiness of the Covenant under which they
professedly stood.

First, for the similitude of one to the other compared. As we are sinners
because we have sin in us, and Saints because of grace; so some are Saints, or
an holy people, though they have no holiness in them, but only engaged
positively to be holy. Wherein is the likeness? As some having learning are
learned, so some engaged or professing to be learned are learned. Is not this
good?

And then again. As we are Saints and sinners in diverse respects, so are
persons believers and unbeleevers in diverse respects. The comparison should
have been, of some who are Saints and no Saints, to have fitted believers and
unbeleevers; the denomination is taken from the prevailing or predominant part.

. 3.
Then for the thing it self. First, he describes positively believers, such
who are soederally and professedly of the Christian persuasion. Well, and are
not all the excommunicate, or most of them so? have not they a dogmatical
faith? And 2. are they not foederally, positively engaged; no time nor
condition can take off, or free them from their baptismal engagements.

Well, but in his explanation of his unbeleevers negatively, he adds more to
the description of his positively believers; as namely; 1. Visible submission
to the outward means of faith and reformation, not as aliens but of the
household of faith. 2. Not justifying their miscarriages. 3. But coming to our
solemnities. 4. Professedly hoping in Christ for salvation; and 5. in no other
Savior. And p. 57. he further describes them thus. The baptized among us that
frequent our Assemblies, hear our doctrine with reverence and attention, join
with us in our solemnities, give us visible testimony of their assent to our
doctrine, to such we are to administer as believers, etc.

Now 1. I would know what Reason Mr. W. can produce for putting in these
qualifications, into the description of his positively believer, rather than,
that he should in general, walk according to his profession, which makes a
visible Saint, or justified believer? 2. If all these be necessary to make up
his positive believer, who must have the Sacrament then, if these or any of
these be wanting visibly, in a baptized person adult, and not excommunicate, he
is not (or not enough) a positive believer, and so must not be admitted to the
Sacrament. It should seem then, its Mr. W. his doctrine, that if a person
baptized and adult, either will not be reproved, is a desperate swearer, who as
the dog turns again to rent him, that (though never so prudently and meekly)
casts the pearls of admonition before him; or if he frequent not (come not
above twice or thrice a year to any public, religious solemnities) or if he
do justify and plead for his miscarriages; or if he know not whether Christ be
God or no, whom he says he hopes in; or whether Christ be man too and dyed;
yea or if he do not hear the word with reverence and attention, and give us
visible testimony of his assent thereunto. In any of these cases (much more
where all concur) suspension is allowed of; and I presume Mr. W. would not
have this person for any one of these offenses excommunicated in his sense,
viz. excluded all public Ordinances. And yet whiles he grants all this, he
pretends to justify the position I opposed, viz. that no ignorant or
scandalous baptized adult, and not excommunicated person should be debared the
Sacrament; our Gentleman who is so impatient of being contradicted by me, can
calmly and contentedly contradict himself, and that in so many instances
altogether.

3. I would demand, where God has promised to him that believes dogmatically
only, and professes so, and that he is willing to receive, etc. that he shall
have the Sacrament, either the bare signs, or the thing signified thereby? If
he will forbear to answer these scriblings (as his severity calls my writings)
till he have some clear proof for that, I think we shall be no more honored
with his public assaults. But I may not impose such hard conditions on him;
his tongue and pen are his own.

4. But if his positive believer do truly profess the whole Christian
persuasion, that is, to assent to the doctrine of the Gospel understandingly
(for a man cannot be persuaded of what he understands not) and that he hopes in
Christ, that is, in Christ's way; he is a justified believer. If he do but
credibly profess the same, no one doubts of his admission to the Sacrament. But
then the Question will be, whether this word profession is credible, when his
deeds do notoriously contradict the same; of which we must speak beneath.

. 4.
Mr. W. adds, p. 51. And we read not of any debarring this had people (the
Israelites) from the solemnity of the Passover. There were no such imperious
Masters of Reformation in those days, which gathered proselytes of the better
sort into a faction, and excluded all the rest from Church fellowship, as the
world, aliens, unbeleevers, and no Church members. -- Likewise the Apostle
says, We are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles; so our people
are Christians by nature and birth, and not sinners of the Pagans, positively
by the proper Rules of their very profession.

This latter assertion of our being Christians by birth, as the Jews were
Church members borne I deny not. But that's no medium to prove the general
admission he pleads for. The former words of his are argumentative after a
fashion. The argument is gathered from comparing the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, with the Passover among the Jews, and our Ministers with the Jewish
Governors then.

And here first we have the flowers of his argument, Imperious Masters of
Reformation; faction. He should remember he was to dispute not revile now. But
some men's mouths do so abound with the distillation of reproachful terms,
that they can hardly speak vehemently, without spitting abusively. 2. We have
his false intimations, that we gather proselytes into a faction, excluding all
the rest, etc. This falsehood runs almost through his book; that we gather new
Churches, and disclaim the old constitution as null, lay another in
examination: notorious untruths! I shall say no more to them now, but demand,
whether the Constitutions and Cannons ecclesiastical, primo Jacobi, which Can.
27. enjoined that all should kneel at the Communion, and that the Minister
should not deliver it to any if they did not kneel; were intended by the
Imposers thereof (or did it amount in the nature of the thing it self) to a
new constitution of the Church? Did they gather the kneelers into a faction as
their proselytes. Mr. W. I think, will hereby cross his affection to the
Prelatical Government, hinted in his p. 73.) so as to say that was a factious
design. And then all excluding some-from the Communion in our Churches
(without excommunicating them from all Ordinances) yea though upon unscriptural
grounds (for I am of opinion, their kneeling was not jure divino, no more than
bowing at the name of Jesus) is not a demolishing of the former constitution of
the Church, and erecting a new one in a faction. And I might ask, whether every
time the people of the Jews, were by their godly Magistrates called to renew
their Covenant with God, and sometimes so strictly enjoined hereunto, that he
that refused should be severely punished, yea separated from the Congregation.
(2 Chronicles. 15.9, 12, 13. and 34.29, 31, 32. Ezra 10.3, 5, 7, 8.11, 12.19.)
Whether (I say) then they pulled down the old constitution of their Church, and
made a new one in a faction?

But I keep the Reader too long from the argument, the strength whereof I
shall neither conceal nor decline, though its but sorrily here hinted by Mr. W.
And because this objection against suspension is the strongest that I know of,
I shall take the occasion here offered to speak more closely, and yet largely
unto it. But of this in the two following Chapters. Now to our Crumbs of comfort.

PSALM 119. part. 8. H. 57 High God, my portion; I have said.
I Will keep thy word most true.
58 Heartily I thy savor prayed:
Thy promised mercy show.
59 Heeding my paths, I turned my way
Unto thy Testaments.
60 Hasting, I did no whit delay
To keep thy Commandments.
61 Hells wicked bands have robbed me.
Thy Law to mind I call.
62 Humbly at midnight, Ple thank thee,
Right are thy Judgments all.
63 He who seares thee, walks with me still.
And who thy precepts keep.
64 Here-all this Earth thy mercies fill.
Teach me thy statutes deep.

CHAP. IX.
. 1.
THe passage wherein Mr. W. is pleased to insinuate the argument against
suspension, is this; We read not of any debarring this bad people (the
Israelites) from the solemnity of the Passover. The argument here intimated is
this; All the people circumcised, though never so bad, were admitted to the
Passover, therefore so must all the baptized adult, etc. be admitted to the
Lords Supper.

1. I deny the consequence as its here propounded, (and yet it is most strictly
propounded, according to the forementioned passage of our Friend, from which
its framed) because it proceeds from fact to right, which is not valid; if it
were, he might by like reason prove polygamy lawful, because it was in so many
ages, and by the best sort of men in those ages practiced in the old Testament.

2. And if in stead of [admitted] we put [rightfully admitted] to the
Passover: yet the consequence is not clear enough to determine our
controversy. Because the Ordinances of the Old Testament are not without
limitations, Rules for the New, in these things. We grant an argument may be
drawn from Analogy in some cases, viz. where we can prove the Analogy it self
by Scripture, or at least that the ground of the Analogy is of equal
concernment and latitude to us now, as to them in the old Testament, and that
too not retrenched by any particular Institution in the New.

. 2.
The strength of that Argument from infant-circumcision for pedobaptism, lies
not in this immediately, that because their children were circumcised ours must
be baptized; but because it is evident by their circumcision, that they were
Church Members: therefore our children are Church Members. Which consequence
holds firmly, unless it could be showed, either that their Church Membership
was typical, and so concerns not us, or else that that privilege of
Church Membership belonging to the children of the believing Jews then, is now
reversed in the New Testament, which we put the Anabaptists or Antipedobaptists
to prove if they can. And then because they (or most of them) grant, that all
Church Members (not forfeiting their privileges as infan^ cannot) may be
baptized, hence we conclude Infant Baptism. But now in this Argument from the
Passover to the Lords Supper, (supposing at present but not granting the
rightful general admssion there pretended) there is not the like ground of
Analogy to go upon. For we grant not to Mr. W. that all Church Members (whereof
many forfeit their privileges) may be admitted to the Lords Supper. This is
the thing in question between us. If he would have argued to purpose, he should
have given in his Medium, whereby he would evince the like generality of the
subjects recipient of the Lords Supper as of the Passover. Whether from the
identity of nature, use, and signification of the Passover and the Lords
Supper, or from what else, and then it would be considered.

. 3.
1. That the Passover was a Sacrifice as well as a Sacrament. Mark 14.12. The
first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the Passover. (...), quando
pascha immolabant, Deuteronomy. 16.2. thou shall sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord
thy God of the Flock and of the Herd. By the way we may note, that this
translation in the last words mentioned [of the Flock and of the Herd] seems to
contradict Exodus 12.3. and other places, which say it must be a Lamb only or a
Kid, how then of the Herd?. The most learned Dr. Ralph Cudworth (the now worthy
Professor of Hebrew, and the great ornament of the University of Cambridge, and
the Master of that flourishing College there, to which I am most obliged to
wish happiness) in his discourse called the true notion of the Lords Supper,
p. 38.39. gives us this solution. The words (says he) in the Hebrew, according
to a several punctation, and supplying of something that must be understood,
may be expounded diverse ways, any whereof is far better then that which our
English translators pitch upon. Onkelos reads it, Thou shall sacrifice the
Passover before the Lord thy God, of the sons of the Flock, and the Peace
offerings thereof of Oxen. Which may be confirmed from that of Josiahs
Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35, 7. And Josiah gave to the people of the Flock, Lambs
and Kids, all for the Passeover-offerings, to the number of 30000, and 3000
Bullocks; Where the Bullocks, or the Herd, are divided from the
Passe-over-offerings. So verse. 13. these were roasted. -- but the other sod in
pots. So that forenamed place, Deuteronomy. 16.2. is to be read thus: Thou shall
sacrifice the Passover to the Lord thy God (and then the Verb being again
repeated) thou shall sacrifi^e sheep and oxen, or the stock and the herd, that
is, one in the Passover, the other in Peace offerings. But I quoted the text
only to show that the Passover was a Sacrifice. It was indeed killed by the
people, or might be. Exodus 12.6. Though the Levites killed it, 2 Chronicles. 30.17.
that was because the people were unclean, and so might not come into the Court
to kill it. Which special and peculiar reason so rendered, shows that except
in such a case of uncleanness, the people themselves had killed the Passover.
The same reason is rendered for the like purpose, Ezra 6. But this makes it not
no Sacrifice properly so called: For the people might kill other Sacrifices, as
the Burnt-offerings, Levit, 1.4, 5. Peaceofferings, Levit. 3.2. and
Sin Offerings, Levit. 4.24.

The Passover likewise was brought to the Tabernacledore, as Sacrifices were
Deuteronomy. 16.2. compared with chap. 12.5. Numb. 9.7, 13.. compared with Exodus
29.42. It also agreed with the Sacrifices, in that the blood of the Passover
was to be sprinkled by the Priest, and the fat to be burnt on the Altar, Exodus
23.18. and 34.23, 25. 2 Chronicles. 30.16. and 35.11. Now the skillful Jews tell
us, that the sprinkling of blood is the essence of the Sacrifice. At the first
institution in Egypt there is some difference, for it was there killed in every
private house; but then also Sacrifices were not appointed to be offered by a
peculiar order of men, as they were afterward.

. 4.
2. Again, concerning the thing signified in the Passover, we may consider, In
the first celebration of it, according to the institution, Exodus 12.17, 27. and
34.18. Deuteronomy. 16.1. Two things are represented therein as it was a token, 1. of
Gods merciful passing over their houses, when the first born of the Egyptians
were slain in each of their houses. 2. Their passing out of Egypt. Some speak
of another Transitus denoted, viz, their passage through the red Sea. But I
find no Scripture-ground for this in particular; only as it was a part of
their bringing out of Egypt, it was not excluded; yet not specially referred
to, as the two former were; and yet of these one (the later) seems to be more
intended then the other (the former.) My reason is, because there was another
ordinance instituted particularly, referring to this, viz. the giving up the
first born to God, Exodus 13.2, 13, 15. So there was not of that. No doubt too
the Passover was a type of Christ, (as the Manna and water of the Rock were, 1
Cor. 10.3, 4.) by the right use whereof the godly were to be led to the
meditation of the Messiah to be rested on. But as the Manna and Water were
communicated to them who were not capable of receiving a Sacrament as such, so
might the Passover also. Because there were other ends and reasons of it,
besides what were sacramental. And then our Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
not to be paralleled with them in this general admission; where the receiving
the Bread and Wine delivered, is merely sacramental (not at all intended as a
Meal for the body as those were) referring only to Christ, and salvation by
him; not as theirs which was a commemoration of a temporal deliverance, which
wicked men had a share in, as well (and as to the deliverance considered in it
self as much) as the best had. Nor is our Sacrament a Sacrifice, as their
Passover was. A Sacrament and a Sacrifice thus differing, says the renowned
Bp. Usher (P. M.) In the former there is an offer made by God to us, in the
later there is an offering to God. In the sacrifices Christ was signified as
given for us, in the Sacrament as given to us. The Sacrifices only as signs,
the Sacraments seals also. So he in his Body of Divinity, p. 404,

. 5.
3. Furthermore, if we have clear grounds in the New Testament to deny the
general admission (pleaded for) to the Lords Supper, whatsoever is urged from
the old Testament, will have no consequence in it to the New. But we have given
some reasons before, to prove that in the New Testament such believing as
connotes visible actual obedience to the Gospel, is the only rule for
admission to the New Testament Sacraments. And as learned Mr. Baxter says in
his third Dispution about right to the Sacraments. page 303. It is certain that
the fabric of the Jewish Polity, especially the grounds and reasons of all
Gods institutions of those times are so imperfectly known to us, that it is
utterly unfit to reduce so many clear Gospel-arguments to one dark one from
those Laws. For it is a most necessary Rule, that in all our Disputations we
must reduce uncertainties to certainties. Our Arguments must be A notioribus ad
minus nota. Mr. Blake consesseth it very dangerous to argue from mere Analogy,
and professes he does not so but from the ground of the institution. And how
dark are those grounds in some cases to us? So he.

It is certainly a most hard thing to give any consistent account about many
concernments of the Passover, How all the Paschal Lambs should be killed (in the
place where the Lord should choose) Deuteronomy. 16.5, 6. and the blood of each
sprinkled on one Altar: And as some say, the fat sacrificed on the Altar too.
How all these (many hundreds) could be so killed in one place, in one evening (or
betwixt the two evenings, as they called it) in a few hours space, is a thing
to me hugely difficult to conceive. And whether Capellus his distinction of a
private and public immolation of the Passover, does avail here, I dare not
determine. How difficult is it to show how the Jews might certainly know the
Even of the fourteenth day (which some accounted to be the beginning of the
fifteenth) after the Moon had changed; especially when the change of the Moon
happened to be near the end of one day, and beginning of another? And from this
uncertainty most probably came the variation of days, wherein Christ and the
Jews celebrated his last Passover; if there were such a difference, which is
(as I remember) denied by Tolet and Baronius, whom Cloppenburgius defends; but
asserted by the illustrious Scaliger and Causabon. The Arguments of both
parties are marshalled by Capellus in his (...) ad amicam inter se and Johannem
Cloppenburgium epistolicam collationem de ultimo Christi Paschate. But if the
Jews, or at least some of them, varied from the day Christ observed for
celebration of the Passover, whether it was on the account of a Tradition
which should be observed by the Jews, that when the Passover fell on the day
before a Sabbath, they might put it off till the Sabbath; that the
inconvenience of two Sabbaths coming together might be avoided, and then that
Christ would not comply with them in this their frugality, or rather
niggardliness in Gods service? But this Reason, though asserted by many, is
confuted by the most learned Doctor Cudworth before praised, in his discourse
concerning the true notion of the Lords Supper, who shows that the Jews had
no such custom in our Saviors time, and that Calendar which now they use
according to the Talmud, was not completely finished till about the five
hundredth year of the Christian Era. Or whether the variation of days was
from the uncertainty of knowing the right day, when the (...), or appearance of
the Moon was not soon discerned after the change; which might occasion the
observation of diverse days, according to several persons their persuasion
about the time of the Change, and as some say, Observare duos dies propter
dubium? And whether Christ's Passover ws a true Legal Passover, or only a
Feast of unleavened bread, in a private imitation of the Passover? According
to which the learned Hugo Grotius in Annot. ad Matthew. 26. gives this
distinction of the (...), and says, this was not (...), but (...), such as the
Jews celebrate at this day; because the Temple being down, all sacrifices are
ceased. But this distinction is denied by others, and especially assaulted by
the fore praised Capellus.

Diverse other difficulties there are about the Passover, which with the former
mentioned, may confirm what Mr. Baxter so reasonably asserted, viz. That it is
utterly unfit to reduce so many clear Gospel-Arguments to one dark one from
those Ordinances about the Passover, if there were such an one. I shall add
also, That there is no small difficulty in clearing who were the subjects to be
partakers of the Passover, particularly whether children so soon as they were
capable of eating flesh, did not partake? I shall not discuss the point, it
would be too long; only I must crave liberty to say, that I see no
convincing-proofs of their exclusion, nor any absurdity following upon their
reception; whiles I consider the Passover (as was before hinted) was not
wholly and only sacramental; though I believe it was a Sacrament (as the
Manna was also to some:) and the Scripture probabilities of their partaking,
are more then I can find alleged for the contrary. And if this Argument be
further urged for admission of all such to the Lords Table, as were admitted,
(or are supposed by some to have been admitted) to the Passover. It may be it
will occasion a further and more exact consideration of that point, concerning
their Infants partaking of the Passover: Which. yet if asserted, will not (I
think) infer; that such children now must partake of the Lords Supper: But
will most effectually overthrow the consequence of the argument I am now
answering to.

I should now proceed to a second answer to be given to this argument; which I
shall forthwith endeavor as soon as I have taken my Cordial following.

PSAIM 119. Part 9. I. 65 Just Lord, thou with thy servant low,
well dealt, as thou had said.
66 Instruct me right to judge and know;
for on thy Word I staid.
67 I went astray whiles crossless most,
but now thy Word I keep.
68 In thee dwells goodness, good thou do;
Learn me thy Statutes deep.
69 Impure proud men, against me have ly'd.
I serve thee with heart right.
70 Jolly and fat as grease they bide.
In thy Law I delight.
71 It Is good that I have felt thy Rod
to learn thy statutes just.
72 I count thy Law better, O God,
then thousands of gold dust.

CHAP. X.
. 1.
THe last Chapter presented what I judged sufficient (at present) to answer to
the consequence of this argument, viz. If all the people of the Jews
circumcised, though never so bad, were admitted to the Passover, then all such
baptized, must now be admitted to the Lords Supper. The Antecedent assumed is:
But all the people (circumcised) were admitted to the Passover. Concerning
which this Chapter will give an account of my apprehensions.

This general admission (much more this rightful general admission) to the
Passover, here asserted, is denied not without many reasons given of the
denial of it by the learned Mr Gillespy, in his Aarons Rod blossoming, l. 1.
c. 9, 10. which I refer to the diligent perusal of the judicious Reader who
has not read him already.

I shall also humbly offer somewhat in the following particulars, whereby the
foresaid assumption may be disproved. I shall meet with and solve the most
colorable pretensions that (I have seen) undertaking its protection.

(1) The command of celebrating the Passover is delivered in general terms,
Exodus 12.3, 6, 43, 44, 45, 47. etc. All the Cngregation of Israel shall keep
it. And this reaches clearly thus far; that they all there spoken of were
obliged to this as their duty, viz. to celebrate the Passover according to the
ordinances of it. But hence it follows not, that there might be no hindrances
(and that through their own fault,) which might debar them in statu quo from
doing what they were obliged unto. The obligation to a duty does not ever
warrant the performing of it, when there is a present incapacity and
unpreparedness for it; but it should put on ever and provoke to a preparation
and performance both.

And so I should think all Christian adult professors baptized, are obliged to
celebrate the Lords Supper, yea even the most profane, (shall I add, the
justly excommunicate also who are not disobliged from, though debarred from the
Sacrament through their own default). A drunken professor of Christianity,
whiles drunk at the time of divine service, is not sure disobliged from Gods
public service, no not from the Lords Supper, but yet, none doubts, he is
then justly debarred and excluded from the same. There are two sorts of
hindrances from the Sacrament. 1. When the persons hindered are wilfully
accessory to their own hindrance. 2. When they are hindered without their own
fault. The first hinders but does not excuse; the latter both hinders and
excuses: of the former sort we had an instance in the man who neglected to
circumcise his males, in which default, he was debarred, yet not excused from
celebrating the Passover, Exodus 12.48. Of the latter sort seem those
mentioned, Numb. 9. in case of ceremonial uncleaneness. And yet if any did
unnecessarily and wilfully touch a dead body, or take a journey fifteen miles
from the camp, or from Jerusalem (as the Jews interpret [a far off] though
they were hereby hindered, they were not excused before God for their neglect.)

(2) But in reference to these persons hindered from the Passover, Numb. 9. I
shall observe these things.

. 2.
1. That there was no express exception of them in the former general
commands, Exodus 12. That all Israel should do the Passover. For then there
could have been no doubt about these in their case; at least Moses would not
have been at a stand about it, as he seems to be, verse. 8.2. That yet it was
not thought (notwithstanding that general command without exception expressed)
that all might keep the Passover without limitation of some preparedness for
the same. 3. That there was then an order, and care had, for keeping back some
(even of the Israelites) from the Passover. These two last observations are
evident in verse. 6, 7. Those defiled say to Moses and Aaron, Wherefore are we
kept back; that we may not offer -- among the children of Israel? Which
implies that they tendered themselves to partake, and complained that they were
by some kept back. 4. That its manifest here is not intended an enumeration of
all impediments, no not of all those impediments which excused from doing the
Passover, (as sickness, etc. not here mentioned) how much less of those which
excused not; which I think this text does not refer to. And therefore
notwithstanding this place, the Jews thought other things bars of their
celebrating the Passover. John 18.20. They went not themselves into the
Judgment hall, least they should be defiled, but that they might keep the
Passover. They judged preparation for the Passover (for which they had a
solemn day) antecedently necessary to the doing of the Passover. And
probably, in their judgment, a litigious action on an holy day, was accounted
a moral sin, which they pretended to make scruple of. There is little doubt,
they hold excommunication for moral sins, as Mr. Gelaspy has copiously showed.
And yet neither are their excommunicates expressly excepted in this text; so
that it should make against their excluding the de facto, as well as the ipso
jure excommunicate. It cannot therefore be inferred from this text, that all
did partake of the Passover, except those in a journey, or polluted by a dead
body.

. 3.
(3) It may further be considered, that there were those severe laws against
sin, as required the cutting off such as were notorious and scandalous
offenders. I confess its a mighty difficult thing clearly to determine the
importance of that phrase; Its applied so variously; sometimes as a punishment
for small offenses, the neglecting some ceremony, or the like. Exodus 30.38.
Levit. 7.18, 20, 21, 26, 27. Numb. 19.13, 20. And sometimes for notorious
wickedness. Exodus 31.14, 15. Levit. 20.6, 17. as for incest. Diverse texts,
particularly, the last mentioned, seem to evince that it was putting one to
death, which cutting off imported. And yet some of these sins to be thus
punished, might be private, and not juridically or otherwise notoriously known;
and therefore could not be punished by man, with the cutting off by death.
Ainsworth says on Genesis 17.14. It is sometimes spoken of Gods cutting off men
by death for their sins. Levit. 17.10. and 20.3, 5, 6. And so the Hebrews
understand it here, and in all other like places, that for willing
transgression in secret God would cut them off by untimely death. (Which may be
thus expounded, that the offender might expect Gods immediate vengeance in such
cases, though the Lord had not (by his threatenings) tied up himself from
exercising patience and long-suffering toward them.) And if there be witnesses
of it, the Magistrate is to punish or kill them. But for ignorant
transgressions, they were to bring the appointed sacrifices; so he. Now the
notorious obstinate offenders were adjudged by Gods Law, in that Theocracy of
the Jews, to be cut off, as appears by many texts; see such as these; Exodus
chapt. 21. verse. 15, 16, 17. and 22.18, 19, 20. and 31.14, 15. and 32.26, 27,
28. and 35.2. Levit. 24.15, 16, 23. and 20.9 10. Deuteronomy. 13.5. and 17.5, 6. and
22.21. More general texts adjudging this cutting off to all manner of notorious
wickedness are, Deuteronomy. 17.12. and 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. Now if this were so, Its
supposed that the Magistrate doing his duty (or if it referred to
ecclesiastical cutting off, those entrusted in that, doing their duty) there
should be none to partake of the Passover who were notoriously scandalous. And
its the less strange, if exceptions against such are not particularly and
expressly mentioned, although they might have no right to the Passover.

4.
4. Again. If we peruse all the examples of their celebrating the Passover in
the old Testament; therein we find not any (I think) admitted under such
notorious wickedness as should then be judged visibly inconsistent with true
actual faith.

We may soon view the places, they are not many. After the first celebration
upon the Institution, Exodus 12. when they were under those miraculous
dispensations which were apt to dispose the very wicked (in heart) and much
more others to an outward good conformity.

The next and only Instance while they were in the Wilderness, was that of
Numb. 9. which has been already perused by us. And then soon after their
entrance into Canaan, the Passover was celebrated, Josh. 5.10. immediately
after the circumcision of the adult, not circumcised in the Wilderness before;
which its no way probable they were compelled to receive, without being
acquainted with, and having respect to the Covenant they entered with God, and
God with them, whereof circumcision was a seal. And that the people
(indefinitely) were then in a visible beleeeving frame and obediential posture,
is gatherable from Chap. 1.16, 17, 18. which the miraculous bringing them
through Jordan also, (immediately before this their celebration of the
Passover) was apt to confirm and establish them in, Chap. 3. and Chap. 4.

During the time of the Judges we read of no Passover kept (I do not say there
was none). And in the time of the Kings there are but two Passeovers recorded
in holy Scripture, viz. one during the reign of Hezekiah, and the other of
Josiah, those two good Kings. Hezekiahs we have 2 Chronicles. 30. where is mentioned
(according to our translation) the long interruption of it, v. 6. That they had
not done it of a long time, in such sort as it was written. (In stead whereof
both the Syriack and Arabic versions have, Because their riches were much
increased). And there are here, not only no intimations of the visible
profaneness of any who did partake, but great testimony is given to the
contrary. They were indefinitly called by the King and Princes to turn again
to the Lord, and that they should not be stiffaecked, v. 6, 7. and they
answered that call, v. 11. Of some its said, that they humbled themselves,
(they were confounded, says the LXX, acquiescentes consilio, says the vulgar
Latin: they were contrite in heart, says the Syriack, or they trembled in
heart, as the Arabic) and they came to Jerusalem. And of others its said, v.
12. God gave them one heart to do the commandment of the King and Princes by
the word of the Lord; which was to turn to the Lord, as before. And that this
was manifested in deeds and notable instances of real reformation is showed v.
13. And then Hezekiah begged pardon, or acceptance for them (only) who had
prepared their hearts to seek God, v. 19. Which implies that he took them (all
indefinitly) for sincere believers. The Syriack version has it thus; The good
God expiate for the whole people of Israel, seeing that we have prepared our
hearts to pray to God, etc. And the Arabic says; The God of goodness spare
the Isralitish nation, seeing that he has prepared our hearts to pray to God,
etc. And then v. 21. they kept the feast of unleavened bread with gladness,
and the whole assembly took counsel and kept other seven days with gladness,
v. 23, 26.

. 5.
The other Passover was in the time of Josiah, recorded 2 King. 23.22, 23. and
2 Chronicles. 35.1, 2. etc. where is to be observed, that things being much out of
order by the ill government of his Grandfather Manasseh, and his Father Amon,
Josiah does endeavor a reformation before its story'd that he called the
people to a Passover; In the twelfth year of his reign, he began to purge
Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, groves, and Images, 2 Chronicles. 34.3, 4,
5, 6, 7. And then it follows, v. 8. Now in the 18th year of his reign, when
he had purged the Land and the house, he took order to repair the house of
God: and having found the book of the Law, he caused it to be read to all the
people, great and small, v. 30. he himself being greatly humbled by the
contents thereof; He v. 31. made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the
Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and testimonies, and statutes, with all his
heart and soul, to perform the words of the Covenant which are written in this
book. And v. 32, 33. he causet^ all present in Jerusalem and Judah (all the
people, v. 30.) to stand to it. And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did according
to the Covenant of God, the God of their Fathers. And Josiah took away all the
abominations out of the Countries that pertained to the children of Israel; and
made all that were present in Israel, to serve, even to serve the Lord their
God. And all his days they departed not from following the Lord, the God of
their Fathers. And now having thus prepared the people (in this same 18th year
of his reign, 2 King. 23.23. 2 Chronicles. 35.19.) he commanded the people to keep
the Passover there recorded. What footsteps are there here of any visible
profane persons partaking of the Passover?

There is only one more example in the old Testament story'd, Ezra 6. It
pleased God after a long captivity for the humbling Judah, to stir up Cyrus to
proclaim liberty of their return to build the Temple, he encouraging and
assisting them therein. Those of them whose spirit God raised to go, Ezra 1.5.
Closed with the design, attempted it, and pursued it, with a visible frame of
great humility, fear of the Lord, zeal for his service; and to the utmost
laid out themselves in the same. Chap. 1.5. Chap. 2.68, 69. the whole third
Chap. Chap. 5.5-11. (1 Esdras 5.44, 45, 53, 61, 63, 65.) Ezra 6.14, 15, 16, 17,
etc. And then is related their keeping the Passover, v. 19. viz. as is showed,
v. 21. The children of Israel which were come again out of captivity; and all
such as had separated themselves from the filthiness of the heathen of the
Land, to sock the Lord God of Israel, did eat and kept the feast of unleavened
bread seven days with joy, etc. The Syriack version, has it thus; And the
Israelites eat it, who came up from the Babylonian Captivity (viz.) all those
who were separated from the filthiness of the Land. And so it is also in 1
Esdras 7.13. making that separation to be the preparative qualification of all
who did partake of the Passover. But if we take it as referring to the
Proselytes, it supposes the children of Israel, to whom the Proselytes were so
joined, were in like manner separated from the filthiness of the nations. Upon
a strict view of all these examples; It appears not, that any did partake
under a visible profaneness, inconsistent with visible actual faith and
obedience; but the contrary.

. 6.
(5) Let me add, That when the people generally did keep the Passover,
although some might be notoriously wicked at home, it is not easy to conceive
how those who admitted their paschal Lambs, and offered part thereof for them,
and who had the charge of the holy things, could know their particular
scandalous sins, so as thereupon to debar them. How could they know who was
ceremonially unclean by touch of a dead body, or who had not circumcised his
males, and so was morally incapable in that state? Yea though many thus
obnoxious might be known so to be at home, yet it being not manifest to those
Governors, they could take no notice thereof. And yet hence it follows not,
that they who thus thrust in themselves had a proper right to actual present
participation of the Passover; as elsewhere is showed by us. But the case is
otherwise now, as to the Lords Supper; when Christian people are gathered into
particular Churches, under the Inspection of Guides and Officers, in a special
manner appropriated and designed to watch over them in the Lord.

However, this seems evident, that on the same Reason whereby they did gather
the exclusion of those otherwise ceremonially unclean, from the particular
express prohibition of the unclean by a dead body: they might also infer
the rightful exclusion or abstension of all notoriously profane and breakers
of Gods Covenant, from the particular express prohibition of him who
circumcised not his males, Exodus 12.48, 49.

. 7.
(6) To conclude (at last) this pont. The general command for celebration of
the Passover, is no larger then for circumcision: now as this supposed the
Covenant to be visibly entered into, with understanding, as Ainsworth shows on
Genesis 17. So that must suppose their continuance in that Covenant, as necessary
to enright them in a sacramental partaking of the Passover.

But its high time for me to crave the Readers pardon for so long detaining him
upon, and hindering his Transitus from this argument of the Passover. But if
he think (as I do) that its the strongest objection, and that answering it,
will enervate diverse others (as that fetched from 1 Cor. 10. concerning the
Manna and rock, though indeed its much more easy to answer those, and they
have been clearly answered by others, and therefore I pass them) If my Reader
(I say) consider the importance of this argument, I trust he shall not
complain, I have provoked his patience, or abused his leisure herein. If any
will needs be passionate, I have David's remedy for an ill spirit.

PSALM 119. part 10. K. 73 Kned was I by thy hands, and made:
Learn me thy statutes just!
74 Knowing me shall thy people glad:
For in thy Word I trust.
75 Known are thy Judgments right to me:
In truth thou smit'st me Lord:
76 Kindly me comfort, I pray thee,
According to thy Word.
77 Keep me alive, by grace from thee:
In thy Laws joy I find.
78 Knowing no cause, the Proud wronged me.
Shame them! thy Word I mind.
79 Knit may they be to me in love,
Who thee fear, thy Laws know.
80 Keep my heart sound 'ith truth to prove;
Least shame me overthrow.

CHAP. XI.
. 1.
THe great quarrel he has about Examination is cast in my way, p. 54. and
often elsewhere. But though it justles uncivilly, and as a bold intruder
absurdly presses in, when we are busy about other matters, I am resolved it
shall stay for its answer, till its turn come among the Digressions, and then
I shall deal heartily with it.

At p. 58. Mr. W. brings in this syllogism, as if it contained my sense, and
were some part of my argument, viz. Such as by Scripture characters are to be
judged and taken to be unbeleevers, are unbeleevers. But all men baptized,
adult, and of the Christian persuasion (if irregular in their conversations)
are by Scripture characters to be judged and taken to be unbeleevers. Ergo, all
men baptized, and adult, and of the Christian persuasion (if irregular in their
conversations) are unbeleevers.

He quarreld ere while with my inserting parenthesis in a syllogism, but if I
had put in such a parenthesis as he here has in his minor and conclusion,
which being taken out, the sense is destroyed in both propositions; I might
have well deserved his censure, which yet I list not to return upon himself
here. But to the matter I answer. Did ever any one say, that any irregularities
in conversation, were Scripture characters whereby we might judge of persons as
unbeleevers? I asserted only that there are some such as would amount thereto.
What those are, was not our business to enumerate. If I say some irregular in
their conversations are to be excommunicated, will it hence follow, that all
irregular persons (in any respect such) are to be excommunicated? What
coherence is here? And yet this toy seems to tickle his fancy, and he plays
with it again and again, p. 58, 59, etc. And gravely as if in sober sadness,
thus delivers himself; Some irregularities in men's lives we hold not
unreconcilable with a true doctrinal persuasion, nor with the habit of saving
faith neither. When such irregularities become notorious, public and
scandalous, the parties so offending are legally to be proceeded against. But
for every private miscarriage, a Pastor is not to debar a man at his pleasure,
upon the verbal information of some few in private; but deal gently by private
conference with the party informed against, as a Father with his child. -- And
then he points his tale on me in these words; This were more Christian-like
than your rash frequent and rigorous suspensions.

In answer whereto I say.

1. Neither the habit of saving faith in persons, nor of dogmatical faith (as I
have already showed) is directly enquired after by us, in order to administering
the Sacraments to them; but the visible exercise thereof, which an habitually
godly man may be destitute of for a time.

2. Who said any irregularities might debar one, except notorious public or
scandalous?

3. Some notorious miscarriages need not any trial for the proving them to be
such as deserve excommunication. But the offenders are ipso jure excommunicate,
having manifestly and publicly lost their right at present of actual
admission to some Church Communion. 2 Epist. John, v. 10, 11. If there come any
to your house and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor
bid him God speed. Where particular private Christians as well as others were
commanded, to deal with such as excommunicate in law; whether the governing
Church upon a juridical trial had declared them to be such or no. What need is
there of witnesses to prove an unmarryed woman who has borne a child is a
fornicatresse, or of Judges to try and discern whether this sin (without
repentance manifested for it) deserve excommunication. Is not 1 Cor. 5.11. a
sure Rule, unless pronounced by the Church Governors, or any other?

4. Yet its not unlawful to take juridical cognizance of such plain cases.
(Abundans cautela non nocet) And upon good reason it may be judged meet and
most orderly where it may be.

5. What means he by a Pastors debarring any at their pleasure? Is not this an
odious insinuation? Do we pretend to arbitrary Government?

6. Did any ever say that for any private miscarriage one might be debarred?

7. What quarrel has he against verbal information? Is it unsufficient on that
account? or must it needs be written?

8. May not some private miscarriage, that is, some grievous wickedness
privately committed, and known to two or three only, yet persisted in, after
the procedure mentioned Math. 18. be a cause of excommunication, as well as a
public offense notorious in its own nature, without all such previous
admonition, according to 1 Cor. 5.

9. What means he by [the information of some few in private?] Is the
information taken before persons chosen by the Parish for the congregationall
government thereof, an information taken before some few in private? What,
would he have it before all the Congregation? or before how many of them? What
rambling exceptions are here?

10. I do hereby provoke Mr W. to prove that any have been suspended or
excommunicated in the Parish I minister to, except for gross offenses,
notorious through the nature of their crimes, or the publickness of their
committing them, or by a juridicall receiving the testimony of sufficient
witnesses thereupon. And those offenses too visibly continued in without
repentance after admonition. And these Cases have been very rare with us: not
so many I think, as the years have been of my serving the Church here. And then
commonly the issue has been comfortable, and upon their profession of
repentance they have been restored with great joy, and that shortly; we
administering the Sacramens in a constant frequent course. I confess some few
have been desired to refrain for one time, or perhaps two upon several grounds
respecting themselves and others), when yet it has been then signified to them
that they were not suspended, nor should be debarred by us. And yet Mr. W. (so
far is he from the timerousness he censures me for) dare tell the world in
print of my rash, frequent, and rigorous suspensions.

. 2.
At p. 60. Mr W. is pleased to add, By our administering to believers is meant
to such believers as we may have certainty that they are believers. But of men's
faving faith (which lies invisibly in the hearts of the havers thereof) we can
have but a conjecture or charitable hope, of their baptism, and of their true
doctrinall confession of says, we may have certainty. And their visible
conformity to the means of faith, and solemnities of the Christian Religion,
with their brethren in the public ordinances of worship, is a visible
testimony of their owning the Christian Religion. And the outward
administration to them as to visible believers, is equally their outward right,
with the strictest livers. For Ministers are but the outward ministrators of
the elements in the Lords Supper; the Spirit is the inward administrator of the
invisible grace.

Whereunto I return, 1. That we must have a certainty those are believers (that
is, visibly such) to whom we administer, I readily grant. 2. That we can have
any more certainty of a persons dogmaticall faith, then of his justifying
faith, I have before denied, and do still; upon the grounds above mentioned. He
that pretends to know who is really a dogmaticall believer, must pretend to
know the heart immediately. Men's dogmatical, or doctrinal. as well as their
saving or justifying faith, (which lies invisibly in the hearts of the havers
thereof) we can have but a conjecture, or charitable hope of. Yea, let me add,
It is as difficult (if not more) for a Christian to discern in himself, whether
he has a true dogmaticall faith. i. e. whether he does assent to the truths he
professes, as to know whether he consents to the same, receiving them in love.
And who that has been acquainted with the troubled spirits of the godly, and
their temptations, has not had experience of those dangerous doubtings about
believing or assenting to the great points of Christianity, concerning Christ,
the Scriptures, etc. I know a Minister would give much to be constantly assured
that he believes the doctrines he preaches concerning those common and great
points of the last judgment, heaven and hell, and the like. Yea, do not all
doubts about our justifying faith, recurr to the doubting about our doctrinall
faith, as the ground thereof? Does not the soul thus argue? Could I love God so
little, and the World so much, be so mindless of Gods service, so sluggish, so
careless of my soul, if I did really believe the truth of Gods promises, the
immortality and pretiousness of my soul, the vanity of the world, the danger of
Gods displeasure, and that now is the day of grace offered to me, the
continuance whereof I have no assurance for an hour longer? If a man promise
to poor beggars, that if they will but come to such a Prince a few miles off,
they shall there have great riches, etc. and yet they sit still and stir not,
would not another suspect, and may not they suspect themselves, that they
believe not there is truth in the proposition and motion made unto them? Quis
enim Domino mente credit, and facultate non credit? Quis Deo animam suam mane
pat, and pecuniam negat? Quis promissis coelestibus fidem commodat, and non
agit ut esse possit particeps promissionum? Et ideo cum videamus homines haec
non agere, cogimur non credentes palam and evidenter agnoscere. Salvian ad
Eccl. Cathol. l. 2.

And I think the great ( Physical if I may so call it) work of conversion, lies
in illumination of the understanding, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19, 20. And the will is
sweetly moved, according to the nature of such a faculty (yet necessarily in
respect of the event) to close with such through convictions. A man may profess
a dogmaticall faith, (and so also a justifying faith) who has it not. And we
must believe his credible profession. But I think that man whose understanding
is so far enlightened with Gospel Truth as a sincere believers is, is a
sincere and justified believer; that predominat assent being inseparably joined
with consent also.

This consideration I have the more insisted on, that it might be an answer to
that Objection, viz. If justifying faith only entitle to the Sacrament, then
none may receive who want assurance. Let those who hold dogmaticall faith
intitles to the Sacrament, answer, and say, what he must do who doubts (and
wants assurance) of his dogmaticall faith; and it will serve to direct him, who
doubts concerning his justifying faith: the case is the same in both.

3. Mr. W. here insinuates (if I understand him) how we must have a certainty
of their being believers, whom we administer to, viz. by our having a certainty
of their baptism, and their true doctrinall consession of the Faith. This will
rationally put an end to the Controversy about (that which is called)
Examination before admission to the Sacrament. But that is not now to be
insisted on.

4. I grant, after they have once given a certainty that they have in their own
persons made a true doctrinall confession of the Faith, with professed consent
thereunto, their right to the Lords Supper is not to be denied, till they do by
notorious wickedness (as before has been declared) incur Ecclesiastical
censure.

. 3.
5. I know not well what Mr. W. means by visible conformity to the means of
Faith, and solemnities of public worship, which he says, is a visible
testimony of their owning the Christian Religion. If he mean that their
conversations are not notoriously opposite to the faith they have professed, I
concur. If their coming to Church, what ever their lives be otherwise, then I
demand whether a Christian may be censured for no misdemeanour, unless he
neglect coming to Church? And if he may, then his coming to Church is not a
sufficient testimony that he is such a visible believer who has right to the
Sacrament,

6. That should seem to be intended as an argument which Mr. W. adds, viz. [For
Ministers are but the outward Ministrators of the Elements,] and then it would
be to this purpose, If Ministers are but outward Ministrators of the Elements
in the Lords Supper, then the outward administration to them who are baptized
and come to Church, though notoriously profane in their lives, is equally
their outward right, with the strictest livers. But, Ergo. I deny the
consequence, neither is there any semblance of connection in it. If the
governing Church do retain profane persons in their sacramental communion,
that might have some more probability of inferring the Ministers duty to
administer to them. But what is that to our case?

. 4.
7. Whereas Mr. W. further adds, therefore as long as the Church holds [men
baptized and grown to years] in her outward communion, in other ordinances, so
long does she hold them in the outward worship of celebrating the Lords Supper
with her members as their due and duty.

I answer, Nay rather from what was before asserted, whence this is inferred by
Mr. W. viz. That Ministers are but Ministrators, it follows, that they are to
minister and officiate to them as in the Churches communion only so far as the
Church retains them in her communion. And therefore if the governing Church
exclude any from the Sacrament, though not some other Ordinances; the Minister
answerably may officiat to them in other ordinances, but not in that.

8. Whether the governing Church may exclude some from communion in the Lords
Supper, who are retained in other Ordinances, I know is questioned; and perhaps
Mr. W. may aim at such a thing here. But I see not how his words do signify
it; I shall not therefore here stand upon it, having laid down those grounds
before, upon which the question may be determined in the affirmative.

And thus have I adventured, more particularly than otherwise I should have
thought needful to answer Mr. W. his Pretensions in this thing; because that
in his confidence of my weakness, he here so vauntingly vapors and concludes
in these words, p. 62. In your next let me understand what you can produce and
offer for refutation hereof, which I believe you neither will do, nor can do.

PSALM. 119. Part 11. L. 81 Longing for thy heart faints my heart.
In thy word I hope Lord.
82 Looking thou should comfort impart.
Mine eyes fail for thy word.
83 Like to smoak't Bottles I am now.
Thine Hests I Will not forget.
84 Let me my dayes-count know, when thou.
wilt pay my Foes their debt.
85 Lewd men have dug pits for me
in pride, against thy word true.
86 Laws made by thee all faithful be;
help me when Foes pursue.
87 Lo, they on earth almost me spent,
but I left not thy Law.
88 Let thy kind love my dullness rent:
Ple keep thy word with aw.

CHAP. XII.
. 1.
HAving cleared and confirmed, that those who are visibly in a notorious way of
wickedness inconsistent with the exercise of true faith, are on that account
such unbelievers visibly, as have no immediate right to the Lords Supper, and
so ought not to have it administered unto them. The Assumption follows at numb.
25. in my M. S. That those who by word openly refuse the Lord Jesus Christ, are
visibly such unbelievers, and therefore they are such visibly to whom the Lords
Supper ought not to be administered. This assumption I thus confirmed (numb.
27.) hecause to profess to renounce Christ, is to profess not to believe; now
he who seems seriously to profess his not believing, that is, his renouncing
Christianity, cannot be by any (rightly) judged and taken to be a believer.
that is, such a believer as aforesaid.

I here gave an instance of one incapable of rightful admission to the
Sacrament, and therefore not to be admitted, though he be baptized, adult, and
on whom the sentence of the Church may not (perhaps) have passed for
excommunication. (The Instance was of one who does in words renounce
Christianity. I added [seriously] not in opposition to madness or distraction,
(as Mr W. trifles, p. 63.) For then the Instance would not have fitted the
Question; Mr. W. himself excludes the unintelligent, p. 34. but in opposition
to both. 1. Ironicall uttering of words, which then signify not what otherwise
they would; as those words are usually interpreted, Genesis 3.22, Behold he is
become like one of us. And 2. a questioning or doubting uttering of words,
which though in form assertive, yet are otherwise manifest to be intended not
as assertive but probational. So Joseph's speech is fairly interpreted, Genesis
42.9, 16. By the life of Pharaoh, ye are all spies. So Psalm. 73.13. Verily I
have cleansed my heart in vain, but after he cleeres his meaning, was only a
questioning or doubting of it, v. 15. If I should say thus, I should offend
against the generation of the just.

Now such an one as thus in words significative of a renouncing of Christianity
(where the circumstances of uttering them, declare the meaning of the speaker
is not ironical, nor probational only) does profess to renounce Christianity, I
said, is not in a capacity of rightful admission to the Sacrament. And by this
one Affirmative, I overthrew their universal negative; they say none adult
baptized, not put off from other ordinances, may be suspended or debarred the
Sacrament: I say, such an one as we have mentioned may; therefore their
universal negative proposition is false except further limited.

. 2.
I think now, there are few who understand any thing concerning disputation.
but would expect, Mr. W. should have answered, either by affirming that this
word renouncer of Christianity should be admitted to the Sacrament, if he
tender himself to partake; or else by distinction, have put some limitation on
the universal negative I assault, whereby it might have appeared, that such an
instance as this was not comprehended in it. But (to admiration) he can answer
(and doubts not to refute me) without denying or distinguishing: as follows.

1. He says; The whole depends upon a mere supposition. It is rather a thing
imagined, than a cause likely to happen in the Church. This exception I made my
self, and answered it, which answer of mine Mr. W. endeavors to take off
beneath; where I shall make my reply.

2. He says; But if such a case should fall out, viz. That a man in the Church
should professedly renounce Christianity, then he renounceth the Lords Supper
too. And so your suspension in this case would be needless. -- There is no
need of suspending or excommunicating, such a wilful renouncer of Christianity.

I answer, by distinguishing, 1. Betwixt renouncing of all the essential parts,
and some essential part of Christianity. 2. Between his renouncing the Lords
Supper in particular, as to his using it for the end and use Christ has
appointed it for; and, renouncing it altogether, upon all accounts whatsoever.
And 2. now I say. 1. To renounce an essential part of Christianity, is to
renounce Christianity, though a man profess not to renounce all the essential
parts of Christianity. It is essential to Christianity, that Christ be
accepted, embraced and submitted to, as Lord and Savior; to save us from sin,
Math. 1.21. as well as from punishment; therefore to reject Christ as Lord, is
to reject Christianity. He that says, I believe Christ dyed for me to redeem
me from hell, etc. But I will not obey him, he shall not reign over me, I
neither will nor can spare my lusts (at least not yet) etc. does renounce an
essential part of Christianity, and so by Consequence, Christianity it self.
For any essential parr of a thing being removed, the thing it self is removed.
I may say of our accepting Christ as King and Savior, as the Epigrammatist
spoke of his two poisons; Dividat haec si quis, faciunt discreta venenum:
Antidotum sumet, qui sociata bibet.

2. He who thus renounceth Christianity, renounceth also (expressly or by
consequence) the Lords Supper, as to a maine end and use Christ has appointed
it, viz. for the engaging the soul nearer to Christ, and resigning it up, in
grateful and holy obedience to him, who is the author of salvation to them who
obey him. But yet he may not renounce it, as to all other respects; he would do
as others do in the outward work, etc.

And therefore there is need, yea a necessity of suspending or excommunicating
such a wilful renouncer of Christianity.

. 3.
3. Mr. W. tells us, this (supposed renouncing Christianity) cannot abolish his
positive estate, which stands on the free grace of God by Baptism -- and so he
is a believer for his positive estate in point of Religion, by virtue of his
consecration, unto the Christian faith in Baptism -- and God will judge him as
a Christian, if he continue in his revolt till death; not as a Pagan Infidel,
p. 63, 64, 65.

Ans. 1. Who ever said his wickedness disobliged him from his baptismall
engagements? 2. Mr. W. confesses, that this renouncer of Christianity, is a
Christian and believer (by virtue of his Baptism) at the day of Judgment,
when condemned. And does he think such a Christianity as is in hell, gives
right to the Sacraments here? Who then can be excluded? A damned Christian is a
baptized person, consecrated to Christian duties, and not wholly disobliged
from the same. 3. And yet Mr. W. says, p. 63. I should judge of him rather by
his continuance, or non-continuance in this supposed abrenunciation. What would
he judge of him? to be a Pagan Infidel^e So he is not when damned, therefore
cannot so be judged of by his foresaid abrenunciation here and continuance
therein, or will he judge him to be an unbeleever as destitute of habitual
saving grace? that belongs not to us to judge of, but to God alone who knows
the heart; or must he be judged an unbeleever, as lying under notorious
wickedness, inconsistent with the exercise of faith? that indeed we may judge
of; But then to what purpose does he thus judge of him, in reference to his
sacramental claim? If to allow it, and admit him, then its all one as to this,
as if he were not so judged of. If to exclude him; then I have what I contend
for; unless there be no judging of a man till he be dead, and then no man can
be excommunicated for any crime whatsoever. For (I am of opinion) there is no
need of excommunicating or suspending a man after he is dead, nor of judging of
him in order thereunto.

. 4.
4. Mr. W. tells us, Papists are Christians -- But we need not suspend them
from the Lords Supper; their fancy of transubstantiation, and other heretical
Mormoes, save us the labor. I know not why Papists may not without destroying
their principles tender themselves to receive with us, unless the necessity of
their obedience to the Popes prohibition, hinder them; and yet that is not a
principle to the French Papists. But if a Papist remaining such, and owning
transubstantiation, Popish Indulgencies, merit in the Jesuits sense, prayers to
Saints, religious adoration, or worshipping of Images, etc. tender himself to
receive, will Mr. W. admit him? why them does he not plainly say he would? as
indeed his doctrine leads him to admit him, if the Papist be not excommunicated
in such sense as I think none in England are. But those words of his [save us
the labour] I suppose intimate, that if they did not withdraw themselves from
our Communion, but should tender themselves to receive, we should be at the
labor of suspending them. And yet Papists are not forbidden to come to Church,
nor separated from all other Ordinances in the Church. And then the universal
negative Mr. W. pretends to defend [that no baptized person adult, intelligent,
not excommunicated, may be debarred the Lords Supper, if he tender himselfe] is
again battered by another Instance which his own pen has afforded. May not a
Papist be baptized adult, intelligent, and not excommunicated the public
Congregations, if he exclude not himself, (as some others do). And yet I
think Mr. W. grants he may be kept back from the Lords Supper, whiles he
professedly remains a Papist: and its to my admiration, that this Gentleman
can so confidently defend the said universal negative before mentioned, and yet
overthrow it by diverse such concessions, as this in his book.

. 5.
5. Mr. W. tells me, I delude men with the contracted notion of saving faith;
and I may tell him, 1. that he does as much delude men with the contracted
notion of doctrinal or dogmatical faith. 2. And that its not the notion of
saving faith, but the resting in a common verbal profession of Christianity,
crying, Lord, Lord, which will be found to be the great deluder of men, when
the day of trying all things shall come. And then he informs us, that
Sacraments are not seals of a personal and inward faith only. They are visible
scales of the righteousness of faith. i. e. of the doctrine of faith in Christ,
unto justification in the sight of God, without the works of the Law. From
whence he inferres; And why should not all baptized persons, adult, and not
excommunicated, personally testify their assent to this doctrine, by taking
the consecrated bread and wine into their hands, as the visible similitudes of
the body of Christ sacrificed for us? etc. To which I reply; Who has said that
they are seals of a personal faith only? But does not Mr. W. here grant (as
well he may) that they are seals of a personal inward faith, though not only?
Sacraments are considered; 1. in respect of the Institutor and Author; 2. of
the Receiver; both ways they are seals, In respect of the Author they seal
his tender of the Covenant of grace, wherein salvation is freely promised to
all that believe: In respect of the Receivers, they are instituted and
appointed by God for their solemn sealing or testifying their believing, and
obediential embracing of the Covenant of grace in the blood of Christ. And as
the Administrator is to attend both; so in subserviency to his Master, both
these are to be designed by him in the celebration of the holy mysteries. The
seals (as is often said) are commensurate with the Covenant sealed. If a
single covenant or mere promise tendered to all who will believe, that they
shall be saved, might be sealed with the Sacraments, there were nothing in the
nature of the Sacraments, which should hinder the administering of them to
heathens remaining such; to whom this Gospel is to be preached, Mark. 16.15.
John 3.16. But its manifest, these seals can be administered only where there
is visibly a mutual covenant, viz. God promising justification on the condition
of faith, to the Communicant, and the Communicant visibly closing with that
condition of believing to justification. This is manifest in that famous text
Mr. W. relates to; which is, Romans 4.11. concerning Abraham his receiving
Circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of faith.

. 6.
This text requires our most serious perusal. And here I shall observe; That
though Gods sealing or confirming his promise or single covenant of grace is
not excluded, yet this text does very eminently refer to the sealing or
confirming of Abraham's personal faith; and that not only a dogmatical, but
justifying and saving faith, professed by him in receiving Circumcision. The
Question Paul disputes in the context is, whether a man may be justified
without the works of the Mosaical Law as such? and he proves our affirmative in
the example of Abraham. Abraham was a righteous person, and justified by faith,
his faith was imputed to him for righteousness; that is, God dealt with him,
and accepted of him through Christ, as if he had been perfectly righteous in
himself. (having pardoned his sins, as the phrase is explicated, v. 6, 7, 8.)
That this is the clear and easy importance of the phrase of imputing a thing
to another, I think I first learned from our learned Wotton, on John 1.12. (a
notion much better than fine gold) which is demonstrated by two places of this
Epistle, where the same manner of speech is used; Romans 2.26. If the
uncircumcision keep the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision. (...); that is, he shall fare no worse than if circumcised; so
Romans 9, 8. Now that Abraham was thus justified without those Mosaicall works,
the Apostle proves; 1. In that he was justified before the works of the Law as
such, were in force. For he was justified before he received Circumcision (one
use whereof afterward was to engage the receivers thereof to all the Mosaical
Law, Gal. 5.3.) 2. In that Circumcision in its design and intendment (and to
Abraham effectually) was to be a seal of the righteousness of faith before
received: and hence (as well as from other texts) Divines so unanimously
conclude, that the Sacraments are not instituted for the unconverted, but
converted. (I say instituted. For its vain to speak of the possibility of
conversion in the event, by or at the Sacrament, as thence to infer the
manifestly profane and unconverted may be admitted. For no one can say of an
heathen or excommunicated person, if he be sinfully present and partake, that
he shall not, may not be converted at, or by that sinful partaking. The spirit
blows where it lists.) The concurrent judgment of Divines, English and
Foreign, Episcopal and Presbyterian, herein; that man of vast and digested
reading, the learned Baxter, has demonstrated at large in sixty Testimonies,
produced in the second of his five disputations concerning Right to the
Sacraments. Sundry of which Testimonies have many in them, being the judgment
of many Churches, and many learned men therein. And many more might be easily
brought forth. I shall take leave to mention only two or three in reference to
this text in special, not cited by him.

Oecumenius in locum, (Maximo Florentino Interp.) says; Nullam aliam ob rem,
circumcisus suit (Abraham) quam ut pro signo ac demonstratione ipsam
circumserret circumcisionem justitiae illius, quae in praeputio substitit ipsi
Abrahae. Si vero signorum ac sigilli loeo accepit circumcisionem, nihil ipsi ad
justitiam prosuit, sed hac solumodo ratione justificatum esse significavit, hoc
est, quod cum in praeputio esset, adhuc justitia dignus habitus fuit. Arctins
in loc: says, (...) autem (circumcisio) proprie fuit respectu electorum, nam
in his geminum usum retinuit, scilicet, obsignare justitiam eis collatam.
Pareus quotes Lyra expounding it thus; Accepit signaculum justitiae fidei, hoc
est, ut esset signaculum justitiae fidei latentis in mente. When the Rhemists
on this place had said; the heretics (that is, the Protestants in their
language) would hereby show, that the Sacraments of the Church, give no grace
or justice of faith; but that they be notes, marks and badges only of our
remission of sins had by faith before, because Abraham was just before, and
took this Sacrament for a seal thereof only, etc. These Rhemists are thus
answered herein by our learned Cartwright: St Paul (says he) does not only
call Circumcision a sign but a seal, whereby it is evident, that God so
wrought by this sign, that thereby he came to a further assurance of his
righteousness, which he had before the setting to of the seal. -- And whereas
they (the Papists) would have this righteousness, which was before the seal
thereof, to be peculiar unto Abraham; and that in others the righteousness is
not before the seal, but with it! It is directly contrary to the whole
discourse of the Apostle -- 2 Then, It is absurd, that thus the seal is
supposed to be put before the justice, whereof it is the seal. And thus the
Lord (which for men's better understanding borrows his Sacraments from the
common usage of their compacts and Covenants as near as may be) is brought
first to seal, and then to write that which he seals, clean contrary to
that usage of men, from whence he draws the resemblance of his Sacraments,
etc.

Behold here the old Protestant Doctrine aslerted in opposition to the Papists,
viz. that a personal faith or justice is according to this text sealed or
confirmed, and supposed to be existent in one before he comes to partake of the
Sacrament. Which designs the sealing of his righteousness upon his believing
supposed: And that the contrary opinion is absurd. Now alas, what impudent
times are we fallen into, when men have the confidence to tell us (against our
own eyes) that It is a novelisme and heterodox upstart doctrine, now among us,
that Sacraments are instituted and designed only for the converted, and for the
confirming (not working of faith); when as I think, it will be hard for them
to produce so much as a Protestant Catechism which asserts not the same. This
book of Cartwrights I have quoted so largely, was written (as the Title and
Preface show) by order of the chief Instruments of Queen Elizabeth, and the
State, at the special Request of many most famous and eminent Divines, Goad,
Whitaker, Fulk, and sundry others.

Furthermore, that this text does point to Abraham's faith, as that which was
sealed by the Sacrament, (and not only Gods promise) may be showed from
several hints thereof in the text and context: As, 1. It was the seal of the
righteousness he had before Circumcision, which (at least according to our
translation) denotes an inherent qualification in him, which he received a
seal of, by submitting to that ordinance of God, appointed for the testifying
of his faith and obedience.

2. That faith was sealed, in respect whereof he is the Father of them who
believe; now that was a faith inherent in him, and not only the doctrine of
faith revealed to him, and others also in common. And they are Abraham's
children in the sense of the text, who walk in the steps of our Father Abraham,
v. 12. And Christ tells many of the Jews flatly (who yet had the same doctrine
of faith revealed to them as Abraham had) If ye were Abraham's children, ye
would do the works of Abraham, John 8.39. Although he acknowledges them
Abraham's seed too, after the flesh, v. 37.

Let me lastly Insert, D: Hammonds Paraphrafe on the text, Romans 4.11. And
Abraham being justified after this Evangelical manner, upon his says, without
and before Circumcision, he received the Sacrament of Circumcision, for a seal
on his part, of his performing those commands of God given him; his walking
before him sincerely, Genesis 17.1. (upon which the Covenant is made to him, and
thus sealed, v. 2, 4, 10.) and on Gods part -- etc.

I conclude therefore according to this text, the Sacraments are seals of the
mutual covenant (which only indeed is a covenant properly and strictly) viz.
not only of Gods tender of grace to us through Christ upon the condition of
faith; but also seals whereby according to Gods institution, we are to ratify
our accepting of those Gospel terms for justification in Christ's blood; and in
so doing receive a further confirmation of Gods love toward us, (in such
degree as we are capable of the sense of it). And though God requires all them
to whom the Gospel is revealed to seal their acceptance thereof, yet God
requires no man to seal he does what he does not, nor has he any proper
visible right to the Sacraments, who visibly rejects these Gospel terms.

. 7.
6. Mr. W. tells us, God makes men believers by Baptism, p. 66. If he mean
they are solemnly to signify the same herein, I grant it. But if that they are
not Christians before, I deny it upon evident Reason.

1. For they are baptized because Christians, not forfeiting the privileges of
such, therefore they are Christians before. I shall here only refer to Peter
Martyr (the Author Mr. W. so often mentions with honor in his book, as well
he may) loc: com: cl. 4, cap. 8.. 3. et 7. etc. Where he gives an account of
the baptizing Infants of Christian parents, upon the Churches hope of their
election, as being the seed of the holy. Neque parvulos baptizaremus, nisi jam
eos ad ecclesiam et ad Christum arbitraremur pertinere. And he says; Those are
not to be heeded who move a scruple in this matter, and say, What if the
Minister be deceived, what if the child be no son of the promise, nor of the
divine election and mercy? For the same cavil may be about the adult; Nam de
illis quoque ignoramus ficte necne accedant, an vero credant; an filij
praedestinationis an perditionis; An Christi gratiam habeant, an illa sint
destituti, et mendaciter dicant se credere. Yet we baptize them upon their
external profession (quam si mentiantur (says he) mea non refert). And on 1
King. 8. the same Peter Martyr says; Justificatio ex baptism non pendet sed
antecedit. Obj. Coeterum forte^ dixeris, quorsum baptismus ijs traditur, si
ante rem baptismi habuerunt? An illis luditur opera? minime; quia deo paremus,
qui baptismi opus nobis praeceperit. 2. Deinde promissionem et donum quod
accepimus, obsignamus. 3. Praeterea, ibi a spiritu sancto per verbum et externa
symbola fides confirmatur. In which doctrine of this learned man, may be seen
(as the orthodox Protestants generally I think do agree) that all are supposed
actually in Gods favor, and made partakers of remission of sins, before they
are admitted to Baptism. And from this and diverse such passages in him, may be
strongly inferred the doctrine of suspension I am treating upon. (Whatsoever
Mr. W. pretends of this Authors opinion to the contrary.) For if we baptize men
adult, because we believe their profession, then we cannot baptize them, when
either they make no profession, or if a verbal one, which is not credible to
us; and then we admit men to the Lords Supper, on the same account, viz because
we take them to be believers, and that non mendaciter dicentes se credere, but
as to us and our hope of them, really and savingly.

2. Again; If Baptism did make men Christians, it were as necessary to
salvation, (not only necessitate praecepti, but medij also) to be baptized, as
to be a Christian, and then all unbaptized (at least of the adult) must be
damned. For no one can be saved, who is not a Christian, as to the essence of
Christianity.

. 8.
Mr. W. tells us over, and over, and over again, that they are positive
believers, who are baptized, whereby they are distinguished from the
unbaptized, or Pagans, and that their obligation by baptism, cannot be removed
by their personal vitiosities. -- And at last concludes in this chiding
strain; Who are you then, that deny them the title (being the proper
cognizance of their obligation to Christ) and discharge them from the visible
service of Christ in the celebration of this holy Supper; under pretense, that
they are no visible believers, because of some wants and deformities in their
lives? etc. p. 66.

Ans. He said before this title agreed to Papists, and he cannot deny in his
sense, it agrees to the greatest Apostates that ever lived upon the earth; they
are his positive believers, that is, consecrate to the Christian faith in their
baptism, and their baptismal obligations still lie on them, whereby they are
distinguished from men of other religions, or rather from men who never were
engaged in the profession of the Christian Religion. And then I think it will
be no great honor to have such a title in such a sense only; when the thing of
Christianity is wanting. 2. But I have told him before, that I acknowledge them
Christians and Believers in his sense, that is, they are positively obliged to
Christ, and to believe in Christ: but that alone entitles them not to the
Sacrament; for then none might be debarred who had ever been baptized. 3. And I
never discharged them from celebrating the Lords Supper, no more then he does
the drunk, who yet are justly hindered from it; they sin in not receiving,
because their hindrance is by their own fault, and yet they ought to be
debarred, as has been showed before. Yea, Its manifest that Heathens to whom
the Gospel is preached, are as truly obliged to be baptized as these baptized
persons now spoken of, are obliged to receive the Lords Supper. Let Mr. W.
answer how a Minister can debar an heathen coming to baptism (which he is
bound to do) for want of profession of his assent and consent to the doctrines
of Christianity, and yet not be guilty of discharging him from his duty? And I
doubt not the same answer (if opposite to this) will serve to answer that
concerning the Lords Supper. The thing has been explained already, therefore I
shall not here repeat it. 4. Mr. W. here again insinuates, as if I asserted
persons visibly such unbeleevers as have no rightful claim of admission to the
Sacraments, because of some wants and deformities in their lives: as if any
wants or deformities were affirmed by me to be sufficient to prove persons
visibly, actual unbeleevers, whereas I say it only of such as are inconsistent
with the exercise of faith: Concerning which I have adventured to give in my
thoughts, Chap. 7.. 10. and. 12.

The sum of the argumentation we have had before us here, is this, Such as in
word renounce an essential of Christianity, may be debarred the Sacrament
though adult baptized, and not by the sentence of the Church excluded other
ordinances; therefore some baptized persons adult, and not secluded from other
ordinances, may be debarred the Sacrament. Mr W. has answered hereunto, as you
have heard, without denying that such should be debarred, or distinguishing
thereupon. But what he wants in rational answering, he makes up (as he is
wont) in confident concluding, and says, p. 67. We are rather confirmed than
any ways confuted. Proceed to the Exceptions which you seem to allege as ours
against your pretended assertion, and withal let us hear you take them off,
and then give us leave to maintain them as far as ours. Such a maintenance will
starve the incumbent upon it, unless an augmentation can be procured. But of
this in the following Chapters. Here we take up at present, and return to our
repast.

PSALM 119. Part 12. M. 89 Mighty Lord, thy word settled is.
The Heaven by thee does stand.
90 Amongst men is seen thy faithfulness.
The Earth bides by thy hand.
91 Made they remain, this day, by thee.
For all obey thy might.
92 My streights e're this had crushed me,
But for thy Laws delight.
93 My mind thy Laws fast holds, for I,
quickened by them, am taught.
94 Me save who am thine, thine wholly,
for I thy Precepts sought.
95 Men vile have waited me to rend,
But I Will thy judgments mind.
96 Mine eyes have seen perfections end.
Thy Law most bread I find.

CHAP. XIII.
. 1.
THe Reader may be pleased to know, that when I had drawn up the argument
before insisted on, I (as my manner is) studied to oppose it my self. And as I
know not that the argument has been thus made use of about admission to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; so I knew no exceptions that any had made
against it. But I faithfully set down what in my own thoughts seemed
considerable; and therefore alleged them not as my Antagonists exceptions, as
Mr W. insinuates. Yet I do not see that he himself has any thing so material
to object, as I had before objected to my self in these exceptions, which he
labors (but in vain) to make good against my argument.

The first exception was (at numb. 28.) that no baptized person adult and not
fully excommunicate, tendering himself to communicate, will, or does ever so
openly in word renounce Christ. To which I answered, (at numb. 29) the case may
yet be supposed, yea it may happen. And that is a real power for censure which
may be exercised upon an occasion which may possibly occur, whether it does
actually occur or no. In reply hereunto, he pretends not to deal with the
substance of my answer, but promises to consider it in the fourth Exception.
But he has by businesses enough in the interim, to engage in, whereby the
unwary Reader might be drawn away from the point we are upon. As the Lapwing
makes a great cry to draw the passenger from her nest.

2.
1. He is still angry at the distinction of fully and not fully excommunicate,
and says, You grant a degree of excommunication to lie upon the party debarred
by your suspension, and therefore your suspension is essentially
excommunication, for things that differ gradually are essentially the same. p.
69.

1. I do grant a degree of excommunication on him who is properly suspended
from the Lords Supper; and therefore I told him, the question ought not so to
be stated, Whether one qualified as aforesaid, and not at all excommunicated,
may be debarred the Sacrament. For all Divines, I think, who hold suspension,
do acknowledge it to be a degree of excommunication: But whether such an one as
aforesaid, not debarred all public ordinances (according to our Antagonists
sense of excommunication) may be debarred the Lords Supper. But this plain
sense will not sink into his head, and therefore he goes on thus: Your
pretended Antagonists propound their case heartily, clearly, and ingenuously
(see Mr. W. can give good words when he has a mind) and say [not
excommunicated] removing excommunication altogether from the parties they
admit, and look upon them as in Church Fellowship and communion. And do not we
do so also to them we admit? The question is not of them we admit, but of those
not admitted. But you (says he) lay down your case obscurely, fraudulently and
captiously, as if you meant no fair dealing. And why alas? but because I will
not trifle in the question, to enquire whether one not excommunicated may not
be suspended, that is in our sense excommunicated? or go from my own
principles, and the principles of our reformed Divines, who so generally hold
juridicall suspension to be an excommunication.

2. Things which differ Physically only in degree, may differ Morally in kind;
to be adjudged to have a small scarre in the flesh, and to have the head cut
off, differ gradually, as a greater or lesser wound: yet they are punishments
of a different kind and nature; the one capital, and the other not. The
residue of his answer to the exception, is almost all a bundle of untruths: one
of the most eminent whereof is this, That none with us are Church members till
admitted after our examination and trial of them. And this in sense diverse
times repeared, p. 70. And he hereupon tells us, how we prepare our people for
Anabaptisme. Be it known to him; the truly learned Mr Blake and Baxter, are as
likely to understand what is of tendency to Anabaptisme as he, (no
disparagement to him neither,) and yet they both hold the lawfulness of
suspension of some of the persons mentioned in our Question. And though they
have some differences among themselves, yet they both agree against Mr W. his
doctrine.

A second thing I added, was, The case of some such persons (qualified as
aforesaid) their renouncing Christ, is supposeable not only as possible, but
probable to occur (at numb. 30.) if (as under the Episcopal government) all
baptized persons adult, should be required under a purse-penalty, to
communicate once or twice a year: then many open rejecters of Christianity,
and who aver there is no Christ without them, might to escape the penalty,
tender themselves to receive. The same may be said of hundreds, who account the
Sacraments mere carnal things in our times.

To this Mr. W. says, 1. This is my malicious slander of the Prelaticall
government. If it be a slander, does he know it to be malicious too? Has he
dived into my breast? Good words I pray: Whence is all this heat? He tells us
the 21 Canon of the Church of England, (1. Jacobi) enjoined Ministers so to
order matters, that every parishioner might communicate at least thrice in the
year; but not a word of forfeiting any sum of money in case they did not. But
he tells us not of a 22. Canon next ensuing, which requires all to receive the
Sacrament thrice a year, under the penalty and danger of the Law. But will Mr.
W. go about in this age to persuade people, that they were not punished by
purse-penalties, when presented in the Prelaticall Courts for not receiving?
and accuse them as malicious slanderers, who say they were? Mr W. talked of one
following truth so close that it dash out his teeth. This is not Mr. W. he has
not lost his teeth, he can bite deep enough I am sure. But I am afraid his
forehead is in more danger, when he can set a face on so notorious a bad
business. Were not they required under a purse-penalty to communicate, who
were commanded to receive under the penalty and danger of the Law, and felt
that penalty was chargeable to their purses.

. 3.
2. In an angry dialect he says, that those instances I mentioned of such as
might deny the essentials of Christianity, and yet probably to avoid an
external penalty, might come to communicate, do no way make for me. But he is
too wise to tell us why they do not; Is there not a possibility, yea
probability, such, in such a case would tender themselves to communicate? And
did not that take off the exception, which said, none such would come to the
Sacrament.

3. In the next place he seems to have a mind to extol the Episcopal
government. And it is not my business to disparage it; yet I doubt not the
Presbyterian government is lawful according to Scripture. But the Reason he
gives for the excellency of the Prelaticall government as it was in England
formerly, above the present Ecclesiastical government (established by the
State, Aug. 29. 1648.) because under that government such monsters durst not
appear and prosessedly show themselves, as now swarm every where without
control. I say, this Reason is not valid. For the State-assistance then was
afforded, which is not now so effectually, as to the execution of our
government. If the State had left men to their liberty then, as much as now, it
might have been even in that respect as bad as it is now with us, as in other
respects it was far worse.

. 4.
4. He ends with a continual strain of provoking language, which I pass over
and neglect, and he concludes all goes on his side, says, Well, this first
exception stands good against your assertion; and why? Because he says,
Nothing I alleged has proved, that any will or does by word renounce Christ,
who tenders himself to the Sacrament. But I told him, It was not necessary to
destroy the exception, to prove any will or does; but that it is possible, yea
probable, there might be such an one as would perpetrate such wickedness, which
cannot be denied, I would be content to lose my argument that it could. Who can
prove that any one will commit fornication, and continue obstinately under the
guilt thereof visibly in some particular Church? And yet it follows not
thence, that such wickedness if committed, and be notorious, is not a
sufficient cause of Ecclesiastical censure. And our present case, as to the
probability of its occurring, is the like.

PSALM 119. Part 13. N. 97 Nothing I love as thy law high,
which I mind all the day.
98 None of my Foes are wise as I.
'Cause thy Hests with me stay.
99 Norknow my Guides that which I do,
For all thy laws I mind.
100 Nay more than the Ancients I do know,
when me thy statutes bind.
101 Naughty ways I have shunned all,
That I may keep thy word.
102 Nor from the judgments turn I shall,
For thou have taught me Lord,
103 Nothing sweet as thy word I taste,
no not the honey pure.
104 Noon-light beams they on me cast.
All false ways I abjure.

CHAP. XIV.
. 1.
A Second Exception I laid in against my Argument, was this, (at numb. 32.)
That such persons as aforesaid, tendering themselves to receive, cannot openly
at that time profess their rejecting Christ, because in the tender of
themselves to this Ordinance, they offer to profess the contrary, viz. their
owning of Christ.

To the which I answered, 1. That the case under our present consideration,
supposes him at the same time, when he tenders himself to be admitted to the
communion, to profess (being asked) against his owning of Christ, q. d. I
desire to do as others do in receiving; but I am resolved at present I will not
submit to the commands of Christ, nor part with my lusts which he bids me fly
from.

Mr. W. now to take off this answer, besides uncivil chidings here both in the
Preface and Epilogue, has only one thing (which I hope was but a mistake in
him) to allege. Is it your practice (says he) to provoke men in the open face
of the congregation, by asking them questions, when they come humbly and
reverently to celebrate the Lords Supper with their brethren?

It is our practice to know those who communicate before the time of
celebration come, and then when they signify their intention to receive
(especially such as have not joined with us before) is a special season we lay
hold on, if any notorious wickedness in one who tenders himself give occasion,
to admonish him concerning the same. And then is the time for suspension if
there be just cause, not in the moment of celebration, (there would be the
execution of suspension if one suspended should thrust in thither, by refusing
to administer to him.) We have no such questioning there; the case had no
reference to it. But it was thus, as for example, If a person notoriously known
to live in whoredom, and keeping a strumpet in his house, shall tender himself
some convenient time before the day of celebration of the Sacrament; and then
be asked, Whether he will leave his wanton? and he answer, No, he cannot leave
that vice, he hopes God will be merciful to him notwithstanding, and yet he
desires to receive as others do; will Mr. W. say it was unlawful or
unseasonable then to ask him that question? and does not the said vicious
person by professed refusing to repent of, and leave his lust, renounce an
essential of Christianity, and therefore renounceth Christ, notwithstanding
his tendering himself to be admitted to the communion drawing on. And was not
this according to the order formerly appointed in the Church of England? See
the Rubric before the communion, where it is thus ordered. So many as intend
to be partakers of the holy communion, shall signify their Names to the Curate
over night, or else in the morning before the beginning of morning Prayer, or
immediately after. And if any of those be an open and notorious evil liver, or
have done any wrong to his neighbor in word or deed: the Curate having
knowledge thereof, shall call him and advertise him, in any wise, not to
presume to the Lords Table, until, etc.

This mistake being discovered, I shall not need to insist on the answering
diverse other passages Mr W. has after in his Book, which are grounded on this
unreasonable catch.

. 2.
2. My second answer to this second Exception was, It Is not impossible for such
a man to profess contradictions, so that you cannot conclude he professes not
against Christ, because he professes for Christ, at the same time, or in one
breath. Mr. W. reply, Yea we can and ought in the judgment of charity so to
conclude: and he would put me off with this slurre, should we say it is not
impossible for you to profess contradictions, you would rather laugh at our
folly, then conceive your self guilty. Give us leave then to judge you none of
the wisest, for this ridiculous elusion.

Some prove themselves men by their visibility rather than rationality, they
will laugh you out an argument of their manhood, sooner then give you a
reasonable demonstration of it. What ridi^ulous matter our brother has here
got to make himself merry with, I see not, if he keep close to the case we are
considering of. If I say I do accept Christ as tendered in the Gospel, and yet
in the same breath, say, Christ shall not reign over me, I think I should
profess contradictions, and my profession of the former, is no evidence that I
do not profess the later. He may turn his tune, change his ha! into ah! and in
stead of laughter see just cause of lamentation, that such contradictory
professions are too frequent. An Arian says, I believe the Scriptures to be
true, yet I believe Christ is but a mere Creature. The Socinian says, I take
him for my Savior and Redeemer, yet in a proper sense he never redeemed me,
paid no price, never was accursed sor me, etc. Those mentioned by Christ in the
Gospel, Matthew. 21.38. said, This is the heir, come let us kill him. They
acknowledged him heir, and so their Lord and Master, and yet profess they
would kill him, was not here a contradiction in one breath professed agreeable
to our present case?

. 3.
A third answer to this second Exception I suggested thus, (at numb. 34.) he
then denies Christ expressly, he professes to receive Christ only by
consequence, from the nature of the ordinance he desires to join in; although
perhaps he understands it not, or does plainly reject his owning of that
consequence.

The Exception to which this third answer was fitted, must be remembered to be
this, viz. That a person baptized, etc. and tendering himself to receive, cannot
openly at that time profess his rejecting Christ, because that in this tender
of himself to this ordinance, he offers to profess the contrary, viz. his
owning of Christ.

Now in reply to my said third solution of this objection, the less Mr. W. has
of weight and pertinent, the more does he power out gall and bitterness, p.
80, 81, 82, 83. And, 1. He says; My answer is not so large as the exception.
The case is (says he) concerning a baptized person [adult, intelligent, and
unexcommunicate] tendering himself to receive the Lords Supper; the Query is
this, viz. Whether such a person at that time in the tendering himself can be
said herein, to reject Christ or Christianity.

1. Here Is the mistake continued I before discovered, taking the time of actual
celebration of the Sacrament, in stead of the time of tendering himself to be
admitted to the sacramen-approaching. 2. He seems to intimate that I had said,
the very tendering himself to communicate was a renouncing of Christ; which no
word of mine ever signified, and I am apt to think Mr. W. himself has so
much charity toward me as to hope that absurdity never entered my thoughts. 3.
If there were a defect in what I here propounded, it was in delivering of the
exception, not in the answer thereunto. The answer is manifestly as large as
the exception; and though The exception only mentioned a person baptized, the
other limitations of [adult, intelligent, and unexcommunicate] were excluded,
according to the former explications given, in stating the Question, not
necessary ever and anon to be repeated at large, 4. Yet as to the particular
matter we are now upon, Its all one whether all these limitations be taken in
or no; our present Query is, whether he that tenders himself to be admitted to
the Communion, can at that time (not in that act of tendering himself, as Mr.
W. wildly lays it) professedly renounce Christ? The which I say he does who
renounceth professedly any essential of Christianity, notwithstanding his
tendering himself to receive. And as to this particular, its all one whether he
were before excommunicate or not.

And yet Is it not a very good Jest, that whiles Mr. W. thus industriously
seeks for flawes where there are none, but what his greedy desire of finding
some has imprinted in his own fancy; he yet here says, he must wink at
small saults in me. He may wink at my faults, I grant, but I think then, he
winkes not close, but only contracts his peepers, that his eyes may see, and
his eyelids too may try my failings; or if perhaps he wink close, its but with
one eye, and that the right, that with the left, he may take a sinister aim
at, and more peircingly pry into my supposed defects.

. 4.
2. Upon my supposition, conceiving the person spoken of, that he does profess
to receive Christ by consequence from the nature of the ordinance which he
desires to join in; Mr. W. inferres; How then can such an one then and therein
be said to deny Christ expressly? Mark those words [then and therein] and see
how he abuses me; where did I say that not only then but therein (in tendering
himself to receive) he may be said to deny Christ (at all, much less)
expressly? And yet when he has made to himself this man of straw, and
scuffled with it a while very valiantly; he insults amain, and paratragoediats
wonderfully; and is ill ashamed of his match, he descended to graple with; and
is now so very bashful, that he tells us, he is ashamed that ever a mother in
our Israel should breed such a son, as he has phancy'd me to be; To which I
also am ashamed to return any reply; and so we are both like to be ashamed
together. Didicit ille maledicere et ego contemnere, as he said in Tacitus. I
despise these his insultations, maledicta haec, quae in me iratior quam
consideratior evomuit, as Augustine said of Petilianus, l. 3. contra Ipsius
Petiliani scripta perversa. The good man is ashamed of me; and indeed though I
judge his answers sufficiently absurd and indiscreet, yet I must confess I see
more reason to be ashamed of my self (when I look into my self) then of him;
though in that inscript, he has thummed so uncivilly; upon a strict perusal
and review of it, I discern no reason which should invite me to recant the
sense of any one sentence therein. The term [Admissionists] which for brevity
sake in that private M S. I had inserted, I could wish had been omitted, and in
stead thereof such a periphrasis as this, [our brethren for the general
admission pleaded for] had been placed. And some passages besides I think
might have been more conveniently expressed, and probably would have been, if I
had suspected their publication. -- But I am afraid it was anger, rather than
modesty which brought the red into his face on this occasion; or having
endeavored to murder my good name, with the blood thereof, he dies his
checkes, and would be accounted shamefast. --

. 5.
3. He excepts against that clause [though perhaps he understand it not, or
does plainly reject his owning of that consequence]. The sum of his
exception, (laying aside his insipid scorns, mingled therewith) is perhaps he
well understands, what he goes about, and perhaps he ownes the consequence, and
does not reject it at all. Our [perhaps] is more charitable then yours, and
bottomed upon a better foundation of hoped grace. -- When an evil against a
man can be but supposed, and good may be hoped, true Christianity will rather
hope the best, then suspect the worst.

Let the Reader judge, whose [perhaps] here is more charitable; when he has
well weighed, whether is the less crime in one to profess contradictions not
understood so to be, or when he knows they are so, and ownes the same; my
[perhaps] was of the former, his was of the latter. And now let the Reader also
judge, whether Mr. W. has in the least invalidated my answer, and proved that
a man cannot be supposed to profess contradictions, when he professes one
thing in express terms, and the contrary, by necessary consequence, which
destroys and contradicts the former; the which if Mr. W. could prove (for his
encouragement in such a design he may be assured) it would thence follow, that
the most notorious heretic by tendering himself to receive should (ipso
facto) become Orthodox this tendering himself to receive, should quit him of
Arrianisme, or any other blasphemy, which yet on all occasions he professedly
asserts and maintains.

. 6.
The third Exception I mentioned was this (at numb. 35.) Some may say, that
such an one, should be fully excommunicated: to which I answer (at numb. 36.)
by hinting some Reasons to the contrary (which are strengthened and enlarged by
the discourse concerning excommunication, and the degrees thereof, which we
treated upon above, Chap. 3.) But Mr. W. counts that labor impertinent. It
suffices him to confute all, by saying I prove not the case but only suppose
it: and so he proceeds to the 4th Exception. This Reply of his, has twice or
thrice already occurred; and yet because Mr. W. in his answer to my solution of
the first exception, then passed it over with naming it, and promised to speak
to it more fully on the 4th Exception. I have hitherto delayed to confirm my
argument against him. But now looking forward into his animadversions on the
4th Exception, and finding him speaking little there close to this matter, I
shall here take occasion to make my defense in it. But that may furnish another
Chapter.

PSALM 119. part. 14. O. 105 Of all Lamps thy word bright'st does burn;
Its to my seet a light.
106 Obey will I, what I have sworn,
To keep thy Judgments right.
107 O Lord, afflictions sore me sting;
By thy words quickening reach!
108 Oh! accept my prayse-offering!
And me thy Judgments teach!
109 Often my soulis in my hand,
Yet to thy Law I cleave
110 Od'ous men sought to snare me, and
Thy precepts I Would not leave.
111 Of old my heritage has bin,
Thy Laws, which gladness send.
112 Ordered my heart is to walk in,
Thy statutes to the end.

CHAP. XV.
. 1.
THe Reader may be pleased to remember, that the Question is whether any such
qualified, as aforesaid, may be debarred the Sacrament? I supposed the case of
one by word renouncing Christianity (or some essential part thereof) who, I
said, though so qualified as the Question puts him, (to wit, baptized, adult,
intelligent, and not fully excommunicate) may be debarred; and if so, then
their universal negative, that none so qualified might be debarred, is
manifestly false. Mr. W. often has answered; that he excepts against the case.
I no where find him saying that in such a case this person should not be
debarred; but he says, p. 83. Our exception lies against that very
supposition, and you do but repeat your own case, against which we except. And
often elsewhere, he says this same thing. But not any where can I see him
offering any Reason of that his exception? I shall now offer my reason against
it.

If it be a valid exception against an argument which makes supposition of the
present case supposed, to say that case ought not to be supposed; It is either
because the case supposes what is impossible, or what never was, is, nor shall
be existent; or for some of these, or some other Reason. But as I know no other
Reason to be pretended, (when I do, it may be considered) so these here
enumerated, are either not applicable to our present case, or are not valid
against it.

The first is not applicable to it. Its not impossible that a man who tenders
himself to be admitted to the communion, should professedly in words renounce
Christianity, or (which is tantamount here) an essential part of Christianity.
Its neither impossible, impossibilitate absoluta and ex part rci, quae sita
est in implicatione terminorum, qui se mutuo evertunt; neque impossibilitate
relativa and ex part atque respectu alicujus potentiae. Its not so impossible
as it is for God to deny himself, or for yesterday to be to day; nor as it may
be impossible for some one who is blind to see, (I mean in sensu diviso, for
in sensu composito, this is impossible with the absolute impossibility before
mentioned). This therefore is not applicable to our present case supposed. And
yet if the latter kind of impossibility were, it were no valid reason against
our argument. For we find in Scripture arguings upon such things or cases
supposed. Its a rational observation which the learned Amyraldus has, Specim.
Animadvers: special: par. 3. erot. 5. Licet (says he) supponere eum esse
fidelem (I may say also infidelem, in the sense opposite to that wherein he
there takes fidelis) qui actu non est talis, neque vero esse potest: nam and
Paulus supponit justitiam esse per legem, quod falsum est, and ex ea
suppositione deduxit Christum esse mortuum (...), quod est adhuc falsius; ut
ostenderet, quod est long verissimum, justificationem non ex lege, sed ex
evangelio constare: sic Christus dicit, si dixerim me non nosse patrem,
mendaxero, etc.

. 2.
As for the other Reasons pretended against the validity of my arguing upon the
supposition aforesaid, viz because the case supposed, neither has been, is,
nor shall be existent; or because at least some of these may be said of it; I
should return as follows. If the non-present existence of the case, were
valid against the arguing on it, then we could never prove by argument the Rule
in general that any notorious Adulterer were to be censured, in any particular
Church, where there is not such a notorious Adulterer existent among them. And
if the non-former existence were valid as aforesaid, then no new kind of crime
could be new censured. The consequence of both these, is manifestly sound and
rational. But the consequents in both are plainly false, therefore the
Antecedents are not true. And the futurition of such crimes cannot certainly be
foreknown by natural means; therefore if the non futurition were a bar to the
supposing such cases, there could be no supposition of any crime not present or
past; which is also most false. For all penal Laws suppose an offense to be
committed, upon which the execution of them takes effect.

. 3.
2. Again; If that might not be supposed, which, neither is, was, nor shall be
existent, then the holy Scriptures make not right suppositions. For such are
frequent there, Gal. 1.8, 9. If we or an Angel from heaven preach another
Gospel, let him be accursed. We may make supposition of an Angel from heaven
(since the fall of man) preaching a false doctrine, and that he should be
accursed; neither of which happen; yet we may argue, if he do so, he is
accursed: even as I supposed a baptized person, etc. his word-renouncing of
Christianity, and his being suspended: whether either of these happen or no? I
might argue, that, if he do so, he is so to be dealt with. Multitudes of other
such suppositions, of things which never were, nor are, nor shall be, we find
in Scripture, and arguings thereupon; see many together, 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19. so elsewhere, Math. 6.15. John 8.39. and 16.7. and 18.23. Gal.
2.21. Ezekiel. 18.24, 26, etc.

Augustine in his book de fide et operibus, thus disputes against them who
would admit notorious unclean persons to Baptism, Cap. 12. He supposes to
them that an Idolater should come without renouncing his Idolatry, and asks
them whether they would admit him to Baptism, (though perhaps this case never
occurred) and thence he argues against their admitting of notorious
fornicators, without renouncing that their wickedness before. Profecto (says
he) dicturi sunt homini, Templum Dei futurus es, cum baptismum acceperis. Dicit
autem Apostolus Quae compositio Templi Dei cum Idolis? Quare ergo non vident
similiter dicendum, membrum Christi futurus es, cum acceperis baptismum non
possunt membra Christi esse membra meretricis -- Cur ergo ad baptismum Idolis
servientes non admittimus, and fornicatores admit tendos putamus. Cur and his
and caeteris malis dicat, and haec quidem suistis; sed abluti estis, sed
sanctificati estis, sed justificati estis, in nomine Domini Jesu Christi, and
in spiritu Dei nostri? Quid igitur causae est, ut cum potestas pateat utrumque
prohibendi, venientem ad baptismum permittam fornicarium permanere, and non
permittam Idolis servientem: cum and illis and his dici audiam, and haec quidem
suistis sed abluti estis. (It should seem by the way, that those words of 1
Cor. 6.11. were spoken to the baptized, which manifests they in those times
took all the baptized to be savingly justified persons.) Thus we see how from a
case which perhaps never occurred, he argued in reference to a case frequent
among them: there being the same Reason of both, in the thing wherein he
compares them. Would it not have been a sorry and silly Answer for Caecilianus
to have returned to this Argument of Austines; Why but none not renouncing
their Idolatry do, or will desire to be baptized, I except against the case
supposed? All know that the truth or falsehood of an hypotheticall proposition,
depends only on the right or wrong connection of the parts of it, not on the
parts themselves whether one or both of them.

. 4.
3. Besides the case I supposed, was at least possible to occur, yea
probable, as has been before showed; and therefore is further removed from the
Exception.

PSALM 119. part 15. P. 113 Perfectly all vain thoughts I hate,
But love thy Laws O Lord:
114 Preserved under thy shield I sat,
I do trust in thy word.
115 Part ye from me who evil do;
For I Will keep Gods Laws just.
116 Preserve me by thy word, I so,
Shall live, and boldly trust.
117 Propt by thine arms I safe shall be,
And still thy precepts eye.
118 Plucked down the lawless are by thee.
For their fraud is a lie.
119 Put back from thee dross-earthlings be,
I love thy hests therefore.
120 Poor flesh! I quake for fear of thee,
I dread thy Judgments sore.

CHAP. XVI.
. 1.
ANd now I shall wait on Mr. W. in his animadversions on the 4th exception I
set down against my Argument, and my solution thereof. The exception was (at
numb. 37.) That there is no such instance in our times of a word-renouncer of
Christianity, when he tenders himself to be admitted to the Communion. And
therefore we need not perplex our selves, with forecasting what might be done in
such an extraordinary case. But the present controversy is concerning such as
in word profess to own Christ, when they tender themselves to communicate,
although there be visible testimony that their lives are not hitherto agreeable
to their profession. My solution hereof was (at numb. 38, 39. etc) The sum
whereof is; Its no needless point of wisdom, to labor to foresee, the
necessary ill consequents. which may ensue upon the receiving a principle,
although at present there is not opportunity for the existence of them. -- And
those evince the principle not sound. If suspension then in the case proposed,
cannot be denied, then it must not be universally rejected.

Now Mr. W. in his reply hereto; 1. affixeth on me, as if I owned what was put
in the exception, viz. that the case supposed was an extraordinary Instance,
and that the present controversy is concerning such as in words profess
Christianity: and so he thinks to beat me with my own concessions. Is not this
brave disputing, that what I brought in as an objection against my argument,
should be taken for my own assertion? Yet this he takes for a confutation of
me, p. 86, 87. and does so far presume on the silliness of his Readers, as to
tell them hereupon, that I am in a wood, and know not which way to get out. I
came indeed among briars and thorns when I fell into Mr. W. his hands, and I
shall hardly get out without receiving some marks of his sharpness. But that
may seem to some (especially mine Antagonist) an extraordinary Instance, which
is not so.

Again; I would distinguish, a case may be said to be extraordinary in a
twofold respect; 1. in respect of the rare and seldom occurring of it; so of
incest or parricide, the Instances may be extraordinary. Or 2. in respect of
the Rule whereby a case is to be discerned and judged of, which may differ from
the ordinary Rule. As the ordinary Rule determines incest unlawful, but an
extraordinary temporary Rule made it lawful for Adams immediate children to
marry together. And now whereas Mr. W. says, Extraordinary Instances happening
in the course of Gods extraordinary providence, cannot infringe the truth of a
general Rule, true in the course of Gods ordinary providence. And adds; This
is a Rule that best Divines walk by, notwithstanding your pretended skill in
Logic.

What pretended skill in Logic did I ever boast of? What an impotent scoff is
this? how iucoherently and abruptly brought in? If I might answer Mr. W. in his
own way I should say, perhaps he may presume of his artificial Logic,
especially in the first part, both of the peripatetick, for he is good at such
simple terms, as mormo, mormonize, and the like, and the Ramistical; one would
be apt to think his Invention is too great, by the figments he has published
concerning me. But a little more natural Logic, its humbly conceived, would
not make him (no more then me) an overplus. For I think the Preface he printed
before his first Errata Table to this book, argues no overflowing of his
discretion; the Preface was this; Christian Reader, my remoteness from London,
and the miscarriage of my Letters by the Post, have caused many oversights to
pass (in this impression) without timely correction. And that now I may not be
disappointed, I have committed my business to honest Randal Foster, Carrier of
Leek, who is sure and trusty, though but slow in his motion. But to the thing I
answer, by applying the former distinction, and say the Rule mentioned is true
being understood in the latter sense not in the former. Now our case if it may
be called extraordinary, its so only in respect of the seldom occurring of it,
not in respect of any extraordinary Rule appointed for the judging of it,
differing from the ordinary Rule, which determines that unbeleevers in the
sense above explained, are not to be admitted to the Sacraments.

. 2.
2. He says, p. 89, 90 Why must wise men be of such a long proviso, to provide
so long beforehand, against supposed evils of future contingency, which happily
may never fall out? or if they come to pass, shall it be imputed to their
folly, that they had not provided themselves with remedies against unknown
evils, which possibly may come to pass? What fools then were the primitive
Fathers of the Church, that they could not foresee the evil of heresies; but
must assemble in Councils after they arose, and had no instantaneous remedy to
put a sudden check thereunto. Nay, what fools were the very Apostles, that
they did not foresee the evil of Judaizing, that they must go up to Jerusalem
to consult about a Remedy after the evil arose? Doubtless, all these wanted
some of your suspension wisdom. Those old times did not afford men of such a
prudential forecast, as the present age does. --

1. The Ranting Language I Will skip over, as a dirty puddle in my way. 2. The
contingency of the offenses happening, does not make that a Rule should not be
necessary for the ordering of them. For there is a contingency in the happening
of adultery, drunkenness, or any such offense, for which Excommunication is to
be inflicted on an offender, according to 1 Cor. 5. And these in the nature of
the things themselves, are as much contingent and casual events, as that our
present case supposed of a word-renouncing of Christianity. And the Rule for
exclusion reaches this as well as those. 3. Hence it follows, we are to admit
no principle contrary to this Rule, in this no more than those. If I hold such
a Principle as does necessarily infer, That no incestuous person may be
debarred, the not occurring of such an offense does not make the principle to
be true. And therefore I am to renounce that principle, whether incest be ever
committed or no.

4. The examples Mr W. pretends to the contrary, are wholly impertinent. They
concern either first, the foreseeing of offenses which after did occurr,
whereas the point we are upon, is the foreseeing an irregularity which would
follow upon a principle in case such offenses do occur: the former we are not
bound to foresee, the later we are. Or secondly, they concern the execution of
a Rule before known, in such manner as may be most for the edification of the
Church; in reference to which there will be continual need of new
consultations as long as the world stands; because of the varying circumstances
of places, times and persons, and the exigencies thereof. Councils now do not
make new principles, when a new case occurres, but consult for the better
improvement and application of principles already received, in reference
thereto. The very edge therefore of Mr. W. his Similies turns, and so will not
at all touch the nerves of this my first Solution, given by me to the fourth
exception propounded.

. 3.
My second answer to the exception of the extraordinariness of this case I had
supposed (at numb. 39.) was, That though this case seem so rare and
extraordinary (which explication of rare by extraordinary, showed, I meant
thereby rarely or seldom occurring as before) yet by necessary consequence it
concludes (not includes as Mr. W. prints me) other instances of daily and
ordinary incursion. For if he who in words rejects Christ, may be debarred,
then he who by some notorious deeds rejects Christ (though not in words) may be
debarred, though he be a person baptized, adult, and not fully excommunicate.
The further Mr W. goes on, the more does he go out, and extravagate: and where
he has (as appears to me) least color of argumentation, and least pincheth my
papers, there is he most confident and censorious. I shall meddle as little
with such stuff as I can, but some is so interwoven with what seems more
material, that it will not be sundred. But to the matter I would design my
Reply. And

1. He says, p. 94. Few would have imagined how rare and extraordinary should
by necessary consequence have concluded daily and ordinary. This cavil is
answered in the last chapfer, by distinguishing of the word ordinary. From the
Rule of some things which seldom occur, conclusions may be drawn in
reference to things which frequently occur. From Abraham's being justified in
believing that singular promise, that in his seed should all the nations of the
earth be blessed, is concluded justification by faith in general of all them
who are justified, Romans 4. From the promise made to Joshua, to be with him
(especially in conquering Canaan, which was an extraordinary and rare case, is
concluded, that God will be with his people in ordinary cases of daily
incursion. Heb. 13.5. compared with Josh. 1.5. Diverse such examples there are
in Scripture. Our Protestant Divines disputing against justification by works
in the Popish sense, and their doctrine of Purgatory from the singular instance
of the Thief on the Cross, who went immediately to heaven, Gerrard observes,
Harm. Evang. de passione, cap. 15. p. 183. that the Papists would seek such an
evasion as Mr W. here does. Tandem igitur (says he) eo abeunt, quod privilegia
paucorum non constituunt nec evertunt Regulam. To which he answers, Atqui cum
est omnium piorum coram Deo justificatio gratuita, scilicet ex fide in Christum
Medintorem, id quod Apostolus clare ostendit, quando Romans 4. v. 1. etc. Ex
particulari Abrahae justificati exemplo, generalem justificationis formam ac
modum probat. Quod ergo anima conversi Latronis sine Purgatorii ignis
interventu, recta in Paradisum est sublata, id non est personale privilegium,
sed generale exemplum, etc.

Yea, let me add further, that it is usual in Scripture to suppose Cases, which
(for ought we know) never were nor shall be existent, and from thence to
conclude matters of ordinary and frequent incursion. Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel
12. supposes the case of a rich man taking the poor man's Ewe for his guest,
and the grievousness of that offense so supposed, being granted, he thence
concludes the hainousness of David's wickedness committed by him in the point of
Uriah. This was an usual way of arguing with Christ Jesus, for the conviction
of the Jews: there are many instances thereof in the Gospels: there are two of
this nature, Matthew. 21. He there supposes a man who had two sons, and he
commanding them to go and work in his vineyard, the one said, I go Sir, and
went not; the other said he will not go, and yet went. And thence concludes,
that the Publicans and Harlots enter into the kingdom of heaven before many of
the Jews. So likewise he supposes an Householder planting a Vineyard, and
letting it out to Husbandmen, and how injuriously and treacherously they dealt
with his servants and son, and how severely they were punished; and thence
concludes against the Jews for their abusing the Prophets, and rejecting
Christ himself; as they themselves perceived, verse 45. The force of such
arguments lies not in the existence of the case supposed, but in the merits of
the cause supposed, and in the parallel and likeness betwixt the case supposed,
and their cases whom he deals with. Comparata etiam ficta arguunt fidemque
faciunt. as P. Ramus rightly observes, and gives many examples thereof,
Dialect. l. 1. c. 18. So here, whether word-renouncer of Christianity be
existent or no, if he be to be debarred the Sacrament, and the case of one who
in deeds rejects Christ, be parallel to that, as to a visible renouncing of
Christ, the Argument is valid from the former to the debarring of the later.

. 4.
2. Another exception Mr. W. makes against the expression (he says is mine) of
quotidian and ordinary rejectings of Christ. This expression (says he) is
somewhat harsh and rigorous, p. 96. and the like he has, p. 103. But
expressions warranted by Scripture, are not too harsh nor rigorous; but such is
this: For the Scripture frequently puts this language on the notorious acts of
disobedience, even amongst Gods people by dedication and verbal profession, 1 Samuel 8.7. and 10.19. and 15.23, 26. 2 King. 17.15. Jerem. 16.19. and 8.9. Hosea
4.6. And Christ Jesus makes these two phrases of rejecting him, and not
receiving his word, of equal importance, John 12.48. And would to God this
were not too ordinary and frequent!

3. Mr. W. adds, p. 96, 97. Perhaps some of your reverend Pastors and grave
Elders, may possibly be involved in the crime. It is supposeable, nay possible
(to use your own weapon) that such may be word- or deed-rejecters of Christ in
your sense. If such an extraordinary emergent as this appears, who then shall
suspend the Parish Pope, or his Vestry Cardinals? They will happily have a private
Mass, though none of the Congregation will join with them. In this supposable
case which possibly may occur, though it does never actually occur, what
instantaneous Remedy have you? Methinks such wise men as you should foresee the
evil, and be furnished with an instantaneous Remedy against it, when such a
case shall occur, though it never actually does occur. Shall I retort upon you
this Counter-buff, viz. That God has placed a power somewhere in his Church
for the instantaneous checking of this supposable evil? or else must you
renounce your principle, which upon a close pursuit will cast you on this rock?
We only here improve your Argument to such further usefulness as you never
expected; and the improvement is rather good against you than against us,
because it is your own argument.

Despising his scornful language, I answer. 1. Mr W. does here manifestly
abuse me. For in his Counter-buffe (as he calls it) he puts this Pofition down
in a different Character, as if it had been mine assertion and words, viz. That
God has placed a power somewhere in his Church, for the instantaneous checking
of this supposable evil. The passage of mine he alludes to, was in the
beginning of the Argument, where one proposition in my Syllogism was, Those
who are visibly such as the Lord has in his word, declared to be persons, to
whom he would not have the Lords Supper administered, may be suspended from the
Lords Supper. And this I said, is clear; because God has placed a power
somewhere in his Church for the managing his Ordinances so, as they may not be
dispensed to such as he has declared in his word, he would not have them
administered unto. And I had before limited the Question thus, That we are not
now enquiring by what power any may be suspended, but only concerning the
lawfulness of the act of suspending the persons mentioned in the question, by
any person or persons whatsoever, in whatsoever capacity they are, or by
whatsoever kind of power it may be exerted by them, or any of them. So that if
it were lawful for a General Council to suspend, it proved the assertion
sufficiently which I undertook. You see then, 1. that the expression of an
Instantaneous remedy he talks on, was not mine, but his own. 2. Besides, we
may distinguish of debarring, 1. by a Rule for debarring: and 2. by the
execution of that debarring the Rule appoints. In the former sense, there is an
Instantaneous remedy (as he speaks) in the case propounded by him; to keep the
ordinances from being dispensed to such as have no actual right thereunto: For
the word of God so debarres them, that they ought not to approach to the seal
of the Covenant, without their real and present accepting of the
Covenant-terms, which they cannot do, whiles they lie under notorious
wickedness unrepented of. In the later sense there may not be ever an
instantaneous remedy to execute the Rule effectually. But we are not disputing
what men do, but what they ought to do according to Scripture-Rule. He might in
the same manner trifle about suspending the unclean from the Passcover, and
say, But what if the Priests and Governors were to keep back the Legally
unclean, were so unclean themselves, who must suspend them? and hence argue,
that they might not debar others, because there was none to debar them, or
not instantly; when as yet the Rule debarred them as well as others; and they
sinned in not complying with it themselves, as well as in not executing the
same for the debarring of others.

And thus the Reader may perceive our Gentleman's Counter-buffe, is but the
blind-mans-buff, and fitter for an hoodwinkt boy than a learned censurer of
others Logic. But, O my soul, stop here; restrain, yea, extinguish the rise of
a seeming just indignation by attending wholly to the divine and calming
meditation of,

PSALM. 119. Part 16. Q. 121 Quietly I do judgment just.
Save me from Tyranny.
122 Quasht let me not be by proud dust!
For good be my surety!
123 Quite fail mine eyes for thy goodness;
and for thy right'ous word:
124 Quickly to me mercy express!
Teach me thy Statutes Lord.
125 Qualify me with grace to know
thy Testimonies right!
126 Quickly Lord work! It is time now,
For men thy Law null quite.
127 Questionless therefore I do love
Thy Truth above gold best.
128 Questionless thy Laws right I prove,
and each false way detest.

CHAP. XVII.
. 1.
THe consequence in my argumentation (at numb. 41.) If word rejecters of
Christianity, though baptized, adult, and not fully excommunicate, may be
debarred the Sacrament, then also some such deed-rejecters of Christianity may
be debarred, my paper proved (at numb. 42.) as is related by Mr. W. p. 98, 99.
Which we shall have occasion anon to repeat.

I shall now gather up the sum of what Mr. W. answers for the enervating
thereof, and then having compared my argumentations with the pretended
solutions he returns thereunto, I shall make my Reply to them severally, and
then add more proof for the confirmation of my Consequence aforesaid.

1. Mr. W. says, p. 99. We begin now to fear the feverity of your Church
Officers: But our comfort is, that neither Titus 1.16. nor 1 Cor. 5. nor Math.
18.15, 16. nor Rev. 2.2. do establish your suspension, nor command us to
submit to your Church Officers.

2. That Timson calls them intruded Elders, p. 99, 100.

3. The Question now in agitation with us is, Whether open scandalous and
presumptuous offenders in the Church, are to be punished by the discipline of
the Church? We affirm positively that they are -- such offenders in words or
deeds. -- The correction of these do fall properly under Ecclesiastical
discipline; yet not so as the Christian Magistrate is to be excluded -- And yet
all this does not infer the necessity of your suspension, as a censure
distnct from excommunication; viz. that every Parish Priest with his Elders
(after his own humor) should be Judge in his own cause, use partiality,
exclude men from the Lords service, merely at his pleasure, for not submitting
to his Examination, though otherwise judicious and of good example, albeit the
cry be against men ignorant, and of gross behavior! -- And then tells us, Its
fit the correcting discipline should lie in indifferent and impartial hands,
more public then the Parish Priest and his Elders. -- And oft-times it will
fall out, that a Pastor and his Elders will be Judges in their own cause, and
then suspension was become private revenge, and parties will become Judges; All
this, p. 101, 102.

4. He asks; Is your Parochial suspension with your Classical power in being
(by toleration civil) an universal Remedy against all the Errors that belong
to Ecclesiastical cognizance? As yet you have no place for public Judicature
allowed by the State, no Power to issue out Warrants for the legal summoning
in of offenders. And therefore your proceedings in suspension are without all
form of Law, p. 103.

5. I see that (ipso facto) men must be suspended (by you) for their former
miscarriages, and present words of sorrow, and of promising obedience for the
future, must not serve the turn. This he insists on in many words, p. 103,
104, 105, 106, 107. and labors to confute me by Luke 17.4. and asks, Whether
the Church, (which is coetus misericors, and deals not against men in rigor
of Justice, but with bowels of mercy) may not take men's present words of
repentance for a real dissenting from their former evil deeds, and believe in
charity, that their word-Testimonies of Repentance are serious Retractations of
their former evil deeds?

And now I desire the Reader to do himself, Mr. W, and me that right, as to
compare these five answers severally and jointly with my argumentation, which
should be confuted by them; and let him try his best skill to fit them
thereunto. My reasoning for the confirmation of my Consequence, recited in the
beginning of this Chapter, (which Mr. W. here assaults) thus proceeded; If the
above mentioned Consequence (from the suspension of word-Rejecters of Christ,
to the suspension of some deed-Rejecters of Christ) do not hold, it is either
because no deed-rejection of Christ is so manifest, visible and heinous a
rejection of Christ, as word-rejecting of Christ is; or else because the
Officers in the Church, have some good Rule according to which they may
dispense with, or not deny the Sacrament for deed-rejecting of Christ, rather
then word rejecting of Christ, or for some other Reason. But neither of these
do enervate the Consequence, nor any other Reason, therefore its good and
valid: not the latter, because no such Rule can be produced, but rather the
contrary, Titus 1.16. 1 Cor. 5. Math. 18.15, 16, 17, Rev. 2.2. Not the former,
because, etc. -- which may be perused (at numb. 44, 45.)

2.
Mr. W. in answering hereof, does neither assert, that either of the Reasons
mentioned, does enervate my Consequence, nor fault the enumeration of
obstructive Reasons which might enervate it, nor assign any other. And yet his
foresaid returns must serve for solutions, and he in the strength of them thus
flourishes it out, and shows his mettle, p. 108. The proof of your
Consequence we have examined at large, we have showed Causes, why we cannot
approve of it; You may take time to consider, and reply if you have any stomach
to the undertaking. But (I fear me) you will consider of it ten times, before
you will undertake it once.

Truly I may consider it twenty times, before I can find any thing herein
pertinent, for me to reply unto: such an adversary may safely challenge and
provoke to Disputation. Did ever any Quaker return a more impertinent
pretended solution to an Argument? And yet they will be as bold as Mr. W.
himself has attained to be, and tell you, no body dare or can answer them.
And under the shelter of that their irrational impudence, they often escape
Replies to them. And so might Mr. W. for me, if others Judgment had not
prevailed against my own for this once; hereafter I hope my Friends will not
urge me in this kind any more.

But though these his five Reasons against my Consequence, (so you see he calls
them, else I had wanted a name for them; as the Painter that wrote [This is a
Lyon] over the picture he had drawn, that no body should take it for a Bull)
though I say these his answers are manifestly nihil ad Rhombum, yet because it
may be thought, he may, like a squinting Fencer, wound me some where else by
them, though he touch not the place he makes a show to aim at; I shall
therefore satisfy his importunity this once, as I have sometimes gratified the
Quakers, to make some reply to them severally; and then I shall (as I promised)
confirm my own argumentation.

. 3.
To his first; Its plain I cited not those texts to prove suspension
immediately; I brought them to prove that Church Officers have no good Rule
according to which they may dispense with deed rejecting of Christ, any more
then with word-rejecting of Christ, in point of sacramental administrations,
thus; If there be a deed rejecting of Christ, for which Ecclesiastical Censure
is to be inflicted, as well as for a word rejecting of Christ; then the Church
Officers have no Rule to dispense with or not deny the Sacrament for the former
rather than the latter. The Antecedent is proved by the texts quoted; Titus
1.16. In words they profess Christ, in deeds they deny him: And the other texts
proved a deed-rejecting of Christ, (yea when in words Christ is owned) to be
causes of Ecclesiastical Censure, and therefore as truly as word rejecting of
Christ is.

To his second, I say, Mr. W. it seems has found one man, as bold as
himself, to reproach Elders without offering any Argument against them, or
invalidating those produced for them. A confident man as I have lightly met
with, who though then a private Christian, as he styles himself, without
blushing, tells us in his Epistle to the Reader before his Bar removed; I look
to be censured for this my presumption, in dissenting from the common
interpretation of several Scriptures, and asserting some things against the
judgment of many, or most Divines and godly Christians, etc.

Assault Humphreys and Timson, cries Mr. W. p. 48. The men like Ingenuous
Worthyes appear in print, etc. Its pity that such a learned and ingenuous
Divine as Mr. Humphreys appears to be, should be yoakt so unsutably with Mr.
Timson. Mr. Humphreys wants not assaulting, Mr. Timson (as to our controversy)
will not I think deserve an assault; until now (in his public capacity Mr.
W. intimates) he gain the repute of less arrogance and more learning than his
former writings (so far as they reach our case) have discovered. If such a man
as Mr Humphreys, will pick out that which looks as considerable in this
controversy in Timson, it would sooner be answered. But I wonder not Mr. W.
and Timson so well agree; For they are both good at provoking words; and its a
jolly Champion whose name Mr. W. has mentioned 26 times (I take it), in his
book. When I have little else to do I may perhaps answer him as Mr. W.
challenges me. But I hope to be better employed. And the truth is, I agree
with him and Mr. Humphreys in so many things (they treat of) for substance,
that the service of answering them is not so proper for me as their peculiar
Antagonists. But see what an answer this is: Timson is against Elders, Ergo
there is no consequence from the suspension of word rejecters of Christ, to the
suspension of deed-rejecters of Christ. Sampsons new withes will not tie these
together. This is to dispute at a low rate indeed.

. 4.
3. To his third, I say, 1. Our question was not whether open scandalous and
presumptuous offenders in the Church are to be punished by the discipline of
the Church? I wonder he has the face to say it was, and tell the Reader so,
who has the Question stated before him otherwise. But whether any of these
might be debarred the Sacrament, though not fully excommunicated. Therefore Mr.
W. his debate here is not only impertinent to the present argumentation he
pretends to answer to, but also to the whole controversy in hand. 2. His
odious Insinuations of every Parish Priest, after his own humor, using
partiality with the rest of that riff raff; have been answered before. 3. But
that which ad ravim usque he talks on, is suspending for non-submission to
Examination, and that of persons otherwise judicious and of good example. Our
Question was, whether for any cause any might be suspended, not for what
causes? Yet this Digression I intend to say somewhat to, when it comes among
the Digressions at the latter end; to which I refer it. 4. If it were not fit
the correcting discipline should lie in the hands he excepts against, because
of their cohabitation with them who should be corrected, which may cause
partiality; then the Corinthian Officers should not have had in their hands the
correcting discipline wherewith to censure the Incestuous person, because
(forsooth) he was among them; and they might (if Mr. W. had been their
prompter) have evaded the Apostles objurgation for neglect of disciplining him,
and have said, It was not fit for us, who live with him, to censure him; some
body else more remote, (who might be presumed more impartial) should have taken
him in hand. And belike the same Reason would as well persuade Justices of
peace, that its not fit for them to take cognizance of offenses among their
neighbors; they are fit to minister Justice to those who are remote from them,
not to them who cohabite with them, in the same Hundred or Parish. And yet
though Mr. W. talks thus consideratly, (as he says himself, p. 103.) yet a
while ago he seemed to have a better mind to exercise discipline among his
neighbors, if the State would enough assist him therein. For, said he, p. 90.
we have ordinary cases enough in being for the full exercise of Ecclesiastical
discipline, had we power from the Christian Magistrate to convent offenders
before us authoritatively, and to inflict punishments upon them (after their
legal conviction) according to the quality of their crimes; and should not
rather be a ludibrium to bold offenders, then any way reform them.

To the former part whereof I answer; Did he never see the Ordinance of Lords
and Commons of March 29, 1648. entitled, The Form of Church Government to be
used in the Church of England and Ireland, agreed upon by the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, after advice had with the Assembly of Divines? Is that
but a toleration? or was it ever repealed? But some Ministers and others
pretend ignorance of such an Ordinance, and wonder when its showed them; and
well they may, that they should no more regard the affairs of the Church.
Others have pretended, It was but an Ordinance, and therefore not valid after
the dissolution of the Parliament who made it, and yet in the mean time, have
sued for their tithes upon an Ordinance built upon the same Authority.

To the latter part I return Cyprians answer, Epist. 55. ad Cornelium; Quod si
ita res est, frater charissime, ut nequissimorum timeatur audacia; and quod
mali jure atque aequitate non possunt, temeritate ac desperatione perficiant,
actum est de Episcopatus vigore, and de ecclesiae gubernandae sublimi ac divina
potestate; nec Christiani ultra aut durare, aut esse jam possumus, si ad hoc
ventum est, ut perditorum minas atque infidias pertimescamus. -- And after, Non
id circo frater charissime, relinquenda est ecclesiastica disciplina, aut
sacerdotalis solvenda censura, quoniam convitijs infestamu^, aut terroribus
quatimur, etc.

. 5.
To his fourth, I answer; Its most of it answered in what was lately mentioned,
whereby it appears, if Ministers were not the greatest hinderers of Church
Order, they might see that presbyterated Churches have power from the State,
authoritatively, to send for offenders, yea to give Oath if need require. But
as long as the Magistrate does not compel them to do their duty herein, (by
depriving them of their maintenance for neglect hereof, as well as for total
neglect of preaching) they cannot see sufficient authority for their acting
herein. That Question Mr. W. here propounds, whether Parochial suspension with
Classical power in being (by toleration civil) be an universal remedy against
all the evils that belong to Ecclesiastical cognizance? Lanswer negatively; Who
said it was? But does Mr. W. thence evince the consequence of my fore-recited
argument to be invalid? Good Reader, Respice titulum; Look to what Mr W. is
answering to all along, and then judge whether it was handsome, he (of many)
should have told the world, how he fears my brains are almost marred, as he
does, p. 89. I am beholding to him for his care of me; But I cannot desire he
should be fo sollicitous about mine, as so pitifully in the interim to neglect
his own?

. 6.
His fifth Answer or Reason against my foresaid consequence, is a mere
fiction, the product (I think) of an extravagant fancy, and too fruitful an
invention, ratified and excited by a passionate heat. I never said that former
acts of wickedness, though amounting to a rejecting of an essential of
Christianity, nor yet word-rejecting of Christ, when retracted by a visible
repentance, should debar any from the Sacrament. They are then cancelld and
blotted out, when repented of, and are no more to be mentioned against the
offender. As Cyprian says, Epist. 55. Cornelio fratri. Primus foelicitatis
gradus est non delinquere, secundus delicta cognoscere. Illic currit innocentia
integra and illibata quae servet, hic succedit medela quae sanet. But as in the
beginning of the argument I spoke all along of a word-rejecting Christ, which a
person is found in, when he tenders himself to communicate; so here the deed
rejecting of Christ was such as he was then visibly still guilty of; which he
is not, when he has seriously retracted it by repentance and promise of
Reformation. And yet where this Gentleman is most amiss, he is usually most
confident, and (if I may use Cheshire language) threapes me down thus, p. 104.
You cannot say I misconceive your meaning; no, by no means. If he say white is
black, he must not be contradicted, no not when he pretends to know my
thoughts, so infallible is he; the seven Hills aspire not to this Elevation I
trow. Marsilius Ficinus, who interprets Plato, says, Platonis quidam
familiaris vir doctus, edidit librum cujus inscriptio fuit Contradicendum non
esse, eidem de eo Platonem consulenti, respondit Plato, Cur me consulis, si
tibi prohibes contradici. I shall leave him in his confidence, and return to
the Ark of my trust.

PSALM 119. part. 17. R. 129 Right wondrous are thy statutes bright,
My soul keeps them therefore.
130 Receiving of thy words give light.
Th'simple with knowledge store.
131 Restless I called and pant, for I
Longing thy precepts crave.
132 Regard me with that rich mercy
Which does thy lovers save.
133 Regulate my steps in thy Word!
Let no sin rule over me.
134 Rescue me from man's wrongful sword!
So I Will thy Laws keep free.
135 Rays from thy face shine on me now!
Teach me thy word to awe!
136 Rivers of tears from mine eyes slow,
Because men break thy Law.

CHAP. XVIII.
. 1.
ANd now having answered Mr. W. his Reasons (as he called them) The Reader may
discern how my argumentation concerning deed-rejecters of Christ their
suspension, remains untouched by him, much more unwounded and safe. But
because the point is of great influence into the present controversy, I shall
add somewhat more hereunto, to prove that notorious gross wickedness
(continued in, without visible repentance of it) is and ought to be taken (in
the judgment of the governing Church, or where there is no governing Church in
the judgment of the Minister officiating) as equivalent to word-Rejecting of
Christ; and therefore equally renders a person incapable of having the Lords
Supper administered unto him.

The argument I before propounded (at numb. 44, 45) was to this purpose; If
words are no otherwise testimonies, then as they signify the mind of the
speaker; then words of profession for owning Christianity, are not
significative of the mind in that profession, when there are some such deeds at
present owned which do more probably signify the mind to the contrary. This
consequence is clear, because the use of words is to be signs of things; when
they manifestly are not so, they cease to have the use of signifying the mind
in the thing spoken of. Verba quid audio facta cum videam? Cyprian de unitate
ecclesiae catholicae, says Credere se in Christum quomodo dicit, qui non facit
quod Christus sacere praecipit.

The Antecedent also is manifest. For,

. 2.
1. In other matters some deeds practiced and continued in, render words to the
contrary incredible; and there is the same reason of them and this case, as to
the thing wherein I now compare them. The command is to Give to him that
needs; but every one who says he needs, is not to be taken for a needy
person, when as the contrary other wise appears to us, by his abundance
visibly under his hand, and his large and unnecessary expenses. So he that
repents is to be forgiven, but he that says he repents is not to be believed,
when actually and visibly he continues in the wickedness he says he repents
of: Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum, and that before God or
men. If a thief rob me of my purse, and then say he is sorry for my loss, and
that he has so injured me, yet will not restore my purse to me; Is his saying
I repent, a probable indication of his mind? Is that a credible profession? St
John shows, 1 John 3.17. compared with Chap. 4.20. If a man say he love God,
or his neighbor, and yet so manifest his hatred, that he will not relieve his
brother in distress, he is a liar; and therefore so must be judged of, by that
manifestation of his deeds contrary to his words. Was not the enmity of the
Jews Adversaries as to building the Temple, signified by their practicing
against the same, more then their friendship was by their good words, Ezra 4.2.
Let us build with you, for we seek your God as ye do, etc. So Jer. 8.8, 9.
How do ye say ye are wise -- they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what
wisdom is in them. 1 John 2.4. He that says I know him and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. 1 John 1.6. If we say we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth.
Now sure a lie manifested to be so, is not credible, nor a significative
testimony of what in words is asserted. When the Pythonisse maid, Act. 16.16,
17, 18. gave testimony to Paul and Sylas verbally, saying, These men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation: Was
that a credible profession or testimony? Augustine libro de Mendacio ad
Consentium, says, Ille mentitur, qui aliud habet in animo, and aliud verbis,
vel quibuslibet significationibus ennnciat.

. 3.
2. Words are more apt to be counterfeit then some deeds, therefore some deeds
may be more credible testimonies of the mind, then words contrary thereunto.
When Saul said to Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.13, 14. Blessed be thou of the Lord, I
have performed the Commandment of the Lord. Samuel said; But what means this
bleating of the sheep in my cares, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
And Saul's disobedient deeds of sparing Agag and the best of the Amalekitish
flock, (though pretended for sacrifice) was a more credible sign of Saul's
disobedience, then his word-profession of obedience was to the contrary. Was
not Judas his betraying Christ into the hands of the Jews, a more credible
signifier of his treason, then his good words [haile Master] at the same time
was of his dutiful submission? And were it any uncharitableness in judging
concerning Judas at this time, to take in the cross-witnesse of his deeds,
against his words. One would think this matter were so plain, there should be
no need of arguments or Instances to prove it.

3. If some deeds of wickedness committed after the profession of godliness,
do evince that profession to have been false, and so now not credible: then
some deeds of wickedness committed and visibly continued in at the time of the
said profession, do much more invalidate it, and render it non-credibly
significative of the mind of the speaker. But the former is true. The Prophet
thus convinces the Jews of their falsehood and dissimulation; Jerem. 42.20,
21. Ye have dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the Lord your God,
saying, Pray for us, and according to all the Lord shall say, we will do. And
now I have declared it unto you, but ye have not obeyed, etc.

. 4.
4. Our Savior shows the man's unwillingnesse to go and work in the Vineyard,
though he said readily, I go sir, in that he went not, Math. 21. therefore his
not going was a more certain signification of his unwillingness to go, then
his verbal profession that he would go, was of willingness to go. So the
Psalmist from the transgression of the wicked (what ever they may profess to
the contrary, concludes the fear of God is not before them, Psalm. 36.1.
Therefore its evident what the learned Mr. Baxter has 3. disput. about right
to the Sacraments, p. 277. viz. That verbal profession, if it be not a probable
sign of the thing professed, its not to be taken for a valid profession. But
words contradicted by the notorious tenor of the life, are no probable signs,
but these works are a more certain sign of the contrary. -- If an
affirmation presently contradicted by words as express and certain, be not to
be taken for a valid profession, then much less is an affirmation more
certainly contradicted by the tenor of the life, yea and too often by professed
impenitency, so he. If Mr. W. be entertained to officiate to a people upon
their promising him an honorable maintenance, I would willingly know, whether
he will continue his pains among them, upon condition of their promising him
his salary, though they do not pay it, or upon the condition of their
performing what they promised. If their deed non-payment be not to prevail
against their word-paiment, or verbal promise of payment, an easy thing will
content him.

But I am of opinion, if they should so abuse him, he would tell them (as well
he might) that their word-payment stands for nothing, when contradicted by
their non-payment in deed; he would not take their being positively his
pay-masters sufficient to engage him, whiles they are negatively no pay-masters
to him; if I may so use the distinction he lays so much weight upon, in this
Controversy of positively believers, which should enright them to the
Sacraments, though they are negatively unbelievers, that is, engaged to
believe, though they do not.

I will conclude this with a passage of Salvian. de gubern. Dei l. 4. ( p.
mihi, 143.) where speaking how Pagans are scandalized by the wicked lives of
such as profess themselves Christians, he adds, Et cur hoc ita? Cur utique
nisi ob eos qui Christiani esse dicuntur, and non sunt, qui per flagitia as
turpitudines suas, nomen religionis infamant; qui ut scriptum est, Ore fatentur
se nosse Deum, factis autem negant, cum sint abominabiles and increduli, ad
omne autem opus bonum reprobi, per quos ut legimus via veritatis blasphematur,
etc.

PSALM 119. Part. 18. S. 137 Surely thou right'ous art O Lord,
Upright thy judgments are.
138 So are the Statutes of thy Word,
all faithful, right and rare,
139 Sharp zeal consumed and cut me sore,
when foes thy word forget.
140 Solely pure is thy word, therefore
my soul so loves it.
141 Small though I am, and scorned, I cast
not thy will out of mind.
142 Stable thy Righteousness does last,
Thy Law the Truth I find.
143 Surpised I am with grief and pain,
Thy Commands me delight.
144 Settled thy just Laws aye remain.
Give me Truth's living light!

CHAP. XIX.
. 1.
ANother Reason my paper added at numb. 46. which Mr. W. sets down, p. 108. and
it was thus: Furthermore, if the deed-rejecting of Christ were not of as
certain credible signification concerning a persons unbelief, as the
word-rejecting is; then no person who denies not Christ in words, may be fully
excommunicated; especially if he desire to communicate, and that earnestly:
which these men say is a testimony of his seriousness, which we may not refuse
in his profession to believe. And doubtless, etc. -- the rest see at numb. 47,
48. This Mr W. designs to answer and confute, p. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114,
115, 116. In all which, if neither vain confidence (his primum, secundum and
tertium,) nor calumniating falsehoods, nor impertinent digressions may serve for
reasons against me, I doubt not my present argumentation will remain safe
enough for ought Mr. W. has to produce against it. Indeed if a Disputation
were to be managed in the passionate mood, and the Crab'd Figure, (such as the
Pythagoreans accounted the number 2.) he is hard enough for any man I know,
(unless the Quakers might go near to match him.) I must confess I dare not vie
scoffs (Irony's I can digest well enough) nor foul language nor falsehoods with
him. If this be the victory he seeks, he may take it for me. But it may be the
Reader who has not seen his Book, will hardly believe so many pages should be
blotted with such stuff; but will expect I should give him a more particular
account of them. I am sorry so to spend time, yet if it will not be helped, I
must be content, and he also.

(1. At p. 109. he tells us in 8 or 9 lines, 4 or 5 times over, that his cause
is good, and mine bad. In all this (says he) there is little afforded
considerable, that has not been before answered. Here Is no convincing new
evidence, that any ways disproves our position. The imbecility of all your
Allegations against us, and the miserable shifts you are put to in coloring
ever your own, confirm us the more strongly in what we hold, and against what
you pretend to. And the longer you argue, the more apparently do we see your
imbecility, and the goodness of our own cause.

Oh expedite and cleaver confutation! But Reader, I am afraid he suspects thou will scarce believe his tale once told, that he tells it thee so many times
over, and that altogether too. But look back and see whether this reason of
mine he assaults, was at all mentioned, much less answered before in the
dispute; thy two eyes will give thee better information herein, than his tale
twice two times told.

. 2.
2. In the next place he says, You know we are not against the excommunicating
of scandalous notorious and stubborn delinquents -- but before such
excommunication we maintain their external right unto the Lords Supper, and
their right of free access thereunto. And a Ministers admission of them is not
considerable in the present case. They come not thereunto upon his courtesy
(as if he had power to admit or not admit). This is extrinsecal to the matter
in hand. But they come upon their own proper and internal right, i. e. their
baptismal interest as Christians to perform visible homage to their Lord and
Savior. And he that debars them as long as they are in visible communion with
Christians in other ordinances of equal sanctity, is injurious to God and to
them also!

1. Reader, suppose all this true, and see whether it wound my Reason he is
answering. Will it hence follow, that some deeds of wickedness are not as
significative of a persons rejecting Christ, as words are, (which was the
proposition by me to be proved,) or that if this were not so, no man who in
words did not renounce Christ, might be fully excommunicated? (which was my
Reason to prove the foresaid proposition by.)

20 To the things he mentions, though impertinent to this place, I shall also
make some reply. 1. Though mine Antagonists do not simply deny excommunication,
yet they (some of them at least) so lay their train, as to deny excommunication
among us in England in these times. For they quarrel with any power claiming
to manage it. Congregational Independent power will not sure be allowed by
them; and Classical Presbyterial power is the object of their scorns and
contempt. And unless we could have Bishops again, and those assisted by the
State, I see not how they would allow of excommunication here in England. In
England, I say, For I hope to the reformed Churches beyond Seas they will be
more favorable than to deny them the use of Church censures for want of
Prelates. But if they are impartial, and will take in them too, whose case (to
say truth) differs not from ours; then shall excommunication be owned by them
in all Europe no where, or only among the Papists, who still have Prelates.
And are not these Gentlemen very libe^all now (that they should tell us of it
themselves) for granting excommunication on this fashion.

. 3.
2. I hold also that after a person is regularly admitted to the participation
of the Lords Supper (that is after a solemn personal owning of his baptismall
engagements) he is not to be debarred the Lords Supper, before he fall under
some excommunication, viz. either jure or facto, less or greater.

3. One while M. W. speaks of their external right to the Lords Supper, as if
he asserted only their external right. But soon after he says, They come upon
their own proper and internal right, i. e. their baptismall interest, etc. 1.
We should here distinguish of, 1. a direct and proper right, they may have by
Gods grant to them, to receive the Lords Supper, and the benefits represented
therein. 2. an improper right, and collateral, by Gods authorizing the
Ministers to administer to them, whiles they visibly appear such as have
interest in those benefits. Many may have right in the later sense externally,
or before the Church (i. e. Ecclesia judice) who have not right in the former
sense internally and properly. A man who only seems to be poor and distressed,
may have an external, improper collateral right to my alms before men, as I
am bound to relieve him, and sin if I do not, Prove. 3.27. Withhold not good
from him to whom it is due, (that is, the Needy, as the LXX. turns it) when it
is in the power of thine hand to do it. Yet if he do but counterfeit poverty
and distress, (...) has no inward proper right to my alms. These two
therefore should not have been confounded and jumbled together, as they are
here by our Author.

4. If such as we have spoken of, have no right to be admitted, and do visibly
so appear, I think the Minister is concerned in the admission or debarring of
them, if he will approve himself a faithful Steward of the divine Mysteries,
and that it lies wholly in him where there is no governing Church, but where
there is, it lies on him jointly with others instructed by the Church.

As for that passage (often before) of the Ministers courtefie in admission, it
has been once and again repelled as an odious and wretched, impertinent and
false insinuation: he must admit according to the Rule prescribed him by his
master (to whom he must give account) without being swayed awry either by base
fear and passion, or partial respects. I think Chrysostom was of this mind
when in his 60. Homily ad Pop. Antioch. de sumentibus indigne, etc. he says,
Let no cruel unmercifull man approach, no impure one any way. These things I
would have spoken as well to you who communicate, as to you who minister -- No
small punishment hangs over your head, if ye permit any to partake of this
Table whom you know to be held with any wickedness, for his blood shall be
required at your hands, etc.

5. Their baptismall engagement to celebrate the Lords Supper, does not hinder
their being justly debarred (in the case under consideration) no more than a
Heathen (who hears the Gospel preached to him) his engagement to be baptized,
does hinder his being justly debarred baptism for want of scrious profession
of the Christian faith, antecedently necessary to baptism (as all I think do
grant.) Let Mr W. show the contrary if he can. I say the one is aeque though
not aequaliter engaged as the other; as truly, though not so solemnly, and
multifariously. A man is as truly obliged to obey God, who hears his will
clearly revealed, as he is who has by his own profession further positively
bound himself to obey.

6. The learned and ingenuous Mr Humphreys (a Gentleman worthy indeed to be
answered) acknowledges (as we have seen above) that as an heathen, so an
excommunicate may be admitted both to the prayers and hearing of the word
preached, in the Church; and the thing is manifest in it self, as h^th been
showed. And yet says this our confident Author, ^^^ou hear, He that debars
them as long as they are in visible communion with Christians in other
ordinances, is injurious to God, and to them also. What he will say he means by
visible communion in other ordinances, I know not. But they may be present with
them in the Congregation, and that in a constant course, and that as doing
their duty there, as well as others; and they may account themselves, and so
be lawfully owned by others as Church Members, though suspended or
excommunicate.

. 4.
I know no difficulty here, but that concerning receiving their children to
baptism. But that I find not mentioned by Mr W. And if their children should be
debarred baptism, that is no argument against debarring them the Lords Supper;
Its no good reason that nothing should be done in a business, because all is
not done which some think (and suppose rightly) should be done. So far we are
satisfied that the parents being so notoriously wicked as aforesaid, should be
debarred the Lords Table; Whether also their children must be debarred baptism.
is another thing to be enquired into. This Controversy is weighty and large,
and I shall not presume to design a just discussion of it here, yet may I not
wholly omit it. Concerning the baptizing of the children of both parents
notoriously ungodly, and suspended or excommunicate, I would briefly hint these
few things.

1. Some solve the difficulty, by saying, We receive their children to baptism
on other accounts than on their right from their immediate parents, as Mr Drake
answered Mr Humphreys on this point.

2. But by the immediate (though notoriously ungodly suspended or
excommunicate) parent, I humbly conceive a right is conveyed for the baprism
of his infant. (Supposing that the parent desire it; otherwise none can meddle
with the dedicating of his Infant, which is parentum juris, at the parents
disposal.) For,

. 5.
1. All Pedobaptists use this Argument, Church Members may be baptized. Some
children are Church Members-. Ergo. And doubtless they understand their Major
proposition here of Church Members not sinfully debarring themselves. For a son
of a believer, who has not been baptized in infancy, though he be a
Churchmember, may when he is adult by his scandalous life, hinder himself of
receiving baprism, as well as one baptized may of the Lords Supper. Now the
child of a notoriously ungodly, and suspended or excommunicated parent is a
Churchmember, and does not sinfully hinder, or put a bar to his own baptism.
That he is a Churchmember is proved; If the parent be a Churchmember, then so
is the infant, (this consequence I think none I have to deal with will deny).
But that he is a Churchmember still has been proved above, chap. 3.. 6.

That this child does not put a bar to his own baptism, I need not prove. Upon
this ground I add,

2. The child is not to be punished for the fathers sin; which yet he were, if
he should not be baptized. 1. Admit the parent be visibly a believer when his
child is born, or rather when the child is begotten, according to 1 Cor. 7.14.
(which is said to describe the child's birth-priviledge, as it is called, though
it seems rather to be a generation-priviledge) and that he delay the baptizing
his child a month (perhaps longer) and in the mean time he for some notorious
wickedness is suspended or excommunicated. Certainly his infant had a right to
baptism (at least coram Ecclesia) and supposing the parent to have true grace (
coram Deo too) after it was born, and therefore it cannot be said, that to deny
it baptism is no punishment, as not depriving it of any right it ever had: and
therefore the denying it baptism now, is to cut it off from what it had, and
lost not by its own default.

2. It will not I think be denied, that it is a privilege and great mercy
which the gracious providence of God has disposed unto this infant, that it
has or had right to baptism. If it were only the privilege of the parent,
that he might have his child baptized, it were more imaginable how his child
might be debarred upon his forfeiture. But since it is a privilege to the
child, it cannot be debarred, but it must be punished as well as its parent and
that for its parents personal miscarriage. He himself indeed may keep it from
baptism; but as in that he sins and does it wrong, so should they who refuse
to do their office for the baptizing of it, upon the parents defire.

. 6.
3. It is not nothing that the Jewish children were to be circumcised the
eighth day, although the parents by legal (or moral) uncleanness might be
debarred the Passover, or excommunicated; which it should seem would not have
been, if the censure upon the parents had reached any further then to the
suspension of him from some personal privileges, whereby he was as an heathen
in some respects; and did not extend to make his child as an heathen in any
respect; particularly, that it should be debarred circumcision as the child of
an heathen should; though the parent were debarred the Passcover, and so dealt
with in that respect as though he had been an Heathen.

4. He may be admitted to Baptism who is holy by consecration, and being
rightly devoted to Christ's service, does no way reject the same. But such is
the condition of the child of a notoriously scandalous Christian, yea
excommunicated. Ergo, he may be admitted to Baptism. Of the first there is no
question I think. The latter proposition is clear in both its parts. 1. This
child is holy by consecration, and being rightly devoted to God. For when the
parent entered, or seemed to enter Covenant with God; as therein God tendered
himself his God, and the God of his, or his seed; So his restipulation was
answerable thereunto. that he and his, his seed should be the Lords people.
Whether this parent was sincere in this covenanting or no; he and his are
engaged thereby; and so his seed is a seed holy by consceration, and being
rightly devoted to God, and the service of Christ: and as he himself is to be
accounted really justified, or dealt with as such, till he notoriously
contradict his professed engagements to Christ's service, ( Deuteronomy. 26.17.) so
also is his seed (which in devoting himself he also devoted to God ( Deuteronomy.
29.11, 12.) to be treated as holy ones, and as justified ones are to be dealt
with, till that they by notorious disobedience contradict the engagements which
lie on them. And thus the children which some wicked Jews offered to Idols,
God claims as his in a special and peculiar sense, as having been devoted to
him, and his service, Ezekiel. 16.20, 27. and 23.27.

. 7.
5. Although the learned and worthy Mr. Baxter in his third disputation about
Right to the Sacraments; asserts and copiously labors to defend that the
Infants of notoriously ungodly parents have no right to Baptism, (In answering
of whom, this controversy might have its just disquisition, which it cannot be
expected I should undertake) yet in that same disputation, p. 264, 265. he most
reasonably asserts; That all God requires in the free universal Covenant of
grace, to our participation of his benefits, is our consent. And children do
consent by those, whose they are: For they that owe them, or whose they are,
have the disposal of them, and so of their wills interpretatively, and may
among men make any Covenant for them. which is for their good (at least) and
oblige them to a performance of conditions.

Now upon this ground I would propose it to consideration, whether a
notoriously ungodly parent, yea excommunicate, (who in words professes assent
to the Christian faith, and knows what the Christian faith is, as to the
fundamentalls of it) may not justly and fairly be presumed by the Church and
Minister, heartily to consent to dedicate his child to God in Gods way,
although he himself is so bewitched with and enslaved to his lusts, that he
does not consent (as it appears by his contradictory deeds) to give up
himself to God in his way; For my part I do verily think, many a drunkard
would have his child sober and temperate; and many a wanton desires his child
may be chaste, etc. And in general many a wicked parent appears cordially to
rejoice in the towardliness and godliness of his children, etc. And then
according to the foresaid position of this accurate and pious Author, the child
of such a wicked parent may be admitted to enter, and therefore to seal his
entrance into Covenant with God in Baptism; he consenting understandingly for
him upon Gospel terms, whose he is, and in whose will the childs will is
interpretatively involved. Yet because the scandalousnes of the said parent
gives just occasion to the Church of suspicion, fear and jealousy, least he
should alter his will and desire now signified to have his child truly a
Christian and godly, and so fail in using necessary means for his childs
instruction (during its nonage) in the Christian faith; Its but equitable the
Church should demand sureties for the same; according to Ames his resolution of
the case; de conscientia lib. 4. qu. 1. Resp. 8. Excommunicatorum contumacium
liberi, non expedit baptizari nisi sponsorum idonco^um interventu. I must beg
the Readers pardon for this excursion which I fell into almost unawares; and
having engaged in it, of some I shall have cause to crave their excuse for
saying so much, and of others for saying no more; the point indeed deserves a
larger disquisition. But mine apology to the former shall be, that Mr. W. his
exception I was answering did in the latitude of it comprehend this, and
therefore I would not wholly pass it by; and to the latter, that his words do
not clearly import he had any special reference to this point, and therefore I
thought the less might serve to note concerning it, in my Reply unto him.

PSALM 119. part. 19. T. 145 This whole heart cried to thee, Lord hear!
Thy statutes I Will fulfill.
146 To thee I called; save me most dear,
Thine hests I shall keep still.
147 The daybreak my cries do prevent;
Trusting thy word I wait.
148 The night too, mine eyes are intent,
Thy truth to meditate.
149 To my voice hark in kindness true!
Thy Judgments quicken me!
150 They draw nigh who mischeife pursue.
Far from thy Laws they be.
151 Thou Lord art near, and very true,
Are thy Commandments sure.
152 Thine hests thou have (of old I knew)
Founded aye to endure.

CHAP. XX.
. 1.
I Shall now proceed to what remains. (3) In the next place Mr. W. answers my
forementioned Reason, to this purpose, p. 110, 111. If the man (supposed in the
case) comes and desires to communicate, and that earnestly, this Mr. W. says
is rightly affirmed (by mine Antagonists) to be a Testimony of his
seriousness, which we may not, upon his profession thereof, refuse to believe.
And this Mr. W. proves in these words; For, Sir, if you grant the case, viz.
that he desires to communicate, and that earnestly; then show a Reason (if you
can) why all godly minded Christians should not (in charity) believe (upon his
profession hereof) that this is to us (in foro externo) a credible testimony of
his seriousness? Nay, you add moreover, that [who makes a credible serious
profession of his faith and willingness to submit to the Lord Jesus Christ] the
Church ought not to excommunicate. Nay, you add [doubtlesse the Church ought
not]. And we add, that [doubtlesse] the Church ought not to deny such an one
the Lords Supper, or suspend him from it. What a schism will do we know not,
etc.

The Reader may be pleased to bear in memory, that after I had evinced that a
man baptized at years and not fully excommunicate, might be debarred the
Sacrament, if at the time when he tenders himself to be admitted (when the
time of celebration begins to draw near) he in words renounce Christ, or an
essential of Christianity, (which is not (that I find) denied by Mr. W.) In
the procedure of my argument I added; that if such word rejecting of Christ, as
before-said, may debar the person aforesaid, then some deed-rejecting of Christ
may also. Because that by some deeds of wickedness, there is as credibly a
signification of a man's rejecting Christ, as in words. And this was proved as
by other arguings, so by this under our hand at present, viz. If some deeds do
not as credibly signify a persons rejecting of Christ, as words might do;
then none could be excommunicated for sinful deeds, whiles they renounce not
Christ in words, but in words profess their earnest desire to be admitted to
the Sacrament. This consequence is valid, at least ad hominem, because mine
Antagonists intimate, that he who verbally professes his desire to receive,
must be by us accounted a serious professor of faith (what ever his works are.)
And I aver that no visibly serious professor of faith is to be
excommunicated. For then one in the way of a visible exercise of faith and true
repentance should be excommunicated; which none sure will affirm. And this
Consequence I cannot see that Mr. W. sticks at. But now whereas I should
assume; But some may be excommunicated for sinful deeds, notwithstanding that
in words they renounce not Christ, but verbally profess their carnest desire
to be admitted to the Sacrament.

This I think Mr. W. denies; I am not certain; look over his words thy self
Reader, and use thine own judgment to guess what he drives at. But this I am
certain of, either he denies this, or he says nothing of a contradictory
tendency to my argumentation which here he pretends to enervate. And if he do
deny the foresaid Assumption, as I conceive his words import taken together, It
may be imputed to his have, that he should hold what is so manifestly false,
viz. That none may be excommunicated for sinful deeds, though never so heinous
and notorious, if he renounce not Christ in words, and profess verbally his
earnest desire to communicate.

. 2.
But because M. W. bids me show a Reason (if I can) for the contrary. I must
prove that the Sun shines at noone day. And, 1. If this his assertion be true,
then not professing earnest desire to communicate, in the only crime sufficient
to cause excommunication. But a man may be excommunicated for other wickedness,
without respect to this, 1 Cor. 5.11. A whore monger, or drunkard, etc.
notoriously such, may profess his earnest desire to receive, and yet that makes
him not, no whoremonger, and no drunkard. 2. Then also, the Church may look for
no further satisfaction in order to restoring of an excommunicate, then his
verbal profession of earnest desire to receive the Sacrament. For that which
should prevent their excommunicating of him, must be avaylable to restore him.
But the Church in many ages has required particular confession of notorious
sins, and express profession of repentance for them, (and not only profession
of earnest desire to receive) as antecedently necessary to the absolution of an
excommunicate, in analogy to that, Levit. 5.4, 5, 6. where he who was to bring
his trespass offering for a false oath (though through ignorance) was to
confess that he had sinned in that thing, and then he is allowed to b^ing his
trepass offering to the Lord, and the Priest shall make an atonement for him,
concerning his sin. So more generally, Numb. 5.7. on which says Ainsworth out
of Maimonides; The Hebrews set down this duty thus -- This confession is with
words: and its commanded to be done. How do they confess? He says, Oh God!
for I have sinned, I have done perversely, I have trespassed before thee, and
have done thus and thus; and lo, I repent, and am ashamed of my doings, and I
will never do this thing again. And this is the foundation of confession. And
who so makes a large confession, and is long in the thing, he is to be
commended. And so the owners of sin-and trespass-offerings, when they bring
their oblations for their ignorant or presumptuous sins; atonement is not made
for them by their oblation, until they have made Repentance and confession, by
word of mouth. Likewise all condemned to death by the Magistrates, or condemned
to stripes, no atonement is made for them by their death, or by their stripes,
until they have epented and confessed. And, so, he that hurts his neighbor,
^ does him damage, though he pay him whatsoever he owe him, illonement is not
made for him, til he confess and turn away from doing so again for ever.

Now it may be Mr. W. could have taught them a more expeite and easy way of
satiffactory confession, viz. if the offendeiprofess verbally, his earnest
desire to partake of the Passeove, that shall quit all scores.

. 3.
() Mr. W. further adds; As for your [fully and not fully] excommunicate] we
look not on them as considerable in this present controversy, they are your
own miserable shifts, etc. What Is the conclusion? Ergo, my fore mentioned Reason
is not sound? Wonderful hap he has, if he can draw this inference from such
premises. This distinction of excommunication has been proved before, (at
Chap. 3.) and I wonder not if he would so feign shift it out of his way if he
could, it so fully enervates the Reasons of his Champion Mr. Timson, and shows
his miscarriage in the very stating of the Question. If that third Chap.
aforesaid stand good, particularly the sixth, that excommunicates are
Church Members, and are not by excommunication cut off from all ordinances,
(although accidentally that may sometime coincidere, and often did fall in, in
the primitive times.) The title of his book is blasted, which over each leaf
is this, to receive the Lords Supper is the actual right of all Church members;
but in the first page, is thus; To receive the Lords Supper the actual Right
and duty of all Church members of years not excommunicate. Which is sorrily
propounded. For 1. here and in his book he confounds Right and duty, as if
these were of the same latitude; as if because its an heathens duty to be
baptized, or a Christians duty when drunk on the Lords day, to sanctify the
Sabbath in public Ordinances, yea or an Excommunicats duty to receive, (all
which are manifestly their duty, which they are obliged to) that therefore it
were the heathens right to be baptized, without any more ado, or the drunken
Christians to be admitted into the Assembly while drunk, or the excommunicate
had actual right to the Lord Supper, while excommunicate. 2. And that all
excommuncation turns our of Church Membership Mr. Humphreys holeth, Rejoynd.
p. 155. where he says, Suspension is null withot dismembership. To what
purpose then should Mr. Timson hae added [not excommunicate] but to instruct us
in this lesson; That to receive the Lords Supper is the actual right and duty
of all Church members (at years) who are not no Church member. This is the
Warrior whose Herald Mr. W. is pleased to m^^e himself; and he once and
again provokes me to graple with him. But if I have made good this one
argument against Mr. W. there is none (I think) can reasonably think, there is
any need of answering Mr. Timson in print. Mr. W. has much of his sense and
language too, where he could bring it in. But his distinction of fully and not
fully excommunicate, I suspect the more angers him, because it makes the
weapons of his ious brave man, unserviceable in this contest with me in this:
gument.

But I have showed, there is an excommunication by the Officers of the Church,
or Minister alone, and by the people alone, though the Officers refuse to
join: and there is an excommunication wherein the Officers and people of the
Congregation (and neighborhood too perhaps though that's not essential) do
concur, which is a fuller excommunication then either of the former.

. 4.
5. In the 5th place Mr. W. answers and confutes (as he pretends) my Reason, by
saying; As for your Excommunication you give us a very quaint account thereof,
and in a taunt he says, Scholars may do well to furnish their note books
with it. And in stead of better Answers (furor arma ministrat) he fits down in
the chair of the scorners, and thus acts his part. It should seem (says he)
that your [full excommunication] is a very shrewd thing, when you can be at
leisure to meet in a full Classis, and so have your severe Rabbis of
discipline sit in state, with the rest of your grave Benchers, then the case of
a poor sinner is put upon the debale, and after that your Elders have well
stroaked their beards, and nodded in their votes, the decree is that the sinner
arraigned is to be excommunicated fully, and that with full excommunication
completely. The sum whereof is, that such a man found and judged guilty of
such misdemeanors, is declared to be as an heathen Infidel, and do such an one
to be looked upon, and dealt with by all our Church members, i. e. to he counted
as an enemy, and not to be admonished as a brother.

Here are learned arguments, apodictical demonstrations, but be like all in
Bocardo. Here are formulae oratoriae for the cupping crew, who may probably
applaud the Author, and quaffe his health round for them. I Will confess they
are not to be answered by me. Ego poenitere tanti non emam, (as Demosthenes
said to the Corinthian Lais) I dare not answer according to this folly. No
wonder if he crow over me, as wanting stomach, and not being stomackfull enough
( p. 108, 118.) for such doughty disputings. He makes it appear (though
unmannerly) what a full stomach he has, by his continual cructations of such
putrid and adust choler. For after all this, he is rifting again in this very
place, and afterward, as sowrely as if he had had no vent before, and at last (
p. 114.) brings up that crude calumny (which he for the once belcheth forth) to
besmear me with it, viz. the denying the Pope to be Antichrist.. I see its
parlous to be near a man in his casting fits, or that owing one a spite, has
the trick of the new organon salutis, and can with his provang unload his
stomach at his pleasure. And this he ushers in with a parturiunt montes, and
says, you know my meaning. I know indeed what follows, and thence conclude,
M. W. is content to be a Mousetrap, that my paper may seem ridiculous. But if
he remember the story Sir Walter Rawleigh has out of Herodotus, it may lessen
his confidence of vanquishing the Mouse he laughs at. The story is thus in
History of the world, p. 612. Herodotus says, Senacheribs great host which he
had when he threaned Hezekia by Rabsheca, was intended against Egypt; But a
great multitude of field mice entering the Camp of Senacherib by night, did so
gnaw the bows, quivers, strings and straps of his men's armor, that they were
feign the next day to fly away in all have, finding themselves disarmed. In
memory whereof (says Herodotus) the statue of this King is set up in the
Temple of Vulcan, holding a mouse in his hand, with this Inscription, Let him
who beholds me serve God. I Will not apply the particulars, but only thus; The
mouse Mr. W. despises, if it may have fair play (I doubt not) will disarme
this warrior, and cut in sunder the nerves of his arguments. But the
[parturiunt montes] I think may be more fitly applied to his ^^^ving and
groaning to be delivered of that flatulent falsehood, that Mola, or monstrous
birth of the Antichristian lie, which at last he brings forth, and exposes to
the view of the world. And let the world (at his own instance and desire)
behold how he travaileth with iniquity, has conceived mischief, and brought
forth falsehood. But this filth I shall wipe off beneath. For I am afraid of
displeasing the Reader, by having too much of these personal fooleries
together. I shall therefore leave them, and speak only to the thing remaining,
which Mr. W. has here touched upon, namely, concerning the description of
Excommunication (which he pretends to gather out of some expressions of mine)
to be a declaring of a person to be as an heathen, and so to be dealt with.

If he had perused Math. 18.17. Let him be to thee as an heathen and publican,
sure he durst not have scoft at that. He that is to be to us an heathen, is to
be judged as an heathen, and so to be dealt with, that is, in some respects;
viz. in those wherein he is to be to us as an heathen. Neither the Scripture,
nor my paper here said he was to be judged an heathen simply. But it says, let
him be to thee as an heathen: with which manner of expression my scriblings (as
Mr. W. fitly calls them) did wholly comply. And what now has our learned
Gentleman to oppose hereunto? that you may seek for some where else; unless
this may be allowed the place and honor of an objection in stead of a better,
which skulkes in an implicit Ambuscado, namely, the interpretation he puts on
my expressions aforesaid; that is (says our learned Expositor) to be counted
as an enemy, and not to be admonished as a brother. But if Paul be not against
his Master, this will do us no hurt. Even an heathen, (any neighbor as such)
is to be admonished as a Brother, in some sense, and not counted an enemy
simply. ( Ephesians. 5.11. Levit. 19.17. and 10.36. Mark 12.33.) And a Christian
excommunicate ought to be admonished, though in some respects he is to be to us
as an Heathen. The reconciliation is easy. Take it in the learned Zanchius his
words on 2 Thessalonians. 3. Obj. Videtur sibi contrarius Apostolus; praecipit, ne
commercium habeatis cum eo (excommunicato) and tamen habete eum pro fratre.
Resp. Prohibet familiaritatem non necessariam periculosam, noxiam, qua
indulgeamus eorum vitijs, aut saltem conniveamus, non edentes ullam
significationem odij and improbationis peccatorum, qua denique in similia
peccata induci and ipsorum scabiae inquinari possimus: or as Zepperus thus;
Although no one ought to join himself in stricter familiarity and private
offices to the excommunicate; yet charity shall be exercised toward him, in
public and private prayers to God, and frequent admonitions. ( de polit.
ecclesia. p. 164, 165.) But the excommunicate are not to be driven away from
the public Assemblyes of the Church, to hear Gods word, least they should
grow hopeless, and the doors of repentance be shut to them.

. 5.
6. The Rest Mr. W. has (besides personal vagaries) is the old business of
Examination, p. 113, 114. and his Question what difference we make betwixt
suspension and full excommunication, has been answered before. And now let the
Reader use his own eyes and judgment, whether any or all these six answers do
in the least infringe my argument he pretends to evervate hereby. Which was
this, If deed rejecting of Christ may not be a cause of Excommunication, where
there is a desire signified to receive the Sacrament; then none who desire to
receive may be excommunicated. The latter is false, therefore so is the former.
Fit now his answers to this mark; and then determine of them as Reason directs.
I must crave thy excuse for holding thee so long in the examination of Mr. W.
pretensions on this point. We will now the more greedily and eagerly drink of
those cordial waters of the Sanctuary.

PSALM 119. Part 20. V. V. 153 View thou my straites, save me! thy Laws
I forget not O Lord.
154 Unloose my bonds! plead thou my cause!
Quicken me by thy Word!
155 Vile men are from salvation far;
Who seek not thy command.
156 Very great, Lord, thy mercies are:
Life by thy Judgments send.
157 Various foes strive me to oppress.
Thine hests I Will not forsake.
158 Viewing Transgressors greiv'd I was,
When they thy statutes brake.
159 Vouchsafe to see, thy Law I love,
Lord, kindly quicken me!
160 Very true I thy Word long prove.
Thy Judgments lasting be.

CHAP. XXI.
. 1.
BE of good cheer (my Reader) Mr. W: now says, I pray let us come to an end. I
hope he is somewhat near (for this time) an end of his revilings, and
impertinencies. How-ever having, tired thy patience sufficiently whiles I have
insisted too long on his extravagancies in the last chapter, I Will promise thee
to touch them more lightly here.

That which remains for Mr W. to answer to, is only a recollection of the
argumentative procedure before had and managed in my paper, which was thus, (as
may be seen at numb. 49. If it be granted that one, though formerly baptized,
and yet not fully excommunicated, yet now being an openly by word professed
Infidel, may be suspended in any case, where there is a bar against his then
full excommunication, then, at least in the like case some scandalous livers in
the Church may be suspended; and then I concluded with some passages of Salvian
and Tertullian thus: I remember I have read somwhere in Salvian, qui Christiani
nominis opus non agit, Christianus non esse videatur. And Infidelis sit necesse
est qui fidei commissa non servat. Agreeable whereunto is what I find quoted
from Tertullian Apol. cap. 44. speaking of the Heathens prisons he says, Nemo
illic Christianus nisi plane tantum Christianus, aut si and aliud jam non
Christianus.

To this short repetition of mine argument, Mr W. strenuously rambles one
continued long chide in nine pages (oh the Art of that man!) without bringing
any thing new which has a color of reasonable opposition to it; or old which
has not been already answered by me. He talks of Examination and my patcht
piece, and braggs as for a wager, p. 118. in these words: You shall uunderstand
how considerable I am, before you and I part, if you have any stomach or
courage in the present controversy. He tells us of his call to his place. p.
119. Of his setting Dog once and again and again, p. 120.121. Of our (as he
falsely pretends) rejecting the suspended from our Pastoral care. And most
audaciously cracks out this notorious calumny, When they are suspended, you
look after them no longer, unless it be for your Tithes and Church dues. And
talks of Brownisme wildly, p. 122.123. acquaints us (as if he were a professed
Quaker, or at least as if he had never writ against the Anabaptists) that he
looks on no deductious from Scripture as obligatory, unless he have some clear
revelations for such deductions. -- And (which some of the Papists, much more
the Protestants will stick at) that for the sense of obscure places of
Scripture, he prefers Catholic expositious before any man's private sense or
interpretation. p. 124. he dreams about the fruitlesness of suspension. p. 125.
And what not? Truly I do not see how he can be out of his way, whose ordinary
road is some digression or other. Some of these may perhaps be considered among
the Digressions beneath, at present we shall not stay on them; only (me thinks)
it is not handsome for him to quarrel with a patch, who solemnly thus dates
his Epistle to the Reader. Given at my poor house at Leeke, July 25. And it is
somewhat suspicious he carries a Dog set in his bosom, who has the
setting-dogg so often in his mouth. I now wonder not he is so ready in his
facundia canina, his currish eloquence. If he have not bos in lingua, be sure
he has canis in lingua, which may keep him from being mute, or meal-mouthed,
especially while he sits under the influence of the Canicular and snarling
constellation.

. 2.
But now at the middle of the 125 page he begins to discourse more soberly, and
so holds on too for diverse leaves together. And in earnest, I would not have
him miss the Readers just commendation for it. It is not so ordinary (for
ought I see) with him so to do, as that it should not now be particularly
observed to his praise. And therefore though it looks nothing like a Refutation
of the sum of the argument he should be dealing with, I shall the more
willingly touch (but briefly) the main contents thereof.

1. He shows the excellency of the Lords Supper, as in other respects, so for
the ocular instruction of the meanest, and as an effectual means to convince
men, and take them off from grossest sins, p. 125, 126.

I suppose in this he aims at that trite argument against suspension, that the
Lords Supper is a converting Ordinance. And I grant it may be so, and has a
probable aptitude as a means (taking the whole celebration together) to
convert, even an heathen (or unbaptized Catechumen) who has some knowledge of
Christianity before, if he should (though sinfully as all grant) be admitted
thereunto. No one can say he shall not be converted thereby. But what is that to
the purpose? If Gods revealed institution design it not to the notoriously
profane, no more than to them, or such as are fully excommunicate? We must not
be wiser than God, nor invent means of good to others unwarrantably, we may not
do evil that the greatest good may come thereby. Yet because it must be
supposed, that there will be close hypocrites in the Church, who yet have an
improper collateral right to the Sacrament, in that Ministers may rightfully
minister unto them (though they have no proper right directly to the
Sacrament.) God in his infinite wisdom and goodness has so ordered it, that
it may be hopefully useful for their conversion to sincerity, and therefore so
it may be designed by the ministrator, upon that supposition aforesaid.

2. Mr. W. shows (and rightly) how the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.14, 15, 16, 17, 21.
to take off the Corinthians from Idolatry, alleges their use of the Lords
Supper, -- saying, ye cannot partake of the cup of the Lord, and the cup of
Devils: he does not herein, and for their evil discharge them from the Lords
Supper, but convinces their reason of the inconsistencie of such criminal
liberty with the use of the Lords Supper. And here Mr. W. is pleased to honor
the Apostle with his commending him for a Rational Churchman, p. 127.

. 3.
3. And then he shows (and rightly too) that the Apostle his speech, 1 Cor.
11.28. commands all Church Members adult to receive. -- And p. 128. answering
the objection, that all cannot examine themselves, says, That such persons are
bound in conscience, immediately to labor for knowledge, and to break off their
profane courses, that they may be able to examine themselves, and to come to
the Lords Table. But in the mean while their ignorance and profaneness takes
not off the Divine obligation that lies on their consciences. And this he
profitably insists upon, p. 128, 129. But at the later end, as if he had
wounded our cause to the quick (though alas! he never touches it) he adds, And
thus you see what the conviction of the double obligation will work men unto,
if pursued and followed rigorously. A thing that lies on the Ministers of the
Gospel to do, and not to cast off the people by a childish or churlish
suspension.

4. Then he shows how by baptism Christians are under this double obligation
to examine themselves and to come to the Lords Table, deny it (says he with
vehemence) who will, or can. When alas! I deny it not, nor does the defense of
my hypothesis require I should. There are some other passages of his mixed with
these I have related, I cannot digest, which have been answered elsewhere; and
I am not willing to quarrel with them here, as long as the main of his
discourse hereon, seems such as I do comply with. I will not compare with Mr.
W. nor any other in rigorous pressing of doctrines, this in special for men's
conviction and reformation. But I do endeavor it according to my poor measure;
and I think here is nothing for substance of these things, which has not been
heard from me. But the knot lies not here, whether they are obliged both to
labor for knowledge, and leave profaneness, and so to come? But in this,
whether they may not be debarred the later, for their visible want of the
former? And he may be pleased to remember, that the Fallacia divisionis, is as
ill Logic as the Fallacia compositionis, to argue a been conjunct is ad male
divisa, is as consequent, as a been divisis ad male conjuncta, which he minds
us of, p. 128. and I have explained my self on this point before, chapter 10.. 1,
2. and elsewhere. I showed that obligation to duty does not ever give or argue
a right of admission to the performance thereof simply, without any more a-doe.
A drunken Christian is not disobliged from the public service of God while
such, nor does any excommunication disoblige from the Lords Supper; they both
sin, in both not waiting on God in his ordinances, and hindering themselves by
their own default. That diverse things debar from the performance of duties,
which do not excuse nor disoblige from them, is a truth so plain, that he that
runs may read it.

. 4.
5. Mr. W. p. 131.132. answers the Query, how infants are not obliged to
receive, 1. By Analogy to the Infants among the Jews in reference to the
Passcover. (but that point deserves a more accurate consideration.) 2. By
showing that his Assertion is consined to baptized persons adult, they are
bound immediately to examine themselves, and to come to the Lords Table; and
they sin against knowledge and conscience by neglecting these duties being
urged upon them, and made known to them: and they cannot be so urged and made
known to infants, by reason of their incapacity, etc. But this last reason is
not valid: For if their incapacity of knowing and having Baptism urged on
them, hinders them not from being baptized, why shall this alone hinder them
from the Lords Supper? They may be brought to one as well as the other, when
two or three years old, and therefore are no more incapable of the one than the
other upon this account.

6. Mr. W. shows the incongruity of denying children their board, and not bed;
belike to teach us, that none in the Church should be denied the Sacrament. But
that I have refuted, chapter 3. at the later end of the sixth Section.

These are the Returns he has given for the confuting the sum of my foresaid
argument, which have as much influence into that design, as Tenterton steeple
has for the causing of Goodwin sands; according to the story I remember Father
Latimer has in one of his Sermons.

PSALM 119. Part. 21. W. 161 Without a cause Princes wronged me.
But thy word awes my mind.
162 Words sacred joy my soul, as he
joys, who great spoils does find.
163 Wretched lies I abhor always.
But love thy commandments.
164 Within the day sev'n times I thee praise
for all thy right Judgments.
165 Who love thy Law, great peace procure,
nothing shall them offend.
166 Waiting I hoped for thy Law sure,
and did thy will attend.
167 With my soul I have kept thy word,
and truly love it most.
168 Well have I marked thy precepts, Lord,
For all my ways thou know.

CHAP. XXII.
. 1.
THere is nothing further to exercise thy patience (good Reader) but some
descants on the passages I quoted from Salvian and Tertullian. And first
against those of Salvian, Mr W. has diverse Exceptions, as 1, that I tell him
not where in Salvian to find them. 2. That I quote a broken piece, concealing
what follows, adding an etc. as a veil under which to hide his sense. 3. That I
quoting two passages in several books, put them together, which he says is
not fair dealing, p. 134. 4. And lastly, that the thing quoted is perverted to
a sense not intended by the Author. -- To these his Exceptions I return, 1. to
the first. When I finished that private paper he has publicly assaulted, I
had not my Salvian with me, else it had been easy to have turned to the Book
and page. Every private paper needs not the exactness (in these things) of a
public plea. Does Mr W. in every Sermon or Lecture, when he quotes any passage
from an Author, name the Chapter, Book and page? If he do, I think it is a
needless exactness; when as any one who doubts of, or peruseth the quotation,
may easily have recourse to him, for the place where it is to be found.

2. His second exception is frivolous, unless the words following those I
quoted, did turn the sense of the former word: to another intent than that was
for which I quoted them; which they do not, but rather confirm it, as shall be
showed in answering his sourth exception.

3. The third exception is removed by what I have said to his first, neither is
Salvians sense at all injured; he speaks to the same purpose in both places,
as shall appear immediately. And I did not say they were joined together in
Salvian; but named them as two several passages, not quoting the book wherein
either of them was to be read.

. 2.
4. To his 4th Exception, (which is most material, the rest are toys suitable
for him that abounds in leisure for them) I answer. I quoted not Salvian (nor
yet Tertullian neither) to prove suspension immediately, as Mr. W. pretends, p.
136. Your intent (says he) in alleging his words is to justisie your
debarring men from the Lords Table. Mr. W. has ill hap in telling my intents,
and yet he will not adone with it. But (says he) whether Salvian intended any
such thing, let the Reader judge. Read him again, he is Minimus patrum, and
its no great labor to read him over. If Minimus patrum refer to the quality
of his writings, and that he is of least account; how comes Mr. W. to be the
Judge and Censor of the Fathers? If to the quantity, as the words following
[its no great labor to read him over] do intimate, I presume Mr. W. in that
has taken his aim amiss. There are other Fathers of whose works and
writings extant, the quantity is less then Salvians; as the Clement about the
year 93. Polycarpus, Ignatius, Minutius Faelix, etc. I know no such
controversy mentioned in Salvian as that is we are now discussing, to wit,
about suspension. What he intended or foresaw the arguments and matter he
treated upon might reach to, neither Mr. W. nor his reader can judge. But I
quoted him, and the other, for illustration (rather then proose) of that which
I before most insisted upon, viz. That meas rejecting of Christ in notorious
deeds of wickedness, was a more credible Testimony and manifestation, that they
are not really believers or Christians, then their bearing and owning the name
of such, is that they are. And hence I inferred, that such are not to have the
Sacrament administered to them, which is properly the portion only of real
believers and Christians. And now let the Reader judge (at mine as well as Mr.
W. his instance and desire) whether my quotations were pertinent or no.

The first passage I quoted from Salvian was, that l. 4. de gubernatione Dei;
where he says; Since that as we have said, this is the faith of a Christian,
faithfully to keep Christ's Commandments; It is without doubt, that he has not
faith, who is unfaithful, nor does he believe in Christ, who treads under foot
Christ's Commandments, and the whole comes to this, that, qui Christiani nominis
opus non agit, Christianus non esse videatur, nomen enim sine actu atque
officio nihil est. The former clause (which I have Englished he speaks to also
in his 3. book, de gubernat. dei. (p. 67.) Quid est igitur credulitas, seu
fides! opinor fideliter hominem Christo credere, id est, fidelem deo esse, hoc
est, fideliter Dei mandata servare. The latter part of the quotation, contains
the matter he much insists upon elsewhere, and aggravates it greatly, l. 3. de
gub. dei. at the end. Quo sit ut etiam nos qui nos Christianos esse dicimus,
perd^mus vim tanti nominis, vitio pravitatis. Omnino enim nihil prodest nomen
sanctum habere sine moribus; quia vita a professione discordans, abrogat
illustris tituli honcrem, per indignorum actuum vilitatem. -- Cum utique hec
ipso magis per nomen sacratissimum rei simus, qui a sancto nemine discrepamus;
nam and ideo plus sub religionis titulo Deum ludimus, quia positi in religione
peccamus. and lib. 4. (p. 127. edit. Oxon. 1633.) An meliores sumus barbaris?
Jam videbimus; Certe quod non est dubium, meliores esse debemus; ex hoc ipso
utique deteriores sumus, si meliores non sumus, qui meliores esse debemus. And
after in the same book. Quae cum ita sint, magna videlicet nobis praerogativa
de nomine Christianitatis blandiri possumus, qui ita agimus ac vivimus, ut hoc
ipsum, quod Christianus populus esse dicimur, opprobrium Christi esse videatur.
And p. 145. Et ideo hoc ipso Christiani deteriores sunt, qui meliores esse
deberent; non enim probant quod fatcntur, and impugnant professionem suam
moribus suis; magis enim damnabilis est malitia quam titulus bonitatis accusat;
and reatus impij est pium nomen. And in his Epistle to Salonius before his,
Epist. ad Cathol. Eccles. Parum sunt rerum vocabula ipsas res non habentia, and
nihil virtutum verba sine viribus.

I have mentioned these sayings of his, not only for the excellency of them,
but that the Reader may see I caught not at one passage let fall from Salvian,
concerning the meaning whereof there might be some doubt, but that it is
agreeable to other places in this zealous Author; wherein he shows how little
account is to be made of men's names, and their words, when they are manifestly
contradicted by their notorious wickedness. But I will wait on Mr. W. in his
observation upon the passages of Salvian, quoted p. 135, 136, 137.

. 3.
1. He says, and observes; That the party he speaks of was a Christian, for
he yields unto him, nomen Christianum. 1. I grant he may be called a Christian
in regard of his positive engagement to Christianity. But that's not the sense
we have here to deal with. For so is an excommunicate, yea the most notorious
Apostate to Turcisme or Judaisme, a Christian still. 2. But in Salvians sense
(which is ours) Mr. W. cannot gather, one is a Christian, because he is named a
Christian, as in part appears from passages before mentioned out of Salvian,
de guber. Dei. l. 4. p. 142. Intelligere ergo possumus aut quales esse pagani
crediderint Christianos, qui talibus sacrificijs Deum colerent, aut qualem
sollicitent Deum ipsum, qui haec sacra d^cuisset. Et hoc cur ita? Cur utique
nisi ob cos qui Christiani esse dicuntur and non sunt, qui per slagitia at
turpitudines suas nomen religtonis infamant; qui ut scriptum est, ore fatentur
se nosse Deum, factis autem negant.

2. Mr. W. his second observation is; That there is opus nominis Christiani,
quod est agendum. An employment prescribed and proper to men of that name and
profession, by the exercise whereof, they should make it visibly and really
appear, that they are men of that honorable profession. -- As he instanceth
in Divines, Physicians, and Lawyers, otherwise they give no visible testimony
of their being of such professions. --

Reader, I pray thee, consider for whom this observation makes: will thou take
him for a Physician, and make use of him as such, who has no skill in it, and
practiceth no cures? The same may be said of the Lawyer without skill in Law,
if that appear to thee, shall the one be thy Lawyer, or the other thy
Physician, because they have gotten them gowns with great buttoned sleeves,
and one calls himself and is called a Doctor in Physic, and the other a
Lawyer? Even so (says Mr. W.) men of the Christian profession must act
accordingly; they must and should, but what if they do not? must not then the
Christian without exercising Christianity, be accounted as the Physician not
versed in Physic, or the Lawyer not employing himself in the Law?

3. Mr. W. in the last place observes; He does say, that [Qui Christiani
nominis opus non agit, Christianus non esse videatur] and of this negative
(which might have been (if Mr. W. had pleased) another observation like the
former) he gives this convincing Reason; viz. [Nomen enim sine actu atque
officio suo nihil est]. He does not say, that such an one is no Christian; but
he cannot be seen of others to be a Christian, nay, nor conclude unto himself
that he is a real Christian, because he rejects the Christian employment, and
does not act as a man of that holy profession, etc.

Thus Mr. W. expounds Salvian; and truly as much for my advantage as I should
have done my self. I should have taken [Christianus non esse videatur] to
signify he may seem to be a Christian; that is, he is no Christian: videtur
being usually an expletive word with Tully and other Latinists (according to
the usual Hebraisme used in Scripture [to be called] is [to be] ( Isa. 9.6.
Luke 1.32, 36. Math. 5.19. Mark. 11.17.); and Salvian himself having so
expounded himself in the point he speaks to elsewhere, as we have seen.
[Christiani esse dicuntur, and non sunt.] But as Mr. W. takes it, [he may not
be seen by others nor himself to be a Christian], it well fits our turn, and
is according to what Salvian has, ad eccl. cathol. l. 2. Quis promissis
caeleslibus fidem commodat, and non agit ut esse possit particeps promissionum?
and ideo Cum videamus homines haec non agere, cogimur non credentes palam and
evidenter agnoscere. Does not this reach to what I had said, viz. That a
deed-Testimony may prevail above a word-Testimony? and therefore if we may
debar him who in words rejects Christ, then also him who by some notorious
deeds of wickedness, does as manifestly reject Christ. Yea does not M. W. say
the same here in effect? Mr. W. before affirmed that we must certainly know
those are Christians and believers whom we administer to; and here he
confesses (in expounding Salvian) that a notorious scandalous professor of
Christianity, who does not the act and duty of a Christian, cannot be seen of
others to be a Christian; how then will he administer to him? he will say, (as
I guess) 1. he sees him to be a word-professor of Christianity; that is, he
sees him to lie, and for his lies sake notoriously appearing to be such, he
will admit him. Oh prodigious terms of admission! or 2. that he is sure he is
baptized, and so engaged to Christianity. But if that be sufficient, no
Apostate whatsoever may be rejected; as has been hinted before. And yet the
man among all these weaknesses he manifests, is strong in uncivil language, and
cries, Abuse not Antiquity to palliate your follies.

. 4.
4. His 4th observation is; That Salvian in another place and book says,
Infidelis sit necesse est qui fidei commissa non servat. And here he goes to
his Dictionary, to teach us that Infidelis is an Adjective, and then says;
Salvian here takes not the word [Infidelis] in the rigid notion of an [Infidel]
for a man without the Church, which directly denies, and utterly rejects the
principles of Christianity, but for a man untrusty within the Church;
unsaithful to him who has committed the things of Christianity to his trust.
And we say so too. And I say so too. Well met then sometime. The place quoted
is in l. 3. de guber. Dei. p. 68. Cum ergo ista sint omnia, per quae fides
constat, videamus, quis tanta haec fidei sacramenta custodiat, ut fidelis esse
videatur: (where videatur is only an expletive as I take it in the former
quotation) quia Infidelis, ut diximus, s^^, necesse est, qui sidei commissa non
servat. And so we are to account of him, as to some respects; according to what
this Author says in the place before mentioned, Eccl. Cathol. l. 2. Cum
videamus homines haec non agere, cogimur Non Credentes paldm and evidenter
agnoscere: to which he adds; Non lice! ut cos nos Deo fidem putemus adhibere,
cum illi se rebus clament negare. Does not this teach us, that he who says he
believes, is not for his saying so, to be taken for a believer, (or a believing
person) when his deeds manifest his unfaithfulness? and then sure its pertinent
to my argument preceding. But (says Mr. W.) this proves not that our
unfaithful and earcless Brethren (as Pagan Infidels) are to be kept from the
Lords Supper, because of some unfaithfulnesses and negligences, before legally
convented and convicted.

1. It proves this as much as, that they are to be debarred, for any
wickedness after legal convention and conviction. I believe Salvian had
respect to neither. 2. What he means by [legal convention and conviction] I
know not; but if he refer to what is done by, or before the civil Magistrate,
or by his positive directions; 1. there was no legal proceeding under heathen
Magistrates for some hundreds of yeates after Christ's ascension: and 2. he
reaches not us who have the directions of the Magistrate in Church Censures,
particularly in this of suspension, as has been showed above. 3. It is not
every unsaithfulness or negligence Salvian here makes the character of his
unbeleever; no more do we of such unbeleevers as ought to be debarred the
Sacrament. This odious infinuation has bin repelled more then once before. 4.
The words of Salvian alleged, prove (or rather assert, I brought them not as a
proof) that he appears to be an unbeleever, who is notoriously unfaithful to
his baptismal engagements: and from that I had before inferred, that he is not
to be admitted, whiles such, to the Lords Supper.

. 5.
As for the discourse Mr. W. here falls into about the difference there is
betwixt a pagan Infidel unbaptized, and a baptized unfaithful Christian, p.
137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144. It has nothing in it which colourably
makes against us (save two passages) which has not been answered before; The
description of excommunication he would gather from Tertullian, viz. That it is
a banishment of a Delinquent from communication of prayer, Assembly, and of all
holy communion with Christians, has been particularly spoken to, Chap. 3.. 10.
One of Mr. W. his pretentions which bears the show of an objection is this, (
p. 141, 142. where he says,) In our Ecclesiastical discipline we proceed not
against men, as no Christians, as no believers, (therein you are mistaken) For
what have we to do to judge them that are without? We leave such to Gods own
immediate severity and disposal. In our discipline we proceed against men as
Christians, and as professed believers, as within, as of ours, and of us, which
have transgressed the law of faith, or violated the holy Rutes of Christianity,
and refuse to submit and make public satisfaction when legally convented and
convicted. Now if you judge and take our men (when you juridically suspend) to
be no Christians, no believers, not within, none of yours, nor of you, what
talk you of either of suspending or excommunicating of them? of no Christians
and no believers, they must be made Christians and Believers by Baptism, not
your examination and approbation of them.

The ground of this his objection has been removed in the place last referred
unto; and in Chap. 5.. 6. (and Chap. 19.. 5, 6.) where has been acknowledged
by us, that not only flagitious baptized persons, but also excommunicates are
Church Members, and therefore within, and so are not to be rebaptized when
restored. In this the Reader may see whose way is more rigorous, Mr. Ws. or
mine. His associates take excommunicates for no Church Members, so do not I;
and yet they restore them not by baptism, when they allege against me, that
such as are not within, must be taken in by Baptism, as we heard Mr. W.
speak. According therefore to what we have before delivered, we distinguish
with Mr. W. and say; 1. Some persons are, and are called Christians, believers,
etc. only upon the account of their being positively and solemnly engaged to
Christianity, and the Christian faith. And 2. some are, and are called
Christians and believers, not only on the account of their being so engaged as
aforesaid, but of their visible conformity to those Christian engagements. All
who are Christians in the former respect, are Church Members, (whiles alive)
and [within] in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5.12. (that phrase [of us] Mr. W.
inserts too, if it refer to, 1 John 2.19. is difficult to be understood, and
its a great question whether it be equipollent, to the [ within, 1 Cor. 5.12.]
so I shall omit it here). A disciple or servant is sometimes denominated from
his being entered into a School, having covenanted with his Master to serve him,
and therefore these are liable to Ecclesiastical Censures. And yet they may be
no Christians, nor believers visibly, upon the account of the latter respect,
and therefore cannot claim the privileges belonging to disciples who learn,
and servants who obey their Masters, whiles they notoriously refuse to learn
and obey Christ.

And this minds me of the second thing Mr. W. has in the forementioned
pages, which seems to need an answer here. Its page 139. where he says; A man
undeniably without, and utterly incapable of the Lords Supper, may have the
Scripture characters of faith in your sense, i. e. he may be instructed in the
Christian faith, be able to give an account (yea a true account) of his faith,
submit unto your Church order of examination, and be of Christian behavior
without exception in his private carriage, and yet be such a visible unbeleever
(to us) as the Lord in his word would not have the Lords Supper administered
unto. -- viz. because not baptized, etc. yea though as he before said, he may
be regenerated.

1. Sometimes Mr. W. makes to be within, and to be a Christian or believer of
equal latitude; as in his last exception, I have answered. Here he
acknowledges one not within, to be a true and real believer; and therefore I
should conclude a true Christian, though not so solemnly. For I am of opinion
none can expect to be saved but true Christians; and these Mr. W. says, may be
truly regenerate and go to heaven. 2. But whereas he tells us this catechumen
or heathen Proselyte may be, without exception, of Christian behavior, in his
private carriage, and yet not be capable of the Lords Supper. I utterly deny
this. For if he were of Christian behavior, without exception, he would submit
to Baptism (the contempt whereof all acknowledge to be a damning sin,) and
then in the same day (and hour for ought I know) he might communicate. And if
he have opportunity to desire the Communion, he has opportunity to be
baptized, and therefore cannot be excused in the neglect of it, nor then be
accounted in that neglect a believer in respect of visible compliance with and
obedience to the Gospel. Who only has a visible right to the Lords Supper. And
now Sir (says Mr. W. p. 145.) to your Allegation out of Tertullian, viz. [
Nemo illic Christianus, etc.].

This also was quoted by me, for the same purpose as the passages of Salvian
were, viz. that the name or word profession of Christianity is no argument nor
testimony he is a Christian, whose deeds do notoriously contradict the same.
And my paper they expressed it (at numb. 50.) [Agreeable whereunto is what I
find quoted from Tertullian, Apolog. cap. 44. speaking of the Heathens
prisons; Nemo illic Christianus nisi plane tantum Christianus, aut si and aliud
jam non Christianus.] Now Mr. W. has left out the word [prisons] in the copy
he has printed as mine, and when he has so done, takes pains from the
context in Tertullian to inform me, that the Father speaks of the Christians
sufferings in prisons; as if I had not understood it before. Is not this a
brave confutation to be boasted of? He excuses his Transcriber of my paper, p.
115. And whether he must take this nonsense to himself he has printed as
mine, or on whom else he will lay it, I know not; I list not to upbraid him
with frauds, imposture, and cheating, etc. which yet he usually puts on me, so
wonderful civil and well manner'd is he.

2. Mr. W. adds; But why shall I trouble you with these things, seeing you are
so ingenuous as to acknowledge that you act herein but by virtue of another
man's Quotation. He had before said to me, p. 60. I find no ingenuous dealing
in all your paper. And here to do me a spite he will contradict himself, (like
as elsewhere he complains of the obscurity of my paper, p. 80, 82, 88. as if he
could not know what I would have; and yet begins his Postscript with these
words; Sir, after all this, I return you thanks for this plain declaration
of your mind in this piece of yours.) But (by his favor) he is too hasty in
concluding I had not perused Tertullian my self (and the same may be said of
his censuring my childishness for referring to diverse Authors as mentioned by
Zepperus) because I said [I find Tertullian thus quoted] there being other
causes of such references, viz. 1. When we have perused Authors, not now with
us, and so the reference at second hand helps us only to the place where that
is, which we would quote. And 2. When the reference to such later learned
Writers who have quoted those Authors for the same intents as we would make use
of them, does add weight to the quotation, by affording a probable proof,
that the passages quoted are rightly understood and interpreted to the true and
genuine sense of the original Authors.

3. After his telling us of his favor in mentioning another passage of
Tertullian for our advantage, (and his favors are not so ordinary and common,
that I should reject any of them, though it shall appear beneath, I act not by
virtue of his quotation) He falls foul on Tertullian; and as scoldes when one
in any thing displeases them, rake in all old fores, and reckon-up all the
faults they can really, or upon uncharitable suspicion, charge him with: so
because Tertullian has the hard hap to cross Mr. W. as himself conceives, and
to favor me, the world shall now be told what failings he had (or he was
thought by some to have had) other ways: But what if there were some called
Tertullianists accounted heretics (when yet the name heretic was very rife)
who denied second marriages, and said that the souls of wicked men became
Devils after their departure out of this life, and that the soul is continued
by going from one into another, as much as to say by carnal descent and
succession, as Doctor Meredith Hanmer in his Ecclesiastical Chronographie,
reckons up their tenants out of Augustine? What are any of these to the present
controversy betwixt Mr. W. and me? And what are Montanus, and his two [false]
Prophetesses, Priscilla and Maximilla, and their phanatique courses, mentioned
by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History. l. 4. cap. 26. and lib. 5. cap. 3.
and 14. (What are these I say) to the point quoted from Tertullian? What if the advice given be commendable; so to read Tertullian, as that bona ejus
recipientes mala respuamus, we take not in the bad with the good? May not the
same counsel be given in reading others of the Fathers also? But are they
therefore not to be made use of in any thing? Is Cyprian of no use, because he
would have heretics rebaptized? nor those of the Fathers, who held the
Millenary opinion? nor Augustine, with many others, who held Infants should
communicate? nor Origin, who had many errors? All my business remaining here
is to show that the passages quoted from Tertullian are not accounted
erroneous; That they cannot be reduced to Montanisme, nor Tertullianisme, I
think is manifest already, to which yet Mr. W. should seem to have respect in
his mentioning them here, for the disparagement of Tertullians authority. I
press not his authority further then the reason and weight of his words
themselves afford us good credentials. But that in this quoted he speaks truth,
and is nothing to be blamed I shall show; 1. from the Notes and Castigations of
that learned man Franciscus Junius on Tertullian: 2. From the consent of other
Fathers with Tertullian. Junius in his Paraphrase upon Tertullians fifty
Apologeticks adversus Gentes; on that passage, Apol. 44. Ait si and aliud jam
non Christiani, says; Nam si quo praeterea eulogio insignirentur, ut furti and
homicidij, jam Christiani non sunt, neque hujusmodi homines in talem amplius
sectam recensentur.

So upon that in Apol. 46. Sed dicet aliquis, etiam de nostris excedere quosdam
a regula disciplinae; desinunt tum Christiani haberi penes nos philosophi vero
illi cum talibus factis in nomine and honor sapientiae perseverant. Whereupon
the foresaid Paraphrast says, that Tertullian answers that objection. But some
of your Christians do err from their Rule, as well as some Philosophers. Verum
hoc, inquit, est, sed ratio diversa succedit. He answers, this is true, but
with much difference from wicked Philosophers. Philosophus enim licet
aberravit, ejus nominis autoritatem non amittit. The Philosopher transgressing,
loses not the authority of his name. Diogenes enim Zeno, and Aristoteles inter
Principes Philosophorum nihilominus habentur. Christianus vero, simulac a
disciplina declinat, ex albo Christianorum eraditur, neque ullo modo eo
dignatur nomine aut censu. But the exorbitant Christian is put out of the
catalogue of Christians, nor is he any way accounted worthy of that name or
estimation. The corrector of Tertullian we see corrects not these passages, but
illustrates them with his Co^mentary upon them. Yet they need not be understood
in the vigorous sense Mr. W. puts upon them, as if these exorbitant or
disorderly Christians should in no sense be Christians, nor Church Members, nor
as if they might not be restored to the honor and privilege of orderly
Christians upon their repentance and reformation. But only that they are not
honored and respected as Christians whiles vicious, as Tertullian objected to
the Heathens, their Philosophers were as chief Philosophers, notwithstanding
their vitiousness.

2. And such like expressions we find in others of the Fathers, which further
demonstrates no singular error of Tertullian is contained in the passages
quoted.

Ignatius Epist. ad Ephesians. ( anno Christi 100.) Solent enim (says he) nonnulli
malo dolo nomen quidem Christi circumferre, sed patrant quaedam indigna Deo,
quos oportet ut feras evitare. Sunt enim canes rahidi clam mordentes, quos
vitare oportet, ut morbo difficulter curobili laborantes. Justin. Martyr (A. C.
130.) pro Christianis Defens. 2. ad Antonium pium. (Johanne Lango interpret) a
good way from the beginning, says, At enim qui non ita vivere comperiuntur,
sicut ille (Christus) docuit, Certum id documentum est, non esse Christianos,
quamvis doctrinam Christi lingua profiteantur. Non enim profitentes tantum, sed
operibus simul professionem confirmantes salvatos iri dicit. Sic enim dicit,
Non quisquis mihi dicet, Domine, Domine, introibit in regnum coelorum. --
Caeterum eos qui minus consentaneam preceptis ejus vitam agunt, Christianique
tantummodo dicuntur, a vobis quoque puniri rogamus.

Origin comra Celsum (A. C. 206.) lib. 4. a good way from the beginning,
Sigismundo Geleno interpret) where he answers the reproaches the Jews cast on
the Christians, calling them worms, etc. he says, Tacco reliqua hominum vitia,
a quibus non facile reperias immunes, ne istos quidem qui habentur pro
philosophis: sunt enim multi adulterini philos-ophi. Atque his obnoxii sunt
homines professione nec Judaei nee Christiani. quae autem Non sunt inter
Christianos si proprie Christianum accipias, etc.

In Minutii Felicis Octau (A. C. 212.) post medium, there are found almost
Tertullians very words. Denique de nostro numero carcer exaestuat: Christianus
ibi nullus, nisi aut reus suae religionis aut profugus.

Cyprian, de unitate Ecclesiae cathol. speaking of a Schismatic, he says, Sic
se Christianum esse profitetur, quomodo and Christum Diabolus saepe mentitur
ipso Domino praemonente and dicente, Multi veniunt in nomine meo dicentes, Ego
sum Christus, and multos fallent. Sient ille Christus non est, quamvis fallat
in nomine ipsius, ita nec Christianus videri potest, qui non permanet in
Evangelii ejus and fidei veritate -- And after. Confessor est, sit humilis and
quietus, sit in actu suo cum disciplina modestus, ut qui Christi confessor
dicitur, Christum quem confitemur, imitemur.

Now Mr. W. may go on, and talk his pleasure (to his tender consciences) of my
abusing antiquity to palliate my own follies, p. 137. and he may jumble heaven
and earth together in rating Tertullian for Heresy and Schism, and all upon
his saying but this in sense, That whereas heathen Philosophers were honored
though never so vicious, Christians lose the honor and esteem worthy of the
Christian name, by their wickedness. And let him also make them believe (who
will see with his eyes) that my quotations were not pertinent for the
illustrating of what I had before otherwise proved (though he insinuates these
were all my proofs: and in an exuberancie of wit, cries, p. 252. Must humane
testimonies be all your proof at last? viz. That a bearing the name (and by
word professing of Christianity, or faith is no credible testimony that he is a
true Christian believer, whose notorious wicked practices contradict his
word-profession. And that the Lords Supper must be administered to such as
appear to be no real Christians, no true believers. I will believe when he or
any else can show me one Scripture-evidence for it.

Mr. W. now dismisseth me, p. 151 in his proper language, thus, Put up your
bagpipes and whistle at home. And let him cry aloud Montibus and sylvis that if
there be any idle echo there, he may procure from it an answer to such another
book as his Suspension discussed is. But by his leave I Will take David's Harp,
and on it thus conclude;

PSALM. 119. Part 22. Y. Z. 169 Yield to my cry thy presence near,
From thy word light I crave.
170 Yield to my suit thy ready ear!
After thy word me save!
171 Ye lips of mine shall praise the Lord,
who taught me his Truth sure.
172 Yea, my tongue shall boast of thy word,
For thy Laws are right pure.
173 Yoak't in thy Laws I choose to be.
Let thine hand help afford!
174 Young fresh delights thine Hests give me.
I longed for thine aid, Lord.
175 Zealously to praise thee I list,
whiles life lasts, just help send!
176 Zion path I, stray sheep, have mist;
Seek me! thy Laws I Will tend.

A particular Answer to twenty-two Digressive passages in Mr Ws Book,
entitled, Suspension Discussed.
(1)
IN his Epistle to the Reader he says (speaking of us) Although some things of
the ancient Fathers, they have sometimes in their mouths; yet they will allow
the authority of the ancient Fathers, no further then will serve their own
turns, etc.

The like complaint the Papists sillily make against the Protestants, so
Canisius barks in the Preface of his Opus Catcchisticum, against Luther,
Calvin, and Melancthon. Is any one so stupid as to allow the authority of the
Fathers in those things he thinks they erred? Mr. W. (as we have seen above)
honorably quotes Tertullian for him, p. 141. and lamentably falls out with him
as a Ringleader of Heretics, p. 147, 148. and says, p. 149. We shall honor
Tertullian in yiedling to his Assertions, wherein he is orthodoxall, but we
shall believe neither him nor you, wherein you are amiss. And does not Mr. W.
use his own judgment to discern wherein he is orthodoxal, and where not; and
so reject his authority in the latter, as he owns it in the former? Was not
this then an irrational and selfe-condemning Exception?

(2)
Your Parish Pope or his vestry Cardinals, cries Mr. W p. 98.

The Pope is not formidable, but with his Bull. And here Mr. W. would scare us
with his Bull against us. For [Parish Pope] is a flat contradiction, according
to the sense wherein [Pope] is now taken. But with such a Bull he shall ride
none but calves.

(3)
Examination of persons in order to their admission to the Lords Supper, is a
maine ground of Mr. W. his many complaints and invectives in his book, p. 3,
4, 9. Though you (says he) delude the Country with a loud cry, as if your
quarrel lay only against the ignorant and scandalous, yet your design is to
bring all men under your Examination, as divinely and scripturally necessary
unto acceptable celebration of the Lords Supper, let their parts be never so
eminent, and their lives never so regular. The same Coleworts are served in
again and again, over and over, p. 21, 27, 28, 38, 54, 56, 60, 88, 95, 96,
113. This dish coming in so often (as the learned Cartwright on 1 John 4.3.
said to the Rhemists on a like occasion) argues either an hungry guest, or a
needy Host.

Concerning this (which is called) Examination, (that is, a taking cognizance
of adult persons, their understanding owning and profession of the Christian
faith, which in infancy they were baptized into) in order to their admission to
the Communion: I shall deliver my apprehensions in the ensuing Considerations.

(1) I consider, that the Scripture mentions not any Instances of such who
having been baptized infants, were afterward when adult admitted to the
Supper, as expressly distinguished from them who were baptized adult, or at
years: nor does it, in express Rules or patterns describe how or in what
manner, such baptized in infancy, were admitted, or are to be admitted to the
Lords Supper.

(2) Yet from what the Scripture informs us in, concerning the prerequisits in
the adult to Baptism, and the nature of the Lords Supper in it self: Some
Directions may be gathered concerning this matter; particularly, That there may
be required from persons when they first tender themselves to receive, that
they make a serious profession of their assent and consent to the Christian
faith, they have been baptized into. (Whether this be by a continued speech, or
catechistically, is not at all stood upon.)

For 1. There is the same Reason for requiring this here, as there is for (that
which none deny) the requiring it from persons adult in order to their
Baptism; although they be never so learned and regular in their conversations
before: As Augustine, Ambrose, and others have been; and such as Mr. W.
acknowledges, ( p. 139.) were in a salvable condition) before their baptism,
and therefore did visibly appear so to be. The visible understanding owning of
the Covenant, whereof the Sacraments are seals, is as requisite in the first
admission of the former to the Lords Supper, as in the latter to Baptism; all
things being equal on both parties, save only that one is baptized, not the
other: but this alters not the thing in debate; because his being baptized in
infancy, is no testimony of his personal or visible owning the Covenant, which
is required in the adult for the participating of the Lords Supper. 2. There is
no Rule (I know of) to direct us at what years any one baptized in infancy,
may be admitted to the Communion, but according to his sooner or latter
understanding profession of his baptismal engagements. Why may not a child of
six or seven years old be admitted (who may be taught to repeat a Catechism,
and to say he desires to communicate) but because he is not then judged in a
capacity understandingly to consent to the Covenant terms? And how can another
though of twenty years be judged understandingly to own the Covenant, who does
not so profess the same before sufficient witnesses? For de non existentibus
and non apparentibus idem est judicium. Therefore this verbal profession may be
required to be made by a person adult (baptized in infancy) in the presence of
competent witnesses, before he is admitted to the Lords Supper. 3. Mr. W.
himself tells us, p. 56. that knowledge of [who are beleevers] and of [who are
not beleevers] must be the loadstar of our administering or not administering the
Lords Supper. And p. 59. he says, In our administration of the Lords Supper to
others, we are to be guided by the Scripture Characters of a doctrinal faith.
And of this we may have infallible certainty, when we know the parties are
baptized, and hear them say the Creed, and testify their beleese of every
Article therein contained. And hence we connclude infallibly, that they are (he
should have said visibly appear to be) of a right faith, and doctrinally true
believers. And again, says he, p. 61. By our administration to believers, is
meant such believers, as we may have a certainty that they are believers. Now
if we must know them to be believers by hearing them say the Creed, and
testifying their belief of every Article therein, before we can have a
certainty they are believers capable of admission to the Supper; then they must
give an understanding (visible) account of their faith, in order to their
admission. Their having been baptized in infancy is no demonstration (and less
then demonstration will not serve for the infallible certainty Mr. W. requires)
of their personal doctrinal faith: this doctrinal faith they cannot be
expected to have without instruction preceding: and the means of instruction
afforded to them, is no proof of their proficiency; therefore according to Mr.
W. his own concessions, they must give an account of their proficiency under
the means of instruction they have had, for the attaining this indispensably
necessary doctrinal faith, (which we must, says he, have an infallible
certainty of) before we administer unto them.

4. The same Reason which will justify the requiring a Parents renewing his
profession of faith, and renouncing what is contrary thereunto, when he
presents his child to baptism, will as effectually prove, that he should
personally profess the faith, before he was admitted to the Lords Supper. And
therefore whereas an ancient Divine in this Country (as I am informed) at the
celebration of a Baptism, having asked the Parent the usual Questions, then
offered to his Brethren, Why that parent might not be admitted to the Lords
Supper, without any further Examination before Minister or Eldership, since he
had now made an open profession of his faith at the baptism of his child? It
may be answered. 1. That if he please to give a reason to warrant his demanding
that profession from the Parent, before the infant should be baptized; the same
will show what he desired. (He may try at his leisure to give a Reason for the
one, which will not as effectually reach the other). 2. Yea much more strong
will it be in the latter than former case; In his datum than quaesitum;
supposing the parent had been (upon a personal owning the Covenant
engagements) admitted before that time to the Lords Supper. 3. I should readily
grant if this parent have not (or not upon a personal confession of the faith)
been admitted to the Lords Supper before, that this profession he was
occasioned to make at the baptism of his infant, may so far as it goes, serve
without renewing of it, at his admission to the Lords Supper. But then it
should be considered, whether the answering in that form, I believe, I
renounce, for sake, etc. may be reasonably judged an understanding owning of
the Covenant, where it appears not (by previous conference with him, or a
present more full explication of himself, or some other probable way) that he
does understand what he answers unto. 4. Lastly, I answer, That the parent who
is to be admitted to the Lords Supper, ought not only understandingly to own
the Covenant and baptism as one seal thereof (which he makes profession of at
the baptism of his infant) but also particularly the ordinance of the Lords
Supper, the signification of the sacramental elements and actions therein, and
the end of celebrating the same, that he may be in a visible capacity of
discerning the Lords body; And therefore there is manifest reason why he should
make a further profession (supposing he has not done it before) for his own
admission to the Communion, then was required from him at the admission of his
Infant to baptism. And so much in answer to this proposal of the Minister
aforesaid, of which I desire his candid acceptance. Some other passages
mentioned by him at the same time I neglect, as savouring of calumny and
passion. The tide may turn, and the brook therewith; I grudge him not the
liberty of Retract on; but then it were seemly to be without detraction from
others who still own the opinion he was lately most zealous for. I now proceed.

(3) It makes no alteration as to the matter in hand, whether this
understanding profession of the faith, be immediately before a persons first
admission to the Sacrament, or a longer time before, so that the thing be done.
And therefore where Confirmation was in use, and seriously managed, that might
serve this purpose sufficiently; according to the direction of the Common
prayer book, before recited, Ch: 4.. 3.

(4) If persons have been unduely admitted to the Lords Supper, without making
this understanding profession of the Christian faith before; that excuses them
not from being now called to make it, in order to their present admission: this
will stand good, till it can be evinced that a neglect excuses from duty; that
that must never be done which has been sinfully left undone, and that because
of that irregular omission; although as fit an opportunity is again afforded
for the doing of it, as that was which formerly was not taken hold of (as it
should have been) for the same. And indeed, (as the Provincial Synod of London
in their Vindication has observed) The great Odium cast upon the Presbyterial
way, is occasioned by the shameful neglect formerly, of the Rules then
appointed for Examination of all, before they should have been admitted to the
Lords Table: And now the Reformation endeavored in this thing, is not so much
for the amending the Rule which before was prescribed, as in calling people up
to a stricter observation of the same Rule for matter and substance.

(5) It has bin already showed, that the Presbyterian Government (which is
that confirmed by the Parliament after advice had with the Assembly of Divines,
not what some Presbyterians may hold) does not require all persons now should
be again examined, who have formerly upon the due profession of their faith,
been admitted to the Sacrament; But it forbidding the ignorant to be admitted,
only inferres, that such as hitherto have not understandingly owned the
Covenant of grace, should now be called to do it, if they would partake of the
Sacrament. And therefore where any have formerly performed that in substance
which is now required from them who are to be first admitted to the Supper, and
can make it appear, there is no necessity according to Presbyterian principles,
for their rene wall of it, as to their present communicating.

(6) This profession must be made before sufficient and comperent witnesses
(else it cannot be a satisfactory profession); But who those must be, is a
consideration of another nature. For this may vary according to the different
circumstances of persons, times, and places, (and the judgment of the Church
thereupon, or of those who are most eminently concerned in the management of
such things pertaining to the prudential order thereof) so that the end be
attained for the good of the persons admitted, and the satisfaction and
edification of the Church. I am informed, by a Manuscript Copy I have of the
Resolves of a Provincial Synod held at Preston in Lancashire, November. 14. 1648.
that the said Synod among other things resolved in their sixth particular. That
there is not only one way prescribed or warranted by the word of god, for the
Elderships satisfying themselves of the sufficiency in point of knowledge of
persons that are members of their Congregations respectively, that they may be
admitted to the Lords Supper. 7. That it is not lawful for the Elderships to
tie themselves to one way as aforesaid, (suppose it be examination before them)
when that one attaines not the end, and another may probably do it. So they.
In the business of Marriage its necessary the consent of the parties should be
expressed before competent witnesses; but the Christian Magistrate may
determine who shall be competent witnesses; whether a Justice of peace, or a
Minister shall be present to take and record the signification of their
consent. Yet no sober man cries out, Why are unscriptural conditions put upon
persons to be married? The like may be said concerning the present point. Yet
in this case (methinkes) that should sway most for our direction herein at
present, which is commended to us by both Houses of Parliament (after their
removal of the Common prayer book) with the advice of the Reverend Assembly.
Form of Church Government to be used in the Church of England and Ireland; (of
Aug. 29. 1648.) p. 30. But if people in some Congregations will not be gotten
to comply with that direction in the letter of it; I know not, but there may be
some variation without offense, as the Minister or Elderships of particular
Churches (with advice of their Classis if extant) may judge expedient for the
satisfaction and edification of the Church. See Mr Blake, Covenant sealed. Chapter
7.. 14. p. 230, 231, 232, 233. and. 16, p. 272, 273. I am afraid I have been
too long on this Digression. The urgency, and misrepresentations of the thing
here handled must be my excuse. I humbly submit it to the judicious peaceable
Reader, who will consider how to show a cleerer way, before he censure this.
And I shall easily neglect discontented, furious, uncivil Wranglers, whose
business is to carp at others, but build nothing consistently of their own in
this matter.

(4)
Your pretended Church order (says Mr. W. p. 4.) requires an account of men's
says auricularly. And p. 28. You deny the Lords Supper to such as will not
give an auricular account to you, or your Elders, etc.

Auricular confession is a phrase used to denote, that which is required among
the Papists, 1 viz. that every one do confess all his sins (though private) to
the Priest alone, whispering the same into his ear. Now what a shameful
slander is that Mr. W. puts on us, in the application hereof to the profession
of faith required among us, cannot but be manifest to every observer. 1. We
require no confession of private sins, but abhor it unfeinedly. 2. Who knows
not, the great quarrel many have against the Presbyterial Government, is
because it allows not the Minister alone of his own head to seclude the other
Officers chosen by the people, from joining with him in receiving this
confession of faith required? But let the Reader here see what cause he has on
this occasion to accompany me in a serious lamentation, that envious
animosities should so far prevail upon any, as to hurry them on to such
calumnies, as malice it self could not devise more impudent.

(5)
Mr. W. adds, p. 4. Which very (auricular) account is the basis of your new
model, or pretended Church constitution. And p. 9. Those you refuse to canonize
by your ghostly approbation, though baptized, them you look upon as the world,
etc. The like he has over and over, p. 11, 21, 22. Such are no Church Members
with you. p. 60, 61, 88, 113, etc.

To name these things is to confute them; I have spoken of their untruth in the
Treatise, Chapter 8.. 4. and Chapter 21.. 1. and need to add no more in so palpable a
falsehood.

(6)
But he adds to this sad heap of falsehoods, when he says, p. 124. Let men be
suspended by you, do what they will afterward; let them be Atheists or of what
sect they will afterward, you regard not. The like he has, p. 122. And woe be
to us if this be truly charged on us; But I defye him and the Accuser of the
Brethren to boot, to prove the charge.

(7)
And the language of envy powers out it self further, p. 123. When they are
suspended you look after them no longer, unless it be for your Tithes and
Church dues. It may be the man who affected to date his Epistle from his poor
house at Leek, grudgeth others their Tithes. His neighbors may do well to
consider his complaint. But a man should carry himself honestly, though in a
poor house, and then he would forbear these criminations, which our course of
personal instruction may manifest to be false, even to a proverb.

(8)
He tells me, p. 124. Debarring from the Lords Supper with you is the
comprehensive of all Discipline; and that power to debar being granted you are
content. And who told Mr. W. this tale? perhaps he is not so ill provided as to
be destitute of some body or other to father it upon; no more then he was for
that story he tells the world in his Apology, about his Antagonists design to
obstruct the impression of his book (which I could never learn any thing of to
this day). But we are for admonition before suspension, and for a further
excommunication (or withdrawing Communion) after suspension, as opportunity may
be offered, and the case require (see Form of Church Government, p. 18, 39,
40.) Let Mr. W. tell what figments he please to the contrary. Certainly he is
no child, but he does what children do, when he is so busy in raising bubbles
made of his own froth, and then shouting aloud, tosseth them about with that
breath which first raised them.

(9)
In the same page last mentioned, he further gives his word against us; You
(says he) make your Brethren your slaves.

(10)
And by your uncontrollable power of suspension, you assume to your selves more
authority over the people, then ever did the most domineering Prelate among us,
in making poor people sland to your courtesy for the Lords Supper.

To both these jointly I answer. 1. How is that an uncontrollable power (to
make our Brethren slaves with) or at our courtesy; (1) which is limited by the
Ordinance of Parliament, so that we may not add of our own heads to the
enumeration of the meritorious causes of suspension? Form of Church Government,
p. 30, 31, 34, 35. etc. And (2) when any may appeal from a Congregational
Eldership to higher Judicatories, in case of wrong done them, according to the
constitution of the Presbyterian Government? Form of Church Government, p. 15.

2. How do we assume that to our selves, which by the said Form of Church
Government we are required to do? (not to mention here what has been
discussed before, concerning the Ministers duty in point of conscience.)

3. How do we take more authority to our selves then the Prelates did? Not to
rake into other old sores, that which the Prelates did in suspending all who
would not kneel at the Communion, and requiring Ministers should not deliver it
to them (as has been recited in the Treatise above. Chapter 4.. 4.) does clearly
manifest the falseness of this, which Mr. W. (or rather his passion, I hope its
not himself) would affix on us.

4. But yet more, his distemper swells above ordinary bounds, when he flatly
determines our usurping power of suspension to be such, as that we assume more
power to our selves over the people, then the (1) most domineering Prelate (2)
ever did, among us. Belike Bishop Bonner himself not excepted. I Will say
nothing here in our own Apology, but rather for Mr. W. who more needs it, I
consider, That as of false Dials, that is best which is most false, because it
will deceive fewest: so it was a favor to us that Mr. W. when he would traduce
us, has done it so palpably and grossly.

(11)
He is pursuing the design of his book, viz. against us, when he says, p. 91.
The scandal of such as depart from us, casting such an odium upon the public
Ministers and proper means of grace, deserves the severity of Ecclesiastical
Discipline more by far, then the private miscarriages of our men, (in
public unity with us in matters of Religion) possibly can: and yet you let
these alone. And here the Christian Magistrates mere toleration, restraines
your consciences, etc.

Mr. W. here seems to insinuate that the Magistrate does so tolerate these
enemies of the means of grace, as that Ecclesiastical Censures might not be
inflicted on them, without offending him. Whereas The toleration of some
supposed to be erroneous, yea schismatical and heretical, is in reference to
the forbearance of laying corporal or purse-penalties on them for the same; not
laying restraint on the Churches in exercising of spiritual Censures. And if
Mr. W. be so bold as to slander the State thus openly, Its the less to be
wondered at, that against our professed judgments and present practice, he
tells the world, that we let these exorbitant persons (being our Church
members) alone; that is, that we dare not censure them Ecclesiastically as
opportunity is afforded unto us. Mr. W. is so much at leisure as to tell me, p.
151. About 19 times you have alarmed us with the bagpipes of your [fully] and
[full]. I might count his Untruths here (I will not say Full lies to answer my
fullies) But I have somewhat else to do.

(12)
But he has another confutation of our suspension (like the rest) p. 114. in
these words: You are a man mightily cried up, and wonderfully admired by some;
and one (a prime friend of yours) in my hearing spoke of you by way of
admiration, saying [O that man!]. And that for which he so deservedly extolled
you was the great good service, you did for the honor and credit of the Popes
holiness, acquitting him from a gross aspersion cast upon his holiness by some
Protestant Divines, charging him to be Antichrist. Now you by your skill and
authority discharged his holiness by open Proclamation or preaching from the
crime objected; And whether for the like good services, others (your Admirers)
cry you up, time will manifest: But me thinks, in this piece of yours I can
find little that savours of Divinity, or of any other good science.

I shall not stand expostulating about the publication of this he pretends to
have heard, (For I grudge every word I shall write for my vindication herein,
and indeed was apt to have contemned it in silence, if some others had not
urged me to take notice of it publicly). But I flatly deny the words he
charge on me, and any other equivalent thereunto. The Sermon from which this
reproach has (as I understand) taken its pretense, was preached on 1 John
2.18. which text was not of my own choosing, but fell to my lot in the exercise
we have in these parts, which handles that whole Epistle in order. 1. I have
the witness of my own conscience that I never harbored that opinion which is
here put on me. 2. I have the testimony of a godly Divine (Mr. Thomas Edge) to
whom I communicated the notes of that Sermon before I preached it, that I
designed to profess against it: the which he has given me under his hand. 3. I
have my notes yet to show, which also I brought to our Classis, that they might
see, how therein I affirmed that it was my opinion, the Pope (with his party)
are the great Antichrist of the latter times. 4. There were six or seven
Ministers my Auditors, sundry of whom wrote my Sermon, who all would
unanimously testify (if I desired it) against what Mr. W. taxes me with.
Three of them, viz. Mr. Newcome, Mr. Martindale, and Mr. Edge did long ago
send me in their Testimonies in this matter: but they are too large to be here
inserted fully; and some passages therein may not well become mine own pen to
transcribe and publish. Yet some one of them I shall here recite; because
Calumniators mouths are not easily stopped.

Mr. Martindale his Testimony runs in these words.

Having lately read in the 14 page of a little book called Suspension
discussed, an invective passage against my dear Brother Mr. Samuel Langley,
Author of the Manusript pretended to be answered in the said book, charging
him to have acquitted the Pope by open Proclamation or preaching from the crime
of Antichristianisme objected against him by some Protestant Divines; I account
my self a debtor both to the truth, and also to the good name of -- a Minister
of Jesus Christ, to give this true and impartial testimony of him, viz. That
upon the 8th day of May last, I heard an elaborate Sermon, preached by the
Gentleman accused, upon 1 John 2.18. (which is in all probability the very
Sermon that the Accuser aims at), wherein he was so far from denying the
Pope to be Antichrist, that he professedly asserted that the Pope (called
elsewhere in Scripture the man of sin) is, and may properly be called (...), the
Antichrist, great Antichrist of these latter days. And that John in using the
term Antichrist may probably allude to such a thing. Though he modestly
proposed his judgment (with submission) that these words [Antichrist] and
[Antichrists] in the Epistles of John, did most properly, and in their primary
and immediate signification, refer to the false teachers of those days. Adding
also his grounds, and diverse Cautions, to have prevented misunderstanding and
misrepresentations, if it would have been. What I have here said I am ready as
occasion shall be given (by oath if lawfully required) to own and justify:
which if I should refuse, not only my conscience, but also my hand hereunto
subscribed, would bear witness against me.

Rothsterne, Janu: 27. 1656. Ad: Martindale.

Mr Newcome and Mr Edge severally testify the same in substance, and speak of
some particulars more largely, out of their written Notes they took of my
Sermon, I shall only add one passage from Mr. Newcome, because it is thought
Mr. W. would father his Story on him, Speaking of me, he says, -- -- He did
over and over assert, that the Pope was the Man of Sin, the Whore of Babylon,
and properly so called the Antichrist of the later times, both as Antichrist
signifies Vicarius Dei, and one opposite to Christ: And that the Apostle might
refer and allude to this Antichrist of the later times, in what he discourses
of the Antichrist in that place of those times. This was the substance of what
was delivered. If therefore Mr. W. referres to any discourse of mine, as the
ground of this reproach that he casts upon Mr. Langley, I do hereby witness the
contrary to what he says of him in this thing: which if he had not meant to
abuse himself, he might further have enquired into, and have understood before
he had so far engaged in such a gross untruth.

Henry Newcome.

In short, my judgment was and is this: He was primarily and directly the
Antichrist spoken of in John's Epistles, to whom those Characters of Antichrist,
1 John 4.2, 3. and 2 John 7. did primarily and directly agree: And those were
the Antichrists of those days, the false Christ's, Matthew. 24.24. He is
secondarily and by consequence (even in John's sense) the Antichrist to whom
those Characters do secondarily and by consequence agree; and this is the Man
of Rome. (upon which I vindicated our Protestant Writers in their referring to
Rome in their Commentaries on these Epistles; so far was I from clashing with
them.) And this man of Rome is properly the Antichrist of the latter times,
directly deciphered, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 1 Timothy 4. and in the Revelation, under the
Titles of the Man of Sin, Whore of Babylon, etc. though the holy Ghost does
never directly and in the primary sense of any place where [Antichrist] is
mentioned in Scripture (it being never used but in the Epistles of St. John)
affix the same on them of Rome, but by consequence only. Alas! good Reader, I
am very sorry this Antichristian business has held thee so long. I would make
an Apology, but that would need another for staying the with it. I will
therefore pass on to the next.

(13)
But your self (says Mr. W. p. 77.) are not over-confident that this answer is
sufficient; and so you add more. Let us have your second.

The Over-confidence I willingly yield to himself the very center thereof. But
what a silly Reason is this, after one answer given to an objection, I add a
second, therefore I distrust the first. Wonderful witty!

(14)
Mr. W. tells us, p. 11, 12, of parties known to be Christianly judicious, and
of blameless behavior, who yet purposely refuse our examination upon the
account of our divine right; judiciously discerning the way and design to be
Brownisticall, and not Scriptural. And so (says he) these last mentioned may
judiciously refuse, that they might not countenance superstition.

1. To whom are these parties known to be Christianly judicious? If to all the
Church Officers, I do not think they would debar them; if they do, I disown
their practice.

2. And I know none who require them necessarily by divine right to renew the
profession of their faith in order to their communicating, who are already
sufficiently known to be (not only judicious but) Christianly judicious, as
Mr. W. speaks.

3. And if any Church did so require it, none do engage the parties spoken of
to believe they must needs submit on that account to this examination that they
may be capable of the Sacrament.

4. The word [Brownisticall] is often taken up to disgrace the Presbyterian
way, as it was formerly against the old Puritans. If Mr. W. had that of a Man
in him he finds desiderated in me ( p. 154.) he might have told his Reader of
Browns opinions condemned (and then it would appear whether the Presbyterian
Principles were guilty thereof) and not fight against us with the Rattles of
mere names. But take these Clackes from him of [Brownists, Anabaptists,
Mormoes, etc.) and you half spoil him.

5. If Mr. W. can make that out, that the parties he speaks of may lawfully
separate from our communions, because of examination required (yea suppose
amiss:) I will undertake upon the same ground to evince that his people may
judiciously separate from his sacramental communion, lest they should
countenance profaneness. And if any do withdraw from him upon the later
account, he may thank himself for giving them such a weapon to defend
themselves against him with. But for my part, although I think the one as
justifiable as the other, I must profess I justify neither. I think this is a
main thing of Brownisme and Donatisme, to hold that we may lawfully separate
from the ordinances of God in Churches holding the fundamentals, because of
some (supposed) male-administrations therein, which we are not necessitated in
our joining with them to approve of. And yet this Mr. W. has asserted by clear
consequence, when he said, that persons may judiciously separate from our
communions, because of a supposed miscarriage in the Church Officers in
requiring examination; who yet never require the persons examined should
profess their belief of the necessity jure divino, of the said examination,
as a condition prerequisite to their admission. Augustine, (the mall of the
Denatists) contra Parmen. l. 3. glossing on those words, 1 Cor. 5. [auserte
malum ex vobu] (whether in the strict sense of the place or no I now dispute
not) Per malum suum malis quisque consentit. Si autem ex scipso auserat malum,
alieno malo non est unde consentiat. Quapropter, quisque etiam contempscrit
Ecclesiae Dei disciplinam, ut malos cum quibus non peccat, and quibus non
favet, desistat monere, corrigere, arguere; si etiam talem gerit personam, and
pax Ecclesiae patitur, ut etiam a sacramentorum participatione quempiam possit
separare, non alieno male peccat sed suo. Ipsa quippe in tanta re negligentia
grave malum est, and ideo sicut Apostolus admonet, si auferat malum a scipso,
non solum auferat audaciam committendi, aut pestilentiam consentiendi, sed
etiam pigritiam corrigendi adhibita prudentia and obedientia in eo quod
praecipit Dominus, ne frumenta laedantur. And this I take to be the right mean
betwixt unwarrantable either separation or admission.

(15)
Mr. W. p. 123, 124, says, He looks upon no deductions from Scripture as
obligatory, unless we have some clear revelations for such deductions: For
(says he) clear revelations of holy Scripture, are the genuine principles into
which our faith is resolved.

1. If by [clear revelations] he mean the light of solid Reason, he says here
no more but this, q. d. we look on no deductions from Scripture as obligatory
to us, unless we do rationally discern that they are right deductions. And
this suits with a passage he has a little after; The Scriptures (says he)
were given as a sufficient and infallible Rule for the government of the whole
Church, so that any deduction not conformable thereunto, must either be
rejected as erroneous, or suspected as impertinent and needless.

2. But I submit it to the impartial Reader, whether his former words do not
fairly intimate, q. d. That we are not obliged by consequential deductions from
Scripture, unless the Scripture also clearly reveal that consequence (and
then indeed it cease to be a deduction only). For he explaines himself in
the next words, viz. [For clear Revelations of holy Scripture are the genuine
principles into which our faith is resolved], that by [cleere Revelations] he
means [the revelations of holy Scripture] not [the reason whereby we draw just
deductions from the Scripture]. I desire the Reader to take Mr. W. in the most
favorable sense his words are capable of. But I thought meet to disclaim this
latter sense, least the Quakers should think we complied with them in denying
consequences from Scripture to be obligatory to us. And the rather, because I
find that was a studied trick the Papists have long since taught their
disciples to put upon us, viz to require us to prove all we held by express
Scriptures, because we ground all the points of our Religion upon the
Scriptures, and not on the authority of the Church. And by such like crotchets
of denying syllogismes, disputing by Queries, etc. Some of the Papists have
bragged, they would undertake to make a Cobbler able to put the most learned
Ministers of France to a non plus. As may be seen, with the whole Popish plot
(now acted in England with a little necessary variation of the method)
discovered in that little but very learned tract of D. Chaloner, then Principal
of Alban Hall in Oxford, entitled, Credo Ecclesiam sanctam Catholicam, Printed
at London 1638. (long before the name of a Quaker was heard of in England, and
therefore appears not devised to make them odious. p. 134, 135, 160, 161, 162,
etc. Where he shows the Popish design (out of their own Records) agreed upon,
viz. to send Missionaries (as they themselves called them) culd out of all
orders and Universities, who dispersing themselves, shall after Sermon ended,
by this method blanke the Ministers of the reformed side. The which may not be
unprofitable to have observed in reference to our present times and the
behavior of diverse under the names of Quakers, Seekers, etc. among us.

(16)
M. W. adds, in the page last quoted; And for the sense of obscure places of
Scripture, we prescrre Catholic Expositions before any man's private sense or
Interpretation, accommodated or applied to favor his own, or his modern
parties pretension.

For answer to this, see the last quoted Author; Credo Ecclesiam sanctam, etc.
part. 1.. 7. p. 150, 151. And Bishop Usher in his answer to a challenge made by
a Jesuit in Ireland. Edit. London. 1625. p. 32, 33, 34. Where he shows that
diverse of the Papists themselves grant (what they blame in us) that a man may
without arrogance dissent in interpretation of Scripture from what is given by
the most of the Doctors before. He quotes Fisher the Jesuit confessing, that
it cannot be obscure to any, that many things as well in the Gospels, as in the
rest of the Scriptures, are now more exquisitly discussed by latter wits, and
more clearly understood then they have been heretofore. And Cardinal Cajetan in
the beginning of his Commentaries upon Moses, advising the Reader not to loath
the new sense of the holy Scripture; for this, that it dissenteth from the
ancient Doctors; but to search more exactly the text and context; and if he
find it agree, to praise God, that has not tied the exposition of the
Scriptures to the senses of the ancient Doctors. As for that passage Mr. W.
adds, [Accommodated to favor his own, or his modern parties pretension], its
only a begging the thing in question. All acknowledge that its a wrong to
interpret the Scripture in favor of an old or new error; But none will grant,
his own interpretation is accommodated to an error. But if Mr. W. would have
kept to his own Rule he has here given, he would not have set 1 Cor. 9. 3, 4.
upon the rack in his Title page, for the countenancing the design of his
discourse following. When as those words he there sets down [Mine answer to
them that examine me, is this] are by the stream of Interpreters (I have seen)
referred to the preceding words, v. 3. q. d. mine apology to them who question
my Apostleship is this; Am I not an Apostle? -- to you, doubtless I am, For the
seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord. Not to the following words, as he
has, by corrupting the text with his [viz.] inserted before [Have we not power
to eat and to drink?] And if it should refer to the subsequent words; Mine
apology to them who examine me is this, have we not power to eat and to
drink, have we not power to lead about a sister a wife as well as other
Apostles, etc? What then is that passage [Have we not power to eat or to
drinke] to sacramental eating or drinking? Like as much as [paveant illi] had
to the excusing the Priest from paving. Over the head of this quotation he
tells us, he published his book for the satisfaction of weaker consciences. But
what ever he thought of their consciences, me thinks he presumed of their
strong stomachs and sharp set, that he can proffer them such a crude morsel in
the first mess: a bad omen its counted to stumble at his own threshold; and it
brings to mind what D. Whitaker Regius professor sometimes of Cambridge, in
his defense of his Answer to Campions Reasons, said to Duraeus. lib. 1. de
sacris literis. Nihil est quod metuam, me tu mihi scripturarum possessionem
cripias, praesertim cum scripturis aut raro admodum utaris, aut imperite ac
pueriliter abutaris.

(17)
Mr. W. it may be, will not take it well if I should neglect the ornaments of
his book, rather then we should fall out about this, I will adventure upon the
Readers patience to insert some of them here; especially the fine liveries he
is pleased to cloth me (his meanest servant) with. Magisterial rashness, p. 8.
You delude the Country with a loud cry, p. 9. Specious cheat, p. 21. And thus
you may see what conscience it is that you pretend to, p. 22. Majestical
severity. Bead roll of words, as if you would charm the senses of the vulgar,
with your rare skill in Logic, p. 30. A mere sophister, p. 46. Your
heterodoxal brownisme, p. 53. Your malicious slander, p. 72. None of the wisest
for this ridiculous allusion, p. 78. I am ashamed that ever a mother in Israel
should breed such a son, p. 81. A mere crack, p. 94. Your clandestine
scriblings, p. 48. Whisper, peep, mutter, p. 48. (as if he would prove me a
Conjurer from Isa. 8.19.) Your brethren of the Anabaptists, p. 113. A fugitive
in the land of Nod, p. 118. Cum multis alijs. This part of Mr. W. his book I
acknowledge is unanswerable by me: he has quite non plust me at scoulding: Let
him have his Triumphs for this glorious victory; Sed male vincit is quem
poeniteat victoriae. But I begin now to question with my self. whether it were
not good to blot out all this Catalogue, least it fall into the hands of some
Quaker, who may use it for a Calcopy, and rail by authority of a Minister. But
for my self, I am not pricked with this crown of thorns he has set on my
head, nor do I fret that he has exposed it to the world.

(18)
In your next (says Mr. W. p 95.) prove this, viz. that refusing to come under
your ghostly Inquisition is a deed-rejecting of Christ.

But first he should show where I affirmed, it was either directly or by
consequence. All I undertook in the Manuscript sheet he deals with, was to
prove that some ignorant or scandalous persons baptized and not fully
excommunicated, may be debarred the Communion. Now how does this or the defense
of it, necessitate me to take up what he here would have me? But if he could
soberly propound, whether one who never gave an account of his faith to
competent witnesses thereof, may be debarred for refusing to do it? I have
proved the affirmative in the third Digression above. If others may be orderly
appointed to take this trial (which he odiously calls an Inquisition,) neither
I nor my brethren I think should be crossed thereby in our affections, but
rather should gladly be discharged of it, if so it might be.

(19)
Mr. W. thus speaks, p. 144. The Lords Supper is the ministration of the
Spirit, that gives life, as part of the Gospel ministration, deny it if you
can. A glass wherein the glory of the Lord is to be beheld with open face,
effectual to change men into the image of God by the Spirit, as well as any
other Gospel ordinance; deny it if you can, or dispute what you can against it.
Say (if you please) that then, an heathen is to be admitted to the Lords
Supper. He is, in sensu diviso, he is not in sensu composito. Incommodum non
solvit Argumentum. But the Apostle gives you the Rule, viz. [ We know, that
what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law, Romans
3.19.] The proportion of which Rule is this, viz. [We know, that what things
soever the Gospel says, it says to them who are under the Gospel.] And this
may stop your mouths.

(20]
He goes on and says; Repentance and conversion is the design of the whole
Gospel ministration to them that are under the Gospel. Let heathens be once
brought under the outward Regiment of the Gospel, by instruction and baptism,
and then the whole Gospel ministration would tend to their repentance and
conversion [termes aequipollent] and effect the same, unless the fault were
their own. The proper intent of Gospel ministrations, is the conversion of such
as live under the same.

Though there are (at least) two distinct things to be spoken to in these
Digressions, I put them together, because the same answer will serve some
passages in both. My return is as follows. 1. How far the Lords Supper is to
be acknowledged a converting ordinance, I have before showed, Chap. 21.. 2. 2.
But here Mr. W. would answer an objection he supposes I should make against
him, by inferring that then Heathens should be admitted. But I would not make
that inference from the supposing the Sacrament were (in some sense) a
converting ordinance, no more then that an excommunicate should be admitted. We
must not administer ordinances to any but those the Lord has warranted us to
administer unto, although we might conceive a probable aptitude in those
ordinances (as means) for the spiritual good of such as are sinfully
admitmittted thereunto. 3. Yet if I should make that objection Mr. W. here puts
upon me, it would (for ought I see) remain in force for all he has here
brought for the solution of it. He tells us, 1. He is to be admitted in sensu
diviso, not composito. But if the Lords Supper he designed and appointed to be
used by us as much and primarily for conversion as preaching the Gospel, there
appears no reason in the nature of the ordinance it self (Mr. W. is treating
of), why it should not be dispensed to an heathen whiles an heathen, as well as
preaching is. 2. He abuses that Scripture, Romans 3.19. I hope I shall not wrong
the Reader by inserting a few words for the clearing of its meaning, whereby
will appear the absurdness of Mr. W. his application thereof.

The proposition the Apostle resumes further to prove, is in the 9th verse;
That both Jews and Gentiles are all under sia, and so liable (in themselves
without the grace of the Gospel) to condemnation. And this he proves by sundry
Quotations out of the old Testament, verse. 10, 11, etc. to the end of verse. 18.
As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one, etc. These Scriptures
quoted must reach the thing for which they are quoted, to wit, the depravation
of man's nature in general, as Calvin speaks of them, Nihil impedit quo minus
ri^e ac vere in humanam naturam congerantur. And its evident that the
injustice, cruelty, fearlessness of God, therein spoken of, were sins against
the light of nature; which rendered the Gentiles as well as Jews obnoxious to
condemnation upon that account: as also upon the account of the positive
revelation of the haynousnesse of these sins, to the Jews, and to such of the
Gentiles to whom the said positive revelation was or should be made known. And
therefore the following words, ver. 19. which Mr. W. quotes, are not brought to
show that the Jews only were under the precepts and prohibitions of the
written Law. But the Apostle here makes a particular Application of those
quotations, which showed the depravednesse of men in general, to the Jews in
special; that they might not exempt themselves, or think themselves better by
nature than the Gentiles: as they had been brought in pleading against the
Apostle, in the beginning of the 9th verse, And now (says he) we know, that
whatsoever the Law says, (the old Testament Scripture,) it says to them that
are under the Law. So we read it; but the Original is (...), it says to them
that are in the Law. Now Romans 2.12. (...) is opposed to (...), [Being without
the Law] that is, [not having the positive revelation of the Law made known to
them.] And the strength of the Apostles applicatory conviction of the Jews
here, seems to lie mainly in this; that since they not only had the light of
nature to convince them of their sinfulness, as those Gentiles had who were
without the Law; but also the positive revelation of the Scriptures made known
to them, and so were in or with the Law: therefore they especially should not
be unacquainted with this point the Scripture did so fully and frequently treat
of, as was showed in the places before quoted. And indeed it cannot be said (as
some Interpreters sense the words, though with no advantage to Mr. W.) that
what ever the Law says, it speaks of the Jews to whom it was given. For it
speaks often of the Gentiles. But this is clear, what it says, it says to
them to whom it is made known, and therefore their mouths, (together with the
Gentiles) should be stopped from pleading for justification, by their obedience
to the Law, which none of them had perfectly obeyed.

Now how can this text be applied by proportion to infer that the heathens
must be baptized before they come under the commands of the Gospel; as Mr. W.
would have it, q. d. As the Jews were particularly concerned to take notice of
the corrupt nature of man, which made justification by works to be impossible,
either to Jews or Gentiles, and to take notice of what ever the Law says to
(or of) them: So (what shall I say?) Heathens under the times of the New
Testament are not obliged to receive the Lords Supper till they are baptized,
and positively engaged to Christianity. Where Is the proportion, which Mr. W. is
so confident of, that should stop the objectors mouth? Such a Rule of
proportion as this should rather be called the Leaden then Golden Rule. It may
be a truth (though not gathered from this text) that Heathens to whom the
Gospel is not revealed, shall not be condemned for sinning against the positive
Rules of Christianity. But if Christianity be revealed to them, they are bound
immediately to close therewith; and so to be baptized and communicate, as
opportunity is offered. They are in the Gospel now, according to the proportion
of (...), Romans 2.12. though not sub lege, having not professed their submission
thereunto. And the neglect of this latter does not excuse their disobedience to
the positive Rules of Christianity concerning Baptism and the Lords Supper: I
mean their not being under the Gospel by professed submission thereunto,
excuses them not, who are in the Gospel, or are not without the Gospel
revealed unto them.

4. To the maine of the 20th Digression, wherein Mr. W. says; The proper
intent of the Gospel ministration is the conversion of such as live under the
same: I answer. But what means he by [being under it?] Those who have
submitted professedly thereunto, and testified the same by receiving Baptism:
so his other words manifestly lead us to understand him. But then what a wild
position has he given us to no purpose? When Christ gave Commission to his
Ministers to disciple all nations, Gentiles as well as Jews, and then to
baptize them; and to preach the Gospel to every creature: must the scope of
their Ministry be properly to bring them only to an external profession of
submission to the Gospel, that they might receive Baptism, and not properly
intend their saving conversion, till after they were baptized? I had thought
the proper intent of the Gospel ministration to the Heathens, when it was first
preached to them, had been to convert them sincerely, to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, to receive forgiveness
of sins, and an inheritance among them who are sanctified by faith in Christ,
Act. 14.15. and 26.18. and not properly first to make them hypocrites, only
dogmatical professors; reserving the proper intent of the Gospel ministration
for their saving conversion, till after they were baptized.

But if Mr. W. mean by [being under the Gospel] such as hear the Gospel, then
he says true. The intent of the Gospel ministration is to convert them who
hear it, as Heathens do, when it is first preached to them, as well as borne
Christians. But this is impertinent to the scope of Mr. W. his present
discourse, and the pretended solution of the objection he is now dealing with.

(21)
Mr. W. in sundry places speaks of the rise and publishing of my paper, with
his answer thereunto. In his Epistle, having told us the difference happening
betwixt himself and some of his Parish (especially) in the point of
suspension; thereupon (says he) in all likelihood the Author of the
Manuscript was sought unto, to declare his thoughts concerning the
Controversy. -- At length, the long looked for piece came, was cordially
embraced of the Affectors of the discipline stood for; and being judged and
taken by him to be satisfactory, and a total rout thereby given to our party;
the Author thereof was pleased to give way, that I should have the sight and
perusal thereof, and to declare my thoughts concerning it. -- I went to the
Gentleman (to whom it was pretended to be sent for his satisfaction) and
desired a copy thereof, though there were no name to it, and I obtained my
desire without reluctance. And p. 116. Mr. W. says; The subject matter hereof
is of more general concernment, then mine or your particular, and therefore I
print it, for a public benefit. And p. 73. Surely you never intended this for
the public light, but the mischief you have done by your clandestine
dealing, and the high opinion that some men have conceived of your learning and
integrity, makes me print you, that men of blind credulity may see what you
are, and what the men of your pretension and practice, have for the justifying
of their new Model.

I shall give a plain but brief Narrative of the transaction of this
business. I was sundry times earnestly solicited by a Minister (Mr. N.) to let
him have an account of my judgment concerning suspension, which he desired on
the behalf of Mr. M. (the Gentleman Mr. W. mentioned) an endeared friend of
the said Minister. I told him I had nothing written about it, but some short
animadversions I had long ago made for my own use, upon Mr. Humphrey his first
piece on this subject. Which upon entreaty I lent to him: and it should seem
by what Mr. W. says, p. 115. they were communicated to the Gentleman
aforesaid, and without my knowledge to Mr. W. Being again and again,
importunately moved by the Minister aforesaid, to state the Question, and give
in my opinion thereon, more distinctly; I at last consented to endeavor
somewhat therein; the which I finished at the house of the said Minister, being
occasionally there one night. Upon his further desiring that with my leave,
this paper might be communicated to Mr. W. I permitted the same, if by the
Gentleman aforesaid, it should be thought fit; being certified that upon Mr. M.
his representing to his Minister Mr. W. how he was unsatisfied in the doctrine
of the general admission contended for; Mr. W. for the satisfaction of his
Parishioner had showed himself willing and desirous to admit of a collation
with some Ministers of a different judgment from him therein. (as I have to
show under the hand of Mr. M. the Gentleman aforesaid.)

And indeed I was cordially desirous to have the controversy searched into to
the very bottom, as being of great moment, and my self sufficiently
inclinable (if I know mine own heart) to receive any convictions Mr. W. might
afford rationally to sway me to his part, as the most desirable upon many
outward accounts, if it could but appear to be warrantable; which made me the
more willing to consent to the Requests aforesaid. Now when this Paper of mine
by Mr. M. was communicated to Mr. W. Mr. M. has certified me under his hand.
that Mr. W. (in stead of returning a private answer as was expected for a
candid brotherly impartial discussion of the point) as if he had gotten some
mighty advantage, with abundance of triumphing and insulting expressions, gave
out he would print it. And further, Mr. M. attests under his hand in these
words, And whereas some of Mr. W. his friends had given out on his behalf, that
the reason why he answered this paper of Mr. Langleys in print, was, because
several Copies were dispersed of it in his parish, and he had no way to meet
with them, but this of printing his answer, I do hereby declare that this is
utterly untrue, I was so far from giving or suffering Copies to be taken of it
that to my knowledge I never showed the paper to any in the parish but himself;
and there were no Copies of it extant among us (I my self not so much as
reserving a Copy) but that which was in his own hands, till they were printed
and published by him. T.M.

Many other passages Mr. M. has testified under his hand, but I shall omit
inserting the same here, in respect to Mr. W. whose disparagement I seek not,
to the Reader, to whom personal matters I know will be tedious, and to the
cause it self I defend, which needs not the infirmities of its opposers to
raise it self by. When I had intimation of the resolution for printing my
paper, I said I would not lift up my lip to desire a forbearance: I think I
could have been content to have seen my self rationally confuted. But when I
saw the answer, and how in stead of close answering the argument before him, he
did so pitifully extravagate, and so sedulously seemed to endeavor the
disgrace of my person, rather than the confutation of my cause, I was much
confirmed thereby in the opinion I had asserted. Let the equal Reader freely
judge herein.

(22)
Mr W. says, p. 150. Truly I have not done pious and renowned Timson the
honor I should, in omitting the many and material passages that I find in his
Epistle to the Reader, and every where so exactly set forth in his excellent
Book. It were pity but he should honor Mr. Timson as the Scholar did Zabbarel,
who being set to epitomize him, transcribed every word, saying, all was so
sweet he could leave out none. But some Palates count moldy cheese the best:
and the material passages Mr. W. has honored his renowned Timson with the
quotation of, are so unsavory and tainted, as will disgrace the judgment of
the Author and Citer of them, p. 37, 38, 99, 100. He calls your Church Officers
(says M. W.) Intruded Elders, etc. This forsooth is an honorable quotation.

It is not my business now to discuss the Controversy; whether any persons but
Ministers or preaching Presbyters may be chosen and designed by the Church, to
join with the ministers in the Ecclesiastical external government thereof? If
I should speak any thing concerning it (in this last Digression) I should
premise a distinction to be put betwixt what is appointed in Scripture by
divine institution, and command for all Churches at all times to observe, and
what is gatherable from Scripture precedents and passages, to have then been
lawfully used in the Church of God, and therefore may still lawfully be
imitated. Of this later sort are Lords-dayes, Collections, 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
Pastors and Teachers, as distinct offices allotted to several persons, Romans
12.7, 8, etc. Of which sort also I humbly conceive the Station of such as are
now called Ruling Elders, is to be accounted; not merely so an excogitation of
prudence, as if it had no footsteps in Scripture paterns, nor yet so absolutely
by divine appointment, as that all Churches sin, who in any times have not made
use of them. And this I take as a mean betwixt two extremes.

I shall not so much as name the Arguments commonly produced for the
Scripturalnesse and Reasonableness of their Office. I shall only crave leave
to offer one Scripture, which is not so much taken notice of as I think it
should be for the clearing this point, (having before warned the Reader that it
is not the name but thing I aim at.)

Acts 15. The Synod there mentioned, wrote Decretall Letters, after this
manner, v. 23. The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send greeting unto the
Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia, etc. And then
the Decree it self is recorded in the following verses. That which I would have
here observed, relating to the point in hand, is, that some under the name of
Brethren, are joined with the Elders, or Pastors, from whence arises this
Argument, viz.

If these (called) Brethren acted authoritatively in this Ecclesiastical
Decree, and yet were not private Christians, the Disciples or Members of
Jerusalem Church; then some select persons, not Ministers did act
authoritatively in Ecclesiastical government. But the former is true:
Therefore the later. In the Consequence of the Antecedent I see nothing likely
to be denied. The Minor I shall endeavor to prove in its two parts.

1. That these brethren acted authoritatively in this Ecclesiastical Decree, is
evinced by many of these strong Reasons, whereby the Reverend Assembly (in
their Answer to the Reasons of the Dissenting Brethren, concerning Presbyterial
Government, presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, p. 65.) do prove
that the Elders did act authoritatively as well as the Apostles: the which are
further improved by the London Ministers in their Jus Divinum Reg:
Ecclesiastici, p. 224. to evince that both the Elders and Brethren acted
authoritatively as well as the Apostles. The Elders and Brethren (say the
London Ministers) who were as authoritatively members of the Synod as the
Apostles, did in all points as authoritatively act as the Apostles themselves.

For 1. The letters containing the Synodical Decrees and Determinations, were
written in the name of the Elders and Brethren, as well as in the name of the
Apostles, verse. 23.

2. The Elders and Brethren as well as the Apostles, brand the false Teachers
for troubling the Church, subverting of souls, declaring that they gave the
false Teachers no suck Commandment to preach any such doctrine, v. 24.

3. The Elders and Brethren as well as the Apostles say, It seemed good to the
holy Ghost, and to us, v. 28.

4. The Elders and Brethren as well as the Apostles did impose upon the
Churches no other burden then these necessary things, v. 28.

In all which its manifest the proof is as strong for the joint authoritative
acting of the Brethren here, as it is for the Apostles and Elders. I speak of a
joint act in the same kind of power: how far the Apostles might excel the
Elders, or the Elders the Brethren in the degree of power in each respectively,
is not now enquired for.

All (I can think of) which may be objected against this proof is;

(1) That in diverse places the Authors of this synodical Decree are mentioned
under the name of the Apostles and Elders, without joining the Brethren with
them. As, 1. The Antiochian Delegates are in their Instructions directed to
make their address to the Apostles and Elders about their Question, v. 2. And
2. the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter, v. 6. And
3. the Decrees of this Synod are said to be such as were ordained by the
Apostles and Elders, which were at Jerusalem, Act. 16.4.

(2) That the Brethren may be named here, no otherwise then as in Paul's
Epistles Timothy, or Sosthenes, and sometimes all the Brethren with him, are;
which denotes only their consenting thereunto.

To the first of these I answer. 1. That its ordinary to name the whole from
the predominant, leading and more noble part. 2. These Scriptures do not say,
the Apostles and Elders only, excluding others were Authors of this Synodical
Determination; and therefore they are no prejudice to those other Texts, which
put in the Brethren with them.

To the second, I say, Though Paul join others with him in his Epistles
sometimes, yet, 1. the title of those Epistles bear his name only. 2. He
manifests in the Epistles themselves, that they are his only, speaking in the
first person therein. Gal. 1, 2, 6, 9, 10, etc. 1 These. 5.27. 2 These. 3.17. The
salutation of me Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle,
so I write. 3. If we had no such clear Reasons elsewhere to prove Paul only the
Author (under the Holy Ghost) of such Epistles, the joining others with him in
the Preface would be a sufficient ground of our taking them who are so
mentioned in the Preface, to have been joint Authors with him thereof. But now
here is nothing can be showed to invalidate the title of the Synodicall Decree,
in its strictest sense. Act. 15.23. 2. The Decree speaks all along in their
names which are prefixed thereunto. 3. Decrees and Laws speak most strictly
and properly; especially in the Titles and Prefaces thereof, which declare the
power whereby they are made and promulgated (as a Law made by Kings, Lords, and
Commons:) Although in familiar Epistles, there is ordinarily more liberty of a
larger expression.

2. The latter part of the Minor proposition, in the Argument I am upon, is
this, viz. That these Brethren were not private Christians, the Disciples or
Members of the Jerusalem Church.

1. This (I believe) will not be denied by our Brethren, either of the
Episcopal or Presbyterian judgment, if they be convinced that these Brethren
acted authoritatively in the Synod. (Which I think is clearly proved above.)
For no private Christian is allowed by them, as such, to have right of
authoritative suffrage in Ecclesiastical Councils.

2. I have only here against me, the Brethren of the Congregational way, who
(though from other Scriptures they own the Officers I dispute for, yet) here
say, that these Brethren were the members of the Jerusalem Church, as such. But
that I humbly conceive cannot be. The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren, v. 23.
are the same with the whole multitude, v. 12. And the Apostles and Elders with
the whole Church, v. 22. Now this whole Church, and whole multitude, must
either refer to the whole Church of Jerusalem, or to the whole synodical
Assembly only of that and other Churches there met together, (which the
Reverend Mr. Cotton in his book of the Keys, ( p. 54, 59.) is pleased to call
a Synod of Churches, or a Congregation of Churches, yea a Church of Churches.)
It cannot refer to the whole Jerusalem Church, because neither that whole
Church, nor the greater part thereof, could meet in one house (much less a
private house, as its probable this was,) to manage the synodical affairs
orderly; as appears by the great numbers of that Church recorded upon count,
120, Act. 1.15. 3000, Act. 2.41. 5000 men, Act. 4.4. here are above 8000; and
multitudes besides, Act. 2.42. and 5.14. and 6.7. as is more largely showed by
the London Ministers, and most excellently by the Reverend Assembly in their
Answer to the Reasons of the dissenting Brethren, where they undo the
Exceptions made against it, so solidly, learnedly, and perspicuously, that they
seem to have left no place for a colorable Reply. (Whereby (among other
Arguments) they demonstrate that the Jerusalem Church was a classical Church,
or a Church by association of sundry particular Congregations, called one
Church, Act. 8.1. and 11.22. and 15.4.) It remains therefore that the whole
Church and multitude, Act. 15. must be the synodical Assembly of the Apostles,
Elders and Brethren, which Brethren must needs be the Delegates of the
Brethren, or those who represented the Brethren, members of several Churches.
The Delegates of Antioch are expressly mentioned, v. 2. and probably there were
some from Syria and Cilicia, v. 23. who were as much concerned in the business
consulted about as Antioch was.

Thus far its evin^ed, that some of the Brethren (not preaching Elders) being
delegated and appointed by the Church, may according to Apostolical pattern,
authoritatively join with preaching Elders in acts of external government of
the Church. And then, if Presbyters with such delegated brethren, may be the
subject of Church power in higher Assemblyes and matters; it will easily thence
follow, such brethren may have and exercise a proportion of Ecclesiastical
power, in lower matters and Assemblyes. This Argument I humbly submit, (with
all else I have written) to the peaceably judicious. I shall conclude with the
34th Psalm, that these 22 Digressions may be attended with a refreshment
proportionable to the 22 Chapters of the Treatise above.

The 34th Psalm (in the original whereof the initiall Letters of the Verses
proceed Alphabetically, save only that the 5th Yerse beginning with He, ends
with Vau the next Letter, and so the Psalmist omitting Vau in the beginning of
the next Verse, goes on with Zain, etc. whereby it comes to pass, that the 22
Hebrew Letters being gone through and ending in the 21st Verse, the last verse
of the Psalm is super-numerary) rendered according to the Acrosticall conceit
of the Original.

1 At all times I the Lord will bless:
my mouth shall praise him dear.
2 Boasting my soul shall God confess:
which meek ones glad shall hear.
3 Come, magnify with me the Lord;
jointly exalt his Name.
4 Duly I sought the Lord: he heard,
And all my fears ore'came.
5 Eyeing him men received light:
their face no shame did see.
6 For this poor man cried, and Gods might
from troubles set him free.
7 Gods Angel round encampes them who
him fear, and gives them rest.
8 How God the Lord is, taste and know:
who trust in him are blessed.
9 In fear, serve God the Lord, each Saint:
who fear him he will not scant.
10 Known may be hungry Lions faint:
who seek God, no good want.
11 Learn of me, children, come to me;
I Will teach you the Lords fear.
12 Man, if thou life love, and to see
Days which much good do bear;
13 Never fail to keep thy Tongue from ill,
thy lips from words untrue:
14 Omit no good, no lust fulfill:
seek peace, and it pursue.
15 Pleasing to Gods eyes just ones are;
And their cry to his ears.
16 Quite contrary ill doers fare;
from earth their name God tears.
17 Right'ous men God hears, when they cry,
and preserves them from ill.
18 Soft hearts the Lord have to them nigh:
he saves the contrite still.
19 The Rigt'ous under griefs may groan;
God brings them out of all
20 Verily, he keeps every bone,
that not one broken fall.
21 Woe slayes the vile: who, wish the just ill
X times more themselves have.
22. Yet God keeps his: who trust him still
Zions King them shall save.

FINIS.
Reader,
THine ingenuity is not so much suspected, as that it should be counted needful
to give notice here of every mischance in some letters points or Accents. Its
hoped that those which might hinder or retard thine understanding of the
Authors meaning, are here corrected.

In Ep. Dedic. page 5. l. 18. read debarred. Of p. 13. l. 33. r. if we. p. 23.
l. 32. r. christianarum. In the Book, p. 2. and p. 4. dele the marks ' ' ' in
the margin. p. 6. l. 37. for there, r. then. p. 25, 27, 28, 73. for (...), r.
(...). p. 13. l. 6. for nor, r. or. p. 24. l. 7. r. proportion. l. 23. dele it.
p. 27. l. 14. r. consortio. l. 29. for none, r. now. p. 28. l. 22. for word, r.
world p. 32. l. 19. dele the note of a parenthesis. p. 35 l. 34 r. but requires
time. p. 36. l. 3. for their, r. the. p. 36. l. 29. for quare, r. quam. p. 37.
l. 11 for not what, r. not of what. p. 39. l. 9. r. contaminet. l. 10. r.
laelantur. l. 24. for vel plebe, r. ut plebe. p. 42. l. 33. for there, r. here.
p. 56. l. 32. for each, r. earth. p 58. l. 33. r. perhaps believers, and such
like tules may be attributed. p. 63. l. 41. r. signum. p. 64. l. 23. for to as,
r. to them as. p. 66. l. 6. for there, r. thine. l. 38. for thee, r. the. p.
71. l. 34. for honor r. know. p. 79. l. 38. dele of. p 80. l. 34. for 4. r, 1.
p. 85. l. 28. for sc, t. si. l. 37. r. ipse est. Nullus. p. 93. l. 40. for will
hereby. r. will not hereby. p. 95. l. 28. for that, r. the. p. 103. l. 23. for
had, r. hold. p. 109. l. 17. r. parentheses. p. 115. l. 2. r. thy help. l. 13.
for when, r. whom. p. 116. l. 39. r. made to my. p. 120. l. 27. for our, r.
the. p. 127. l. 34. r. appositc. p. 129. l. 12. for a, r. the. p. 130. l. 9. r.
continued. l. 10 r. and concluding. l. 34. r. shunned. p. 131. l. 3. r. Noon
light beams thy laws on me cast. p. 132. l. 33. for visibility, r. Risibility.
p. 134. l. 4. for excluded, r. included. l. 27. r. concerning. p. 135. l. 7.
for inscript, r. manuscript. p. 141 l. 33. add I reply. p. 142. l 2. for this,
r. his. p. 147. l. 6, 7. r. governors who were. p. 148. l. 38. for was, r.
will. p. 152. l. 31. r. considerably. p. 162 l. 1. r. entrusted. p. 177. l. 41.
for consequent r. inconsequent. p. 179. l. 35. for or peruseth, r. or would
peruse. p. 181. l. 15. for sit, r. fit. p. 183. l. 12. for seem to be, r. seem
not to be. p. 184. l. 20. r. ad Eccl. p. 185. l. 29. for when, r. whom. p. 187.
l. 20. for they, r. thus. p. 189. l 19 for Ait r. Aut. p. 191. l. 7. r.
consitetur, imitetur. l. 20. r. at last?) viz. l. 28. for cry, r. sing. p. 204.
l. 26. for Dei, r. Christi. p. 205. l. 17. for staying the, r. staying thee. p.
217. l. 11. r. Lords days collections.


