Lanseters Lance, FOR Edwards'es Gangrene: OR,

A ripping up, and laying open some rotten, putrified, corrupt, stinking Matter
in Mr. Thomas Edwards his Gangren, or book entitled, The second part of
Gangrena.

Wherein, amongst others, he has abused and belied Mr. John Lanceter, calling
him Peddler, and saying, that he opened the whole book of Ezra at a private
meeting in stead of opening his Pack, which is proved false, and other things
also.

So that in consideration of the particulars, judicious men may well conceive
the cause of his Gangren to be his blind ignorance of the truth, and his mad
malice against the well-affected conscientious people.

NEHEM. 6.8. Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as
thou say, but thou fainest them out of thine own heart.

2 TIMOTHY 2.16.17. Shun profane and vain bablings: for they will increase unto
more ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a Canker, [or, Gangren.]

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1646.

A little Crum for Mr. Cranford, the Licencer of Mr. Edwards'es Gangren.
Mr. Cranford to the Reader, expresses thus,

Reader, thou art presented with the second part of Gangrena, declaring some
other (not infirmities of the Saints, as some men call them, but) abominations
of men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.

Answer.
1. Observe here, how forward Mr. Cranford is to give credit to whatsoever Mr.
Edwards speaks, be it false or true, as if Mr. Edwards had purchased Mr.
Cranfords good word by a gift, thereby making his eyes blind; for a gift will
blind the eyes of the wise.

2. Observe Mr. Cranfords judgment of private meetings, to pray and preach, and
to confer one with another; it seems, they are abominations (in Mr. Cranfords
opinion) amongst the rest.

3. Observe his ungrounded harsh censuring of such men as do such things, that
they are Reprobate concerning the faith. But where is Mr. Cranfords charity all
this while, which should teach him, To judge nothing before the time.

John Lanseter.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHen Mr. Thomas Edwards his Book against Independencie and Toleration, came
forth, about four years ago, O what boasting there was then among the
Prelaticall party, and Temporizers, as if the day had been their own! But when
the woman came and struck the nail of Independency into the head of their
Sisera, with the Hammer of Gods holy word; then their sport was spoiled and
quasht, the effects whereof appears: for since that time he could never set
forth any thing but Gangrena, or such like stuff (as his Antipologia before
it, which the same party answered, and presented as a new years gift, that he
might break off his old sins, etc.) And what is Gangrena, (or the Gangren?) It
is a putrified, rotten, dead, and insensible soar, whose nature is to fret, to
the mortifying of that member that has it growing upon him. Therefore is that
which he produces, rightly called by him Gangrena: for the ripping up and
opening of which, this Lance was made, whereby the Christian Reader may see
that the bitter effects of persecution (or want of public toleration of the
true Religion) causes nothing but corruption and putrefaction, tending to
utter destruction. But happy is he that is forewarned by other men's harms.

Vale.
THE Introduction.
AS the nature of a Gangren is to spread it self to the endangering of the
body; even so is it with Mr. Edwards his Gangren: (which endangereth both his
body and soul, and others also) for he himself acknowledges in his preface
that this his second part is of the same nature, and kind with Gangrene, and I
think herein the man says true, though all is not true which he speaks or
writes; for if it were so, as it is not, then he would be that which he is not,
as may appear by this following relation.

For this second part of his Gangren coming to the hands of Mr. John Lanseter,
who perusing the same found it to be a book of tales, not so true, as new and
amongst the rest, he found a letter, dated from Clare in Suffolk March 30.
1646. but without the name of the party that sent it, even as almost all of his
letters are, which I have ground to suspect to be lying relatio^s, as this is.
Which, says M. Edwards, is a true Copy of a letter written from a worthy and
godly Minister in Suffolk, in the name, and by the consent and agreement of
other Ministers of the County at a meeting of theirs, and sent up by the hands
of a godly Minister in those parts, who delivered it to me;

After some tidings, the letter says.

This bearer can likewise tell you somewhat of Mr. Archer of Halsteed: Also of
one Lansister of Bury, a Pedlar, and of his opening the whole book of Ezra at a
private meeting, in stead of opening his pack, and of the prayer that followed
his Exercise, etc. It would be lost labor for me to make a further relation by
writing of these things, seeing you shall receive the truth morefully by word of
mouth, and by a faithful relater. After the letter he says;

Upon conference with the Minister who brought up this Letter, he related these
following passages to me, and I writ them presently as he spoke them. One
Lansister, in a private meeting at Bury, condemned all the Ministers of England
for the Sanballats and Tobiahs of this time, that hindered the building of the
Temple, resembling himself, and the Sectaries to those who would build the
Temple; but it was withstood by the Ministers, who hindered it: At that meeting
there was a plain godly man, a solid old Christian of Master Faircloths
Congregation who opposed him, and God was so mightily with him, that it turned
to the shame and reproach of this Lansister, and those who adhered to him:

This being so in Mr. Edwards'es book, Mr. Lanseter thought it meet to clear
himself as publikly as he had aspersed him, yet determined first to go to Mr.
Edwards to speak unto him about this in a peaceble way, which He did
accordingly, before he went out of London upon June the 29. and took Mr.
Edwards his book with him; who coming to Mr. Edwards his house, and a friend or
two more with him to be as Testimonies, He asked him saying: Sir, do you know
me? No, says Mr. Edwards, I do not know you; Sir (says he) my Name is
Lanseter, and I came from Bury, and you have mentioned me in your book; I have
so, says Edwards: Sir, says Lanseter, do you know that those things are
truths which you have written here of me? They are none of mine says Edwards
but the relation of others.

Lanseter: That's all one, seeing you are the divulger thereof, and this book is
yours: Sir, says Lanseter, what if these things be proved false: how then?

Says Edwards, it will not lie upon me, but upon those from whom I had the
relation: Sir, says Lanseter I pray you tell me their names. I will send,
says Edwards, first to those from whom I had the relation, and I believe that
they are able to make it good. well, says Mr. Lanseter, I pray you tell me
their names, or show me the letter; I know not where to find it, says
Edwards, but I will (when I have time) look for it.

Sir, says Mr. Lanseter, I am able to prove that there were not such things as
you have related here.

It may be, says Edwards, you are not the man; Then it was testified that
there was no such name in Bury, beside him, and therefore he was the man that
they meant. Moreover, (says one present) Mr. Edwards, if one should write
false things of you, and then say he did not mean you, he meant another, would
that excuse him? and if he be not the man, who is?

Then, says Mr. Edwards No, it may be you are not the man, neither is your
name so, but you come in his name; for I have been served so by diverse before
now? Says Mr. Lanceter: Sir it may be you have: but my name is Lanceter, and I
dwell in Bury, and I am the man, and there is no other of that name;

How shall I know that? (says Edwards:) another that stood by, said, I know
the man, and his name is Lanseter, and he dwells in Bury, and moreover I know
the man to be an honest man, and he tells you his name, but you have set no name
to the relation, and I have ground to believe that which Mr. Lanceter says is
true; but therefore in the mean while your letter that has no name, will go
under the notion of a Libel.

You say here, I am a peddler. Its well known I am no peddler, but I served to my
Master a Mercer 11. years and a half, and do keep shop in Bury; but let that
pass, says Lanceter: you say that I opened the wh^l book of Ezra at a private
meeting, in stead of opening my pack; Sir this is untrue also: as those that
were there present can justify.

Says one by, what a base abuse is this, that you should call him pedlar in
such a disgraceful manner? [I know him to be a Shopkeeper in Bury;] And to say
he opened the whole book of Ezra at a private meeting in stead of opening his
pack, what should his pack do at the private meeting?

Then said Lanseter, you say that I condemned all the Ministers of the Church
of England for the Sanballats and Tobiases of this time: Sir, I did not, this
is false also: but suppose (says Lanseter) that I had; what evil had I done?

Then you had done very wickedly (says Edw.) and deserved to be called in
question for it, and its the Sectaries that hinder reformation, and not the
Ministers of the Church of England.

Says another that stood by: what was Sanballet and Tobias? were they not
hinderers of the blessed work? And what are the Ministers of the church of
England, are they not hinderers also of the blessed work of reformation? And
had Sanballet and Tobias any calling? And what calling have these, any at all?
yea, says Edwards, that they have, You must go to Room for it then, says the
party. No not so, says Edwards: yea, but you must, says the party, or else
you will have no calling at all; did you ever read Mr. Samuel Rutherfords book,
there he fetches his Church and ministry from Rome: Then Edwards refused to
reason with him about it. Neither have you speld my name right; for it should
not be Lansister, but Lanseter.

Lans. If these things which you have here related, be false, which I am able
to prove to be so, I pray you vindicate me in your next fruits that you set
forth. But Mr. Edwards would not assent unto that, then said one by to Mr.
Lanseter: Mr. Lanseter seeing that Mr. Edwards will not vindicate you in his
next fruits upon your proving the relations to him to be false, which is a very
reasonable request of yours; Now you know what you have to do, even to publish
your own vindication to the world, as publikly as he has cast aspersions upon
you.

After this Mr. Lanseter went into his own Country again, and sent up his
vindication, and the observations that he raised from some part of the first
Chapters of Ezra, at a private meeting, that so reasonable men may judge
whether the things therein are truth or no: Then some of his friends went
again on the 27. of July to Mr. Edwards, to know his resolution whether he
would deliver up the names of the parties from whom he had the relation, and
the name of the messenger that brought it? but in stead of doing it, he showed
himself agrieved, that the party demanding it came with 2. or 3. witnesses,
and fell a railing on them saying, you bring here 2. or 3. witnesses, I know
your way of lying. Then said the party, Tax us if you can with lying in the
least, yea, in the least, with any one lie, if you can: Then says he, I desire
to talk no more with you, nor to have any thing to do with you, you may be
gone, I will not have any thing to do with you, nor do I desire to meddle any
more with you. But says another to Mr. Edwards: we will have to do with you as
a liar and a slanderer.

Now here follows the substance of what Mr. Lanseter spoke from Ezra Chap. 1.
verse 1. at the private meeting of honest men in Bury, about the beginning of
march last 1645. which was written by Mr. Lanseter himself, and sent up to
some of his friends in London, who now have thought it meet to set it forth to
the view of the world, that so the well affected may judge of it, and see if it
deserve those aspersions, and censures which Mr. Edwards has cast upon it in
his second part of Gangrena.

The substance of what was spoken by me (JOHN LANSETER) at a meeting of honest
men in BURY, about the beginning of March last, 1646.
AT our first meeting in the morning, when there were about twenty come
together, after some discourse among us, those men who had appointed the day,
made the motion to begin the work that they came to do, to which I answered on
this wise, and said, Friends, I was invited to come this day among you, and I
am come; but I desire to acquaint you what my end is, namely this, I cannot
join with you in this duty, to keep it as a day of humiliation; for I have had
very little warning: but I can join with you in prayer, judging you godly men;
but you may (according to your purposes) go on in the duty, and I not be
prejudicial to you, To which they agreed, and then questioned among themselves
who should begin, and agreed upon it to persuade me to begin. To which I
answered, and said, Friends, I think it not convenient for me, the duty and day
being appointed by you, and I being different from you in some things, I think
it were fit for some of you to begin. But they held to their agreement, to
persuade me. Then I saw it was their earnest desire, and so I did apprehend it
to be a call of God, and therefore I demanded from them, What they would have
me do? and whether they would have me read any part of the Scripture, or go on
in prayer without reading? To which they made answer, They thought it very fit
to read a portion of Scripture: For (says one) it may be God has made known
something to this our friend, which he has not done to us, and we ought to be
willing to learn from any by whom God will teach us. Then I asked if we should
desire a blessing upon the word? to which they answered, that it was a fitting
thing. Then I propounded this to them, that I desired, that if there were any
thing spoken that day contrary to the Rule, it might freely be objected against
in love, that it might be cleared; and they agreed thereunto, and liked the
motion very well.

Then we joined together, and sought God for a blessing upon our coming
together, and that he would give us to understand his mind in his word. And
after we had so done, then

I opened the Bible, and read the first Chapter of Ezra, which contains in it,

1. The occasion of King Cyrus his proclamation, That the word of the Lord by
the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, in the 29. of Jeremiah the 10. verse.
For thus says the Lord, that after seaventy years be accomplished at Babylon,
I will visit you, and perform my good word to you, and cause you to return from
this place.

2. The Proclamation it self, Thus says Cyrus, King of Persia, Who is there
among you of all his people, his God be with him, let him go up to Jerusalem
which is in Judah, and build the House of the Lord God, he is the God which is
in Jerusalem.

3. An exhortaion to the people where these Jews dwelt to help them with
supplies for their journey to Jerusalem.

4. The effects that were wrought by the proclamation and exhortation, Then
rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the Priests and
Levits, with all those whose spirit God had raised to go up to build the house
of the Lord which is at Jerusalem. Then all that were about them, strengthened
their hands with such supplies as they were exhorted unto by the King.

5. The concurrence of the King with them, he brought forth the vessels of the
house of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had put in the House of his God.

1. Here is to be noted the great care of God over his people, not to let them
lie any longer in captivity then the appointed time, 70. years. The word of
comfort he uttered to his people, it was both spoken and written before, that
so they should not faint under Gods corrections, but at the end they should be
delivered: For the wed of the wicked shall not always lie upon the lot of the
righteous, lest they should put forth their hands to iniquity. Now was the time
indeed that God did as is said in the 40. of Isaiah, verse 1. Comfort ye my
people, and speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and tell her her warfare is past,
etc.

2. Observe the way of Gods working deliverance for them, it was by
over-powering the heart of Cyrus, a heathen King, to give them liberty.
Sometimes God will make use of instruments to bring to pass his own designs,
yet not out of any real love he bears to them, but out of love to his people.

3. Observe also the noble frame of spirit that was in a great part of the
people of God, that they (with Paul) did not consult with flesh and blood, but
were obedient to the will of God, and rose up presently, according to Eccles.
9.10. What thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might.

4. Observe what great encouragement they had by the King, and by the people.

First, by the King two ways: 1. He exhorted others to help them: and 2. He
himself delivered out to them the vessels of the House of the Lord, which had
been carried to Babylon, (which if they had been destroyed, and the people to
make all new) it might have been a long time before they should have been in a
fit posture to worship God. And this was great encouragement to the people.

Quest. But what was the reason that God gave power into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, to carry them away into Babylon; and the vessels of the House
of the Lord, to put them into the hands of his God, and to use the people so
hardly as they were used.

2. Quest. How did they carry themselves toward God in Babylon.

3. What was Gods end in bringing them out of Babylon again.

1. Answ. To the 1. I answer, it was for their sins, and rebellions against
God; for poluting the house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem, and
for abussing the Prophets that came unto them, and for dispising their words:
therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, 2 Chronicles., 6. and
14.15.16.17. and they burnt the house of the Lord, see verse. 19. and they
became servants to him, and his Sons, nay slaves, a sad change for them to be
carried from a place of peace, to a place of sorrow, from a place of freedom to
a place of thraldom, see the 1 of Lamenta. the 2. verse. she weepeth sore in the
night, and so through the Chapter we may see how God chastises her.

Answ. to 2. Quest. She carried her self obediently, humbly, and boar
patiently the hand of God, see Jer. 39 5.6 7. and Lament. 3 from 22. to 29.
verse, and several places in that book; but though they found no rest they
waited for his salvation,

Answ. to 3. Quest. What was Gods end in bringing them out of Babylon again at
the appointed time.

1. It was to perform his faithfulness to his people; for so he had promised
after 70. years was fulfilled to bring them back again.

2. He brought them out for this end that they might build him an house in the
place appointed, that so he might manifest himself unto his people, by
communicating special blessings unto them: And God had declared his love to
Zion; how that he made it his peculiar habitation where he said he would dwell,
Psalm. 132.13.14.15. In Moses days after God had delivered his people out of
Egypt the Lord desired them to build him a Tabernacle, and he promised to dwell
with his people, and so he did, and his glory rested upon his Tabernacle, and
after that, they were settled in Canaan, God commanded them to build his Temple,
and it was built in Solomans days, and God manifested his glory therein; And
now is the time that God desires that his spiritual house should be built
that he might manifest his glory to the sons of men that love his name and take
hold of his Covenant and join themselves unto him, such as these indeed are the
only meet subjects to build him a house; Note hear how that none were to build
this holy house in Ezraes time but such whose spirits God had raised up to go
up even as it was in the building of the first house spoken of in the 35. of
Exodus for after the^e came others, ( Ezra 4.1.2.3. verses) and such as
professed they were seekers of their God as they did, and sacrificers to their
God as they were a long time: yet they were not admitted, And because they
could not be received, therefore they sought with all their might and policy
to weaken their hands, and by false informations prevailed for a time until
the Lord stirred up Haggay and Zecheriah to speak prophetically unto them, and
to encourage them in the work, and then they went on in it, and Ezra blessed
God (in the 7. Chap. 1.27.) for the faver of the King toward him in the
business; And Darius also gave free toleration (in the 6. Chap. 1.7. verse,)
that the house of God might be built in his place, and it was finished within
four years, (se Haggai. 1.1. compared with the 6. of Ezra 1.15. verse,) and
after it was finished, there was joy, se verse 16. and non were admitted to the
passover but such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness
of the heathen of the Land to seek the Lord God did eat, see Ezra 6.21.22. Now
let us consider of these things, and call them over, and examine, whether we
may not now leave Jsrael, and rellatively compare our selves, and our Estate
that we have been in of late under Antichristian darkness to be as Jsrael was
in their Captivity? and whether it be not now with us, as it was with them in
their coming out?

First, Let us consider and examine whether we were Jsraellites before, or
whether we were Heathens, and whether we may not rather go under the name of
Christians in apostasy, according to the tenor of the Scriptures, and are now
only required to seek out the good old way and return it.

2. Use. Examine whether we have been in Captivity or no? have we not bin in
spiritual Babylon: which has bin worse then temporal Babylon was to Jsrael?
have we not been deprived of spiritual privileges? have not our enemies been
the chief? have they not made us to cry by their heavy burdens? have they not
made our lives bitter unto us? have they not given us gall to drink? I mean
their filthy tradissions, without which we could scarce enjoy one Ordinance,
which thing was to our grief.

3. Use. Examine whether God has not now by his providence so ordered it, and
wrought in the hearts of men in authority to proclaim liberty for us to get out
of that slavery, by taking away these heavy burdens, and by using means to
prevent them, who would impose the like, or worse burdens upon us; for which
liberty we are bound to be thankful, and to improve it to the best advantage
for the glory of God.

4. Use. Examine whether it be not Gods end, in working these for us, that now
we should build him an house for himself to dwell in? and whether it be not
his desire to have a visible house upon earth now in the time of the Gospel as
in the time of the law? if not, wherefore did Christ himself and by his
Apostles endeavor by their preaching and working miracles to bring men and
women to believe, and then to build them, [or to build of them several
spiritual houses or Churches] that they might be fit habitations for himself
to dwell in, to communicate unto them special blessings, not only the
gleanings which others may have, but even handfulls of refreshments, ( Ruth the
2. and 16.)

5. Consider whether God require any other now to build him an house, but such
as he has made capable. I mean such which the spirit of God and the word which
is the sword of the spirit, have had a work upon to fit and square them for
the building, even such as God has made willing, and whether God will axcept
of any others in the work? Christ sent his Disciples to gather in such as might
be found fit for his Kingdom, and such as Christ embraced to be of his
Kingdom the Holy Ghost is pleased to call them Saints, precious, a peculiar
people, a chosen Generation, a royal priesthood, a spouse of Christ's, Children
of the most high, heiers of the Kingdom, a Temple, a City in whom God the
Father will dwell, and in whom Christ will take pleasure, and in whom the
spirit will abide, and whom the spirit will lead, direct, and comfort.

Now this I would feign know, whether any are fit for such a work of building
an house for God to dwell in, but such as we may warrantably judge to be Saints?

Obj. You will answer (it may be) that the Church of Corinth was not all such
meterialls, and Simon Magus was not such a ^ne.

Answ. I answer to this, and will affirm it, and prove it, that neither the
Church of Corinth, nor Simon Magus, nor any members of any of the Churches
mentioned in the old or new Testament were admitted members, but were first in
charity (and that grounded upon a rule out of the word) judged to be Saints,
and fit materials. Therefore now look into the Parish Churches, and see if it
were so in the constytution of them, I pray compare things together, and see if
you can find the Church of Christ, and the Parish Churches agree, either in
their constitution, or in their doctrine, or in their discipline; now if you
find a suitableness between them in all this, then well and good, but if you
find not the first nor the last, then it is bad, and sad, And consider whether
there be any hope of bringing the Parish Churches into a rightposture,
according to the rule, or whether their be not clear resemblances of upholding
her still in her foundation, though there may be amendment in her discipline.

6. Consider whether God do not require his people now to be active in this
business; and that from these places, Acts 9.26. and 1 Pet. 2.5. and 2 Cor.
6.17. 2 Cor. 8.5.

And consider whether (after it has pleased God to give his people to
understand the way that he will be worshipped in,) if that an agreement between
them to walk in that way together, according to the rule of the Gospel, be nor
the formal cause of their being a Church; if it be such a number as that they
are in a capacity of enjoying all ordinances, and of performing all duties? And
I would fain know wherein lies the evil of engaging my self by covenant, to
do those duties which God commands me in his word to do, first, to himself;
secondly, to my brother. Take notice of this which Solomon says, Prove. 10.29.
The way of the Lord is strength to the upright; but destruction shall be to the
workers of iniquity.

This is the substance of what I spoke, and then according as I propounded
before I began, so I did after I had done, that if there were any thing to be
objected against, there was free liberty for any to speak: and no man objected
against any thing.

Reader,
NOte that whereas Mr. Edward; has set down, in his second part of Gangrena,
that at this meeting one of Mr. Farcloths congregation opposed Mr. Lanceter,
and that God was so mightily with him, that it turned to the shame and reproach
of this Lanceter, and those who adhered to him. This is very false; And Mr.
Lanceter spoke since with the two men of Mr. Faircloth congregation, whose
testimonies concerning this matter, are sufficient to disprove Mr. Edw. his
relation in the sight of the Sun; which testimonies taken before witness, Mr.
Lanceter has also sent in manner and form as follows.

This 23. of June, 1646. one of the auditors of Mr. Faircloth said to me before
two witnesses at Newmarket, that he had indeed spoke of thee Meeting to some of
his friends, but he never said to any man, that I opened the whole book of
Ezra, or that he said to any, that he did oppose me; for, said he, I spoke not
a word to you, (nor did any man there in his hearing,) or that I compared the
Ministers of England to the Sanbalats and Tobiahs'es.

The other Auditor of Mr. Faircloths, on the 25. of June, said before two men,
to me, that he never spoke word to any man of the meeting, neither did he
oppose me; and I heard (says he) nothing to be objected against.

Several observations gathered from some observable expressions in Mr. Edwards
book called, The second part of Gangrena.
The first expression of Mr. Edwards in the beginning, is, A fresh and further
discovery of the errors, heresies, blasphemies, and dangerous proceedings of
the Sectaries of this time.

1. Observe Mr. Edw. his policy in beautifying his book in the beginning with
such high expressions as if he would possess men at the first sight, that
there was never the like heard of; and this occasions the sale of his book,
amongst the Sect of Antichristian Presbyterians.

2. Observe how he goes about to work in men's understandings, as if he were an
infallible man, and holds no errors, but would clear himself of all, and lay
all upon those that dissent from him.

3. Observe how that Mr. Edwards has also a stronger desire to discover the
weakness of those that are godly, then to discover the wickedness and
abominations of Drunkards, and Swearers, and Idolaters, and Superstitious
persons, and of Witches; and he makes no mention of these, I marvel he has
not the Art to find out Witches! he has other Arts.

2. Mr. Edwards to the Reader speaking of Mr. Goodwin, calls him, A hairy,
rough, wild, red man, an uncircumcised Philistin, GOLIATH GOODWIN.

1. Observe the strength of the man's malice to one who is known to my self,
and to a great part of the kingdom, to be a man of worth, a man of great
parts, a man who has held out more light to others, then many others have
done, a man who has given clearer testimony of his godliness, then Mr.
Edwards has done, as far as I and many more can see for the present, yet see
how Mr. Edwards is pleased to use him, even worse then he ought to use a
heathen; see how he scoffs at his person, which I suppose all that know Mr.
Goodwin and Mr. Edwards, will prefer Mr. Goodwin to be the comlier man.

2. Observe how bold Mr. Edwards is, to take upon himself to sit in the room
of God, to judge the heart of Mr. Goodwin, which none can nor ought to do but
God alone.

3. I am confident (says he) that among all the Presbyterian Ministers and
chief Members, who endeavored and acted for that way since Presbyterians, the
Sectaries cannot instance in one man like to hundreds and thousands of their
Sectaries, either for errors in judgment, or loosnesse in life.

1. Observe his u^grounded confidence in his own party, as if they were all
without errors, and holy in their lives and conversations, when as I on my own
knowledge, and many more do know, several Ministers that are very loose in
their lives, and altogether unfit for that work, and yet hold strongly to the
Presbyterian way: and I suppose it were easy to find out in Suffolk and
Norfolk another Century of Scandalous Ministers.

2. Observe how he speaks nothing by his own knowledge, but all by relation;
and if all his relation prove like to this which he has written of me, what
will the man do?

3. Observe what it is that casts the scale in this man's judgment, not the
errors themselves, but Independency or Presbyterianisme. If an Independent,
Edwards will sound his trumpet against him, though his error be never so small.
If a Presbyterian, then silence, all is born withal. Mark what a fit man this
is to be a Judge!

Mr. Edwards says thus, It is much against my genius and temper to do it
(namely to bring men's names upon the stage) for naturally (says he) I do not
love to offend any, or to contend with any man, but to comply and please all.

Now mark the man in his carriage and first observe whether there be any
resemblance in his life and conversation that he is of Paul's temper, to become
all unto all, that he might gain some, to be weak with the weak, etc. or
whether it be not more clear, that the man is of a very bad temper, and
complieth with men for his own ends, for profit and preferment.

2. Observe and see whether he do not plainly lie in this expression; for it
is evident that he uses no means to comply with the Independent party, but all
means to make them odious to the Parliament, and to the world.

Mr. Edwares in the 20 page.
A true copy of a letter written to me by a worthy and godly Minister in
Suffolk, in the name and by the consent and agreement of other Ministers of
the County, at a meeting of theirs.

First, Observe, the thing was of great wayght and moment, and stood them in
hand to look about them; for if this be suffered, think they in time we shall
lose all our gayn, and such as these will steal away our honor, therefore
come on, let us consent together, and give notice of this business, to our
Goliath, or to our stalking horse, and by him shoot it abroad to the
discouraging of them in this way, if it be possible.

Secondly, Observe and take notice of this act of theirs, and see if it had not
been their duty to have sent to me, and so to have reproved me in a loving way,
rather then to publish it at Gath, especially seeing I was their neigbour,
living in the same County, they might have come, or sent unto me, to reprove me
for my evil they would allege against me, and I should have taken it
thankfully.

Thirdly, Observe from the letters it self, Worthy Sir, your Brethren in these
parts desire to pray so God for you, and for that courage he has given you to
encounter, etc. See how they bolster up the poor man in an evil way, and
encourage him to go on in such a way as some of themselves dare not go on in,
(having (I hope) more grace, and seeing further.) They acknowledge themselves
his brethren; why? because they are Presbyterians. And truly, it appears to
me, that they are partakers of his evil deeds; and if this be not an evil
deed, to be an incendiary to set the kingdom on fire, and to stir up man
against man, then I am deceived.

He says page 21. Of one Lansister of Bury, a Pedlar, and of his openinn the
whole book of Ezra at a private meeting, in stead of opening his pack, and of
the prayer that followed his exercise, etc. Mark these expressions, how wisely
they are set down, and

1. Observe they with a lie advance me in saying, I opened the whole book of
Ezra, which I fear none of them are able to open in a months time, but I
desire to be thankful for what I have received.

2. Observe, I did it (say they) in stead of opening my pack. I would they had
expressed a little further, and a little wiser, Whether they think it had been
convenient for me, either to have brought all my shop of ware to the meeting?
or my horse laden, as I drive him to Market? Surely, it had been absurd to
have done either of them both. But see and

3. Observe whether these expressions did not come from them as from men
overwhelmed with grief, to think that such a one as I am, should according to
the grace which is given me, open a portion of Scripture to the edification of
the hearers.

Further, he says, that I condemned all the Ministers of England for the
Sanballets and Tobiahs of this time, that hindered the building of the Temple,
that I resembled my self and the Sectaries to those that would build the
Temple. And there was a plain godly man, a solid old Christian of Mr.
Fairhlot^s congregation, who opposed me, and God was so mightily with him, that
it turned to the shame and reproach of me, and those who adhered to me. Now let
every rational man consider, and weigh-things; for in the first place, I deny
that I opened the whole book of Esra: 2. I deny that I once named Tobiah and
Sanballet: 3. I deny that there was any man that opposed me in any one thing
that I spoke either out of Ezra, or in prayer, and this I shall prove; and in
all these things, I appeal to those that heard me See Mr. Faircloths 2 hearers
vindication of I. Lanseter.
. But as I said before, let every man consider and see whether it be not as
probable, that the Priests of the Church of England are the hinderers as any
any other men in the kingdom.

2. Observe and consider, whether if profit and honor went along with that way
which these speak so much against, whether it be not probable many of them
would have been forward in it long ago.

Mr. Edwards in the 179. page, says, That we may see or learn what is like to
become of them and of their way, and what their end will be, namely confusion
and desolation, and if ever God spoke by me (says he) I am confident he will
curse this Faction of Sectaries in England, and cast them out as an abominable
branch, me thinks I see their day a coming and drawing near. And in 180.
page, I shall (says he) towl the great Bell for the Sectaries Anabap, etc. and
hope shortly to ring it out, and to preach their funeral Sermon, and rejoice
at the breaking up of their Conventicles. Now consider and

1. Observe, the man is in good hope to see the rooting out of all those that
are for any way but his Presbytery way: he has not so much patience as
Gamaliel, (Act. 5.38.39.) to wait, But he longs for their ruin.

Secondly, Observe how he builds his confidence upon a suposition, Indeed, a
mere suposition (says he If ever God speak by me? truly I question it) and so
do many more: and I am persuaded that the man will be frustrated of his
expectations, and then I hope he will question indeed, whether ever God speak
by him?

Thirdly, Observe how he has bespoke two offices, first, to ring the bell, out
of which uses to be matter of profit to the under Officer: see he is hungry
after money. Secondly, to preach their Funeral Sermon, which uses to be twenty
shillings for a man of some rank: but now, it being for so many in the
Kingdom, and for some of great quallity too: he hopes to be rewarded, with as
great a living as doctor Burges has, at which he seems to envy.

Mr. Edwards in the 185. page, says he, Independency is a faxion, because all
these following sorts and ranks come into it.

1. Needy broken decayed men, who know not how to live.

2. Guilty, suspicious, obnoxious men who have been, or are in the lurch, and
in fear to be questioned: Independency being a Sanctuary where such fly and be
sat

3. Ambitions, proud covetous men.

4. Libertines and lose persons who have a desire to live in pleasure, and
enjoy, their lusts, etc.

1. Observe how Mr. Edwards is conceited of his own new found way, newly trimed
over, and therefore casts dirt upon every way also, because he would have all
turn into him, to his crooked ways, as in Prove. 2.12.15.

2. Observe how he dispiseth poor and needy men, and is resolved to keep them
out of his way, why? because they have no fleece for him.

3. Observe whether this man is not blind, for he cannot see the guilty,
suspicious, obnoxious persons that are in his own way, let Mr. Edwards bring
forth if he can, what Independent Church has ever secured such persons from
the law of the Land.

4 Observe how the man contradicts himself to say, proud, covetous persons:
For he says in the same book that there is an Independent Minister that has
50. l. a year from 3. or 4. men, it seems they are not covetous men.

5. Observe how the man mistakes in his own expression, to say they are
Libertens and loose persons that desire to enjoy their lusts when as it is
known they receive non but such as either the whole Church or a great part know
to be conciencious; And it is well known that if an Independent Church, cast
out any for some great office, the same parties can go to some parish Church in
England, and never be questioned at all: Thus the Independents excremen^s
becomes these Presbyterians ornaments, Mr. Edwards in the 194. page, says,
that God will make them com (viz.) those who are the Antitipes to those Jews
namely namely the S^^^^^^s, Anabaptists, Independents, etc. and worship before
the feet of the Scots, and that God says, I will adorn thee. (to wit) (the
Scots) and thou shall have victories over these enemies, and thou shall enrich
thy self with their spoils, and further he says, O Church of Scotland, and
all ye that are for reformation Presbyteriall, nourish your hopes and let not
your hearts be troubled etc.

1. Observe whether the man do not flatter with the Scots, and speak more from
Mr. Brightmans rela^ion, then from his own ability, to make out the thing from
the word

2. Observe whether it do not appear by Mr. Edwards expressions, that he does
what he can to insence the Scots against the Parliament and Army, and against
all in the Kingdom, that cannot submit to his yoke, and if ever the Scots
should do any wrong to England, (as I hope they will not) whether they may not
(with us) say, Mr. Edwards encouraged them in it.

3. Observe how he exorts his own party, to nourish their hopes, (without
giving any ground out of the word) Mr. Edwards in 198. page, says in his 4.
Corrolary Since then we see from all these errors, herises, blaspheamous
proceedings of the Sectaries, that Magistrates, Ministers, and Masters, other
Christian of Families, parents, etc. have been a sleep, and two careless,
that so many tears have been both sowed, and are grown up to such a head, that
all the beasts of the field come to devour, (viz.) Heretics, Scismeticks,
(resembled to Wolves and Foxes) entering, not sparing the flock etc.

1. Observe whether he do not cast a reproach upon the Parliament, being she
chief Magistracy of the Kingdom, by saying they have been asleep.

2. Observe whether he does not by this insinuate into the Magistracy, to stir
them up out of their sleep (as he says) to set about destroying and rooting
out all those that do dissent from his (as he supposes) infallible way.

Mr. Edwards in his 158. page, says, The Sectaries are men of large
conscienceses, and have consciences like Ostriges stomachs, that can digest
Iron, can bear with them that do evil, or any thing that is evil, so it
will promote the Catholic cause. Mark and

1. Observe, how can this man possibly pluck out the moat out of his brothers
eye, when a beam is in his own eye. And see how he goes about to hide his own
sin, by laying a large charge upon other men, and consider whether Mr.
Edwards, and them of his way, have not much larger consciences then any of the
Independent way and can swallow, and digest that which the Independents cannot.

1. Whether it does not appear in this, that they have received Tithes so many
years together, amounting to great sums of money yearly, and not only the
tenth of the rent of Land, but of poor men's labor, and of the labor of their
servants, and of the labor of their cattle, and have done little or nothing
for it, and yet can digest it well, and are always like the Horse-leach,
crying, Give, give; and if men put not into their mouths, they prepare war
against them.

2. Whether does it nor appear (in this) that they are always ready and in a
fit posture to act to act the decrees, and follow the directions of Councels
and Synods, though they be contrary to the Rule of the Word; witness former
and present actings of theirs.

Postscript.
READER, note that Mr. Edwards in his Gangrene tells many tales of Gods
judgments upon the Sectaries; I can tell stories also of the Sectaries (I mean
of Gods Judgments upon the Members of the Church of England) as well as he. And
if I prove not mine, better then he proves diverse of his, I shall have cause to
be ashamed. Now, forasmuch as Mr. Edwards tells me, that after I published my
vindication, he would publish the names of those that helped him to this
relati^n of me, which J have disproved: J will wait to see what the man will
say to all this, and in the mean while rest,

Thine (in truth.) JOHN LANSETER.

FINIS.

