The Love and Faithfulness of the Scottish Nation The Excellency of the
Covenant, The Union between England and Scotland, cleared, by Collections, From
the Declarations of Parliament, and, Speeches of several Independent Brethren.
By THeophilos.

Jerem: 34.8. The King Zedekiah made a Covenant with the people, v. 11.
Repented: v. 17. Therefore thus says the Lord, v. 18. I will give those men
that have broke my Covenant, v. 20. into the hands of their Enemies. John
15.14.Ye are my friends, if ye do what soever I command you. The way to keep
all things in Union, is for every man to keep within his bounds; the swelling
beyond tends to the breaking all in pieces. Mr. Bur: Irenicum p. 112. Nihil
perniciosius quam divisio, nihil melius quam Vnio. Plato de Rep. Si pacem
diligis, Belli ne feceris mentionem. Sen. de Moribus. LONDON: Printed by F:
Neile for Tho: Underhill at the Sign of the Bible in Woodstreet. 1646.

The Preamble.
THe times we are fallen into are times of Fear, and therefore had need be
times of Prayer: It is the best use a Christian can make of fears to turn them
into Prayers: Never more profession and less practice since the creation of
all things: Confusion and desolation is at hand, yet who considers it? How are
men's tongues and pens employed to work division, not between man and man,
Brother and Brother only; but between Kingdom and Kingdom, and between such
Kingdoms as are obliged by the strongest bonds, this state of mortality is
capable of: this is it that heightens our misery, and without timely prevention
will work our ruin: God will (certainly) avenge the quarrel of his Covenant.
It is not many days since a Paper came abroad by a namelesse Author, hinting
at the Brotherly Respects of England to Scotland, with an addition of large
Encemions of this Nation for their voluntary and free assistance, in the times
of their progenitors, when they were in great distress; since which there are
two several Pamphlets, bending their strength against the City Remonstrance;
one of which Report speaks Mr. John Goodwin the Author of, the Dialect (at
least) one of his Fraternity: both of them concurring to disparage our
Brethrens proceedings, and all of them triumphing at the prize of a Brotherly
Confession. I am ignorant of the end, and fully assured of the
unseasonablenesse and needlesnesse of such memorandums, which our Brethren so
frequently have made mention of in their Declarations and Remonstrances unto
this Kingdom; more particularly in their Reasons for assisting England upon the
request of both Houses of Parliament in the year 1643. Unless it be to
endeavor a withdrawing of that Brotherly love and respect we owe unto them; At
the best it reflects upon their present expedition into England, as if it were
but a bare requital of former kindness, and this not fully granted; although it
be acknowledged by the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and our Independent
Brethren, as a business of so great concernment, which should oblige England in
thankfulness unto them for ever; which does certainly evidence something more
to be in their undertaking in the behalf of England, then is talked of by
undiscerning Spirits, that watch for any thing that may in the least manner
reflect upon our Brethren (though of no concernment) to their dishonor, which
they conceiving these Papers do lay bold upon them as a fit opportunity to
slander their real and cordial Endeavors for our peace and happiness;
contrary to our Vow and Covenant, made with them before the Lord ( Jehovah)
whose Name is holy; which is of so low esteem in the words and thoughts of
many, as if such obligations were of so low an allay, that there were no
necessity of keeping and observing them; contrary to the Declarations of
Parliament, and the professions of our Independent Brethren; some of them
having been employed as Commissioners to crave the assistance of our Brethren
of Scotland, and to manage that weighty business of entering into a solemn
League with them, which will more plainly be evidenced by taking a view, of the
sever all Declarations of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the Letters and
Speeches of our Independent Brethren; an Extract of which, follows.

June 16. 1646.
Declar. and Resol. of Parl.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, have with approbation and thanks, received
from the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, a clear manifestation, of
the respect, which the Lords of His Majesty's secret Counsel for that Realm do
bear to the welfare and peace of this Kingdom, In the expression of their
affections, wherein they were pleased to second the desires of the General
Assembly of that Church for Unity in Religion, Note.
and Uniformity in Church Government, in His Majesty's three Kingdoms: --
wherein as we have satisfied our own reason, so we hope we shall satisfy the
loving and Christian defires of our Brethren of Scotland; -- And as we resolve,
according to the National Covenant betwixt the two Kingdoms, to be careful of
the peace of Scotland as of our own, so we doubt not but their Lordships and
the Nation of Scotland will be careful to express their brotherly kindness
to us. -- We acknowledge it an Act of love to us, Note.
and of wisdom for the good of both Churches -- that our Brethren of Scotland
have bestowed their serious thoughts, and earnest desires for unity of
Religion; that in all His Majesty's Dominions there might be one Confession of
Faith, one Directory of worship, one public Catechism, and one form of
Church Government. And although it will hardly be obtained punctually and
exactly, -- yet both intending the same end, proceeding by the same rule of
Gods Word, and guided by the same Spirit, we hope by Gods assistance to be so
directed, that we may cast out whatsoever is offensive to God, or justly
displeasing to any neighbor Church, and so far agree with our Brethren of
Scotland, and other reformed Churches, in all substantial parts of Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, that both we and they may enjoy those advantages and
conveniences which are mentioned by them, in this their Answer, in the more
strict Union of both Kingdoms, more safe, easy, and comfortable Government of
His Majesty, etc. -- The main cause which hitherto has deprived us of these
and other great advantages, which we might have by a more close Union with the
Church of Scotland, -- is the Government by Bishops, -- ( which) makes us
desperate of that most beneficial and desirable Conjunction, with them, until
this great impediment be removed, etc. -- Upon which we do declare, -- that
this Government -- is evil, and justly offensive. -- And according to our
former Declaration of the 7th of February our purpose is to consult with godly
and Learned Divines, that we may not only remove this, but settle such a
Government, as may be most agreeable to Gods holy Word, most apt to procure and
conserve the peace of the Church at home, and happy union with the Church of
Scotland, etc. -- This being the Resolution of both Houses of Parliament, we do
desire our Brethren of Scotland to concur with us in petitioning His Majesty,
that his Royal Authority may be applied to the conservation of a firm unity
between the two Kingdoms, and that they likewise will think good, to send to
the same Assembly (of Divines which were to meet the fifth of November.) some
godly and learned Divines of that Church, Note.
whereby an Uniformity in form of Church Government may be obtained, and
thereby a more easy passage made to the settling of one confession of faith,
one Liturgy -- of the public worship, and one Catechism in all three
Kingdoms. A Declaration and Resolution of Parliament, Sept. 23. 1642. Declar.
Parl. to Kingd. Scotl.
We Lords and Commons, etc. -- Do hereby declare to our Brethren the Estates
and other Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland, that not only according to our
resolution and promise signified in our former Declarations, we have nominated
and appointed Jo: Earl of Rutland, etc. -- To be Committees and Commissioners
of both Houses of Parliament -- for settling all matters concerning Debts and
Accounts, in which this Kingdom stands engaged to them; but more especially to
desire their present and speedy aid and assistance for security of Religion,
and Liberty of both Kingdoms, -- Note.
being an effectual means for preserving the peace of both Kingdoms according
to the late Act of Pacification, by which both States stand obliged to help one
an other; -- We do earnestly request our Brethren of Scotland, to hasten the
aid desired, and to consider, that although in these straits and perplexities
of want and danger, they shall not receive such plentiful entertainment as
might at other times be expected; Note.
yet they cannot fail of great honor and advantage by this undertaking, -- and
they may rest assured that in all opportunities the two Houses of Parliament,
and this Nation will be ready to express their thankfulness, etc. A
Declaration to the Kingdom and Estates of Scotland, September. 13. 1643. Declar.
of Parl. to Assembly of Scotland.
The Lords and Commons, etc. acknowledging with humble thankfulness to God --
the Christian zeal and love which the General Assembly of the Churches of
Scotland have manifested in their pious endeavors, for the preservation of the
true reformed Protestant Religion, from the subtle practices and attempts of
the Popish and Prelaticall party, to the necessary reformation of Church
Discipline and Government of this Kingdom, and the more near union of both
Churches, Note.
do earnestly desire that Reverend Assembly to take notice that the two Houses
of Parliament fully concurring with them in those pious intentions; and for the
better accomplishment thereof, have called an Assembly of Divines, -- and
likewise nominated and appointed Jo: Earl of Rutland, etc. -- Committees and
Commissioners of both Houses to the Kingdom and States of Scotland. Who -- have
received directions to resort to the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, and propound and consult with them, or any Commissioners deputed by
them, in all occasions which may further the so much desired Reformation in
Ecclesiastical matters in this Church and Kingdom. -- It is likewise desired,
that that Reverend Assembly will according to their former promise and
Resolution, send to the Assembly here, such number of Godly and Learned
Divines, as in their wisdom they think most expedient for the furtherance of
this work, which so much concerns the Honor of God, the prosperity and peace
of the two Churches of England and Scotland. A Declaration, etc. to the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. September. 13. 1643. Mr Marshal and
Mr Nyes Letter.
We cannot but communicate unto you the good hand of God with us in the work --
employed in -- we have had to do with the Convention of States, and Assembly of
Divines; -- the gravest and wisest that we have seen, and who we think are more
sensible of our Condition then we are our selves. Note.
The leading men both of the Convention and Assembly, -- and the whole body of
the Nation looking upon it as the cause of Christ. -- We know multitudes are
prejudiced against them, as if we might expect no help from them but for their
own ends, Note.
but if you dare give any credit to our faithfulness, and most diligent
inquisition and observation, -- let us prevail with you to beat down all such
unworthy thoughts and jealousies of them, they are guided by God in this work,
and we are persuaded will bring glory to Christ, and requital of all our
former love to them. -- Note.
We scarce ever saw so much of Christ for us as this day in the Assemblies
carrying of this business. -- Surely the arm of the Lord in this assistance
extends it self toward you, In the Mount the Lord will be seen. A letter from
Mr. Marshall and Mr. Ny appointed Assistants to the Commissioners of Scotland.
Edinb: Aug. 18. 1643. Mr Nigh his Speech.
The Goodness of God procuring succor and help to a sinful people, ought to
be matter of fear and trembling, even to all that hear of it: Jer. 33.9. We are
to exalt and acknowledge him this day who is fearful in praises, swear by that
Name which is holy and reverent, enter into a Covenant and League that is never
to be forgotten by us, nor our posterity. -- Note.
And such an Oath as for matter, persons, and other circumstances, the like
has not been in any Age or Oath we read of in sacred or humane stories, yet
sufficiently warranted in both. -- Consort and Harmony amongst men, especially
amongst Saints, is very pleasing unto the Lord. It when but two or three agree
and assent unto any thing on earth, it shall be confirmed in heaven: And for
this because they gather together in his Name, much more when two or three
Kingdoms shall meet and consent together in his Name, and for his Name, that
God may be one, and his Name one amongst them. Unity amongst his Churches and
children, Note.
must needs -- be very acceptable unto him: -- We invocate the Name of the
great God that his vows, yea, his curse may be upon us if we do not this; yea
though we suffer for so doing, -- that is, -- to advance the kingdom of --
Christ here upon earth, and make Jerusalem once more the praise of the whole
earth, notwithstanding all the contradictions of men. What is this but the
contents and matter of our Covenant? What do we vow? -- Is it not the
reformation of three Kingdoms, and a reformation universal doctrine,
Discipline, Note.
and worship in whatsoever the Word shall discover to us. -- And if in the
Churches of Scotland any more Light and beauty in matters of Order and
Discipline, by which their Assemblies are more orderly: -- we shall humbly bow
and kiss their lips that can speak right words unto us in this matter, and
help us into the nearest uniformity with the word and mind of Christ, in this
great work of Reformation. -- This Oath is such, and in the matter and
consequence of it, of such concernment, as I can truly say, it is worthy of us,
yea of all these Kingdoms, yea of all the Kingdoms of the world. -- And surely
it can be no other, but the result and Answer of such prayers and tears of such
sincerity and sufferings, that three Kingdoms should be thus born, or rather
new born in a day; Note.
we are now entering upon a work of the greatest moment, and concernment to us,
and to our posterity after us, that ever was undertaken by any of us, or any of
our forefathers, before us, etc. -- It is a duty of the first Commandment, and
therefore of the highest and noblest order and rank of duties; therefore must
come forth attended with choicest graces. Fear, Humility, and in the greatest
simplicity and plainness of spirit in respect of those with whom we Covenant:
Note.
we call God as a witness betwixt us, who searches the heart, With him wisdom
and strength, the deceived, and deceiver is his. Job 12.19. He has wisdom to
discover, and strength to punish, if our hearts be not upright to our Brethren
in this matter. -- As it is the last oath you are likely to take in this kind,
so it is our last refuge, tabula post naufragium: if this help us not, we are
like to remain to our dying day an unhappy people, etc. -- And as for you,
Reverend Brethren, that are Ministers of the Gospel, there is yet an other
obligation will lie upon you; let us look to our selves, and make provision to
walk answerable to this our Covenant, Note.
for the Gospels sake; it will reflect a great aspersion upon the truth of the
Gospel; if we should be false or unconstant in any word or promise, though in a
matter of less consequence, etc. Mr Ny Speech at the taking of the Covenant by
the Parliament and Assembly of Divines, September. 25. 1643. Mr. Solicitor his
Speech.
I conceive there is no need to acquaint you with the benefits that will
redound to this Kingdom, and the advantages we shall have by a nearer
association with them, and by their coming in, to this purpose for our
assistance. -- This great Cause now in agitation by this means will be much
secured; it will be assured to us, that the Event and the success of it will
be made a great deal the certainer; -- Thus we stand in case they are not
called in, the loss so great, that is the loss of all, the event is so
uncertain. Secondly, it will be for our profit, it will ease the war, Note.
it will make the charge, and the burden of it to be less; -- without their
coming, I am afraid there will not be that force on the one side, as to make
the other side out of their estates to pay these debts, which their coming in,
in all likelihood will make them do; which if these debts be paid out of their
estates and land, I know no inconvenience will come to the Kingdom by it; -- If
they come not in, considering the engagements on both sides, and considering
the parties, who we must compound with, I say, the cure is like to be very
imperfect; their coming in, I hope, Note.
will make it perfect. -- So that if there were nothing else in it, but that we
were like to have the better peace, and on the better terms, and what ever it
be, it is likely to be kept the better, to us and our posterity, that were
much to our advantage. -- We have it from our own Committee there, and from all
hands, that it is impossible ( they should undertake for our assistance)
without some sum of money; And if we consider how they have been exhausted
heretofore, Note.
I think we may easily believe it, -- their Army that is in Ireland having been
14 months without any pay at all, they are fain to supply them with
necessities, which has been fourscore thousand pounds, else that Army must
have starved. We know they had two years war, we promised them a Brotherly
assistance, and there is an Act for it, but it is known, by reason of the
troubles we have here at home we have not paid them that; so that considering
the poverty of that Kingdom, it is certain, it is not a pretense of theirs (for
not coming) but it is really so. Mr Solicitor his Speech at Guildhall, Friday,
October. 6. 1643. Mr Bur: his Speech.
There has lately been the most blessed Union of two Nations, as ever was in
the world, -- let us now reach forth our hearts and hands unto our Brethren in
Scotland, let us come up fully to this our Engagement, and rejoice in it, Note.
for certainly that Nation is a Nation that God does love, a Nation that God
does honor, and by those many expressions of his love, showed that he does
intend to make them special instruments of the great things he has to do, in
this latter age of the world; It is a Nation that is united the most firmly
under heaven, we may truly call it a A name that contains in it self al virtues,
Commended for Brotherly love.
Philadelphia. -- Had we had the like union amongst us, Bright: on Revel.
O what great things had we done long before this time. A Nation it is that
has engaged it self to God in a higher way, in a more extraordinary way, Note.
then any Nation this day upon the face of the earth has done; -- A Nation
that has reformed their lives for so small a time, more then ever any people
that we know of in the world have done; -- A Nation that God has honored by
giving as glorious success unto, as ever he did unto any; -- And although they
be of themselves a poor people, and of little strength, -- yet they have kept
the word of Gods patience, and God has kept them in the house of temptation;
God therefore is with them. (How happy should we be, if we may have them in a
near Union with us?) A people that have carried themselves, Note.
with as great wisdom, and order in the most difficult work that ever a people
did undertake, in those by and intricate paths that were before untroden. Note.
-- Was there ever such an Example since the world began, of a people coming
out of a poorer Country, into a fat and rich Country, and having those
opportunities that they had to enrich themselves, to go away so as they did? --
A people -- that began to rise for their Liberties, when the generality of this
people here, were ready basely to bow down their backs, and put their necks
under the yoke: and had it not been that they had been willing to have endured
the brunt we had all been slaves at this day. -- They now desire 100000 l. what
is this to 300000 l. in pay? to five Counties, to the plunder of a whole City?
what reasonable terms do they proffer to come among you? Do but give them
100000 l. advance, and they engage themselves for three months and ten days,
and in the Winter time to be in the Kingdom, -- and willing to depart again
without any more, when they have done their work. Mr Jer. Buroughs Speech in
Guildhall, Friday October. 6. 1643. Sir H: Vanes Speech.
In obedience, to the Commands of both Houses, we that are lately come out of
Scotland, and have been eye witnesses of the affection of that Nation to this
Cause, and of the deep sense they have, of the present state of affairs, here
in this Kingdom, are willing to make the same report, -- to you of it as has
been done to the Parliament, that you may take a right measure of those things,
and not be carried away with mis-apprehensions, and mis-informations from those
that disaffect the Cause, and would willingly abuse your thoughts, and belief
herein. -- For the affection of that Nation, we have had many experiences of
it, and of their ready and cheerful compliance, with the desires of this
Kingdom, even when they were in their greatest distresses and calamities: --
The affairs then of this Nation were in a much lower condition then now we find
them to be, yet notwithstanding those many invitations, -- promises, -- Note.
and -- secret practices among themselves, to make them set loose from the
Cause of this Kingdom, yet so sensible were they of the danger of Religion
here, of the near relation they had to their Brethren of England, -- that they
were ready to break through all difficulties, and to expose themselves to all
danger to take us by the hand, and to join cordially with us in the maintaining
of this Cause. -- And that they might evidence the truth of their intentions,
they speedily enter into COVENANT with us.) And this not only in their own
persons, but enjoined it throughout the whole Kingdom, -- (and) in such a
manner, as that the greatest and powerfullest Enemies of it among them durst
not show their heads to oppose it. Note.
-- They are as sensible as your selves of the great burden and extremities
that this Nation does at this time groan under, -- (though) their Nation has
not been without troubles, -- great charges and burdens that have lain upon
them, and particularly even for the advantage of this Kingdom: -- (Besides)
they have made it apparent by several particulars, Note.
that before this Army -- will be brought to the Rendevouze upon English
ground, -- it will stand them in very near a 100000 l. which must be at their
own charge and expense, over and above what they desire from us: They likewise
have let us know, that they desire not to press us beyond our strength in
matter of moneys, but only so much as may render the service in them feasible,
which we expect from them. -- Note.
They are -- so willing in themselves to come to our assistance, -- that if any
thing lay in their power, either by the morgaging of their own private Estates,
or if there were money sufficient in Scotland, that they could render
themselves master of, they would be willing to contribute any thing of their
own for the necessities of this Kingdom, so much they are affected with this
Cause. Sir Henry Vanes Speech at a Common Hall, London, October. 27 1643. The
Kingdom of England is to pay in ready money to their Brethren of Scotland --
the sum of 100000 l. sterling -- by way of advance beforehand, Note.
which is to be discounted back again unto the Kingdom of England by the
Kingdom of Scotland upon the first monthly allowance which shall grow due to
the Scottish Army, etc.

Article 6. No Cessation, Note.
nor any Pacification or agreement for Peace whatsoever shall be made by either
Kingdom, or the Armies of either Kingdom, without the mutual advice and
consent of both Kingdoms, or their Committees in that behalf appointed.

Article 8. Articles of the Treaty agreed upon betwixt the Commissioners of the
Parliament of England, and the Commissioners of the Convention of the Estates
of the Kingdom of Scotland, at Edin. Nov: 29. 1643. It was far from our
Intentions that the Scottish Army should neither be provided for by us, Note.
nor yet suffered to provide for their own subsistence, etc. The Parliaments
Answer to the Scots Commissioners Papers. Printed April 14. 1646. Deciar: of
Parl.
We do declare, that our true and real Intentions are, and our endeavors shall
be to settle Religion in the purity thereof, according to the Covenant: -- And
to keep a good understanding between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
according to the grounds expressed in the solemn League and Covenant, and
Treaties: Which we desire may be inviolably observed on both parts. A
Declaration of Parliament, April 17. 1646. If any man shall except against this
my endeavor, Conclusion.
I desire him to remember, the tenor of our Covenant binds me as well as
others to use all lawful means, to accomplish the end of our Covenant, and
this I conceive derogates no whit from the rule; nay, it is below a Christian
not to attempt a matter of public concernment for fear of being mis-judged. I
shall wind up all with those two observable passages in Mr Buroughs Irenicum.
One you shall find in p. 11. Truth is the bond, that keeps to Unity, but Error
is wild, you know not where to find it, nor your selves if you give way to it.
The other is in pa. 276. Peace it was the chief masterpiece of Gods work,
there is more of the glory of God in this, then in all that God has done: This
is and shall be the object of the admiration of Angels and Saints, the matter
of their praises to all eternity. This being so, how nearly does it concern
those that shall be heirs of the same kingdom, partakers of the same glory,
Saints in light, to make it their chief study to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.3
Ephesians. 4.3.

Telo.


