THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE Esquire RECORDER OF CANTERBURY. TO THE KINGS
most Excellent MAJESTY At his coming to CANTERBURY The 27 day of October 1660.

LONDON: Printed by S. Griffin, for Matthew Walbancke, at Grays-Inne Gate, 1660.

THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE Esquire, Recorder of the City of CANTERBVRY, to the
Kings most excellent Majesty at his coming to Canterbury the 27. day of
October 1660.
MAy it please your sacred Majesti, our most dread Sovereign to vouchsafe me
leave, to assume courage from your grace and Goodness, once more to speak unto
your Majesty, who like Almighty God, regards more the affection of the heart,
then the speech and utterance of the Tongue.

I know most gracious Sovereign that it will not become me now to make a long
Speech to your Majesty whose Judgment is deep and inscrutable, whose
employments are great and weighty.

But because the power of Command belongs to Kings, and the glory of Obedience
to Subjects: and that by the influence of your happy Reign, your Subjects have
Received Peace, Safety, and Protection: And by your prudence, have been rescued
from the stayn and rust of the late Iron times; and by your Princely Clemency
in your never to be forgotten unparalled Act of Oblivion, restored to this
Golden Age: They cannot but with all humility from the bottom of their hearts,
but render to your Majesty, subjection with all Loyalty, Faithfulness and
Alleagiance.

THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE Esquire RECORDER OF CANTERBVRY, TO THE QUEEN At her
coming to Canterbury, the 31 day of October 1660. She then being in the same
Coach, with the King, and all the Royal Princes and Princesses.
MAy it please your Majesty, most great and glorious Queen, that has made All
England happy in your Royal Issue.

The Mayor, and Citizens of this City of Canterbury, do present their hearty
and sincere thanks to God for your Majesty's safe return to this Kingdom of
England, (wherein your Majesty has so great an Interest) wishing your
Majesty long life with all health and happiness; And that you may prosper in
all you undertake with a full fruition of your own hearts desire.

And that these Royal Branches your Majesty's Children, and their Childrens
Children, may for ever sway Englands Scepter, making your Majesty as great,
and renouned in your offspring, as you are already in your birth and royal
Progenitors.

And let, oh let, those royal Branches, let our most gracious Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES for ever flourish here.

FINIS.

